Intensive Archaeological Survey of the
Barton Hills Retrofit Project in
Travis County, Texas
Permit Number: 4241

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

October 2006

Intensive Archaeological Survey of the
Barton Hills Retrofit Project in
Travis County, Texas
Permit Number: 4241

Prepared for:

Principal Investigator:

Sean R. Nash, RPA
Prepared by:

William J. Wagner III, RPA
Sean R. Nash, RPA

Reports of Investigations Volume 1, Number 5

October 2006

Table of Contents

Table of Contents
Section

Page

Executive Summary ........................................................................................

iv

1

Introduction ....................................................................................................

1-1

2

Area of Potential Impact..................................................................................

2-1

3

Archaeological Background and Previous Work ............................................

3-1

3.1 Prehistoric Background ..........................................................................

3-1

3.1.1
3.1.2
3.1.3

Paleoindian (Before 8800 B.P.)..................................................
Archaic (8800-1300 B.P.) ..........................................................
Late Prehistoric (1300 – ca.500 B.P., or contact).......................

3-1
3-2
3-3

Historic Background...............................................................................
Cultural Properties Inventory .................................................................

3-4
3-8

3.3.1

Eligible Property Types in Surrounding Area............................

3-8

Testing Methods ..............................................................................................

4-1

4.1 Pedestrian Survey ...................................................................................
4.2 Subsurface Examination.........................................................................

4-1
4-1

4.2.1 Shovel Tests ...............................................................................
4.2.2 Backhoe Trenches ......................................................................

4-1
4-2

Results of Testing and Recommendations ......................................................

5-1

5.1 Geomorphic Assessment and Context of Cultural Artifacts ..................
5.3 Recommendations ..................................................................................

5-1
5-3

References ....................................................................................................

R-1

3.2
3.3

4

5

Appendices

A

Inventory of Collected Artifacts, Barton Hills Retrofit Project, Austin,
Travis County, Texas

B

Backhoe Trench Profile Description

C

Backhoe Trench Profile and Shovel Test Photographs

City of Austin
February 2007

ii

List of Figures

List of Figures
Figure

Page

2-1

Project Location Map with Previously Recorded Archaeological Sites .........

2-2

2-2

Baron Hills Retrofit Area with Backhoe Trenches and Shovel Tests
Locations .........................................................................................................

2-3

City of Austin
February 2007

iii

Executive Summary

Executive Summary
HDR Engineering, Inc. (HDR) conducted an archaeological survey of the proposed
Barton Hills Retrofit project in Austin, Travis County, Texas on September 1, 6, & 7, 2006. The
project area (PA) is approximately 1.5 acres, located south of Barton Springs Pool and north of
1200 Barton Hills Drive. Antiquities Code of Texas, Antiquities Permit number 4241 was
issued to HDR Engineering, Inc. principal investigator Sean R. Nash for an intensive
archaeological survey.

Funding for this project comes through The City of Austin. Shovel tests

and backhoe trenches were executed in areas to be impacted by detention ponds and new storm
sewer lines. Five shovel tests and four trenches were excavated and examined for archaeological
and geomorphic data.
Two previously recorded sites exist in proximity to the PA (refer to Figure 2-1 of this
report). Site 41TV2 is a prehistoric site set into a terrace. Site 41TV690 is an historical stone
bridge abutment. The southeast corner of a third site, 41TV689, an historical homestead site,
falls within the northeastern portion of the PA (refer to Figures 2-1 & 2-2). The sites, 41TV2,
41TV689, and 41TV690, together with the surrounding area, constitute the Barton Springs
Historical District, which is listed in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP).
The Barton Hills Retrofit Project cultural resource survey produced few cultural
materials. Five shovel tests were hand-excavated within the PA. Cultural material was recovered
in three of the tests. Four trenches were situated where proposed detention Pond 1 or wastewater
lines could potentially impact archaeological deposits (refer Figure 2-2).

The resulting

excavations produced few artifacts and no discernable features. A single sandy paste, bone
tempered prehistoric pottery sherd, two lithic flakes, and a freshwater mussel shell fragment
were found on an eroding surface impacted by a footpath, sheet wash erosion, and park
maintenance. The cultural horizon on the surface of the terrace is relatively thin (±60 cm) and is
underlain by multiple sequences of Colorado River/Barton Creek alluvium. These findings
extend the boundaries of the non-contributing, prehistoric component of 41TV689.
The construction of the detention ponds and associated wastewater lines will not
adversely affect any significant cultural resources. HDR recommends that construction of the
Barton Hills Retrofit Detention Pond Project be allowed to begin without delay. This report
follows the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) guidelines and is designed to satisfy State
laws and regulations. The findings of the cultural resource survey and records search are
summarized.

City of Austin
February 2007

iv

Section 1
Introduction
The City of Austin has proposed the construction of a storm water retention pond and
associated storm sewer lines. Funding for this project comes entirely from The City of Austin.
Darrell Haba of the City of Austin Parks and Recreation Department (PARD) is the Project
Manager. This cultural resource study is intended to provide the executive director of the THC,
acting as the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO), with the opportunity to comment on the
undertaking as required by section 106 of the National Historical Preservation Act and in accord
with the process detailed in 36 CFR § 800.

City of Austin
February 2007

1-1

Section 2
Area of Potential Impact
The City of Austin is proposing the improvements to control pollutants associated with
runoff from the parking lots of an apartment complex located at 1200 Barton Hills Drive. Two
ponds (Pond 1 and Pond 2) will be constructed that require excavation as deep as 6-feet
(Figure 2-2). Pond 1 is the larger pond (~300x100-feet) and is centrally located within the
project area. Pond 2 is small (~20x30-feet) and is located at the northwestern edge of the project
area. An excavation depth of between 1 and 4-feet is anticipated for Pond 2. A new storm sewer
(~800-feet long) will be laid underground along the southwestern edge of the project area that
will require excavation to a depth of 5-9-feet and a trench that will be about 10-feet wide. A
second section of the storm sewer line will run from Barton Hills Drive to Pond 1, but only ~50feet will be within the high probability sediments. Additionally, a storm sewer line (12-inch)
along the eastern edge of the PA will be replaced. Most of the construction will affect sediments
already disturbed by the previous storm sewer line installation.
The Rabb House Site (41TV689) lies primarily out of the project area, but the defined
southeast corner of this archeological site (an early historic home remains/location) is within the
limits of construction (PA) and appears to be unavoidable in the current plans (Figure 2-1and
Figure 2-2). It lies within and will be impacted by the wastewater line replacement at the
east/northeastern end of the PA; this is the 423 feet of new storm sewer line placed immediately
west of, and tied into on either end, to the existing storm sewer line. The historic component of
41TV689 is a contributing factor in the sites listing on the National Register and creation of the
Barton Springs Historical District.

The southeast corner of the site is defined by a large

Heirloom-variety non-native Crepe Myrtle tree and Iris plants, ornamentals likely planted by the
Rabb family. This vegetation was mapped in 1980 to help delineate the site boundaries of
41TV689 for its NRHP application. A non-contributing prehistoric component of the site was
discovered by shovel tests during a previous investigation (Collins 1996) and confirmed by
shovel tests conducted by Archeological and Cultural Sciences Group (Nash and Trachman
2001). However, the three shovel tests performed for the previous investigation indicated soils
were disturbed to at least 25 centimeters below the surface (cmbs). Archeological and Cultural
Sciences Group (ACSG) shovel tests suggested a deflated soil zone 23 to 27 cm deep. Because
this is the site of the Rabb House, it is likely that much of the area has been disturbed by
domestic activities throughout its occupation.
City of Austin
February 2007

2-1

Areas of Potential Impact

Figure 2-1. Project Location Map with Previously Recorded
Archaeological Sites

City of Austin
February 2007

2-2

Areas of Potential Impact

City of Austin
February 2007

2-3

Section 3
Archaeological Background and Previous Work
3.1

Prehistoric Background
The property falls within the Central Texas archaeological region (Collins 1995).

Prehistoric archaeological sites in Central Texas represent continuous human occupation starting
around 11,500 years ago. Throughout its occupation, hunting and gathering is believed to be the
exclusive resource procurement strategy of prehistoric Central Texans.
Sites have been interpreted to represent relatively short-term occupations. Deeper sites
with large amounts of cultural materials are thought to be camps that were returned to through
the years possibly on a regular basis.
Michael B. Collins (1995) authored a recent synthesis of Central Texas archaeology. The
prehistoric background will be based in large part on his synthesis. Collins divides the prehistory
of Central Texas into three periods: (1) the Paleoindian, (2) the Archaic, and (3) the Late
Prehistoric. Each of these has further been divided into subperiods, such as early and late.
Smaller units of time referred to as “style intervals” are used to coincide with the interval of use
of a particular point style or group of point styles. These style intervals can overlap or extend
over more than one subperiod.

Most, however, can be used to subdivide the subperiods.

Information pertaining to burned rock middens, specifically, is based primarily on Black’s
(1989) research.
3.1.1

Paleoindian (Before 8800 B.P.)

The evidence (e.g., Meltzer 1993) no longer supports the long held belief that North
American Paleoindians could be characterized as nomadic bands of big game hunters. Big game
hunting is indicated, particularly in association with Folsom. However, a more generalized
hunting and gathering subsistence is now evidenced at Paleoindian sites across Texas and the rest
of North America (e.g., Burger Bluff (41GD30) and Baker Cave).

The relatively mesic

conditions that prevailed from about 11,500 B.P. allowed for a high biomass in central Texas and
the surrounding regions (Collins 1995).
Clovis and Folsom style intervals divide Collins’ early Paleoindian period (11,200­
10,000 B.P.). Clovis is the earliest recognized cultural horizon in central Texas. Clovis is
securely dated to between 11,200 and 10,900 B.P. in radiocarbon years. The Wilson-Leonard,
City of Austin
February 2007

3-1

Archaeological Background and Previous Work

Gault, and Pavo Real sites have recently added new data to the study of these early peoples of
what is now Texas. Kincaid Rockshelter and Horn Shelter sites also have documented Clovis
components. Clovis artifacts include prismatic blades, engraved stones, bola stones and the
unique Clovis point (Collins 1995). Clovis points are usually lanceolate, fluted projectile or
lance points (Collins 1998).
The Folsom style interval is not as securely dated, and appears to overlap with Clovis.
The finely retouched and fluted Folsom points are one of the most easily recognized points made
in the Americas. In Folsom times, more than at any other interval, people were specialized
hunters. Bison kills with associated Folsom points remain the typical Folsom site type. The
postulated style intervals following Folsom, known as Plainview and Dalton-San Patrice, are not
well known or clearly defined. However, evidence from sites containing components related to
them, such as Horn Shelter 2, indicate an Archaic-like hunter-gatherer lifeway (Redder 1985).
Wilson, Golondrina-Barber, and St. Mary’s Hall style intervals make up Collins’ (1995)
late Paleoindian subperiod.

This subperiod is characterized as intermediate or transitional

between Paleoindian and Archaic (Collins 1998:63-4). Burned rock features have been found
associated with all three style intervals of this subperiod, but they are substantially smaller and
less frequent than in the Archaic (Collins 1995).
3.1.2

Archaic (8800-1300 B.P.)

The mesic conditions of the Paleoindian period come to an end during the early subperiod
of the Archaic. With the exception of the Bell-Andice-Calf Creek interval of the middle Archaic
subperiod, this was a more xeric time for Central Texas and the surrounding regions. A jump in
the number of ground stone tools, specifically manos and matates suggests an increased reliance
on plant resources (Collins 1995).

Central Texas Archaic sites are characterized by

accumulations of heat altered rock, including those known as burned rock middens.
Three subperiods have been defined for the Central Texas Archaic: (1) early, (2) middle,
and (3) late (Johnson and Goode 1994, Collins 1995). Early Archaic sites (8800-6000 B.P.) are
recognized by the presence of Angostura, Early Split Stem, and Martindale-Uvalde points.
Unifacial Clear Fork tools and Guadalupe bifaces are found in early Archaic sites along with
ground stone tools and other bifacial and unifacial implements. Early Archaic earth ovens and
accumulations of burned rock are found primarily on the better-watered portions of the Edward’s
plateau, in Live Oak savanna habitats. These earth ovens and accumulations of burned rock have
City of Austin
February 2007

3-2

Archaeological Background and Previous Work

been considered the technological antecedents of the classic burned rock middens (Collins 1995).
However, at Ft. Hood seven burned rock middens were carefully dated using Atomic Mass
Spectrometry dating. The features spanned from 5500 BC (early Archaic) to 1400 AD (Quigg
and Ellis 1994). Two others burned rock middens in Kerr County have been dated to the early
Archaic (Luke 1980).

It is possible that these reported early burned rock ovens and

accumulations may represent the same phenomenon in a different form or stage of development
(e.g., incipient).
During the first interval (6000-5000 B.P.) of the middle Archaic subperiod the climate is
somewhat more mesic. Bison populations soared. The technically impressive Bell-Andice-Calf
Creek points were likely made primarily for killing these Bison (Johnson and Goode 1994). By
5000 B.P., the Bison had dwindled and the climate had become more xeric again. Burned rock
middens were likely used to cook sotol and other xerophytes that thrived during these dry years
(Johnson and Goode 1994:26). The last thousand years of the middle Archaic (5000-4000 B.P.)
are divided into two style intervals, Taylor and Nolan-Travis.
The late Archaic (4000-1300 B.P.) began during the driest time central Texans had ever
experienced. There was, however, a steady increase in effective moisture until it peaked in the
later part of the late Archaic (Collins 1995). With the increase in effective moisture came the
return of Bison. Six style intervals are recognized for the late Archaic: (1) Bulverde, (2)
Pedernales-Kinney, (3) Lange-Marshall-Williams, (4) Marcos-Montell-Castroville, (5) Ensor­
Frio-Fairland, and (6) Darl.
3.1.3

Late Prehistoric (1300 - ca.500 B.P., or contact)

The beginning of the late Prehistoric period is defined primarily by the introduction of the
bow and arrow. Pottery was also introduced during this time, but unlike many areas in Texas
and the rest of the New World, hunting and gathering resource procurement strategies prevailed
(Collins 1995). Many documented instances of arrow wounds are recorded during this period
(Prewitt 1974).
The late Prehistoric is divided into early and late subperiods (Jelks 1962).

Each

subperiod has a single style interval. The early subperiod is represented by the Austin style
interval and the late subperiod by the Toyah interval (Collins 1995). Scallorn and Edwards
points are diagnostic of the early subperiod and Perdiz is representative of the Toyah
archaeological manifestation.
City of Austin
February 2007

3-3

Archaeological Background and Previous Work

3.2

Historic Background
Historic exploration and settlement of Travis County area began in the late seventeenth

century when Domingo Terán de los Ríos, the first known European to visit the area, traveled
through the region during an inspection tour to East Texas. In 1730 the Spanish moved the East
Texas missions of San Francisco de los Neches, Nuestra Señora de la Purísima Concepción de
los Hasinai, and San José de los Nazonis to a temporary location at Barton Springs. These
missions were moved to San Antonio in 1731 (Smyrl 2002a).
Anglo-American influence in the area began with a series of land grants from the
Mexican government following Mexico’s independence from Spain in 1821. In an effort to
colonize the Mexican frontier, the Mexican government issued land grants to empresarios, or
land agents, who would settle families in the newly formed colonies (Sons of Dewitt Colony
Texas 2003).
In 1827 Stephen F. Austin received an empresario contract from the Mexican government
to settle 300 families in an area located east of the Colorado River and north and west of the Old
San Antonio Road, which ran from Mexico, via San Antonio, to the Spanish missions in East
Texas. The “Little Colony” as it was called, was Austin’s third colony in Texas. Mina, presentday Bastrop, became the headquarters of the colony. Travis County later developed as an
offshoot of Austin’s Little Colony and Benjamin R. Milam’s Colony, which was located south of
the Colorado River (Smyrl 2002a; Texas General Land Office 2003).
In 1835 Thomas Jefferson Chambers surveyed the area that is now Austin, and by 1838
four families lived in the community of Waterloo, located at the site of present-day Austin.
Waterloo was renamed Austin in honor of Stephen F. Austin and was officially designated the
state capital in 1840. Travis County, named in honor of William Barret Travis, was established
the same year. The initial boundaries of Travis County included approximately 40,000 square
miles. The area was later reduced when additional counties were carved from Travis County
territory (Smyrl 2002a).
Austin and Travis County grew significantly in the late 1840s and early 1850s. Most of
the county residents lived in small communities outside of Austin. During the 1850s, several
rural post offices were established around the county (Smyrl 2002a). In 1854 a post office, store,
and blacksmith shop were opened in the community of Pond Springs, which is located east of the
project area (Odintz 2002a)

City of Austin
February 2007

3-4

Archaeological Background and Previous Work

Austin, the capital of Texas, county seat of Travis County, is located in central Travis
County on the Colorado River and Interstate Highway 35. It sits at the eastern edge of the Hill
Country and the Edwards Plateau. The city was established in 1839 to serve as its permanent
national capital, and named in honor of the founder of Anglo-American Texas, Stephen F.
Austin. Before becoming the capital, the area was centered around the hamlet of Waterloo. The
area's remoteness from population centers left it vulnerable to attacks by Mexican troops and
Indians. Austin solidified its position as a political center during the 1870s and 1880s and
became an educational center. The University of Texas was founded in Austin in 1881. Tillotson
Collegiate and Normal Institute, founded by the American Missionary Association to provide
educational opportunities for African Americans, opened in 1881. The Austin public school
system was started the same year. St. Edward's School, founded several years earlier by the Holy
Cross Fathers and Brothers was chartered that year as St. Edwards College.
Between 1880 and 1920 Austin's population grew threefold. The state's surging industrial
development, propelled by the booming oil business, did not come to Austin. By 1900
segregation of blacks and whites was common and separation became more strictly enforced in
early twentieth century. The city implemented an ordinance in 1906 requiring separate
compartments on streetcars. While residences of blacks had been widely scattered all across the
city in 1880, by 1930 most were living on the east side of town, a process encouraged by the
1928 city plan, which recommended that East Austin be designated a "Negro district."
Most Mexican Americans lived in the rapidly expanding East Austin barrio south of East
Eleventh Street, the 1940s. Hispanic-owned businesses were dominated by a thriving food
industry. Though Mexican Americans encountered widespread discrimination, it was not as
severe as that experienced by African Americans.
During the early and mid-1930s Austin experienced the Great Depression. Nevertheless,
the town fared comparatively well, sustained by its twin foundations of government and
education and by the political skills of Mayor Tom (Robert Thomas) Miller who took office in
1933, and United States Congressman Lyndon Baines Johnson, who won election in 1937. Its
population grew at a faster pace during the 1930s than in any other decade during the twentieth
century, increasing 66 percent from 53,120 to 87,930. Between the 1950s and 1980s ethnic
relations in Austin were transformed. First came a sustained attacked on segregation. Local black
leaders and political-action groups waged campaigns to desegregate city schools and services. In
1956 the University of Texas became the first major university in the South to admit blacks as
City of Austin
February 2007

3-5

Archaeological Background and Previous Work

undergraduates. In the early 1960s students staged demonstrations against segregated lunch
counters, restaurants, and movie theaters. Gradually the barriers receded, a process accelerated
when the United States Civil Rights Act of 1964 outlawed racial discrimination in public
accommodations. Nevertheless, discrimination persisted in areas like employment and housing.
Shut out of the town's political leadership since the 1880s, when two blacks had served on the
city council, African Americans regained a foothold by winning a school-board seat in 1968 and
a city-council seat in 1971. This political breakthrough was matched by Hispanics, whose
numbers had reached 39,399 by 1970-16 percent of the population. Mexican Americans won
their first seats on the Austin school board in 1972 and the city council in 1975.
Austin's rapid growth generated strong resistance by the 1970s. By 1983 there were more
than 150 environmental groups. Environmentalists organized a powerful movement to protect
streams, lakes, watersheds, and wooded hills from environmental degradation, resulting in the
passage of a series of environmental-protection ordinances during the 1970s and 1980s.
To facilitate the transportation of goods to and from gulf coastal ports, the Austin
Railroad Association was established in 1852 to promote railroad construction (Smyrl 2002a).
Railroad acquisition was postponed during the Civil War, but it resumed with much vigor during
Reconstruction.
The economy in Travis County suffered considerably after the war and during the
Reconstruction period. The county began to show signs of recovery by 1880. The county
population rose from 13,153 in 1870 to 27,028 in 1880, and the 1880 census reported 1,912
farms. The amount of improved land rose from 83,200 acres in 1870 to 139,800 in 1880. Corn,
cotton, wheat, and oats took up half of the improved farmland, while livestock dominated the
rest.

The arrival of the Houston and Texas Central Railway, the International and Great

Northern Railroad, the Austin and Northwestern Railroad, and the Missouri, Kansas and Texas
line in the last quarter of the nineteenth century greatly enhanced the commercial opportunities
and boosted the county economy (Smyrl 2002a).

Outlying communities like Cedar Park

benefited greatly from the arrival of the railroads. The Austin and Northwestern Railroad, which
laid tracks through the Cedar Park in 1882, provided a feasible means of exporting the area’s cut
limestone and cedar fence posts (Wynn 2002).
Coinciding with the arrival of railroads, several post offices were established in
Northwest Travis County. Post offices were established in the communities of Running Brushy
(Cedar Park), Buttercup, Volente, Jollyville, and Anderson Mill. The community of Buttercup,
City of Austin
February 2007

3-6

Archaeological Background and Previous Work

also called Doddville, was located on Buttercup Creek, immediately south of Cedar Park.
Buttercup was a thriving community in the 1870s and 1880s. In 1878 the community, which was
located on the road from Austin to Bagdad, had a store, a church, a school, a gin, a mill, and two
doctors. The Buttercup post office operated from 1888 to 1881 and 1884 to 1894. The site of
the community is now located under a reservoir alongside US 183 (Odintz 2002b). Volente is
located on Lake Travis and RM 2769. The community was founded with the establishment of
the Volente post office in 1886. The post office was discontinued in 1909 when the mail was
diverted to Cedar Park. In 1930 the community was partially submerged by the rising waters of
the new Lake Travis, and many of the residents had to relocate to higher ground. For a short
period during the 1940s and 1950s the town was called Dodd City after a popular local resident.
The name was changed back to Volente in the late 1950s. Today the community has several
businesses, a church, a fire hall and community center, and the Anderson Mill Museum (Smryl
2002b).
After the war many former slaves remained in Travis County. Germans, Swedes, and
Mexicans also contributed to the diverse ethnic makeup of Travis County.

The Mexican

influence was especially strong with the continued arrival of large numbers of refugees from the
Mexican Revolution in the early twentieth century (Smyrl 2002a).
By the turn of the century, several hundred businesses operated in Austin. In spite of
Austin’s rapid growth and modernization, the majority of the county's residents lived on farms or
in smaller towns, and agriculture dominated the area economy (Smyrl 2002a).
By the early-twentieth century, cotton farming had preceded the cattle industry. With the
dramatic growth in cotton farming, a shift in farm tenancy developed. Farm tenancy increased
steadily since 1890 and peaked in 1930. The tenancy rates continued to drop during the Great
Depression as many tenant farmers either moved away or turned to other occupations. The
cotton industry suffered economically during the 1920s from the effects of soil depletion, falling
prices brought on by overproduction, and the boll weevil infestation. The Great Depression of
the 1930s worsened the economic situation and encouraged farmers who remained in the area to
shift away from cotton to livestock and alternative crops like corn, wheat, and sorghum (Smyrl
2002a).
Significant population and economic changes occurred in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s.
The construction and expansion of roads throughout the undeveloped areas of Travis County
meant urban populations now had easier access to the Hill Country and vice versa. Local
City of Austin
February 2007

3-7

Archaeological Background and Previous Work

development in the mid-1980s brought a growth spurt to outlying communities like Cedar Park,
Jollyville, and Volente. The consolidation of rural schools also meant children could now attend
schools outside of their rural communities.
Barton Springs, is located in Zilker Park in southwest Austin. There artesian water issues
from the fourth largest springs in Texas. Since Paleoindian times the springs were a gathering
place for Indians. In 1714 Spanish explorers wrote that wild horses were numerous there. The
springs were named after William Barton, an early settler in the area. Saw, flour, and grist mills
as well as ice-making machines have used the water power of the springs. The springs have
always been popular for swimming and other recreational activities. During the 1980s, however,
use of the springs began to be periodically curtailed because of pollution. The average flow from
1895 to 1978 was nearly 370 gallons per second. In 1992 a highly publicized campaign resulted
in legislation for higher standards of water control (Brune 1981).
3.3

Cultural Properties Inventory
Despite the fact that archeological work has occurred in what is now Zilker Park for

almost 80 years, information on cultural sites there is somewhat limited.
3.3.1

Eligible Property Types in Surrounding Area

3.3.1.1 The Barton Springs Archeological and Historical District

The PA is adjacent to the Barton Springs Archeological and Historical District. The State
Board of Review rejected the Austin Parks and Recreation Departments first NRHP nomination
form in November 1983. The nomination was revised and resubmitted at the urging of the
Board. On November 15, 1983 the State Board notified the Director of the Parks and Recreation
Department that the District had been approved at a state level of significance. The Barton
Springs Archeological and Historical District was listed in the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) on November 11, 1985. Five contributing members of the District are listed in
the nomination form: (1) prehistoric site 41TV2, (2) the site of the 1867 Rabb House - 41TV689,
(3) an abutment of a late 19th century bridge - 41TV690, (4) the Barton Springs Bath House and
adjacent spring enclosure, and (5) the Zilker Amphitheater. These components, three of the four
springs, and the pool together with some of the surrounding area make up the District. The five
members were also designated as State Archeological Landmarks in March 1994.

City of Austin
February 2007

3-8

Archaeological Background and Previous Work

Site 41TV2 is a prehistoric site set into a terrace. The earliest excavations in Travis
County were those of Dr. J. E. Pearce near Barton Springs in 1928 at the site now designated as
41TV2. Pearce’s documentation is meager, but the collections and records that exist, including
recollections by the late T. N. Campbell who visited the site during Pearce’s excavations, suggest
that deep, well-stratified cultural deposits are present along and near the right bank of Barton
Creek downstream from Barton Springs (Collins 1996). The district boundaries that encompass
this constituent site exclude areas where disturbance or shallow deposits are reported. The
NRHP nomination form states that site “is dated to a period from approximately 8500 years B.P.
to 200 years B.P. based on the presence of time diagnostic projectile points”. The projectile
points were recovered from excavations under J.E. Pearce in late 1920s. The excavations are
believed to have reached a depth of about 4 feet. However, because the terrace was delineated in
a geologic survey as Barton Creek Alluvium, older cultural deposits were suspected.
Excavations for the testing on the Zilker Loop Trail (Nash and Staples 2002) demonstrate that
the terrace is composed of Colorado River Alluvium.

Testing associated with the Jones

Memorial within 41TV2 suggests deposits from the Middle Archaic to Historic Period are
present but are often mixed by bioturbation and shrink-swell cracking due to high clay content.
The site is over 150m due east of the northeastern portion of the PA.
The Vara Daniel Site (41TV1364) is north of the project area, across Barton Creek, and
the site compromises much of contemporary Zilker Park. It has also been called the Vera Daniel
or the Vera Daniels Site. In anticipation of the construction of a proposed sewer line across the
valley floor between Barton Creek and the Colorado River, archaeologists with Espey, Huston,
and Associates conducted a subsurface reconnaissance that resulted in the discovery and
recording of the Vara Daniel site (41TV1364) and demonstrated the present of stratified
prehistoric archeological components (Espey, Huston, and Associates 1988). Two subsequent
assessments (Ricklis et al. 1991, Takac et al. 1992) added considerably to the understanding of
the site. Archeological Materials were found at varying depths from the surface to 8m below the
surface in a series of mechanically dug trenches and/or auger holes. Radiocarbon evidence dated
these deposits between ca. 10,000 and 1,000 years ago (Collins 1996).
The Rabb House Site (41TV689) is on the western bank of a small drainage that feeds
into Barton Creek. The site is an 1860’s homestead site that was destroyed by fire in 1962. The
boundaries of the portion of the District that encompasses 41TV689 reflect the limits of the
surficial scatter associated with the structure as mapped and recorded in 1980 for its NRHP
City of Austin
February 2007

3-9

Archaeological Background and Previous Work

application and the original definition of the site boundaries. A cistern, a low stone rubble pile,
and domestic vegetation are the only remaining features of the site. With the exception of the
cistern deposits, the 1980 nomination form suggested only 30 – 40% of the deposits may be
intact. The surficial scatter is not extant today and with the exception of the cistern, less than
10% of the deposits remain. The wastewater line that runs along the eastern edge of the project
area will clip the southeastern boundary of the site and may require the removal of the
aforementioned non-native Crepe Myrtle that defines the southeast corner of the historic
component.

The location of this Crepe Myrtle associated with the historic component of

41TV689 is well documented in the NRHP nomination forms and site forms on file at THC and
TARL.
A non-contributing prehistoric component of 41TV689 was discovered by shovel tests
during the first survey of the Zilker Loop Trail (Collins 1996) and later confirmed by a second
set of shovel tests in a separate investigation of the same trail (Nash and Trachman 2001).
However, shovel tests indicated the soils were disturbed to about 25 centimeters below the
surface (cmbs). It is likely that much of the area has been disturbed by domestic and agricultural
activities throughout its 100 year occupation.
Shovel testing in the area in and around the Rabb House site and on the same landform as
the PA was reported by Trachman in (Nash and Trachman 2001):
Segment B runs through the Rabb house site, 41TV689, and lies adjacent
to an intermittent drainage on the east and Barton Hills Drive to the
south. An open area and baseball field exists in the portion that is
bordered by Barton Hills Drive. The baseball field is bordered by a tree
line to the north and inside that tree line is located 41TV689.
Two shovel tests (ST’s 18 and 19) were placed in the line of the proposed
trail from Barton Hills Drive to the tree line. An additional test (ST20)
was placed in the proposed “construction staging area,” also located in
the baseball field. Two of the three tests were negative. Shovel tests 18
and 20 revealed an extra stratigraphic level at the top or uppermost
portion of the test. This appears to be clay loam fill placed for sodding
purposes associated with the baseball field. Shovel test 19 did not exhibit
this level, however it was located in a worn footpath. Shovel test 19 is
located at the tree line and likely represents the southern border for the
Rabb house site (41TV689). Domestic vegetation begins here.
Shovel tests 21 through 24 are within or adjacent to the present
boundaries of the National Register District. Shovel tests 21 and 22 were
positive and were located in site 41TV689, in the line of the city proposed
City of Austin
February 2007

3-10

Archaeological Background and Previous Work

trail. Shovel test 21 revealed one historic domestic artifact and an
abundance of prehistoric artifacts. Shovel test 22 did not have domestic
artifacts, but did have many prehistoric artifacts, including a bivalve shell
and ca. 35 shell fragments at the bottom of level 2/top of level 3. Shovel
tests 21 and 22 likely represent undisturbed, intact deposits with very little
to no clearance in topsoil for the proposed trail.
Shovel tests 23 and 24 are on each bank of the intermittent drainage in
Area A. These two tests also revealed intact soils, though only shovel test
(ST 24) possessed cultural material. Shovel test 24 is located on the
north/northeast side of the drainage (near the tree line of east pool
entrance).
Site 41TV690 is the right bank (south) abutment of a large limestone bridge that crossed
Barton Creek from the 1890s until 1900 when it was washed out by backwater from the
Colorado River (NRHP nomination form, THC files). No deposits are associated with the
structure. 41TV690 is the remnant bridge abutment from a stone bridge built across Barton
Creek ca. 1870. The bridge washed out in the flood of 1900 and the standing architecture is
remaining at the bridge to creek abutment on the right bank (south side) of the creek (Nash and
Trachman 2001). The Site is located immediately north of the northwestern portion of the PA.
The Zilker Amphitheater was built in 1910 and is included in the District because it
represents “20th century-recreational use” and for it’s close association with Andrew Zilker. The
1946 Barton Springs Bath House is included in the district for its exceptional architecture.

City of Austin
February 2007

3-11

Section 4
Testing Methods
The project area is located on a terrace subject to infrequent flooding overlooking Barton
Creek near its confluence with the Colorado River to the east. Several prehistoric and historic
sites are located in the area. Based on the results of this research it would appear that the project
area has a high probability for cultural resources.
4.1

Pedestrian Survey
A 100% pedestrian survey of all areas within the PA was conducted to locate any

archeological or historical sites that may be adversely affected by construction. The PA was
walked in 10 meter parallel transects. Only diagnostic artifacts and artifacts associated with
them were collected from surface survey contexts.
4.2

Subsurface Examination

4.2.1

Shovel Tests

•

The total PA is approximately 1.5 acres and is located in bottomlands (487-507 ft
AMSL) of the Colorado River. The revised minimum survey standards implemented
by the THC for projects that are 2 acres or less require at least three shovel tests (STs)
per acre. Based on these minimum requirements, an archaeological survey of the
Project Area required a minimum of 5 STs (Figure 2-2).

•

STs were dug at 30 cm in diameter and were excavated to sterile deposits. The STs
were dug in levels no thicker than 20 cm, and the excavated sediments were screened
through ¼-inch hardware.

•

All prehistoric artifacts were collected from STs. Machined metal artifacts (nails) and
non-diagnostic automatic bottling machine glass (soda bottle glass) were redeposited
into the backfilled shovel tests.

•

STs were placed no more than 30-meters apart in the spaces between the trenches. An
area of previously identified soil contamination is located in the west end and
southwest corner of the PA. This area is approximately 10-45-feet wide and 140-feet
long in maximum dimension. STs were placed close by but not within the identified
soil contamination.

City of Austin
February 2007

4-1

Testing Methods

4.2.2

Backhoe Trenches

Four backhoe trenches (BHTs) were excavated within the PA (Figure 2). Two BHTs
were placed in the area of proposed detention Pond 1. One BHT was placed in the southeastern
portion of the PA. A fourth BHT was placed adjacent to the northeastern portion of the PA,
between the location of a replacement wastewater line and a sparse surface scatter of artifacts.
Representative profiles of BHT walls were described and photographed. Artifacts discovered
within the trenches were collected and inventoried. A geomorphic assessment follows in the
results section.

City of Austin
February 2007

4-2

Section 5
Results of Testing and Recommendations
5.1

Geomorphic Assessment and Context of Cultural Artifacts
The project area is located on a floodplain on the southeastern (right) bank of Barton

Creek on the outside of a bend in the Creek 0.7-miles from the confluence with the Colorado
River. Barton Creek is a right bank tributary of the Colorado River and is located on the outside
of a bend in the River. Barton Creek lies within the West Bouldin drainage basin. This places
the project area within the Balcones Fault Zone in the Colorado River terraces physiographic
region (Garner and Young 1976). Lower Colorado River terrace deposits are divided into the
Sixth Street, First Street, Riverview, and Sand Beach terraces in order of descending age.
Terrace sediments in the project area are composed of a mixture of Colorado River and
Barton Creek overbank deposits that overlie coarse-grained channel sediment locally. The
general sequence of the soil horizons is “Ap – A – Bw – Cox – Cu” (see Appendix B for a
detailed description of each trench profile.

Representative photographs are included in

Appendix C). A weak soil has formed in the terrace deposits that does not conform to the soil
types reported in the Travis County Soil survey for the area (USDA 1974). The upper-most soil
horizon appears to be disturbed by a combination of plowing, mechanical grading, fill, shrinkswell cracks, buried utilities, old caliche roads and driveways, land clearing, trail construction,
baseball field construction and use, and domestic activities associated with the Rabb House. In
previous investigations, plow zones, domestic activities, land clearing, and other disturbances
were noted in the floodplain deposits (Baskin n.d., Collins 1996, and Nash and Staples 2002).
BHTs revealed soil profiles and sediments distinct from those recorded at the nearby prehistoric
site 41TV2 (Nash and Staples 2002).
The surface of the terrace is at a slightly lower elevation than the surface of site 41TV2
which has been interpreted as being in First Street terrace deposits (Baumgardner and Caran
2002). Weak soil development and incipient oxidation and position of the Cox and Cu horizons
relative to the surface and suggest that this terrace is more recent than the terrace associated with
41TV2 and therefore may be part of the Riverview Terrace. The Riverview terrace is Holocene
in age and has the potential to contain stratified cultural deposits. A total of five shovel tests
(STs) and four BHTs were excavated during the investigation (Figure 2-2). Two shovel tests
were negative (ST 3 and 5) and three (ST 1, 2, and 4) were positive for prehistoric cultural
City of Austin
February 2007

5-1

Results of Testing and Recommendations

artifacts. All of the BHTs were positive for prehistoric cultural artifacts. A total of 19 flakes and
one core were recovered from subsurface proveniences. Five additional flakes, a mussel shell,
and a ceramic sherd were found on the surface. The deepest artifact found was a flake in BHT 2
at 60-centimeters below the surface (60cmbs). No patterning of the artifacts was observed.
Modern glass and nails were found in the top levels of ST 2, ST 4, BHT 1, and BHT 2. No
anthropomorphically altered sediments or artifact concentrations or features were found in any of
the excavations and no diagnostic lithics were recovered. The locations of all shovel tests and
backhoe trenches are shown in Figure 2-2. The positive shovel tests and backhoe trenches
extend the boundaries of the prehistoric component of 41TV689. No historic artifacts or features
were observed within the APE that might be associated with the remaining significant,
contributing, historic component of 41TV689. Aside from the cistern located outside the APE
and the ornamentals, no previously recorded artifacts, artifact scatters, or features associated with
the historic component of 41TV689 were observed.
BHT 1 and ST 2 are located within the footprint of an abandoned baseball field in the
southeastern quadrant of the project area (Figure 2-2). Contours within this area are unnaturally
flat because of grading associated with the baseball field. There is a 7-foot elevation change
from the southern boundary of the project area to the 472-foot contour. The baseball field is
located in the same part of the terrace but the elevation change is only 3-feet, suggesting that as
much as 4-feet of fill has been added to the northern part of the southeastern quadrant. This fill
may have come from the southern edge of the project area. No artifacts were found in context
from BHT 1 but 1 flake was found in the back dirt pile and two were recovered from the surface.
A total of four flakes were found in ST 2. One was found in the 20-30cmbs level and the other
three were in the 40-60cmbs level.
BHT 2 is located in the southeast quadrant of the project area few meters west of the
proposed 12-inch wastewater line. The sandy paste bone tempered sherd and two flakes were
located within a shallow footpath west of BHT 2 and subject to sheetwash erosion (Figure 2-2).
The location of BHT 2 was chosen to examine whether or not intact subsurface cultural deposits
associated with the surface finds or with 41TV689 existed within or adjacent to the northeastern
portion of the APE. BHT 2 has a somewhat smaller combined A and B horizon depth than
typical at the site. This appears to be related to differential soil formation within the floodplain
rather than surface erosion. Two flakes were found in BHT 2. One flake was recovered at
30cmbs and a second at 60cmbs. The depth of the second flake coincides with the maximum
City of Austin
February 2007

5-2

Results of Testing and Recommendations

depth of shrink swell cracks as evidenced by a gravel filled crack scar about 20cm away within
the profile and the change in texture from sandy clay loam to sandy loam.
ST 5 is located in the south-central part of the project area. This test was negative for
cultural materials. Shovel test 4 is located in the north-central portion of the project area. One
flake was found at 0-20cmbs.
BHT 3 and 4 and ST 1 were excavated within the footprint of Pond 1 in the northwest
quadrant of the project area. Shovel test 1 was positive with four flakes unearthed at 0-20cmbs.
BHT 3 revealed one flake at 40cmbs and seven flakes were found while screening back dirt. No
signs of a buried soil or feature were found in the profile. One core was found in BHT 4 at
20cmbs.
ST 3 was located in the heavily wooded area of Pond 2. Thin clayey soils over channel
lag characterize the deposits in this area. No artifacts were recovered.
5.2

Recommendations
Within the project area, no further work is warranted. It is HDR’s recommendation that

construction of the Barton Hills Retrofit Project be allowed to begin without delay at this time.
A site amendment form will be submitted to TARL defining the current boundary of the noncontributing, prehistoric component of 41TV689, as well as providing up to date documentation
on the impacts of park use and maintenance on the contributing historic component of 41TV689
since its nomination. If any cultural remains are encountered during construction, all work
should cease and an HDR professional archaeologist should be called to assess the site. If the
site is assessed to be significant, further consultation with The City of Austin and the THC
should be pursued.

City of Austin
February 2007

5-3

Appendix A
Inventory of Collected Artifacts,
Barton Hills Retrofit Project
Austin, Travis County, Texas

Appendix A

Backhoe
Trench/Shovel
Test

Provenience
(ST/Level or
Surface)

Description

Date

Recorder

Shovel Test 1

0-20cmbs

4 lithic flakes

Sept. 1 2006

W.Wagner

Shovel Test 2

20-30cmbs

1 lithic flake

Sept. 6 2006

W.Wagner

Shovel Test 2

40-45cmbs

3 lithic flakes

Sept. 6 2006

W.Wagner

Shovel Test 4

0-20cmbs

1 lithic flake

Sept. 7 2006

W.Wagner

Surface collection

surface

1 mussel shell

Sept. 6 2006

W.Wagner

Surface collection

surface

2 lithic flakes

Sept. 6 2006

W.Wagner

Surface collection

surface

1 ceramic sherd

Sept. 6 2006

W.Wagner

Backhoe Trench 1

backdirt pile

1 lithic flake

Sept. 6 2006

W.Wagner

Backhoe Trench 1

surface

2 lithic flakes

Sept. 6 2006

W.Wagner

Backhoe Trench 2

30cmbs

1 lithic flake

Sept. 6 2006

W.Wagner

Backhoe Trench 2

60cmbs

1 lithic flake

Sept. 6 2006

W.Wagner

Backhoe Trench 3

40cmbs

1 lithic flake

Sept. 6 2006

W.Wagner

Backhoe Trench 3

backdirt pile

7 lithic flakes

Sept. 6 2006

W.Wagner

Backhoe Trench 4

20cmbs

1 lithic core

Sept. 6 2006

W.Wagner

City of Austin
February 2007

A-1

Appendix B
Backhoe Trench Profile Description

Appendix B

Backhoe Trench Profile Description
All soil colors are taken from dry samples and based on Munsell charts.
Trench 1
•

0-18cmbs: Ap Horizon - The Ap horizon is about 18cm thick and consists of a dark
yellowish brown (10 YR 3/4) calcareous sandy clay loam that has a subangular blocky
structure, with common organics, few pebbles (up to large pebble-sized), and common fine to
large roots. The soil from this horizon is homogenous and porous. The boundary is clear
although difficult to discern between the Ap and A Horizon below.

•

18-25cmbs: A Horizon - A Horizon contains common pebbles in a matrix of dark yellowish
brown (10 YR 3/4) calcareous sandy clay loam that has a subangular blocky structure, with
significant humus accumulation. The lower boundary is gradual and wavy.

•

25-48cmbs: Bw Horizon – The Bw Horizon is a dark yellowish brown (10YR4/6) sandy clay
loam with common pebbles. The pebbles are up to large pebble-sized subangular and
rounded limestone fragments. Sediments are weakly cemented and stage I/II carbonate
buildup is evidenced. The lower boundary is gradual and wavy.

•

48–98cmbs: Cox Horizon – This horizon is composed yellowish brown (10YR5/4) sandy
loam to 98cmbs. No humus appears in this horizon but some incipient oxidation has colored
the deposits. Common subangular and rounded limestone pebbles occur throughout the
horizon. Deposits are calcareous and weakly cemented but friable and have a granular
structure.

•

98-126cmbs: Cu Horizon - At 98 cmbs is a gravel zone with up to cobble-sized clasts is in a
matrix of yellow (10YR7/8) sandy loam. These deposits appear to be unaltered alluvium.

Trench 2
•

0-18cmbs: Ap Horizon - The Ap horizon is about 25cm cm thick and consists of a very dark
brown (7.5 YR 2.5/3) calcareous sandy clay loam that has a subangular blocky structure,
with common organics, few pebbles up to large pebble-sized, and common fine to large
roots. The boundary is clear and smooth between the A and the A-Bw Horizon below.

•

18-40cmbs: A-Bw Horizon – The A-Bw Horizon contains common gravel and consists of
terrace deposits with minor amounts of humus. The gravel consists of up to large pebblesized subangular and rounded limestone fragments. The matrix consists of dark yellowish
brown (10YR5/6), calcareous, sandy clay loam.

•

40-120cmbs: Cox Horizon – This horizon is composed yellowish brown (10YR5/4) sandy
loam. No humus appears in this horizon but some incipient oxidation has colored the
deposits. Common subangular and rounded limestone pebbles occur throughout the horizon.
Deposits are calcareous and weakly cemented but friable and have a granular structure.

City of Austin
February 2007

B-1

Appendix B

•

120-145cmbs: Cu Horizon – The Cu Horizon consists of unaltered alluvial sediments with
common gravels up to cobble-sized.

Trench 3
•

0 -25cmbs: Ap Horizon – The Ap horizon is about 20 to 25cm cm thick and consists of a
very dark brown (7.5 YR 2.5/3) calcareous sandy clay loam that has a subangular blocky
structure, with common organics, few pebbles up to large pebble-sized and common fine to
large roots. The soil from this horizon is homogenous and porous. The boundary is clear and
smooth between the Ap and A-Bw Horizon below.

•

25–40cmbs: A-Bw Horizon - The A-Bw Horizon contains common gravel and consists of
terrace deposits with minor amounts of humus. The gravel consists of up to large pebblesized subangular and rounded limestone fragments. The matrix consists of dark yellowish
brown (10YR3/6-7.5YR6/6), calcareous, sandy clay loam. Sediments are weakly cemented
and stage I/II carbonate buildup is evidenced.

•

40–90cmbs: Cox Horizon – From 40cmbs sediments grade from yellowish brown (10YR5/4)
sandy clay loam to yellow (10YR7/8) sandy loam at 90cmbs. No humus appears in this
horizon. Few to common subangular and rounded limestone pebbles occur throughout the
deposits. Deposits are calcareous and weakly cemented but friable and have a granular
structure.

•

90–140cmbs: Cu Horizon – The Cu Horizon is similar in composition and structure to Cox
horizon, however, no oxidation has colored the sediments (10YR7/6).

Trench 4
•

0-19cmbs: Ap Horizon – The Ap horizon is about 19cm thick and consists of a dark
yellowish brown (10 YR 4/4) calcareous sandy clay loam that has a subangular blocky
structure, with common organics, few pebbles (up to large pebble-sized), and common fine to
large roots. The soil from this horizon is homogenous and porous. The boundary is clear
although difficult to discern between the Ap and A-Bw Horizon below. The soil from this
horizon is homogenous and porous.

•

19-35cmbs: A-Bw Horizon - The Bw Horizon is a dark yellowish brown (10YR4/6) sandy
clay loam with common pebbles. The pebbles are up to large pebble-sized subangular and
rounded limestone fragments. Sediments are weakly cemented and stage I/II carbonate
buildup is evidenced. The lower boundary is clear and wavy.

•

35-85cmbs: Cox Horizon – This horizon is composed yellowish brown (10YR5/4) sandy
loam. No humus appears in this horizon but some incipient oxidation has colored the
deposits. Common subangular and rounded limestone pebbles occur throughout the horizon.
Deposits are calcareous and weakly cemented but friable and have a granular structure.

•

85-105cmbs: Cu Horizon - At 90 cmbs is a gravel zone with up to cobble-sized clasts is in a
matrix of yellow (10YR7/8) sandy loam. The matrix and deposits below appear to be
unaltered alluvial sediments.

City of Austin
February 2007

B-2

Appendix C
Backhoe Trench Profile and Shovel Test
Photographs

Appendix C

Backhoe Trench 2

Surface

18cm

Ap Horizon is about 25cm
cm thick and consists of a
very dark brown (7.5 YR
2.5/3) calcareous sandy
clay loam that has a
subangular blocky
structure, few pebbles
common fine to large roots.
The boundary is clear and
smooth between the A and
the A-Bw Horizon below.

22cm

A-Bw Horizon contains
common gravel up to large
pebble-sized, subangular
and rounded limestone
fragments. The matrix
consists of dark yellowish
brown (10YR5/6),
calcareous, sandy clay
loam.

80cm

Cox Horizon is composed
yellowish brown (10YR5/4)
sandy loam. No humus
appears in this horizon but
some incipient oxidation
has colored the deposits.
Common subangular and
rounded limestone pebbles
occur throughout the
horizon. Deposits are
calcareous and weakly
cemented but friable and
have a granular structure.
Lower boundary is diffuse.

25cm

Cu Horizon is a yellow
(10YR7/8) sandy loam with
up to cobble-sized clasts.
These deposits appear to
be unaltered alluvium.

Figure C-1. Profile of BHT 2 is typical of terraces soil profiles

City of Austin
February 2007

C-1

Appendix C

Gravel

Figure C-2. Profile of BHT 3. Contrast is exaggerated to show gravel in A-Bw Horizon

Figure C-3. Gravel zone dividing Cox Horizon above gravel from
Cu Horizon below gravel
City of Austin
February 2007

C-2

Appendix C

Figure C-4. Profile of BHT 4 (contrast exaggerated)
City of Austin
February 2007

C-3

Appendix C

Figure C-5. Shovel Test 2

City of Austin
February 2007

C-4

