Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Woodland Oaks Wastewater Treatment Plant
Proposed 1.3-Acre Expansion Tract,
Houston, Harris County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Committee Permit No. 5927
HJN 100024 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

A&S ENGINEERS, INC.
A&S Engineers, Inc.
Houston, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

May 2011

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Woodland Oaks Wastewater Treatment Plant
Proposed 1.3-Acre Expansion Tract,
Houston, Harris County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

A&S ENGINEERS, INC.
A&S Engineers, Inc.
10377 Stella Link Road
Houston, Texas 77025

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 100024 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5927

May 2011

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The Sunbelt Fresh Water Supply District (SFWSD) is proposing to expand the existing
Woodland Oaks Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) in northwestern Houston, Harris County,
Texas. The proposed project would consist of expanding the existing Woodland Oaks WWTP
onto an adjacent tract of land that measures approximately 82 meters (m) (270 feet [ft]) north to
south by 61 m (200 ft) east-to-west, covering a total area of approximately 0.5 hectares (ha)
(1.3 acres [ac]). The existing WWTP is located in the northeastern corner of the intersection of
Hollister Street and Kellwood Drive, and the proposed expansion tract is located immediately
adjacent to the northern boundary of the existing facility. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) of
the proposed undertaking would consist of the 0.5-ha (1.3-ac) proposed expansion tract.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the SFWSD, a political subdivision of
the State of Texas, which has applied for funding through the Texas Water Development Board
(TWDB) Development Fund (DSRF) Project No. 4191-02-01. As such, the project falls under
the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. As the project represents a publicly sponsored
undertaking with the potential to impact potentially significant cultural resources, the SFWSD
was required to provide for a cultural resource inventory and assessment of the APE and to
assess the project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. To meet
its responsibilities under applicable state laws, the SFWSD contracted with Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), via its engineering contractor A&S Engineers, Inc., of
Houston, Texas, to obtain all necessary clearances for cultural resources.
On April 20, 2010, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd, field supervisor, and Jared
Wiersema, field technician, under the overall supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal
Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resource survey of the APE to locate any cultural
resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project.
The survey was conducted by Horizon under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5927. The APE was
traversed by Horizon’s archeologists, the modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for
cultural resources, and a total of 4 shovel tests were excavated during the survey, thereby
meeting the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards for a project area of this
size.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey.

HJN 100024 AR

iii

Management Summary

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
new cultural resources were identified in the APE as a result of survey activities, and no
previously recorded sites occur in the vicinity of the project area. Furthermore, no listed historic
properties are present in the vicinity of the project area that would be adversely affected by the
proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for designation as State Archeological Landmarks (SALs) according to 13 TAC 26, and
no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It
is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely
event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point
during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously
surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the Texas Historical Commission
should be notified of the discovery.

iv

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ..................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 5
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 6
2.4
Flora and Fauna ............................................................................................ 7

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................11
3.1
Paleoindian Period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) ....................................................12
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) ........................................................12
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) .......................................................13
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) ...................................................14
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ......................................................15
3.6
Historic Period (ca. A.D. 1700 to Present) ....................................................15

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................21
4.1
Archival Research ........................................................................................21
4.2
Survey Methods ...........................................................................................22

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................27

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................29
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................29
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Archeological Landmark ...................30
6.3
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................30
6.4
Management Recommendations ..................................................................30

7.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................33
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 100024 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map ................................................. 2
Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ........................................................... 3
Figure 3. Overview of Access Road from Existing WWTP (Facing South) (APE Located in
Forested Area at Left) ..............................................................................................24
Figure 4. Typical View of Densely Forested Project Area (View East) ......................................24
Figure 5. Locations of Shovel Tests in Project Area .................................................................25

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1. Summary of Previously Recorded Sites within 1.0 Mile of Project Area ......................22

vi

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The Sunbelt Fresh Water Supply District (SFWSD) is proposing to expand the existing
Woodland Oaks Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) in northwestern Houston, Harris County,
Texas (Figures 1 to 2). The proposed project would consist of expanding the existing Woodland
Oaks WWTP onto an adjacent tract of land that measures approximately 82 meters (m)
(270 feet [ft]) north to south by 61 m (200 ft) east-to-west, covering a total area of approximately
0.5 hectares (ha) (1.3 acres [ac]). The existing WWTP is located in the northeastern corner of
the intersection of Hollister Street and Kellwood Drive, and the proposed expansion tract is
located immediately adjacent to the northern boundary of the existing facility. The Area of
Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed undertaking would consist of the 0.5-ha (1.3-ac)
proposed expansion tract.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the SFWSD, a political subdivision of
the State of Texas, which has applied for funding through the Texas Water Development Board
(TWDB) Development Fund (DSRF) Project No. 4191-02-01. As such, the project falls under
the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. As the project represents a publicly sponsored
undertaking with the potential to impact potentially significant cultural resources, the SFWSD
was required to provide for a cultural resource inventory and assessment of the APE and to
assess the project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. To meet
its responsibilities under applicable state laws, the SFWSD contracted with Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), via its engineering contractor A&S Engineers, Inc. (ASI),
of Houston, Texas, to obtain all necessary clearances for cultural resources.
On April 20, 2010, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd, field supervisor, and Jared
Wiersema, field technician, under the overall supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal
Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resource survey of the APE to locate any cultural
resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project.
The survey was conducted by Horizon under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5927. The APE was
traversed by Horizon’s archeologists, the modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for
cultural resources, and a total of 4 shovel tests were excavated during the survey, thereby
meeting the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) for a project
area of this size.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey.

HJN 100024 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map

2

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

HJN 100024 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

This report presents the results of the cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds
of the project area, respectively. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the survey, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report, and Appendix A presents data collected from shovel tests excavated during the survey.

4

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in Harris County, Texas, near the northwestern Houston city
limits. Harris County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas, and the
project area is located about 55 (km) (34 mi) northwest of Upper San Jacinto Bay, an inlet of the
Gulf of Mexico formed by the confluence of Buffalo Bayou and the San Jacinto River between
Houston and Baytown, Texas. The Gulf of Mexico represents a structural basin formed by
lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal Plain, which extends as far north as the Ouachita
uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists of seawarddipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin, that reflect
the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001). The Houston area is underlain
by rocks and unconsolidated sediments that are quite young in a geological sense, ranging from
modern to Miocene in age. These consist predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic bodies
arranged in an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine
facies making up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities
between these formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that
occurred during periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in this fill are of Late
Cretaceous age. As a result of the geometry of basin filling, successively younger rock units
crop out in subparallel bands from the basin margin toward the modern coastline.
The project area is situated in a small forested area north of Whiteoak Bayou
surrounded by developed, urbanized areas within the Houston city limits. Local drainage is to
the south, predominantly via overland sheet flow, into Whiteoak Bayou. Whiteoak Bayou, in
turn, flows generally southeastward into Buffalo Bayou, which ultimately discharges into the Gulf
of Mexico at Upper San Jacinto Bay. Topographically, the project area is extremely flat,
averaging only about 16 m (52 ft) above mean sea level.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project area is underlain by the Pleistocene-age Lissie Formation (Fisher 1982;
Shelby et al. 1968). The Lissie Formation consists of clay, silt, sand, and some siliceous
gravels that extend up to 61 m (200 ft) in depth (Van Siclen 1985).

HJN 100024 AR

5

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

The project area is situated on soils of the Clodine-Addicks-Gessner Association
(Wheeler 1976). This association consists of nearly level loamy soils on upland prairies.
Specifically, the project area is underlain by Clodine loam (Cd), which consists of deep,
undifferentiated loam sediments deposited during the early Pleistocene epoch (Wheeler 1976).
While aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in deep alluvial
sediments adjacent to major streams in Texas, the relative antiquity of the fluviodeltaic loamy
and clayey sediments that constitute the soils on the coastal plain, such as those that comprise
the current project area, suggests that any cultural resources would be constrained to the
modern ground surface, rather than in buried contexts, in erosional settings lacking integrity.
Intact, buried archeological deposits may occur within alluvial sediments near major streams,
though no alluvial sediments of Holocene age are mapped within the current project area.
However, the proximity of the project area to Whiteoak Bayou approximately 0.3 km (0.2 mi) to
the south may suggest an elevated potential for aboriginal cultural resources. Historic-age
cultural resources may occur in any physiographic setting, though they are comparatively rare in
the frequently flooded, marshy environs of Southeast Texas.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
While the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway
(1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes
3 separate climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late
Glacial Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present).
Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas
was considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region
was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and
Holloway 1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a
slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous
woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway
1985). During the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have
been more stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post
oak savannas. The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued
into the mid-Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more
mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and
Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were
probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern US and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects
the influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with
the urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and concrete to give
the Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout

6

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

much of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water,
humidity in the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often
exceeds 50% even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high
humidity characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and
a modest diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly
high temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in
January to a high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to
9°C (38 to 47°F) in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average
low temperatures range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range
from 27 to 29°C (75 to 79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The Houston region experiences 2 precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott 2001;
Wheeler 1976). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of
infrequent cold fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs
in the late summer to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical
storms and hurricanes from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter
and early spring are relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional
thunderstorms that are relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual
precipitation varies from a low of approximately 100 centimeters (cm) (40 inches [in]) to a high
of more than 132 cm (52 in). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5 to 8 cm (2 to
3 in) in March to more than 19 cm (7.5 in) occurring locally on the coast during September.
Almost all of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely rare, occurring in
measurable amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Harris County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texas biotic province (Blair
1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces
and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some species reach
the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahon et al. (1984) further
define 4 broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic province that lies
on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie, (3) coastal gallery
forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are
strongly controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the
seasonal water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically
dominated by little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter
environments are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria,
bulrushes, smooth cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush,
saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal
waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained

HJN 100024 AR

7

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

environments are characterized by such taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum,
gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass, red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort.
A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon,
nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and
many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish
to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs
and woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the
north and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses
are found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver
bluestem, buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian
sunflower, Engelman daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow
neptunia, snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush,
bluebonnet, ragweed, croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring
in the coastal prairie include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live
oak, elm, hackberry, bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as
the coastal prairie grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland
environment with common stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie
is home to a diverse fauna, including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many
small rodents, amphibians, reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and
pronghorn were also present at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbriar, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are
grasses such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest
include white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and
rodents, turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various times in the
past, and a number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger
deciduous trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory
vegetation varies from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and
young trees. Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle,
greenbriar, Virginia creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A
variety of fauna is also present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit,

8

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

mink, skunk, various small rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was
also present at times in the past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the
transition zone to the coastal prairie environment.

HJN 100024 AR

9

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21county area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 200 km (124 mi) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline. Much of the
archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern Great
Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990).
Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These 2 subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25 km (16 mi) inland from the coast that covers the area influenced by
Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological variability
characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands, marine
coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable ecological
diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to
denote Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural
characteristics of Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring
regions. For instance, the Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and
Southeast Texas, and Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for
Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time
in Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit
evidence of reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be
associated with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of
subsistence-related activities. Inland sites also tend to contain modest pottery assemblages,
fired clay balls (at some sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal
sites tend to consist of multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain oyster shell tools,
large quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), numerous bone tools, and only a few
lithic artifacts.

HJN 100024 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period.
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is
represented by the Paleoindian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred endscrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
Paleoindian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas
are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the Paleoindian period. There is
little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the Paleoindian stage is divided into 2 periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
Paleoindian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late Paleoindian
period (8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far
less pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and
corresponding decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a
diversified resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas,
however, this hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The
appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone
assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural

12

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

stage. Material culture shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in
the application of groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
In Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains.
Many of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and
several new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and
probably the Gary-Kent series.
The Late Archaic period (1,500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is
characterized by Gary, Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos
points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition
developed in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981;
Patterson 1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period
but reached full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as
boatstones and bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang
knives, stingray spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial
practices included the systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre,
and use of locally made grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most
burials are found in extended supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials
are also known. Burial direction is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to
site. Patterson et al. (1993) report that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary
tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area
by about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the
Conroe-Livingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears
to have progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995).
Southeastern Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where
Aten (1983) established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
129 km (80 mi) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal exception of a
few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found on the Gulf
coast west of the Sabine Lake area.

HJN 100024 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods
(Aten 1984; Patterson 1995; Perttula et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility
ware throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown
Plain for about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods
before once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety,
Goose Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor
pottery types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway
(Aten 1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte
types are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste
(like Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined
by the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the
latter part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in
Southeast Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the
Late Prehistoric period (Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995;
Wheat 1953). In fact, Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in
Southeast Texas as early as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points
that consisted of marginally retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a
generalized date of adoption of the bow-and-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca.
A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas. In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to
be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba,
Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial sequence for these point types has not been
established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn points appear to predate Perdiz points
throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto
Plain and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek
pottery remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt
Coated pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

14

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue.
Aten (1983) has
reconstructed the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century,
including the Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (possibly Karankawa), and Tonkawa. The
presence of the Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central
Texas in the 17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought
to have occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the
corresponding mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east
of the San Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe
may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic
Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and
Cuney points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified
by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. A.D. 1700 TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez
Cabeza de Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near
Galveston Bay; however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until
after 1700. The first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission
system, as well as the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native
culture and social systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where
the burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as
increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the
time heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous
Indian population was greatly diminished. The Alabama/Coushatta Indians who currently reside
in Southeast Texas are migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early
19th centuries (Newcomb 1961).
Although Spain claimed the Texas Gulf Coast, few Europeans visited the future Harris
County between 1528 and 1821 1. It is possible that de Vaca ascended the San Jacinto River

1

The following history of Harris County, Texas, derives from Bolton (1970), Freund (1954), Gray (1965),
Henson (1986), Henson and Ladd (1988), Jenkins (1973), McComb (1981), Pomeroy (1994), Puryear
and Winfield (1976), Sibley (1968), Taylor (1955), and Woods (1959), as summarized in The Handbook of
Texas Online.

HJN 100024 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

from Galveston Island around 1529 to trade with the woodland Indians, but his adventures failed
to stimulate interest in the Texas coast. A few French traders from Louisiana visited Indians
living on Spring Creek between the 1730s and 1745, but they established no settlements. A
Spanish mission and presidio complex, El Orcoquisac, was maintained near the mouth of the
Trinity from 1756 to 1771 to monitor and oppose the intrusion of foreigners. In 1746, Captain
Joaquín de Orobio y Basterra from La Bahía visited the Orcoquisac villages along Spring Creek
while looking for French traders. He reported the lack of roads or maps and on his return
blazed a trail westward to find the Old San Antonio Road, on which he had traveled to
Nacogdoches on his way to the lower Trinity and San Jacinto rivers. The first Anglo-Americans
to explore Harris County were members of the various filibustering expeditions launched from
New Orleans between 1815 and 1820 to aid the Mexican Republicans rebelling against Spain.
Using Galveston Island and Bolivar Peninsula as a base, the men belonging to the expeditions
and encampments of Louis Michel Aury, Francisco Xavier Mina, Jean Laffite, and James Long
looked around the San Jacinto estuary for future home sites—their expected reward for freeing
Mexico from Spain. Some of these men were among the pioneer settlers arriving by boat from
Louisiana in early 1822, just after the Mexican War of Independence.
Responding to Stephen F. Austin’s advertisements, the families wrongly assumed that
the San Jacinto estuary was part of his empresario grant. Some moved to the Brazos River in
1824, but merchants and boatmen remained to exploit what turned out to be the best
transportation system in Texas and to petition successfully for inclusion in the Austin grant.
Since Galveston Island and the Gulf shore were forbidden to Anglo settlement, Harris County
was the southeastern border of the colony. The pioneers found no Indians living in the future
Harris County. In July 1824, a state land commissioner, the Baron de Bastrop, arrived and
spent 2 months issuing 29 titles to settlers, even though surveys were incomplete. The
pioneers, including Nathaniel Lynch, William Scott, and John R. Harris, chose sites along
Buffalo Bayou, the San Jacinto River, and the San Jacinto estuary. Between 1828 and 1833,
when Austin’s colonization effort virtually ended, 23 more families secured titles elsewhere in
the county, usually along watercourses. In 1826, John R. Harris laid out Harrisburg on his
league where Brays Bayou joined Buffalo Bayou, the head of navigation. He opened a store
and built a saw and grist mill, while his brothers captained vessels between there and New
Orleans and even Tampico.
By 1833, Harrisburg was an established port of entry for immigrants and freight destined
for the upper Brazos River communities of San Felipe and Washington. Moreover, it was the
hub for east-to-west roads. Eastward from Harrisburg in 1830, travelers crossed the San
Jacinto River on Lynch’s Ferry on their way to Anahuac, Liberty, or Nacogdoches. Opposite
Harrisburg, a road paralleled Buffalo Bayou heading northwest to a community on Spring Creek,
then forked for the Brazos villages. A third important road followed the south bank of Brays
Bayou for 24 km (15 mi) to a community on Oyster Creek near the site of present-day Stafford
in Fort Bend County. This area was known as the San Jacinto District from 1824 until 1833,
when it was renamed the Harrisburg District. From 1824 through 1827, Humphrey Jackson was
the alcalde for the San Jacinto District, which stretched from Lynchburg on the San Jacinto
River to the site of present-day Richmond on the west, and from Spring Creek to Clear Creek.
Jackson reported to Stephen F. Austin until 1828, when the newly instituted ayuntamiento at

16

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

San Felipe relieved the empresario and comisarios were named. The final stage of
development under the Mexican system occurred on 30 December 1835, when the General
Council set the boundaries of Harrisburg Municipality.
Harrisburg Municipality was the home of both President David G. Burnet and Vice
President Lorenzo de Zavala of the new Republic of Texas. They were elected by the
delegates at Washington after midnight on 16 March 1836, and the next morning left for
Harrisburg, where water transportation offered an escape if the Mexican army should win. On
25 March, the group reached Harrisburg, where the president conducted business for the next
2 weeks. Burnet and his bride had moved to Lynchburg from New Jersey in 1831 with
equipment for a steam sawmill that he built on the San Jacinto River above Lynch’s Ferry.
Declining to claim a headright, he bought land from Lynch for his home on a small bay below
the ferry. He was not chosen to represent his neighborhood in 1832, 1833, 1835, or 1836
because of his pro-Mexican views. Delegates, torn by rivalries, chose him because he was not
a delegate. Zavala, a refugee from Santa Antonio López de Santa Anna’s wrath, bought a
house on the north side of Buffalo Bayou below Harrisburg in August 1835, and his New Yorkborn second wife and 2 children joined him in December. The republic’s officials evacuated
Harrisburg by steamboat to Lynchburg on 12 April, when word arrived that Santa Anna’s troops
were crossing the Brazos below Richmond. The steamboat Cayuga later took the officials and
their families to Galveston Island. A constant stream of refugees from the upper Brazos
settlements had been crossing Harrisburg Municipality since mid-March en route to the US.
Santa Anna and his advance units reached Harrisburg at midnight on 14 April and, after
a day of looting, set fire to the settlement on 16 April. The general dispatched a cavalry troop to
Morgan’s Point on 16 April that almost captured the Burnet family. The battle of San Jacinto
took place on 20 and 21 April opposite Zavala’s house on widow Peggy McCormick’s farm,
where perhaps 600 dead soldiers remained unburied when neither commander ordered
interment.
Harrisburg County was formed by the First Congress on 22 December 1836. The
lawmakers also named Andrew Briscoe chief justice, and the infant city of Houston the county
seat and national capital. The county encompassed the territory of the old municipality plus
Galveston Island (the mainland was attached to Brazoria County) until May 1838, when its
modern boundaries were established. In December 1839, Congress changed the name to
Harris County in honor of John R. Harris. The county briefly lost its northwest corner in 1841
when Spring Creek residents tried to form a separate county. The first county court, convened
in February 1837, was composed of the chief justice (called the county judge after 1861), the
sheriff, the clerk, and 2 justices of the peace who served as associate justices.
Harrisburg recovered from the Mexican Revolution slowly. By 1853, it had a steam mill
and was the terminus for the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos, and Colorado Railway, which crossed the
county to Stafford’s Point to facilitate the shipment of cotton and sugar. Five other railroads
followed before the Civil War. The Galveston, Houston, and Henderson connected the island to
the mainland, while the Texas and New Orleans constructed tracks along the north side of
Buffalo Bayou to Liberty and Orange, thus enabling Confederate troops from Harris County to
reach the Neches River on their way to Virginia. The Houston and Texas Central ran west from

HJN 100024 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

town to Cypress, Hockley, and Hempstead. The Houston Tap and Brazoria linked Houston with
the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos, and Colorado south of town and had a line to Columbia to serve the
Brazoria County sugar plantations.
Early settlers in Harris County were mainly southerners bringing their black slaves.
Besides cultivating field crops, some of the African Americans worked the cattle on the openrange ranches, particularly in the area south of Buffalo Bayou, which remained ranching country
into the early 20th century. By the 1840s, a number of Germans and French had immigrated to
Harris County. Both groups included city-dwelling artisans, merchants, and farmers—some
Catholic, some Protestant. Many of the immigrant agrarians settled north and west of Houston
and established successful truck and dairy farms that drew Europeans through the turn of the
century. Contrary to legend, few Mexican prisoners chose to remain in Harris County when all
were released on 21 April 1837 by President Sam Houston. The 1850 US census revealed no
Mexican-born males of the right age in Harris County or surrounding counties. A few Mexican
families lived in Houston in the 1880s. It was the economic opportunities offered by the
Houston Ship Channel and the railroads, combined with the unsettled political conditions
following the Mexican Revolution, that brought Mexicans to Houston. Most settled in the city
close to their work and the Catholic churches.
While the first settlers lived along the streams, those arriving after the Civil War chose
sites along the railroads that crisscrossed Harris County. By 1890, land developers in the
Midwest had purchased land along the new North Galveston, Houston, and Kansas City
Railroad, which ran east from Houston along the south side of Buffalo Bayou towards Morgan’s
Point and south to the mouth of Clear Creek. They expected to attract other Midwesterners to
raise fruit, berries, and vegetables or just to seek relief from cold winters. Pasadena, Deer Park,
and La Porte were established in 1892, and Seabrook followed in 1900. South Houston,
Genoa, and Webster developed along the Galveston, Houston, and Henderson Railroad after
the 1870s. Around the turn of the century, Japanese were invited to the Webster area to
develop rice farms on the flat prairies and also at a site on a branch line of the Gulf, Colorado,
and Santa Fe Railway south of Houston that became Mykawa. Between 1911 and 1936, the
Galveston-Houston Electric Railway, called the Interurban, ran parallel to the Galveston,
Houston, and Henderson Railroad and provided 30-minute service from Webster to Houston.
In the 1960s, the land east of Webster became the home of the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) Manned Spacecraft Center, renamed the Lyndon B. Johnson
Space Center in 1973. Houston quickly annexed the area. The development changed the rural
aspect of the area when several new towns sprang up along the north shore of Clear Lake, the
largest being Clear Lake City.
Northern Harris County developed similarly. After the Civil War, other railways such as
the Houston and Great Northern, the Trinity and Brazos Valley, the Houston East and West
Texas, and the Burlington-Rock Island entered north Harris County to converge on Houston.
The lumbering and farming interests established small towns such as Spring and Tomball along
the tracks. The population of Humble, near the Houston East and West Texas Railway,
increased with the oil boom at Moonshine Hill in 1905.

18

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

Harris County east of the San Jacinto River remained an agricultural community
focusing on rice culture in the 1890s. Its only commercial developments were small boatyards
at Lynchburg and Goose Creek and a brick factory on Cedar Bayou that mushroomed during
the 1880s to supply a building boom in Galveston. Between 1903 and 1907, oil was discovered
on the eastern shore of the San Jacinto estuary at Goose Creek and Tabbs Bay. Migrant
roughnecks and their families moved to the area and established a temporary boomtown amid
the derricks between 1915 and 1917. The shantytown was replaced in 1917 by Pelly, which
was built on private land above the noisy and dirty oil camp. In 1919, Ross Sterling and his
Humble Oil and Refining Company (now ExxonMobil) built a refinery on the San Jacinto above
the mouth of Goose Creek. The site was bordered by the Humble company town, Baytown, for
workers, and a middle-class enclave, Goose Creek, for executives and others. Pelly and Goose
Creek vied for dominance, and after Humble sold the company houses to the workers beginning
in the late 1920s, the 3 towns consolidated to become the “Tri-Cities” in the 1930s and finally to
be renamed Baytown in 1948. Eastern Harris County also had an electric interurban train, the
Houston-North Shore Railroad, which in 1925 connected the 3 towns to Crosby and ran along
the north side of Buffalo Bayou to downtown Houston.
The development of Harris County as an industrial power began in 1911, when voters
approved the formation of the Harris County Ship Channel Navigation District. Authorized by
Congress and approved by the state legislature, the district could improve the waterway and
manage the waterfront within the county. It immediately issued bonds to widen and deepen the
channel to make the Houston port accessible to oceangoing vessels. In 1914, the US Army
Corps of Engineers finished deepening the existing 80-km- (50-mi-) long channel to 8 m (25 ft)
from the Gulf through Galveston Bay and up the San Jacinto River and Buffalo Bayou to the
district’s turning basin at the Port of Houston. By 1918, petroleum refineries began locating
along Buffalo Bayou and the San Jacinto River, as did various other industries. Since that time,
the channel has been deepened to 15 m (50 ft) and widened to accommodate larger vessels.
The very profitable Harris County Navigation District owns the wharves and warehouses around
the turning basin (about 3.2 km [2.0 mi] above old Harrisburg), the Long Reach docks, and
various other facilities, including a bulk handling plant at Greens Bayou, the terminal railroad,
and the container facility at the Bayport industrial complex below Morgan’s Point. In addition, in
the 1950s, the district joined national and state governments to build the Washburn Tunnel
under Buffalo Bayou from Pasadena to the north side and the Baytown-La Porte tunnel beneath
the San Jacinto River to reduce the number of hazardous automobile ferries. Exports from the
port include rice, wheat, grain sorghums, cotton, caustic soda, cement, and petroleum products.
Imports include crude oil, iron ore, molasses, coffee, gypsum, and automobiles.
Another venture authorized by Harris County voters was the Harris County Domed
Stadium, which was completed in 1965 and has been leased to the Houston Sports Association.
The Astrodome, the first stadium of its kind, was touted as the “Eighth Wonder of the World.”
The county also maintains 2 public hospitals in Houston and, since 1935, has worked to control
flooding through the Harris County Flood Control District.

HJN 100024 AR

19

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for designation as Texas State Archeological Landmarks (SALs)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their SAL
assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
on the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the
National Park Service’s (NPS) online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas
State Historical Association’s and the General Libraries at The University of Texas at Austin’s
Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a program of intensive survey of the project area. No
cultural resources were documented as a result of this survey, so the second and third of these
goals were not pursued. The rest of this chapter presents the methodological background for
the current investigations and the specific survey methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey corridor. Archival research conducted on the THC’s
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas indicated that 17 previously recorded archeological sites
have been recorded within 1.0 km (0.6 mi) of the APE, primarily along the banks of Whiteoak
Creek (Table 1). Of the 17 previously recorded sites, 13 sites are prehistoric aboriginal sites,
1 site is a historic aboriginal site, and 3 sites are 20th-century Euro-American sites. Most of the
17 prehistoric aboriginal sites were recorded by amateur archeologists in the 1970s, and
minimal information was recorded aside from notes that the sites each consisted of a small
handful of aboriginal lithic and/or ceramic artifacts. Site 41HR406 was described as a bison kill

HJN 100024 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Table 1. Summary of Previously Recorded Sites within 1.0 Mile of Project Area
Site
No.

Cultural
Affiliation

Site Type

Site Size

NRHP
Eligibility

41HR240

Unknown prehistoric

Aboriginal lithic scatter

Unknown

Unknown

41HR249

Archaic (?)

Aboriginal lithic and
ceramic scatter

Unknown

Unknown

41HR281

Archaic (?) to
Late Prehistoric (?)

Aboriginal lithic and
ceramic scatter

Unknown

Unknown

41HR282

Archaic (?) to
Late Prehistoric (?)

Aboriginal lithic and
ceramic scatter

Unknown

Unknown

41HR284

Unknown prehistoric

Aboriginal lithic scatter

Unknown

Unknown

41HR285

Late Prehistoric

Aboriginal ceramic scatter

Unknown

Unknown

41HR286

Late Prehistoric

Aboriginal ceramic scatter

Unknown

Unknown

41HR288

Late Prehistoric

Aboriginal lithic scatter

Unknown

Unknown

41HR299

Late Prehistoric

Aboriginal lithic and
ceramic scatter

Unknown

Unknown

41HR304

Unknown prehistoric

Aboriginal lithic scatter

Unknown

Unknown

41HR406

Historic Native American

Aboriginal bison kill site

6x6m

Unknown

41HR610

20th-century Euro-American

Historic farmstead

80 x 120 m

Ineligible

41HR611

20th-century Euro-American

Historic farmstead

60 x 80 m

Ineligible

41HR770

Unknown prehistoric

Aboriginal lithic scatter

5x5m

Ineligible

41HR771

Unknown prehistoric

Aboriginal lithic scatter

14 x 15 m

Unknown

41HR772

20th-century Euro-American

Historic dairy facility

190 x 140 m

Ineligible

41HR773

Unknown prehistoric

Aboriginal lithic scatter

6x6m

Unknown

NRHP
USGS

National Register of Historic Places
United States Geological Survey

site containing faunal bones, antlers, chipped stone tools, and metal projectile points. The
remaining 3 sites consist of 2 20th-century EuroAmerican farmsteads and 1 20th-century dairy
facility.
Several large linear and block-area surveys have been conducted in the general vicinity
of the project area. No previous cultural resource surveys have covered any portion of the
current APE, and no cultural resources have been recorded within the current project’s APE.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

On April 20, 2010, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd, field supervisor, and Jared
Wiersema, field technician, under the overall supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal
Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resource survey of the APE to locate any cultural
resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project.
The survey consisted of pedestrian walkover of the APE with systematic shovel testing. Field
conditions were generally favorable at the time of the survey—the spring sky was slightly

22

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

overcast, but visibility was good. The APE is situated entirely within a forested upland area
immediately north of an existing WWTP facility (Figures 3 to 4). Access to the project area was
obtained via a gravel road that passes through the existing Woodland Oaks WWTP, and the
entire project area consists of moderately dense woodland. While urban development has been
extensive surrounding the project area, the project area itself appears to be relatively intact, with
no obvious signs of disturbance.
In general, intensive cultural resource survey activities entail a pedestrian walkover with
surface inspection as well as excavation of subsurface probes, such as shovel tests and/or
backhoe trenches. The APE was traversed on foot by Horizon archeologists in parallel
transects, and the modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for aboriginal and historicage cultural resources. The TSMASS for cultural resource surveys state that, for block-area
projects, a minimum of 3 subsurface probes per acre is required in a project area of this size
unless field conditions warrant excavation of more probes (e.g., due to the presence of culturally
sensitive areas) or less probes (e.g., due to extensive prior disturbances or cultural lowprobability areas). In the event that a probe yields evidence of subsurface cultural deposits,
additional probes may be necessary to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of the
subsurface deposits associated with the cultural resource. Thus, a minimum of 4 subsurface
probes would be required within the 0.5-ha (1.3-ac) APE. Horizon excavated a total of 4 shovel
tests during the survey, thereby meeting the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this
size (Figure 5). In general, shovel tests measured approximately 30 cm (12 in) in diameter and
were excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the top of preHolocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable, and all sediments were screened
through 6.35-millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth. In practice, shovel tests were terminated
at depths of 40 to 45 cm below surface (cmbs) due to the presence of dense dark gray clay.
Specific shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.
In addition to shovel testing, the TSMASS require backhoe trenching in stream terraces
and other areas with the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that
shovel tests are capable of reaching (approximately 80 to 100 cmbs or more in sandy sediments
or 40 to 60 cmbs in clayey sediments). It was determined during the pedestrian survey that
deep Holocene-age alluvial sediments that would require backhoe trenching were not present
within the APE. Consequently, backhoe trenching was not conducted within the APE during the
survey, and the pedestrian walkover with shovel testing is considered to constitute an adequate
survey technique for assessing the potential of the project area to contain cultural resources.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic
log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and
non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same
location in which they were found. As no cultural resources were observed during the survey,
the collections policy was not brought into play.

HJN 100024 AR

23

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 3. Overview of Access Road from Existing WWTP (Facing South)
(APE Located in Forested Area at Left)

Figure 4. Typical View of Densely Forested Project Area (View East)

24

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

Figure 5. Locations of Shovel Tests in Project Area

HJN 100024 AR

25

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

The Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all subsurface probes,
including shovel tests and backhoe trenches, were determined using hand-held Garmin
ForeTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices based on the North American Datum of
1983 (NAD 83).
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project areas as defined in
36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3. The TSMASS requirements for subsurface
probes were exceeded for a project area of this size.

26

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The SFWSD is proposing to expand the existing Woodland Oaks WWTP in northwestern
Houston, Harris County, Texas. The proposed project would consist of expanding the existing
Woodland Oaks WWTP onto an adjacent tract of land that measures approximately 82 m
(270 ft) north to south by 61 m (200 ft) east-to-west, covering a total area of approximately
0.5 ha (1.3 ac). The existing WWTP is located in the northeastern corner of the intersection of
Hollister Street and Kellwood Drive, and the proposed expansion tract is located immediately
adjacent to the northern boundary of the existing facility. The APE of the proposed undertaking
would consist of the 0.5-ha (1.3-ac) proposed expansion tract.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the SFWSD, a political subdivision of
the State of Texas, which has applied for funding through the TWDB DSRF Project No. 419102-01. As such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. As the
project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact potentially
significant cultural resources, the SFWSD was required to provide for a cultural resource
inventory and assessment of the APE and to assess the project’s possible impacts on any
significant cultural resources in the APE. To meet its responsibilities under applicable state
laws, the SFWSD contracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), via its
engineering contractor ASI of Houston, Texas, to obtain all necessary clearances for cultural
resources.
On April 20, 2010, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd, field supervisor, and Jared
Wiersema, field technician, under the overall supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal
Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resource survey of the APE to locate any cultural
resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project.
The survey was conducted by Horizon under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5927. The APE was
traversed by Horizon’s archeologists, the modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for
cultural resources, and a total of 4 shovel tests were excavated during the survey, thereby
meeting the TSMASS for a project area of this size.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey.

HJN 100024 AR

27

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for designation
as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their SAL
evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with
important historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of
Texas, archeological resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the
significance of archeological resources for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) and for designation as SALs, respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory
process.

HJN 100024 AR

29

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ARCHEOLOGICAL LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include the following:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are
located in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any
county, city, or political subdivision of the state are state archeological landmarks and are
eligible for designation.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under
Section 26.8 of Part 2 of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may
designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

6.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologists, the modern ground surface was
thoroughly inspected for cultural resources, and a total of 4 shovel tests were excavated during
the survey, thereby meeting the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size. No
cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of the
survey.

6.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
new cultural resources were identified in the APE as a result of survey activities, and no
previously recorded sites occur in the vicinity of the project area. Furthermore, no listed historic

30

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

properties are present in the vicinity of the project area that would be adversely affected by the
proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26, and no further archeological work is
recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the
proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains
or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 100024 AR

31

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory,
pp. 72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The
Florida State Museum, Gainesville.

Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bolton, H.E.
1970
Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.

HJN 100024 AR

33

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.

Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas.
Reports of Investigations, No. 8,
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Fisher, W.L.
1982
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Houston Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Freund, M. (editor and translator)
1954
Gustav Dresel's Houston Journal. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Gray, W.F.
1965
From Virginia to Texas, 1835. Fletcher Young, Houston.
Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Henson, M.S.
1986
History of Baytown. Bay Area Heritage Society, Baytown, Texas.
Henson, M.S., and K. Ladd
1988
Chambers County: A Pictorial History. Donning, Norfolk, Virginia.
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Jenkins, J.H. (editor)
1973
The Papers of the Texas Revolution, 1835-1836, 10 vols. Presidial Press, Austin.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.

34

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
McComb, D.G.
1981
Houston: A History. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
McMahon, C.A., R.G. Frye, and K.L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:163.

Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Perttula, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

HJN 100024 AR

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

35

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Pomeroy, C.D., Jr.
1994
Pasadena: The Early Years Pomerosa Press, Pasadena, Texas.
Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Puryear, P.A., and N. Winfield, Jr.
1976
Sandbars and Sternwheelers: Steam Navigation on the Brazos.
University Press, College Station.

Texas A&M

Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc.,
Corpus Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330.

Shelby, C.A., M.K. McGowen, S. Aranow, W.L. Fisher, L.F. Brown, Jr., J.H. McGowen, C.G.
Groat, and V.E. Barnes
1968
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Beaumont Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin (revised 1992).
Sibley, M.M.
1968
The Port of Houston. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C.
Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Taylor, V.H.
1955
The Spanish Archives of the General Land Office of Texas. Lone Star, Austin.
(USDA) US Department of Agriculture
2010
Digital orthophoto quarter-quadrangle, Hedwig Village and Satsuma, Texas. National
Agriculture Imagery Program, Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
(USGS) US Geological Survey
1982a Hedwig Village, Texas, 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle.
1982b

Satsuma, Texas, 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle

Van Siclen, D.C.
1985
Pleistocene Meander-Belt Ridge Patterns in the Vicinity of Houston, Texas.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 35:525-532.

36

100024_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Wheeler, F.F.
1976
Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Woods, H.
1959
Galveston-Houston Electric Railway. Electric Railway Publications, Los Angeles.

HJN 100024 AR

37

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodland Oaks WWTP
Proposed 3.1-Acre Expansion Tract, Houston, Harris County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates

1

ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

MM-1

257328

3308048

0-25

Grayish-brown silty loam

25-40

Dark gray clay

0-35

Grayish-brown silty clay

35-40

Dark gray clay

0-30

Grayish-brown silty loam

30-40

Dark gray clay

0-40

Grayish-brown silty clay

40-45

Dark gray clay

MM-2

JW-1

JW-2

257339

257355

257362

3308099

3308046

3308129

Soils

Artifacts
None

None

None

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 100024 AR

A-1

