Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project,
Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas
By:
Charles E. Bludau, Jr., Jeffrey D. Owens, and Jesse O. Dalton

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8551
BOA042-1016NARPS

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Berg-Oliver Associates, Inc.
Houston, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

March 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project,
Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas
By:
Charles E. Bludau, Jr., Jeffrey D. Owens, and Jesse O. Dalton

Prepared for:

Berg-Oliver Associates, Inc.
1907 Ascension Boulevard, Suite 440
Arlington, Texas 76006

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
BOA042-1016NARPS

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8551

March 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) conducted an intensive cultural resources
survey for the proposed Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project in Fresno, Fort Bend
County, Texas, on behalf of Fort Bend County and its environmental permitting contractor, BergOliver Associates, Inc. (Berg-Oliver). The proposed undertaking would involve constructing
approximately 3.5 kilometers (2.2 miles) of new roadway extending westward from the current
western terminus of West Broadway Street. The western end of the proposed segment of new
roadway would be located near the northern end of Live Oak Street. For purposes of the cultural
resources survey, the project area consisted of an approximately 3.5-kilometer- (2.2-mile) long
linear corridor measuring approximately 38.1 meters (125.0 feet) in width, covering a total area of
13.4 hectares (33.3 acres).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by Fort Bend County, a political subdivision
of the state of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of
Texas. In addition, the project may require permitting by the US Army Corps of Engineers,
Galveston District (USACE), under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA); as such, the
project would also fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA). The purpose of the survey was to determine if any archeological sites are located
within the project area and, if any exist, to determine if the project has the potential adversely
affect any sites listed on or considered eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) and for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL).
From September 11 to 18, 2018 and March 7 to 8, 2019, Horizon archeologists Charles
E. Bludau, Jr., and Jacob Lyons conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project
area. Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal Investigator, and the survey was conducted under
Texas Antiquities Permit no. 8551. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant
cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. This entailed
intensive surface inspection and subsurface shovel testing efforts along two parallel transects
within the approximately 3.5-kilometer- (2.2-mile-) long project area. The project area is situated
on a low-lying coastal flat and traverses a largely undeveloped, heavily vegetated area adjacent
to Mustang Bayou that contains numerous poorly drained, marshy areas; however, for the most
part, the project area appears to be largely undisturbed. The project area crosses Mustang
Bayou, two artificial irrigation/drainage canals, and an existing pipeline corridor. Vegetation within
the project area consists of greenbrier, dewberry vines, and tall clump grasses, with some larger

BOA042-1016NARPS

v

Management Summary

water oak and pecan trees present near the western end. Visibility of the modern ground surface
was typically poor due to dense vegetative ground cover (<30%).
The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum
of 16 subsurface shovel tests per 1.6 kilometers (1.0 mile) for each 30.5-meter- (100.0-foot-) wide
transect unless field conditions warrant more shovel tests (e.g., in cultural high-probability areas)
or fewer shovel tests (e.g., on steep slopes, in areas with excellent ground surface visibility, in
heavily disturbed areas). As such, a minimum of 71 shovel tests would be necessary within the
project area in order to comply with the TSMASS. Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by excavating
a total of 128 shovel tests within the project area.
Shovel testing typically revealed shallow to deep deposits of sandy loam, clay loam, and
clay ranging in depth from 30.0 to 100.0 centimeters (11.8 to 39.4 inches). Many shovel tests
contained iron concretions and dense clayey sediments, suggesting that shovel testing was
capable of penetrating Holocene-age soils with the potential to contain subsurface archeological
resources and also that the soils have been subject to perennial inundation.
No archeological sites, historic or prehistoric, were recorded within the project area during
the survey. A review of historical aerial photographs and United States Geological Survey
(USGS) topographic maps indicates that no historic-age structures have been present within the
project area since at least the mid-20th century. No cultural materials were observed or collected
during the survey.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or for inclusion in the
NRHP under 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,”
and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking.
However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and
Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered
at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent
discovery, and the Texas Historical Commission (THC) should be notified immediately.

vi

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 7
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 7
2.2
Geology and geomorphology ........................................................................ 8
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 8
2.4
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................11

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................15
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 10,000 to 5,000 B.P.) ..............................................16
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 5,000 B.P. to A.D. 100)..................................................16
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) .......................................................17
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) ...................................................18
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ......................................................19
3.6
Historic Period (A.D. 1700 to Present)..........................................................19

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................25

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................27

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................33

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................35
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................35
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....36
7.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................37
7.4
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................38
7.5
Management Recommendations ..................................................................38

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................39
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

BOA042-1016NARPS

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.

Vicinity Map of Project Area ...................................................................................... 2
Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle .................................... 3
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 4
Distribution of Soils Mapped within Project Area ....................................................... 9
Overview of Wood Portion of Project Area (Facing West) ........................................28
Overview of Semi-Open Portion of Project Area (Facing West) ...............................28
View of Inundated Wetland within Project Area (Facing Northwest) .........................29
Artificial Drainage Canal in Eastern Portion of Project Area (Facing East) ...............29
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Eastern Half of Project Area ................30
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Western Half of Project Area ...............31

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.

viii

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area ........................................................10

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) conducted an intensive cultural resources
survey for the proposed Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project in Fresno, Fort Bend
County, Texas, on behalf of Fort Bend County and its environmental permitting contractor, BergOliver Associates, Inc. (Berg-Oliver). The proposed undertaking would involve constructing
approximately 3.5 kilometers (2.2 miles) of new roadway extending westward from the current
western terminus of West Broadway Street. The western end of the proposed segment of new
roadway would be located near the northern end of Live Oak Street. For purposes of the cultural
resources survey, the project area consisted of an approximately 3.5-kilometer- (2.2-mile) long
linear corridor measuring approximately 38.1 meters (125.0 feet) in width, covering a total area of
13.4 hectares (33.3 acres) (Figures 1 to 3).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by Fort Bend County, a political subdivision
of the state of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of
Texas. In addition, the project may require permitting by the US Army Corps of Engineers,
Galveston District (USACE), under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA); as such, the
project would also fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA). The purpose of the survey was to determine if any archeological sites are located
within the project area and, if any exist, to determine if the project has the potential adversely
affect any sites listed on or considered eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) and for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL).
From September 11 to 18, 2018 and March 7 to 8, 2019, Horizon archeologists Charles
E. Bludau, Jr., and Jacob Lyons conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project
area. Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal Investigator, and the survey was conducted under
Texas Antiquities Permit no. 8551. The cultural resources investigations consisted of archival
research, an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area, and the production of a report
suitable for review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas
Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the
Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.
Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses cultural resources survey methods.

BOA042-1016NARPS

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Vicinity Map of Project Area
2

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

BOA042-1016NARPS

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 3. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

4

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources survey, and Chapter 7.0 presents
cultural resources management recommendations for the project. Chapter 8.0 lists the
references cited in the report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

BOA042-1016NARPS

5

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located northwest of Fresno in eastern Fort Bend County, Texas. Fort
Bend County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas about 104.6 kilometers
(65.0 miles) inland from the Gulf of Mexico shore. The Gulf of Mexico represents a structural
basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal Plain, which extends as far north
as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists
of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin,
that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001). The region is underlain
by rocks and unconsolidated sediments that are quite young in a geological sense, ranging from
modern to Miocene in age. These consist predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic bodies
arranged in an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine
facies making up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities
between these formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that occurred
during periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in this fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As
a result of the geometry of basin filling, successively younger rock units crop out in subparallel
bands from the basin margin toward the modern coastline.
The project area is situated on a low-lying coastal flat and traverses a largely undeveloped,
heavily vegetated area adjacent to Mustang Bayou that contains numerous poorly drained,
marshy areas. Mustang Bayou flows southeastward across the approximate midpoint of the
project area. Mustang Bayou meanders generally southeastward across the coastal plain,
transitioning into Persimmon Bayou and New Bayou before discharging into the Gulf of Mexico at
Chocolate Bay.
For the most part, the project area appears to be largely undisturbed aside from a few
limited areas of observable impacts associated with the channelized American Canal, which
crosses the eastern portion of the project area twice, and a pipeline corridor that crosses the
western portion of the project area. Vegetation within the project area consists of greenbrier,
dewberry vines, and tall clump grasses, with some larger water oak and pecan trees present near
the western end. Visibility of the modern ground surface was typically poor due to dense
vegetative ground cover (<30%). Elevations across the project area are relatively flat, ranging
only from approximately 22.3 to 22.9 meters (73.0 to 75.0 feet) above mean sea level (amsl).

BOA042-1016NARPS

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Geologically, the project area is underlain by the Beaumont Formation (Barnes 1982).
The Beaumont, or Prairie, terrace is the youngest continuous coastwise terrace fronting the
modern Gulf (Abbott 2001). The Beaumont Formation consists of clay, silt, and fine sand
arranged in spatial patterns that reflect the distribution of fluvial (e.g., channel, point bar, levee,
and backswamp) and mudflat/coastal marsh facies (Van Siclen 1985). Sandy deposits
associated with littoral facies are also frequently considered part of the Beaumont. Many
investigators (cf. DuBar et al. 1991; Fisk 1938, 1940) have correlated the Beaumont terrace with
the Sangamon Interglacial (ca. 130 to 75 thousand years ago [kya]), although age estimates
range from Middle Wisconsinan (Alford and Holmes 1985) to 100 to 600 kya (Blum and Price
1994). While debate about the temporal affiliations of and correlations among the deposits that
underlie the major coastline terraces remain active, they are of little direct geoarcheological
relevance because virtually all investigators agree that these deposits considerably predate the
earliest demonstrated dates of human occupation in North America.
Soils within the project area consist predominantly of a mosaic of clayey and loamy
fluviomarine deposits of Quaternary age (Figure 4; Table 1) (NRCS 2018). While most of these
soil units are of considerable antiquity, one soil unit, Kenney loamy fine sand, 0 to 2% slopes,
consists of loamy alluvium of potentially Holocene age.
Aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in deep alluvial sediments
adjacent to major streams in southeast Texas. Based on the physiographic setting of the project
area adjacent to a prominent waterbody, the project area has moderate to high potential to contain
aboriginal archeological resources. However, these resources would be expected to occur in
surficial or shallowly buried sediments potentially lacking in integrity within the relatively ancient
fluviomarine sediments that characterize most of the project area due to erosion and the poor
preservation contexts represented by the perennially saturated soils. The Kenney soil unit
consists of an alluvial sediment of potentially Holocene age that has the potential to contain more
deeply buried archeological resources; however, this soil unit is restricted to only a very small
area near the western end of the project area. Historic-age cultural resources may occur in any
physiographic setting and tend to be observable on the modern ground surface, though the
relatively remote and waterlogged setting of the project area suggests that use of the project area
in the historical past was probably limited.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). While
the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway (1985)
present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes three separate
climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late Glacial
Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was

8

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Figure 4. Distribution of Soils Mapped within Project Area

BOA042-1016NARPS

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Table 1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code

Soil Name

Parent Material

Typical Profile
(inches)

Bb

Bernard clay loam,
0 to 1% slopes

Clayey fluviomarine deposits on
coastal flats

0-6: Clay loam (Ap)
6-31: Clay (Bt)
31-50: Clay (Btk1)
50-80: Clay (Btk2)

Be

Bernard-Edna
complex,
0 to 1% slopes

Clayey fluviomarine deposits on
coastal flats

0-6: Clay loam (Ap)
6-31: Clay (Bt)
31-50: Clay (Btk1)
50-80: Clay (Btk2)

Ea

Edna loam,
0 to 1% slopes

Loamy fluviomarine deposits on
coastal flats

0-9: Loam (A)
9-38: Clay (Bt1)
38-50: Clay (Bt2)
50-80: Sandy clay loam (Btk)

Ka

Katy fine sandy
loam,
0 to 1% slopes

Loamy fluviomarine deposits on
coastal flats

0-12: Fine sandy loam (A)
12-25: Fine sandy loam (E)
25-28: Loam (Bt1)
28-80: Clay loam (Bt2)

Ke

Kenney loamy fine
sand,
0 to 2% slopes

Loamy alluvium on stream
terraces

0-70: Loamy fine sand (A)
70-80: Sandy clay loam (Bt)

Kb

Katy fine sandy
loam,
1 to 3% slopes

Loamy fluviomarine deposits on
coastal flats

0-17: Fine sandy loam (A)
17-30: Fine sandy loam (E)
30-40: Loam (Bt1)
40-80: Clay loam (Bt2)

La

Lake Charles clay,
0 to 1% slopes

Clayey fluviomarine deposits on
backswamps

0-11: Clay (A)
11-53: Clay (Bkss)
53-69: Clay (Bkss1)
69-80: Clay (Bkss2)

Wa

Gessner fine sandy
loam,
0 to 1% slopes,
occasionally flooded

Loamy fluviomarine deposits on
depressions

0-4: Fine sandy loam (A)
4-19: Fine sandy loam (Bg)
19-25: Sandy clay loam (Btg1)
25-80: Sandy clay loam (Btg2)

Source: NRCS 2018
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were
gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During
the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable.
The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The
drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions
lasting from roughly 6,000 to 5,000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate

10

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by 1,500
years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern US and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects the
influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with the
urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and concrete to give the
Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout much
of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water, humidity in
the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often exceeds 50%
even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high humidity
characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and a modest
diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly high
temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in January to a
high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to 9°C (38 to 47°F)
in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average low temperatures
range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range from 27 to 29°C (75 to
79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The region experiences two precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott 2001; Mowery
et al. 1960). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of infrequent
cold fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs in the late
summer to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical storms and
hurricanes from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter and early spring
are relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional thunderstorms that are
relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual precipitation varies from
a low of approximately 101.6 centimeters (40.0 inches) to a high of more than 132.1 centimeters
(52.0 inches). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5.1 to 7.6 centimeters (2.0 to
3.0 inches) in March to more than 19.1 centimeters (7.5 inches) occurring locally on the coast
during September. Almost all of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely
rare, occurring in measurable amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Fort Bend County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texas biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahan et al.
(1984) further define four broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic
province that lies on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie,
(3) coastal gallery forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of

BOA042-1016NARPS

11

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are strongly
controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the seasonal
water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically dominated by
little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter environments
are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria, bulrushes, smooth
cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush, saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh
aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and
other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained environments are characterized by taxa
like seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum, gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass, red
lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort. A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore zone.
Important larger taxa include raccoon, nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many birds,
including ducks, geese, herons, and many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth of
fish and shellfish adapted to brackish to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal
zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs and
woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the north
and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses are
found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver bluestem,
buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian sunflower,
Engelman daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow neptunia,
snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush, bluebonnet, ragweed,
croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring in the coastal prairie
include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live oak, elm, hackberry,
bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as the coastal prairie
grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland environment with common
stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie is home to a diverse fauna,
including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many small rodents, amphibians and
reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and pronghorn were also present
at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous, trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, water oak, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak,
sweetgum, hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and
sumac. Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbrier, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are grasses
such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest include
white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and rodents,
turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various times in the past, and a
number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.

12

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger deciduous
trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory vegetation varies
from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and young trees.
Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle, greenbrier, Virginia
creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A variety of fauna is also
present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit, mink, skunk, various small
rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was also present at times in the
past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the transition zone to the coastal
prairie environment.
According to Mowery et al. (1960), about 95% of the upland vegetation consisted of coarse
bunchgrasses when Fort Bend County was first settled. However, many of the original
bunchgrasses have been eliminated by heavy grazing over the past 20 or 30 years, and the
vegetation is now of much lower quality. Introduced plants such as bermudagrass, dallisgrass,
and burclover are now common in many pastures.

BOA042-1016NARPS

13

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Southeast Texas archeological region. In broad
terms, much of the archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the
Southern Great Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story
1990). Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These two subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25.7 kilometers (16.0 miles) inland from the coast that covers the area
influenced by Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological
variability characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands,
marine coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable
ecological diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
In discussions of the prehistory of Texas, Fort Bend County is often treated as part of a
cultural transition zone. Following Patterson (1995), Southeast Texas is defined as a 21-county
area (including Fort Bend County) that lies between the Colorado River on the west and the
Sabine River on the east, extending about 199.5 kilometers (124.0 miles) inland from the
coastline. Archeological research has shown that it is especially important to consider the
archeology of Fort Bend and Austin counties together with the eastern part of Wharton County,
as this seems to be an area in which much mixing of technologies occurred, and it has a distinctive
Late Archaic mortuary tradition as well.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to denote
Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural characteristics of
Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring regions. For instance, the
Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and Southeast Texas, and
Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time in
Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit evidence of
reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be associated
with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of subsistence-related
activities. Inland sites tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired clay balls (at some
sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites tend to consist of

BOA042-1016NARPS

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain few lithics, oyster shell tools, large quantities
of pottery (in later cultural components), and numerous bone tools.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 10,000 TO 5,000 B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists have historically discounted claims of much earlier human
occupation during the Pleistocene glacial period. However, recent investigations of the Buttermilk
Creek Complex in Bell County, Texas, have raised the possibility that a pre-Clovis culture may
have been present in North America as early as 15,500 years ago (Waters et al. 2011).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5,000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas are
known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the exploitation of
plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is little
evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented elsewhere in
North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been practiced
during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into two periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8,000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period
(8,000 to 5,000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 5,000 B.P. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signals the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5,000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding

16

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture shows
greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods. In
Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5,000 to 3,000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains. Many
of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3,000 to 1,500 B.C.) and several
new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and probably the
Gary-Kent series. The Late Archaic period (1,500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is characterized by Gary,
Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition developed
in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981; Patterson
1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period, but reached
full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as boatstones and
bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang knives, stingray
spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial practices included the
systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre, and use of locally made
grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most burials are found in extended
supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials are also known. Burial direction
is usually consistent within single sites, but varies from site to site. Patterson et al. (1993) report
that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton
counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area by
about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the ConroeLivingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears to have
progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995). Southeastern
Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where Aten (1983)
established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville

BOA042-1016NARPS

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
128.7 kilometers (80.0 miles) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal
exception of a few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found
on the Gulf coast west of the Sabine Lake area.
Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods (Aten
1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility ware
throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown Plain for
about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods before
once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety, Goose
Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor pottery
types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway (Aten
1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte types
are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste (like
Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas. Along
the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e., spearthrower) and spear was
generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though they continued to be used in the
inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Ensor and
Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In fact, Patterson
(1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in Southeast Texas as early as the
end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points that consisted of marginally
retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a generalized date of adoption of the bowand-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca. A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas.
In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade
technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba, Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial
sequence for these point types has not been established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn
points appear to predate Perdiz points throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (crushed sherd) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric
periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto Plain and Baytown
Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small proportion of smallsized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that are often visible on
vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek pottery remained in use
throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt Coated pottery from the

18

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in Southeast Texas during the Late
Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue. Aten (1983) has reconstructed
the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century, including the
Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (Karankawa?), and Tonkawa. The presence of the Tonkawa in
Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central Texas in the 17th and 18th
centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought to have occupied the coastal
margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the corresponding mainland (Aten 1983).
Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east of the San Bernard River, the ethnic
association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1993; 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic
Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and
Cuney points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified
by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1700 TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when Álvarez
de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay.
However, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The
first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where the burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as increased participation
on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time that heavy settlement
of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was
greatly diminished. The Alabama-Coushatta Indians who currently reside in Southeast Texas are
migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early 19th centuries (Newcomb
1961).
In the early part of 1822, Stephen F. Austin resumed his deceased father Moses’
enterprise of settling colonial Anglo-American families in Texas as a part of an empresario grant
under the authorization of the Mexican government. This grant would allow 300 families to obtain
documents to permit them to settle farms and ranches across central and southeast Texas. In
November 1821, a large party of colonists sailed on a 30-ton schooner named the Lively and
headed for the mouth of the Colorado River (Long 2010). However, bad weather blew the ship

BOA042-1016NARPS

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

off course, and the crew mistook the mouth of the Brazos River for the Colorado and landed (Long
2010). A small faction of this original colony progressed some 144.8 kilometers (90.0 miles) up
the Brazos River and established themselves on a bluff near a river bend (Ott 2010). There, these
erstwhile settlers constructed a two-room cabin; in time, the settlement grew and became
collectively known as Fort Bend (Ott 2010). Two years later in 1824, these colonists officially
received grants from the Mexican government; 53 of the 297 grants were given to colonists that
lived near the area of present-day Fort Bend County (Ott 2010).
From the mouth of the Brazos to Baffin Bay, including the areas settled by the new
colonists at Fort Bend, lived the indigenous people collectively known as the Karankawas
(Newcomb 1961; Ott 2010). The Karankawas were composed of nomadic groups of huntergatherers and fishers that were ethnically tied to both a common linguistic stock and an identifiable
archeological complex (Ricklis 2013). They manufactured a distinctive style of ceramics, called
Rockport ware, and practiced also had a highly developed basketry industry (Newcomb 1961).
Rockport ware typically contains a sandy paste and is may have a stylistic relationship with the
Upper Texas coast ceramic style, Goose Creek (Ricklis 2013). From the 17th to 19th centuries,
the Spanish documented at least five subgroups in official state documents—the Cocos, the
Carancaguases, the Cujanes, the Coapites, and the Copanes (Ricklis 2013). In 1528, members
of Narvaez’s expedition identified the Karankawas as the occupants of Malhado, or the Isle of
Misfortune, and Cabeza de Vaca lived among the Karankawas for several years after his ill-fated
ship wreck (Lipscomb 2010). During de Vaca’s tenure with the Upper Coast Cocos, his account
documents that they traded asphultum, shark’s teeth, marine shell, and smoked fish with the
interior natives in exhange for maize, hides, flint, and red ochre (Himmel 2016). By the turn of
the 18th century, the Cocos were trading extensively with both the Spanish and the French for
European trade goods (Himmel 2016). A few armed skirmishes were documented by the early
settlers at Fort Bend, but by 1850, the Karankawas, decimated by disease, disenfranchised by
the mission system, and hunted by Texas colonists, were pushed all the way south to Mexico and
no longer occupied the area now known Fort Bend and Galveston counties (Himmel 2016; Ott
2010). By 1891, the tribe was completely extinct.
One of the first major towns in present-day Fort Bend County, Richmond, was established
by an act of the Congress of the Republic of Texas in May 1837 (Ott 2010). The town was named
after Richmond, Virginia, by business entrepreneurs Robert Eden Handy and William Lusk (Ott
2010). Shortly after Texas gained its Independence in 1837, Fort Bend County was officially
carved from Austin, Brazoria, and Harris counties, and the first chief justice was appointed, Wyly
Martin, a veteran from the War of 1812 (Cutrer 2010; Ott 2010). In 1838, Richmond was chosen
as the county seat.
Several merchants and business entrepreneurs were instrumental to the formation of the
economic foundations of Fort Bend County. These included Nathaniel Felton Williams and his
brother Samuel May Williams, who developed a very successful cotton, corn, and sugar plantation
on Oyster Creek (Henson 2010). This plantation, outfitted with a raw-sugar mill and cane-sugar
refinery, would become the oldest extant and continuously operated business in Texas, known
today as the Imperial Sugar Company (Kleiner 2010). Jane Long established a boarding house
in Richmond in 1837 and sold a large plot of land to Mirabeau B. Lamar in 1851, where he built a

20

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

large plantation the same year (Ott 2010). Part of General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna’s army
marched through and plundered the area known as Thompson’s Ferry just before the infamous
Battle of San Jacinto in 1836 (Ott 2010). The local residents evacuated their homes and ranches
to seek safety as the Mexican army pursued the members of the newly appointed Texas
Congress, an action that became known as the Runaway Scrape (Covington 2010). Upon their
return, the civilians found their homes pillaged and burned and their livestock scattered or
harvested by Santa Anna’s army.
Fort Bend County prospered during the 1840s and 1850s, having shifted from a
subsistence farming-based economy to utilizing a slave-labor based plantation economy that
focused on cash crops. With the advent of the first railroad infrastructure in the state, which was
laid down by the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos, and Colorado Railway in 1853, a navigable channel was
created from Buffalo Bayou through Stafford’s Point all the way to Galveston, opening the doors
for a fluid exchange of economic goods with the entire South (Ott 2010). As a result, the town of
Richmond became an agricultural hub for the entire lower Brazos River valley, exporting cotton,
sugar, and corn to ports in Galveston (Ott 2010). The backbone of the South’s antebellum
economy was free slave labor, and Fort Bend County was no exception. By 1845, the county had
one of the largest slave populations in the state (1,172), and by 1860, Fort Bend County had a
black majority with 4,127 slaves and 2,016 whites (Ott 2010). This free labor work force
maintained more than 159 farms, including 12,000 acres producing cotton and 1,000 acres
producing sugar cane (Ott 2010). When the ballot to secede from the Union was voted upon in
1861, 468 white men voted for secession and 0 voted to stay in the Union (Ott 2010). Many
citizens, including almost every able-bodied man in the county, volunteered for the Confederate
cause and joined regiments such as the Fourth Texas Regiment of Hood’s Texas Brigade,
Company H, and Terry’s Texas Rangers; by the end of the war, more than three-quarters of the
volunteer soldiers would be killed or wounded in action (Ott 2010).
Although located far from the front lines of the Civil War, Fort Bend County’s economy
suffered tremendous hardships during the Reconstruction period following the war. The
Republican-controlled government during the 1870s included several African-American office
holders, and the ex-slave population outnumbered the whites almost two to one (Ott 2010). The
local white elites only gained the majority of elected positions in the 1880s during the onset of the
violent conflict known as the Jaybird-Woodpecker War of 1888 to 1889 (Ott 2010). This brief
conflict divided the community in half, with one interest, the Jaybirds, composed of about 90% of
the whites living in Fort Bend County, and the other interest, the Woodpeckers, composed of
African-Americans who were ex-political officials during the Reconstruction period (Yelderman
2010). After a peaceful election brought a Democratic defeat, a violent battle took place between
the two belligerents, and the Houston Light Guards and Texas Rangers were called in to declare
martial law (Yelderman 2010). Several people were killed on both sides, and the result was a
Woodpecker majority that dominated the political affairs in Fort Bend County until 1970
(Yelderman 2010). In opposition, the Jaybird Democratic Organization of Fort Bend County was
organized and adopted a mission statement that proposed to be the “protection of the white race”
(Ott 2010). From 1889 onward, the Jaybird Democratic Organization stifled the African-American
vote by taking back the local power structure and marginalizing their voice as an ethnic group (Ott
2010).

BOA042-1016NARPS

21

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

The technological boom of the railroad system spread its dendritic infrastructure across
the county by the 1880s. At the junction of the Gulf, Colorado, and Santa Fe line and the
Galveston, Harrisburg, and San Antonio (formerly the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos, and Colorado) line,
approximately 1.6 kilometers (1.0 mile) west of the town of Richmond, was a headquarters called
Rosenburg that served the interests of the developers of the New York, Texas, and Mexican
Railway in 1882 (Ott 2010). Several independent lines spread across agricultural communities
and farmlands of the county, such as the San Antonio and Aransas Pass and the Texas and New
Orleans rail lines (Ott 2010).
Central European immigrants arrived to pursue socioeconomic and political refuge from
their turbulent homelands. These ethnic groups were composed of Germans, Austrians, and
Bohemian agrarians, and they brought with them distinct cultural influences in architecture and
cuisine as well as various religious denominations. Many practiced Catholicism and different
sects of Orthodox Christianity, adding to the diverse pallet of an existing Anglo-Protestant
majority. These immigrants comprised 10% of the new settlers to the county from 1890 to 1900
(Ott 2010). By the turn of the century, the Fort Bend County population had grown from
9,380 people in 1890 to 16,538 in 1900. Numerous immigrant-founded towns sprouted up around
Fort Bend County throughout the 1890s, many of which still exist today, including Beasley,
Needville, and Orchard.
Land developers purchased tracts near the first stop at Stafford’s Point directly off the
Buffalo Bayou, Brazos, and Colorado Railway, and the town of Missouri City sprang into existence
in the year 1894. Shortly after, the tri-county town Katy (spanning portions of Fort Bend, Waller,
and Harris counties) was established due to its convenient location adjacent to the Missouri,
Kansas, and Texas Railroad (Ott 2010). In 1907, the Imperial Sugar Factory purchased the old
Oyster Creek plantation once owned by the Williams brothers, making it the only cane-sugar
refinery in the state (Ott 2010). From 1930 to 1940, the Fort Bend County population grew by
mere 10%, from 29,718 to 32,963. The next decade would see the county’s only negative growth
rate in its entire history with a -6% decline over the course of 10 years, from 32,963 in 1940 to
31,056 in 1950. The effects of the second World War and urbanization during this period
contributed to this decline.
Numerous natural resources are found in Fort Bend County; including sulfur, sodium, and
limestone, in addition to high concentrations of oil and gas. The first commercially producing oil
well was established by the Gulf Oil Company at Blue Ridge in 1919 followed by another discovery
at Big Creek in 1922 (Ott 2010). Additionally, oil fields were discovered by the Gulf Oil Company
in Orchard in 1926 and near Katy by the Humble Oil Company (now ExxonMobil Corporation) in
1935 (Ott 2010). The mid-1950s saw an average of 30,000 barrels of oil per day, and with the
demand caused by the gas shortages in the 1970s, 40 new crude oil wells were established in
Fort Bend County between 1976 and 1977 (Ott 2010). By the late 20th century, oil businesses
were the top three taxpayers in the county—Exxon, Gulf, and the Houston Lighting and Power
Company (Ott 2010).
Since the 1840s, Fort Bend County’s economy has rested primarily upon the shoulders of
the ranching and farming communities. With the influx of a largely agrarian Eastern European
immigrant movement to the region in the 1880s and 1890s, the county’s agricultural promise was
22

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

rescued from the demise of the antebellum era plantation economy and shepherded into a tenantbased share-cropping and family farm system. The number of farms grew—in 1890, the county
had 995 farms, and this increased to 2,365 farms in 1900 (Ott 2010). Every decade subsequently,
the number of farms in the county multiplied, but this followed a trend of more and more sharecropping tenants working the farms. In 1910, 61% of the farmers in the county were tenants, and
by 1925, 72% of the 3,659 farmers were tenants or sharecroppers (Ott 2010). This trend was the
result of several factors, including the Brazos River flood of 1899, the hurricane of Galveston in
1900, statewide recessions, and adverse weather (Ott 2010). By the mid-1950s, farm tenantry
began to phase out and full ownership of farms began to rebound resulting from a post-World
War II urbanization movement. As a consequence, the number of commercial farms began to
decline. In the 1974 Census of Agriculture, 546 of the 1,304 farms in Fort Bend County made
less than $2,500 in cash sales for that year (Ott 2010). Among these cash crops were beef cattle,
goats, poultry, cotton, sorghum, and rice (Ott 2010). Cattle breeds included Angus, Red Angus,
Hereford, Charolais, Limousin, Brahman, Brangus, Santa Gertrudis, and Simbrah. Sorghum, a
cheaper alternative to sugar as well as a fodder for animal food and an ingredient for alcoholic
fermentation, has been a staple to the local economy with favorable marketing prices and steady
revenues. Based on the 2007 Census of Agriculture, there were 1,404 farms in Fort Bend County
operating on over 382,740 acres. Crop sales provided more than $80,323,000 in revenue, and
livestock sales provided more than $14,170,000 in average income.
Today, two main railroad systems cut through Fort Bend County, the Southern Pacific and
the Santa Fe. Additionally, there are two motor-freight commercial lines and a number of private
and commercial airports and helipads, including the Sugar Land Regional Airport, HoustonSouthwest Airport, Ward Airpark Airport, Aviasud Airpark Airport, the Polly Ryon Memorial
Hospital Heliport, and the Sugar Grove Heliport. Several major highways run through Fort Bend
County, including Interstate Highway (IH) 59, IH 10, State Highway (SH) 6, and SH 36. The Fort
Bend Country Community Center offers event spaces, and the Fort Bend County Fairgrounds,
operating since 1933, has grown into one of the largest county fairs in the state and offers a
barbeque cookoff, a lawn tractor race, livestock shows and auction, rodeo, and live music
entertainment. Honoring and commemorating the heritage of the county’s Eastern European
roots, the annual Czech Kolache-Klobase Festival is held every year in East Bernard. Other
cultural festivals and celebrations include the Chinese New Year and Cinco de Mayo.

BOA042-1016NARPS

23

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon performed background archival research on the THC’s
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA) for information on previously recorded cultural
resources sites and historic properties in and near the project area as well as previous cultural
resources investigations conducted in the vicinity of the project area (THC 2018). Based on this
archival research, no known archeological sites are located within a 1.6-kilometer (1.0-mile)
radius of the project area. No archeological sites, cemeteries, or historic properties listed on the
NRHP or designated as SALs are located within or adjacent to the project area. Two cultural
resources surveys have been performed adjacent to the project area. In 1992 and 1996, the
Federal Highway Administration conducted two surveys just west of the project area. No cultural
resources were recorded during these surveys. No other information is available regarding these
surveys.
In addition to the background archival research, Horizon reviewed historic-age aerial
imagery and topographic maps for additional information about the potential for historic-age
structures within the project area (NETR 2018). Examination of historical aerial photographs and
US Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps indicate that there have been no structures or
other architectural features within the project area since at least the mid-20th century. The project
area appears to have been used primarily for agricultural purposes.

BOA042-1016NARPS

25

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

From September 11 to 18, 2018 and March 7 to 8, 2019 Horizon archeologists Charles E.
Bludau, Jr., and Jacob Lyons conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area.
This entailed intensive surface inspection and subsurface shovel testing efforts. The project area
is situated on a low-lying coastal flat and traverses a largely undeveloped, heavily vegetated area
adjacent to Mustang Bayou that contains numerous poorly drained, marshy areas; however, for
the most part, the project area appears to be largely undisturbed. The project area crosses
Mustang Bayou, two artificial irrigation/drainage canals, and an existing pipeline corridor.
Vegetation within the project area consists of greenbrier, dewberry vines, and tall clump grasses,
with some larger water oak and pecan trees present near the western end. Visibility of the modern
ground surface was typically poor due to dense vegetative ground cover (<30%) (Figures 5 to 8).
The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum
of 16 subsurface shovel tests per 1.6 kilometers (1.0 mile) for each 30.5-meter- (100.0-foot-) wide
transect unless field conditions warrant more shovel tests (e.g., in cultural high-probability areas)
or fewer shovel tests (e.g., on steep slopes, in areas with excellent ground surface visibility, in
heavily disturbed areas). As such, a minimum of 71 shovel tests would be necessary within the
project area in order to comply with the TSMASS. Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by excavating
a total of 128 shovel tests within the project area (Figures 9 to 10).
Shovel testing typically revealed shallow to deep deposits of sandy loam, clay loam, and
clay ranging from 30.0 to 100.0 centimeters (11.8 to 39.4 inches) in depth. Many shovel tests
contained iron concretions and dense clayey sediments, suggesting that shovel testing was
capable of penetrating Holocene-age soils with the potential to contain subsurface archeological
resources and also that the soils have been subject to perennial inundation. Summary data for
all 128 shovel tests excavated during the survey are presented in Appendix A.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic log
was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources. Diagnostic
artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and
nondiagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were to
be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location
in which they were found. As no cultural resources were observed during the survey, the

BOA042-1016NARPS

27

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5. Overview of Wood Portion of Project Area (Facing West)

Figure 6. Overview of Semi-Open Portion of Project Area (Facing West)

28

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Figure 7. View of Inundated Wetland within Project Area (Facing Northwest)

Figure 8. Artificial Drainage Canal in Eastern Portion of Project Area (Facing East)

BOA042-1016NARPS

29

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 9. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Eastern Half of Project Area

30

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Figure 10. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Western Half of Project Area

BOA042-1016NARPS

31

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

collections policy was not brought into play. Following completion of the survey, all project records
were prepared for permanent curation at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL).
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and good
faith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 Code
of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3.

32

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

No archeological sites, historic or prehistoric, were recorded within the project area during
the survey. Horizon excavated 128 shovel tests within the project area, thereby exceeding the
TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size. Based on the overall distribution of shovel
tests within project area and the lack of observed cultural resources, it is Horizon’s opinion that
this area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.

BOA042-1016NARPS

33

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with three
primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the project area and to make preliminary determinations of whether or
not the resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important
historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of Texas,
archeological resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the
significance of archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs,
respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

BOA042-1016NARPS

35

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The four criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or
history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant. This
concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures, districts,
or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent research
questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by three requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least one of the fourcriteria for eligibility listed
above, and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As
discussed here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory
and history according to various periods of development in various times and at various places.
Thus, the significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic
development and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular
period of development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP
under Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding
of prehistory. All four criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought
to bear for historic sites.

36

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

7.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least on one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

BOA042-1016NARPS

37

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

No archeological sites, historic or prehistoric, were recorded within the project area during
the survey. Horizon excavated 128 shovel tests within the project area, thereby exceeding the
TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size. Based on the overall distribution of shovel
tests within project area and the lack of observed cultural resources, it is Horizon’s opinion that
this area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.

7.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or for inclusion in the
NRHP under 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,”
and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking.
However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and
Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered
at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent
discovery, and the THC should be notified immediately.

38

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J. T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Aten, L. E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory, pp.
72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The Florida
State Museum, Gainesville.

Adovasio, J. M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Alford, J.J., and J.C. Holmes
1985
Meander Scars as Evidence of Major Climate Changes in Southeast Louisiana.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 75:395-403.
Barnes, V.E.
1982
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Houston Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Blum, M.D., and D.M. Price
1994
Glacio-Eustatic and Climatic Controls on Quaternary Alluvial Plain Deposition, Texas
Coastal Plain. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies
44:85-92.

BOA042-1016NARPS

39

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V. M. Bryant, Jr., and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Collins, M. B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Covington, C.C.
2010
Runaway Scrape. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/pfr01>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 2, 2019.
Cutrer, T.W.
2010
Martin, Wyly. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/fma64>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 2, 2019.
Dincauze, D. F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Dillehay, T. D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.

DuBar, J.R., T.E. Ewing, E.L. Lundelius, E.G. Otvos, and C.D. Winkler
1991
Quaternary Geology of the Gulf of Mexico Coastal Plain. In The Geology of North
America, Volume K2: Quaternary Non-Glacial Geomophology, Conterminous United
States, edited by R. B. Morrison, pp. 583-610. Geological Society of America, Boulder,
Colorado.
Ensor, H. B., and D. L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 8, Archeological
Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Fisk, H.N.
1938
Geology of Grant and LaSalle Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 10.
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.
1940

40

Louisiana

Geology of Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 18. Louisiana
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Hall, G. D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Haynes, C. V., Jr., D. J. Donahue, A. J. T. Hull, and T. H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Henson, M.S.
2010
Williams, Nathaniel Felton. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/fwi31>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 2, 2019.
Himmel, K.F.
2016
The Conquest of the Karankawas and the Tonkawas (1821-1859).
University Press, College Station.

Texas A&M

Hudgins, J. D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Keller, J. E., and F. A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R. L., and L. C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Kleiner, D.J.
2010
Imperial Sugar Company. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/diicy>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 2, 2019.
Larkin, T. J., and G. W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.
Lipscomb, C.A.
2010
Karankawa Indians. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/bmk05>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 2, 2019.
Long, C.
2010
Lively. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/
articles/etl02>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 2, 2019.
Lynch, T. F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.

BOA042-1016NARPS

41

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

McMahan, C. A., R. G. Frye, and K. L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D. J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D. J., D. K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A. W. Barker, D. F. Dincauze, C. V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D. J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4:659-663).
Mowery, I. C., G. S. McKee, F. Matanzo, and E. Francis
1960
Soil Survey—Fort Bend County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Macbeth
2000
Munsell® Soil Color Charts. 2000 Revised Edition. Macbeth, a Division of Kollmorgen
Instruments Corp. Newburgh, New York.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2018
Web Soil Survey, <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed September 19, 2018. US Department of Agriculture.
Newcomb, W. W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.

National Environmental Title Research (NETR)
2018
Historic Aerials. <http://www.historicaerials.com>. Accessed September 19, 2018.
Open Street Map (OSM)
2018
OpenStreetMap. < http://www.openstreetmap .org>. Available under the Open
Database License:
<www.opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl>.
Accessed
September 19, 2018.
Ott, V.L.
2010

Fort Bend County. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/hcf07>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 2, 2019.

Patterson, L. W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1993

42

Identifying Historic Indian Sites in Southeast Texas. Houston Archeological Society
Journal 106:23-26.

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Patterson, L. W., J. D. Lockwood, R. L. Gregg, and S. M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T. K., M. R. Miller, R. A. Ricklis, D. J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R. A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus
Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330.

2013

The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast: Form, Technology, Style, and
Ethnic Affiliation. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society No. 84. Texas
Archeological Society, Austin.

Story, D. A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J. C. Rose,
D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes. Research
Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2018
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas. Access-restricted online database. Texas Historical
Commission. <https://atlas.thc.state.tx.us/>. Accessed September 18, 2018.
US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2016
Digital orthophoto quarter-quadrangles, Fort Bend County, Texas. National Agriculture
Imagery Program, Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1982
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Almeda, Texas, quadrangle.
Van Siclen, D.C.
1985
Pleistocene Meander-Belt Ridge Patterns in the Vicinity of Houston, Texas.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 35:525-532.

BOA042-1016NARPS

43

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Waters, M.R., S.L. Forman, T.A. Jennings, L.C. Nordt, S.G. Driese, J.M. Feinberg, J.L. Keene, J.
Halligan, A. Lindquist, J. Pierson, C.T. Hallmark, M.B. Collins, and J.E. Wiederhold
2011
The Buttermilk Creek Complex and the Origins of Clovis at the Debra L. Friedkin Site,
Texas. Science 331:1599-1603.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Yelderman, P.
2010
Jaybird-Woodpecker War. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/wfj01>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 2, 2019.

44

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

CB1

262583

3271893

0-30

262538

3271914

None

10YR 3/1 clay

None

10YR 4/2 clay loam

None

10YR 5/2 clay with iron staining

None

10YR 4/2 clay loam

None

10YR 5/2 clay with iron staining

None

10YR 4/2 clay loam

None

10YR 5/2 clay with iron staining

None

10YR 3/2 clay loam

None

10YR 3/2 clay with iron staining

None

10YR 3/2 clay loam

None

40-60+

10YR 3/3 clay with iron staining

None

0-20
20-70+

CB3

262489

3271902

0-20
20-60+

CB4

262438

3271931

0-20
20-60+

CB5

262389

3271923

0-35
35-60+

CB6

262341

3271963

Artifacts

10YR 4/2 clay loam with pebbles

30-60+
CB2

Soils

0-40

CB7

262293

3271956

0-30+

10YR 4/2 clay mottled with 10YR 6/2
clay with iron staining

None

CB8

262246

3271998

0-40+

10YR 4/2 clay mottled with 10YR 6/2
clay with iron staining

None

CB9

262197

3271986

0-30+

10YR 4/2 mottled with 10YR 6/2 clay
with iron staining

None

CB10

262145

3272026

0-30+

10YR4/2 clay mottled with 10YR 6/2
clay with iron staining

None

CB11

262098

3272005

0-20

10YR 4/2 clay loam

None

20-25

10YR 4/3 sandy clay with iron

None

25-60+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

0-40

10YR 3/1 loam

None

40-60+

10YR 2/1 mottled with 5YR 4/2 clay

None

CB12

262054

3272012

CB13

262069

3272007

0-40+

10YR 4/2 mottled with 10YR 6/2 clay
with iron staining

None

CB14

262066

3272037

0-60+

10YR 4/2 mottled with 10YR 6/2 clay
with iron staining

None

CB15

262041

3272031

0-40

10YR 3/1 loam

None

10YR 2/1 clay mottled with 5YR 4/2
clay

None

10YR 3/1 loam

None

10YR 2/1 clay mottled with 5YR 4/2
clay

None

40-60+
CB16

2262021

3272008

0-40
40-60+

BOA042-1016NARPS

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

CB17

262008

3272036

0-30+

10YR 4/2 clay with iron staining

None

CB18

261901

3272020

0-30+

10YR 4/2 clay with iron staining

None

CB19

261903

3272039

0-30+

10YR 4/2 clay with iron staining

None

CB20

261870

3272019

0-30+

10YR 4/2 clay with iron staining

None

CB21

261865

3272038

0-30+

10YR 4/2 clay with iron staining

None

CB22

261840

3272010

0-30+

10YR 4/1 mottled with 10YR 5/8 clay
with iron staining

None

CB23

261830

3272046

0-35+

10YR 4/1 mottled with 10YR 5/8 clay
with iron staining

None

CB24

261786

3272014

0-45

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

10YR 3/2 clay with iron staining

None

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

45-60+

10YR 3/2 clay with iron staining

None

0-25

10YR 4/2 clay with iron staining

None

10YR 3/1 clay

None

10YR 4/3 clay loam

None

10YR 6/2 wet sand with iron staining

None

10YR 4/3 clay loam

None

10YR 6/2 wet sand with iron staining

None

10YR 4/2 clay loam

None

10YR 4/2 clay with iron staining

None

10YR 4/2 clay loam

None

40-60+

10YR 4/2 clay loam with iron staining

None

45-60+
CB25

CB26

261730

2611685

3272046

3272019

0-45

25-50+
CB43

260968

3271924

0-40
40-50+

CB44

260920

3271922

0-40
40-50+

CB45

260876

3271912

0-30
30-40+

CB46

260832

3271912

0-40

Artifacts

CB47

260789

3271904

0-30+

10YR 5/2 clay loam with iron staining

None

CB48

260740

3271909

0-40

10YR 4/2 clay loam

None

40-60+

10YR 8/2 clay loam with iron staining

None

CB49

260693

3271911

0-10+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB50

260649

3271906

0-10+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB51

260600

3271901

0-30

10YR 4/2 clay loam

None

10YR 4/8 clay with iron staining

None

10YR 4/2 clay loam

None

30-60+

10YR 4/8 clay with iron staining

None

0-20+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

30-60+
CB52

CB53

A-2

Soils

260551

260488

3271911

3271906

0-30

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

CB54

260435

3271914

0-30

Soils

Artifacts

10YR 4/2 clay loam

None

30-60+

10YR 4/8 clay with iron staining

None

CB55

260395

3271906

0-30+

10YR 4/3 clay with ironstone
concretions

None

CB56

260355

3271890

0-30

10YR 4/3 clay loam

None

10YR 4/3 clay mottled with 7.5YR 5/8
clay

None

10YR 4/3 clay loam

None

30-60+

10YR 4/3 clay mottled with 7.5YR 5/8
clay

None

30-60+
CB57

260305

3271883

0-30

CB58

260255

3271884

0-20+

10YR 4/1 clay mottled with 7.5YR 5/8
and 2.5YR 4/6 clay

None

CB59

260209

3271878

0-60

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

60-80

10YR 5/4 sand

None

10YR 5/4 mottled with 7.5YR 5/6
sandy clay

None

0-60

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

60-80

10YR 5/4 sand

None

10YR 5/4 sandy clay mottled with
7.5YR 5/6 sandy clay

None

0-60

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

60-80

10YR 5/4 sand

None

10YR 5/4 sandy clay mottled with
7.5YR 5/6 sandy clay

None

0-60

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

60-80

10YR 5/4 sand

None

10YR 5/4 sandy clay mottled with
7.5YR 5/6 sandy clay

None

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

10YR 5/4 mottled with 7.5YR 5/6 wet
sand

None

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

10YR 7/2 clay mottled with 7.5YR 5/6
clay

None

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

10YR 7/2 clay mottled with 7.5YR 5/6
clay

None

80-100+
CB60

260165

3271879

80-100+
CB61

260119

3271878

80-100+
CB62

260072

3271879

80-100+
CB63

260026

3271877

0-60
60-70+

CB64

259978

3271880

0-55
55-65+

CB65

259917

3271878

0-55
55-65+

BOA042-1016NARPS

A-3

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

CB66

259870

3271876

0-55

259822

3271885

None

10YR 7/2 clay mottled with 7.5YR 5/6
clay

None

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

10YR 7/2 clay mottled with 7.5YR 5/6
clay

None

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

70-80+

10YR 7/2 clay mottled with 2.5YR 5/6
clay

None

0-55
55-65+

CB68

259779

3271876

0-70

CB69

259732

3271872

0-40+

10YR 4/2 clay mottled with iron
staining

None

CB70

259685

3271870

0-30+

10YR 4/2 clay mottled with iron
staining

None

CB71

259610

3271872

0-60

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

10YR 6/3 sandy clay with iron staining

None

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

10YR 6/3 sand

None

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

None

10YR 6/3 sand

None

60-70+
CB72

259565

3271871

0-70
70-100+

CB73

259517

3271874

0-70
70-100+

CB74

259311

3271869

0-30+

10YR 4/2 clay mottled with iron
staining

None

CB75

259268

3271868

0-30+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB76

259215

3271866

0-40+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB77

259106

3271867

0-40+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB78

259010

3271867

0-30+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB79

261721

3272026

0-50+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB80

261697

3271982

0-50+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB81

261647

3271998

0-60+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB82

261657

3271967

0-60+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB83

261621

3271986

0-50+

10YR 3/1 clay with iron staining

None

CB84

261632

3271956

0-60+

10YR 3/1 clay with iron staining

None

CB85

261600

3271948

0-20

10YR 3/1 sandy clay

None

10YR 4/2 sandy clay with iron staining

None

10YR 3/1 sandy clay

None

10YR 4/2 sandy clay with iron staining

None

20-60+
CB86

261587

3271974

0-15
15-60+

A-4

Artifacts

10YR 4/2 sandy loam

55-65+
CB67

Soils

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

CB87

261550

3271933

0-15

Soils

Artifacts

10YR 3/1 sandy clay

None

15-60+

10YR 4/2 sandy clay with iron staining

None

CB88

261522

3271955

0-60+

19YR 3/1 clay

None

CB89

261494

3271942

0-60+

19YR 3/1 clay

None

CB90

261518

3271923

0-60+

19YR 3/1 clay

None

CB91

261467

3271929

0-60+

19YR 3/1 clay

None

CB92

261482

3271908

0-60+

19YR 3/1 clay

None

CB93

261381

3271901

0-60+

10YR 4/2 clay loam

None

CB94

261381

3271922

0-60+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB95

261348

3271900

0-60+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB96

261350

3271930

0-60+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB97

261316

3271900

0-60+

10YR 4/2 clay loam w/ iron staining

None

CB98

261316

3271919

0-60+

10YR 34/1 clay

None

CB99

261238

3271924

0-60+

10YR 4/2 clay loam w/ iron staining

None

CB100

261239

3271891

0-60+

10YR 4/2 clay loam w/ iron staining

None

CB101

261212

3271893

0-60+

10YR 3/2 clay w/ iron staining

None

CB102

261216

3271921

0-50+

10YR 3/1 clay

None

CB103

261191

3271917

0-50+

10YR 3/1 wet clay

None

CB104

261183

3271894

0-20

10YR 3/2 wet clay

None

20+

Water table

None

0-20

10YR 3/2 wet clay

None

20+

Water table

None

0-50

10YR 3/2 wet clay

None

50+

Water table

None

0-65

10YR 5/3 sandy loam

None

65-75

10YR 6/3 moist sand

None

75-85+

10YR 6/1 clay mottled with 5YR 3/8
dense hydric clay

None

10YR 3/3 sandy loam

None

10YR 4/1 clay mottled with 10YR 5/6
and 10YR 3/3 dense clay

None

0-60

10YR 3/3 moist sandy clay loam

None

60+

Water table

None

0-30

10YR 3/3 moist sandy clay loam

None

CB105

CB106

JL06

JL07

261136

261089

261117

261077

3271923

3271900

3271943

3271927

0-50
50-60+

JL08

JL09

261039

260991

BOA042-1016NARPS

3271917

3271900

A-5

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)
30-40+

JL10

260941

3271899

260898

3271888

None

10YR 3/3 sandy clay loam

None

10YR 6/3 moist dense sandy clay

None

10YR 3/3 sandy clay loam

None

35-45+

10YR 6/3 moist dense sandy clay

None

0-55

0-35

JL12

260852

3271889

0-30+

10YR 5/2 dense wet clay with iron
staining

None

JL13

260806

3271885

0-45

10YR 4/2 sandy clay loam

None

10YR 4/2 dense clay mottled with
10YR 5/6 and 10YR 2/1 dense clay

None

10YR 3/3 moist sandy clay loam

None

10YR 5/2 dense hydric clay mottled
with 5YR 3/8 and 5YR 6/8 dense
hydric clay

None

10YR 5/2 sandy clay loam

None

40-50+

10Yr 4/2 dense clay mottled with 5YR
5/8 dense clay

None

45-55+
JL14

260762

3271885

0-30
30-40+

JL15

260715

3271881

0-40

JL16

260669

3271882

0-30+

10YR 3/1 dense hydric clay mottled
with 5YR 3/8 dense hydric clay

None

JL17

260628

3271881

0-30+

10YR 3/1 dense hydric clay mottled
with 5YR 3/8 dense hydric clay

None

JL18

260582

3271883

0-30+

10YR 4/2 dense clay with iron staining

None

JL19

260534

3271881

0-35

10YR 3/3 moist sandy clay loam

None

35-45+

10YR 4/2 dense wet clay

None

JL20

260485

3271885

0-30+

10YR 5/2 wet clay with iron staining

None

JL21

260435

3271882

0-40

10YR 4/2 moist sandy clay loam

None

40-50+

10YR 4/1 dense wet clay

None

JL22

260390

3271882

0-30+

10YR 5/2 dense moist sandy clay with
iron staining

None

JL23

260351

3271907

0-65

10YR 3/3 moist sandy loam

None

10YR 6/2 compact sandy clay mottled
with 5YR 6/8 and 10YR 5/6 compact
sandy clay

None

10YR 3/3 moist sandy loam

None

10YR 6/2 compact sandy clay mottled
with 5YR 6/8 and 10YR 5/6 compact
sandy clay

None

65-75+

JL24

260298

3271905

0-35
35-45+

A-6

Artifacts

10YR 3/3 dense hydric clay mottled
with 5YR 3/8 dense hydric clay

55-65+
JL11

Soils

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Lake Olympia Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JL25

260253

3271904

0-30+

10YR 5/2 dense hydric clay mottled
with 5YR 5/8 dense hydric clay

None

JL26

260203

3271909

0-90

10YR 6/3 moist sandy loam

None

10YR 7/4 dense sandy clay mottled
with 5YR 5/8 dense sandy clay

None

10YR 6/3 moist sandy loam

None

10YR 7/4 dense sandy clay mottled
with 5YR 5/8 dense sandy clay

None

10YR 6/3 moist sandy loam

None

10YR 7/4 dense sandy clay mottled
with 5YR 5/8 dense sandy clay

None

10YR 5/3 moist sandy loam

None

10YR 6/3 wet sandy clay

None

10YR 5/3 moist sandy loam

None

10YR 6/3 wet sandy clay

None

10YR 5/3 moist sandy loam

None

10YR 6/3 wet sandy clay

None

10YR 5/3 moist sandy loam

None

10YR 6/3 wet sandy clay

None

10YR 5/3 moist sandy loam

None

10YR 6/3 wet sandy clay

None

10YR 5/3 moist sandy loam

None

10YR 6/3 wet sandy clay

None

10YR 5/3 moist sandy loam

None

90-100+

10YR 6/2 dense sandy clay mottled
with 5YR 6/8 dense sandy clay

None

90-100+
JL27

260159

3271909

0-90
90-100+

JL28

260120

3271903

0-80
80-90+

JL29

260071

3271903

0-60
60-70+

JL30

260025

3271902

0-70
70-80+

JL31

259978

3271904

0-75
75-85+

JL32

259906

3271899

0-70
70-80+

JL33

259864

3271904

0-75
75-85+

JL34

259828

3271892

0-65
65-75+

JL35

259771

3271896

0-90

Soils

Artifacts

JL36

259725

3271900

0-30+

10YR 4/2 dense hydric clay mottled
with 7.5YR 4/6 dense hydric clay

None

JL37

259683

3271897

0-30+

10YR 4/2 dense hydric clay mottled
with 7.5YR 4/6 dense hydric clay

None

JL38

259601

3271895

0-60

10YR 6/3 moist sandy loam

None

10YR 6/2 dense wet sandy clay
mottled with 5YR 6/8 dense wet sandy
clay

None

10YR 5/3 sandy loam

None

60-70+

JL39

259550

BOA042-1016NARPS

3271894

0-70

A-7

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)
70-80+

JL40

259506

3271894

Soils
10YR 7/2 dense sandy clay mottled
with 5YR 6/8 and 10YR 5/6 dense
sandy clay

None

10YR 5/3 sandy loam

None

65-75+

10YR 7/2 dense sandy clay mottled
with 5YR 6/8 and 10YR 5/6 dense
sandy clay

None

0-65

JL41

259315

3271892

0-30+

10YR 3/1 dense hydric clay mottled
with 7.5YR 4/6 dense hydric clay

None

JL42

259263

3271895

0-30+

10YR 3/1 dense hydric clay mottled
with 7.5YR 4/6 dense hydric clay

None

JL43

259220

3271895

0-30+

10YR 3/1 dense hydric clay mottled
with 7.5YR 4/6 dense hydric clay

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

A-8

Artifacts

BOA10161_arch_survey_report

