Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a
Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long Erosion-Control Bulkhead
on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

USACE Project No. SWF-2008-00123
HJN 100075 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

T-BAR-O Ranch Partnership, Ltd.
Houston, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

July 2010

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a
Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long Erosion-Control Bulkhead
on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

T-BAR-O Ranch Partnership, Ltd.
6363 Woodway Drive, Suite 630
Houston, Texas 77057

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 100075 AR

USACE Project No. SWF-2008-00123

July 2010

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

T-Bar-O Ranch Partnership, Ltd. (T-Bar-O Ranch), is proposing to construct an
approximately 945-meter- (m-) (3,100-foot- [ft-]) long erosion-control bulkhead along the
shoreline of a privately owned ranch where it abuts Lake Lyndon B. Johnson (Lake LBJ) in
eastern Llano County, Texas. T-Bar-O Ranch is located approximately midway between
Kingsland, Texas, and the Buchanan Dam on the western bank of the Colorado River, which, in
this area, has been dammed to form Lake LBJ. The proposed bulkhead would consist of a low
cement wall measuring about 0.6 m (2 ft) in thickness extending along the Lake LBJ shoreline in
areas where shoreline erosion is causing soils to slough off into the lake. The Area of Potential
Effect (APE) of the proposed project consists of the construction footprint of the bulkhead, which
measures approximately 0.6 m (2 ft) in thickness, plus a temporary construction easement,
which is assumed to measure no more than about 7.6 m (25 ft) in width, covering a total area of
approximately 0.8 hectares (ha) (1.9 acres [ac]).
The project is being sponsored by T-Bar-O Ranch, a private landowner, on privately
owned land; however, due to the proximity of proposed construction activities to Lake LBJ, a
permit issued by the US Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District (USACE), is required for
the project to proceed. As such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (NHPA). As the project represents a publicly
sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural resources, T-Bar-O Ranch
was required to provide for a cultural resource inventory of the project’s APE and to assess the
project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. To meet its
responsibilities under applicable federal and state laws, T-Bar-O Ranch contracted with Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to obtain all necessary clearances for cultural
resources.
On June 15, 2010, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd, crew chief, and Jared
Wiersema, field technician, under the overall supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal
Investigator, performed a cultural resource survey of the APE to locate any cultural resource
properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project. Horizon’s
archeologists traversed the APE on foot, thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for
evidence of prehistoric and historic-age cultural resources, and excavated a total of 13 shovel
tests during the survey, thereby exceeding the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) for a project area of this size. The APE, which extends along the Lake

HJN 100075 AR

iii

Management Summary

LBJ shoreline abutting the T-Bar-O Ranch tract, consists of a mosaic of areas where shoreline
soils are being actively eroded by shoreline wave action as well as erosion-resistant areas
where the shoreline consists of granite boulders or large granite slabs from which all soil has
already been eroded.
The survey resulted in the documentation of 1 new archeological site, 41LL509, a small,
surficial scatter of aboriginal chipped stone debitage scattered along the shoreline of Lake LBJ.
As documented during the survey, the boundaries of the site are contained entirely within the
current project area, though it is possible, perhaps even likely, that the artifacts are in secondary
context, having been redeposited through wave action from a primary aboriginal occupation
area located beneath the waters of the lake. The site, which consists of a small assemblage of
36 pieces of chert debitage found on the modern ground surface, appears to represent the
remains of an aboriginal flintknapping station, raw material procurement locality (i.e., “quarry”),
or possibly a small campsite. Shovel testing conducted on the site revealed scattered areas
that retained some shallow sediment deposits, though no cultural resources were encountered
in any of the shovel tests. While the site generally reflects aboriginal land use practices, the
lack of temporally diagnostic artifacts, cultural features, organics remains, and stratified contexts
seriously limits the research value of the site. Given the proximity of Lake LBJ and the active
processes of shoreline erosion that are observable on the site, it is likely that the artifacts on this
site have simply been washed up from a primary habitation locale that is currently under the
waters of Lake LBJ. It is unlikely that this site could be profitably investigated further to provide
information pertinent to the aboriginal past, and it is consequently recommended as ineligible for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). No further cultural resource
investigations are recommended on this site.
In addition to the archeological site described above, 1 isolated artifact occurrence was
observed within the project area during the survey. This artifact, a chipped stone biface, was
encountered on the modern ground surface near the southern end of the project area. The area
surrounding the find was thoroughly inspected for evidence of associated cultural resources,
and 2 shovel tests were excavated in the vicinity, but no additional cultural resources were
encountered. The artifact was recorded as an isolated occurrence rather than as a site due to
the lack of any additional evidence to provide context for the specimen. This isolated artifact
does not possess integrity of context, retains minimal to no research value, and does not exhibit
any temporally diagnostic characteristics. While the artifact is generally indicative of aboriginal
(presumably prehistoric) activity in the area, it is ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP. No further
archeological investigations are recommended in connection with this isolated artifact.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of the T-Bar-O Ranch bulkhead
project area documented in this report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be
affected by the proposed undertaking. In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a
reasonable and good faith effort to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural
resources were identified that meet the criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR
60.4, and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed
undertaking. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in
the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any

iv

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously
surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the USACE and Texas Historical
Commission (THC) should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 100075 AR

v

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ..................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 6
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 6
2.4
Biota.............................................................................................................. 7

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 12,000 to 8500 B.P.) ...............................................11
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 8500 to 1200 B.P.) ........................................................12
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1200 to 350 B.P.) ..............................................12
3.4
Historic Period (ca. 350 B.P. to Present) ......................................................12

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................17
4.1
Archival Research ........................................................................................17
4.2
Survey Methods ...........................................................................................18

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................25
5.1
Site 41LL509 ................................................................................................25
5.2
Isolated Occurrence .....................................................................................28

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................31
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................31
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....32
6.3
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................32
6.4
Management Recommendations ..................................................................33

7.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................35
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 100075 AR

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.
Figure 11.
Figure 12.

viii

Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map ............................................... 2
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 3
Overview of Lake LBJ from T-Bar-O Ranch Project Area (Facing East)...................19
Shoreline Formed by Eroding Soil (Bulkhead Construction) (Facing South) ............19
Shoreline Formed by Granite Boulders (No Bulkhead) (Facing North) .....................20
Shoreline Formed by Exposed Granite (No Bulkhead) (Facing North) .....................20
Locations of Shovel Tests in Project Area ................................................................22
Sketch Map of Site 41LL509 ....................................................................................26
Overview of Site 41LL509 (Facing North) ................................................................27
Overview of Shoreline on Site 41LL509 (Facing Northwest) ....................................27
Chipped Stone Artifacts Observed on Site 41LL509 ................................................28
View of Isolated Biface (Isolated Occurrence No. 1) ................................................29

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

T-Bar-O Ranch Partnership, Ltd. (T-Bar-O Ranch), is proposing to construct an
approximately 945-meter- (m-) (3,100-foot- [ft-]) long erosion-control bulkhead along the
shoreline of a privately owned ranch where it abuts Lake Lyndon B. Johnson (Lake LBJ) in
eastern Llano County, Texas (Figures 1 and 2). T-Bar-O Ranch is located approximately
midway between Kingsland, Texas, and the Buchanan Dam on the western bank of the
Colorado River, which, in this area, has been dammed to form Lake LBJ. The proposed
bulkhead would consist of a low cement wall measuring about 0.6 m (2 ft) in thickness
extending along the Lake LBJ shoreline in areas where shoreline erosion is causing soils to
slough off into the lake. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed project consists of
the construction footprint of the bulkhead, which measures approximately 0.6 m (2 ft) in
thickness, plus a temporary construction easement, which is assumed to measure no more than
about 7.6 m (25 ft) in width, covering a total area of approximately 0.8 hectares (ha) (1.9 acres
[ac]).
The project is being sponsored by T-Bar-O Ranch, a private landowner, on privately
owned land; however, due to the proximity of proposed construction activities to Lake LBJ, a
permit issued by the US Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District (USACE), is required for
the project to proceed. As such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (NHPA), as amended (P.L. 89-665; 80 Stat. 915; 16
USC §470 et seq.). As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the
potential to impact significant cultural resources, T-Bar-O Ranch was required to provide for a
cultural resource inventory of the project’s APE and to assess the project’s possible impacts on
any significant cultural resources in the APE. To meet its responsibilities under applicable
federal and state laws, T-Bar-O Ranch contracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
(Horizon), to obtain all necessary clearances for cultural resources.
On June 15, 2010, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd, crew chief, and Jared
Wiersema, field technician, under the overall supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal
Investigator, performed a cultural resource survey of the APE to locate any cultural resource
properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project.
This report presents the results of the cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds
of the project area, respectively. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of

HJN 100075 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map

2

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

HJN 100075 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the survey, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report, and Appendix A presents data collected from shovel tests excavated during the survey.

4

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located along the east-central boundary of Llano County in Central
Texas, north of the city of Kingsland, near the eastern edge of the Llano Uplift (also known as
the Central Texas Uplift) physiographic province. The Llano Uplift is composed of a roughly
circular dome of Precambrian rock, primarily granite, surrounded by a ring of gneiss and schist
(also Precambrian) that is, in turn, rimmed by limestone ridges. The most characteristic feature
of this province is a central basin with a rolling floor studded with rounded granite hills 122 to
183 m (400 to 600 ft) high. Geologically, the region straddles a deep-seated fracture zone that
represents the site of past orogenic events that separates the stable continental interior to the
west from the subsiding basin of the Gulf of Mexico to the east and southeast (Hayward 1988a,
1988b). Tectonic events during the Precambrian metamorphosed sediments deposited along
the margin of the continent into gneiss and schists, which were later penetrated by intrusive
granitic rocks. The rocks that form the basin floor and hills in this physiographic region are
among the oldest in Texas.
The Llano Uplift is surrounded by the Edwards Plateau. The Edwards Plateau and
Balcones Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that arcs across Texas to form a
distinct boundary between uplands composed primarily of limestone bedrock and lower plains
composed mostly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary is marked by an abrupt scarp (the
Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational ramp, but the entire length of this
transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography, bedrock, hydrology, soil, vegetation,
and animal life.
Hydrologically, the project area runs along the western shoreline of Lake LBJ; as such,
elevations across the project area are relatively uniform overall, ranging only from approximately
253 to 257 m (830 to 840 ft) above mean sea level (amsl), though micro-topographic variation is
pronounced in localized areas. The Colorado River, which has been dammed to form Lake
LBJ, forms the eastern boundary of the T-Bar-O Ranch. The Colorado River flows generally
southeastward across the Blackland Prairie and the Gulf Coastal Plain, ultimately discharging
into the Gulf of Mexico a short distance northeast of Matagorda Bay. Two unnamed tributaries
of the Colorado River drain the uplands on the T-Bar-O Ranch property and discharge into the
Colorado River, cutting across the linear project area at 2 locations.

HJN 100075 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project area is underlain by the Precambrian Town Mountain Granite Formation,
which consists of coarse-grained, pink, quartz-plagioclase-microcline rock that occurs in plutons
up to 21 kilometers (km) (13 miles [mi]) in size that tend to be concordant, circular, vertical
cylinders with concentric textural variations. The Precambrian spans the timeframe from the
formation of the Earth around 4.5 billion years ago to beginning of the Cambrian Period about
540 million years ago. Notable plutons of the Town Mountain Granite Formation include
Enchanted Rock, which formed roughly 1.05 billion years ago, and Lone Grove, which formed
about 1.06 billion years ago.
Roughly equal parts of the Weswood silt loam, rarely flooded (We), and Keese-Rock
outcrop complex, 1 to 8% slopes, very stony (KoC) (NRCS 2010). The Weswood silt loam,
rarely flooded (We), soil unit consists of alluvium derived from limestone found on river valley
floodplains. The Keese-Rock outcrop complex, 1 to 8% slopes, very stony (KoC), soil unit
consists of granite grus residuum found on hills.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
Bryant and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central
Texas from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial
period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands
were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985).
During the Post-Glacial period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more
stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas.
The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic
conditions lasting from roughly 6,000 to 5,000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway
(1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably
achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Llano County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern climate is
typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate is
influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified by
polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer, and
fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.

6

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature in Texas
manifest regional clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east
to west and mean annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast
(Larkin and Bomar 1983). In Central Texas, climate has fluctuated from subtropical humid to
subtropical subhumid. Average annual precipitation totals 81 cm (32 in) and temperature
averages 19°Celsius (C) (67°Fahrenheit [F]) annually, ranging from 36°C (96°F) in August (the
warmest month) to 15°C (59°F) in January (the coldest month). During this time, however, drier
periods lasting from 3 to 7 years, when total annual rainfall ranged from 30 to 64 cm (12 to
25 in), were followed by abnormally wet years with 114 to 127 cm (45 to 50 in) of rainfall.
Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are
associated with frontal storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with
warm, moist air masses moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The
topographic discontinuity along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf
storm trace and increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall.
Two extreme examples are the excess of 91 cm (36 in) of rain that fell within an 18-hour period
in the vicinity of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 56-cm (22-in) deluge that fell in less
than 3 hours near O’Harris, Texas, in May 1935. Lower rainfall amounts are characteristic of
winter and late summer. In winter, frontal storms pass so frequently that there is little time for
moisture to increase, and prevailing upper-level winds from west to east often dominate over
meridional flow, meaning that much of the available moisture is derived from the Pacific rather
than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer, cool fronts rarely penetrate into the region, and
rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal convective storms.

2.4

BIOTA

The project area is situated in the eastern portion of the Balconian biotic province (Blair
1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces
and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces (Dice 1943). The
Balconian province is considered to be roughly coterminous with the Edwards Plateau and
represents a physiographically distinct unit. Most of the Balconian province is situated on
Cretaceous-age Comanchean limestone, but igneous intrusives and sediments as old as the
Precambrian are exposed in the Llano Uplift region. Several rivers, including the Blanco,
Colorado, Concho, Devil’s, Frio, Guadalupe, Llano, Medina, Nueces, Pedernales, Sabinal, and
San Saba, drain the area. The Comanchean sediments have been extensively dissected by
these rivers and their tributaries, particularly in the southern and eastern parts of the area,
resulting in rugged topography. The Llano Uplift region, which is structurally a large dome, is
topographically lower than the adjacent Edwards Plateau due to the erosion of most Cretaceous
sediments from this area, resulting in rolling to hilly topography. The boundary, characterized
as “approximate,” between Blair’s (1950) Texan and Balconian provinces passes through
western Williamson County about 2 counties east of the project area. Rainfall in the Balconian
province decreases from east to west. The climate in the eastern half of the province is
classified by Thornwaite (1948) as a C1B4 (dry subhumid) climate, and the western half is
classified as DB3 (semiarid).

HJN 100075 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Three vegetation regions are recognized by Tharp (1939) within the limits of the
Balconian province. The oak-hickory-mesquite region corresponds to the Llano Uplift region;
the oak-cedar region corresponds to the dissected southern and eastern portions of the
Edwards Plateau and extends somewhat farther north of the limits of the Balconian province;
and the live oak-mesquite savanna region lies in the central and northwestern part of the
Balconian province. The most characteristic plant association of the Balconian province is a
scrub forest of Mexican cedar (Juniperus Mexicana), Texas oak (Quercus texana), stunted live
oak (Quercus virginiana), and various other, less numerous species. This association occupies
the more dissected parts of the region to the near exclusion of other vegetation communities.
Mesquite is distributed throughout the Balconian province, combining with live oak toward the
west to become the most conspicuous woody vegetation. Stream floodplains are occupied by
mesic forests composed of large live oaks, elms, hackberries, and pecans. Along the Medina
River in the southeastern part of the province and along some streams in the eastern part of the
province, large cypress trees (Taxodium distichum) line the stream courses.
The fauna associated with this region are represented by a mixture of species from the
Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, Kansan, Balconian, and Texan biotic provinces. At
least 57 species of mammals occur in the Balconian province, though no species are restricted
to this province. Mammalian species include Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana), eastern
mole (Scalopus aquaticus), fox squirrel (Sciurus niger), desert pocket gopher (Geomys
breviceps), fulvous harvest mouse (Reithrodontomys fulvescens), white-footed mouse
(Peromyscus leucopus), hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus), eastern cottontail rabbit
(Sylvilagus floridanus), raccoon (Procyon lotor), striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis), ground
squirrel (Citellus tridecemlineatus), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginiana), hispid pocket
mouse (Perognathus hispidus), deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus), black-tailed jackrabbit
(Lepus californicus), pygmy mouse (Baiomys taylori), 9-banded armadillo (Dasypus
novemcinctus), and jaguar (Felis onca). The only species of Terrapene known from the
Balconian province is the widely distributed desert box turtle (T. ornata).
Three species of lizards, including the common ground skink (Leiolopisma laterale),
glass snake (Ophiosaurus ventralis), and 6-lined racerunner (Cnemidophorus sexlineatus),
range into this province from the Austroriparian by way of the Texan and reach western limits in
the Balconian province. Thirty-six species of snakes are known from the Balconian province,
including the western hooknose snake (Gyalopion canum), Mexican garter snake (Thamnophis
eques), black-tailed rattlesnake (Crotalus molossus), rough green snake (Opheodrys aestivus),
ring-necked snake (Diadophis punctatus), smooth earth snake (Virginia valeriae), eastern coral
snake (Micrurus fulvius), northern copperhead (Agkistrodon mokasen), water moccasin (A.
piscivorous), Texas threadsnake (Leptotyphlops dulcis), coachwhip (Coluber flagellum), desert
striped whipsnake (C. taeniatus), black rat snake (Elaphe obsolete), painted desert glossy
snake (Arizona elegans), groundsnake (Sonora episcopa), Marcy’s checkered gartersnake (T.
marcianus), eastern ribbon snake (T. sauritus), California nightsnake (Hypsiglena
ochrorhyncha), red-bellied water snake (Natrix erythrogaster), diamond-backed water snake (N.
rhombifera), and western diamond-back rattlesnake (C. atrox).

8

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

Fifteen species of anuran fauna occur in the Balconian province, including 2 species—
the eastern barking frog (Eleutherodactylus latrans) and cliff chirping frog (Syrrhophus
marnockii)—that range westward from this province into the Chihuahuan but occur in no other
province in Texas. Other common species include Gulf Coast toad (Bufo valliceps), southern
cricket frog (Acris gryllus), gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor), North American bullfrog (Rana
catesbeiana), Couch’s spadefoot toad (Scaphyiopus couchii), Sonoran toad (Bufo compactilis),
green toad (Bufo debilis), red-spotted toad (Bufo punctates), narrow-mouth toad (Microhyla
olivacea), Woodhouse’s toad (Bufo woodhousii), northern leopard frog (Rana pipiens), Pacific
tree frog (Pseudacris clarkia), and Strecker’s chorus frog (Pseudacris streckeri). Only 7 species
of urodele fauna are known from this area, including northern slimy salamander (Plethodon
glutinosus), tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum), Texas blind salamander (Typhlomolge
rathbuni), San Marcos salamander (Eurycea nana), Texas salamander (E. neotenes), Cascade
Caverns salamander (E. latitans), and Fern Bank salamander (E. pterophila).
Common bird species include northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus), eastern
meadowlark (Sturnella magna), mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), killdeer (Charadrius
vociferus), field sparrow (Spizella pusilla), red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis), turkey vulture
(Cathartes aura), belted kingfisher (Ceyrle alcyon), and mockingbird (Mimus polyglottos).
Small herds of bison and antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early
historic periods, but these species are no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

HJN 100075 AR

9

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) Central Texas Archeological
Region. The indigenous human inhabitants of Central Texas practiced a generally nomadic
hunting and gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory, and, in contrast to much of the rest of
North America, mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly
through time in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 12,000 TO 8500 B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (cf. Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (12,000 to 8500 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various
periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted,
lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers,
gravers, and bone foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized
into egalitarian bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic
subsistence and settlement pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence
patterns in Central Texas are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence
focused on the exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the
PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as
has been documented elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern
appears to have been practiced throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the
PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point
styles. These include the Early PaleoIndian period, which is recognized based on large, fluted
projectile points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late

HJN 100075 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

PaleoIndian period, which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 8500 TO 1200 B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(8500 to 1200 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Central Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture
shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of
groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these
3 subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as well. Perhaps most
markedly, burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod, continuing into the
Late Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic subperiod. In
addition, the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered to constitute
evidence of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least partially
accounts for the lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1200 TO 350 B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 350 B.P.) (Collins 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas,
unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The
Late Prehistoric period is generally divided into 2 phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin
phase sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to
suggest that the Austin-phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north, and
lack the ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 B.P. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay.
However, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The

12

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994) as well as increased participation
on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time that heavy settlement
of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was
greatly diminished.
The Tonkawa Indians occupied Central Texas at the time the future Llano County was
first explored. The Comanches entered Tonkawa territory in the 18th century and eventually
claimed territory as far southeast as San Antonio and Austin. During the Republic of Texas era,
Conflicts between European settlers and Comanches in the region was marked by such battles
as the fight at Enchanted Rock in 18411.
The first permanent settlers of European origin in the area were brought in by the
Adelsverein. German settlers established the town of New Braunfels (now in Comal County) in
1845 and Fredericksburg (now in Gillespie County) in 1846. In 1847, John O. Meusebach, the
leader of the German settlers, negotiated a treaty with the Comanches to permit Germans to
live in the area of the Fisher-Miller Land Grant, which included what is now Llano County. After
Meusebach’s treaty, 5 settlements were established on or near the Llano River in what later
became the western part of the county, but the town of Castell was the only one of these to
survive. The settlement farthest downstream was Bettina, a communal colony established by
the "Society of Forty," a group of young men from German universities. Settlers began to move
into the eastern part of the county shortly thereafter, the first ones settling at Tow Valley and
Bluffton on the Colorado River in 1852. A saltworks between the 2 places operated until after
the Civil War, and a sawmill was also established in the area. Small farms were established,
and, by 1853, settlement had begun in the northwestern part of the county. Soon,
2 settlements, Whistleville and Bugscuffle, combined to form Valley Spring. A German
Methodist church was established in Castell in 1856 by Dietrich J.G. Rode; during weekdays,
the building served as a school.
Llano County was organized in 1856 after the Texas legislature formed the county from
the Bexar District and Gillespie County. Donations of 250 acres were made for a site for the
county seat. By 1858, the population exceeded 1,000, and cattle, hides, and pecans were
being exported. Farming was the chief occupation in the north and ranching in the south.
Germans predominated in the western parts and Anglo-Americans in the other areas. By 1860,
the county had 89 farms encompassing 59,744 acres. The agricultural census that year
reported 21,344 cattle and 1,492 sheep in Llano County, and the corn harvest exceeded
23,500 bushels. The US census found 1,101 people living in the county that year; of these,
21 were slaveholders and 54 were slaves.

1

The following history of Llano County has been compiled from Fry (1943), Long (1989), and Oatman (1970), as
summarized in the online Handbook of Texas History.

HJN 100075 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

When the Civil War came, several companies were organized in the area, known as the
Third Frontier District. A company of 100 Llano County volunteers went to Camp Terry in
February 1862 and later joined Walker’s Texas Division on the Red River; they were part of the
forces at Fort DeRussy when it fell. During and after the war, farmers in the county were
harassed by Indians, who frequently raided for horses. In 1867, 5 members of the Friend family
were killed, as were 5 members of the Whitlock family in 1870. The raids came to a stop after
August 4, 1874, when a group of 8 men led by Capt. James R. Moss trailed some Comanches
who had been stealing horses, surprised them on Packsaddle Mountain, and defeated them.
Partly because of the dislocations that accompanied the Civil War, the county grew
slowly during the 1860s. Though the number of farms and ranches had increased to 95 by
1870, the number of “improved” acres in the county had actually declined to 1,624. The number
of cattle had declined to 18,127. Wheat was planted on about 7,700 acres that year and cotton
on about 1,150. The county’s development accelerated during the 1870s and 1880s, after the
danger from Indian attacks had been eliminated. By 1880, 619 farms and ranches had been
established in Llano County, and improved acres totaled almost 34,000. Ranching dominated
the economy; 31,760 cattle and almost 14,000 sheep were counted that year. Corn culture
occupied about 7,700 acres, and cotton was planted on almost 2,250. By 1890, the farms and
ranches numbered 858, totaling about 342,000 acres. Almost 52,700 cattle and about
24,000 sheep were counted in Llano County that year, while about 13,000 acres were devoted
to corn and almost 7,800 to cotton.
The county boomed briefly near the end of the 19th century, particularly after 1892,
when Llano became a railhead and attempts were made to mine iron deposits in the area. In
1900, Frank Teich established the Teich Monument Works, and production of granite became a
factor in the economy. Teich was a sculptor whose work may be seen in Confederate
monuments in several Texas cities. Two other granite sheds were put into operation at about
the same time. Sheep ranching declined during the 1890s; by 1900, there were only about
5,000 sheep in the county. Other parts of the economy continued to expand, however. By
1900, farms and ranches in Llano County numbered 858; about 17,000 acres were planted in
corn, and almost 9,800 in cotton. The population had increased to 7,301 by that year.
Although the railroad had helped to stimulate the economy, the iron mining proved
unprofitable, and the boom soon faded away. Llano did attract some growth as a health resort
early in the 20th century, but the county’s economy declined between 1900 and 1920. The
number of farms dropped to 795 by 1910 and 686 by 1920; the population also shrank during
this period, to 5,360 by 1920. The decline in cotton production was part of the reason. County
farmers produced 4,944 bales of cotton in 1906, for example, but only 1,918 bales in 1916. As
cotton recovered somewhat during the 1920s (about 3,000 bales were produced in 1926), the
county’s population also increased, to reach 5,360 by 1930.
Like the rest of the Southwest, Llano County was hit hard by depression and drought
during the 1930s. The agricultural economy suffered most. Cotton production almost ceased in
the county during the 1930s; in 1936, county farmers ginned only 414 bales, and, in 1941, they
ginned none. Overall, cropland harvested in Llano County declined more than 20% between
1930 and 1940, when only 666 farms and ranches remained in the area. Most cattle ranchers
14

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

suffered but survived. Even in 1935, after several dry years and government buying of cattle,
there were 36,500 cattle in the county. Cattle were not originally included in the Agricultural
Adjustment Act, and, when prices fell to less than 4 dollars per hundredweight, cattlemen
sought relief from the government. At first, cattle were bought by the Federal Surplus Relief
Corporation; in 1934, cattle were placed within the authority of the Agricultural Adjustment
Administration. Government buying of cattle prevented total disaster, although as soon as they
could, cattlemen got out of government programs.
The building of dams on the Colorado River also offered some relief during the
Depression, and the dams brought greater benefits for the area than the temporary jobs the
construction provided. Samuel Insull’s Middle West Utilities Company had been searching for
sites for hydroelectric dams since as early as 1926, and, in April 1931, after negotiations with
local power companies, Middle West began construction on what was then called Hamilton Dam
on the Colorado River. Work stopped, however, in the summer of 1932 as a result of the
Depression and the collapse of the Insull enterprises. After various efforts to obtain public
money, $4.5 million was allotted in 1934 for completion of the dam, largely through the efforts of
Congressman James Paul Buchanan. Later that year, the Lower Colorado River Authority was
established, and it received $20 million to build other dams downstream, largely because the
water that caused a destructive flood in 1935 came from the Llano River, which joins the
Colorado below Buchanan Dam. Buchanan and Inks dams were completed by 1938. In 1952,
another impoundment project, Granite Shoals Dam, was completed, impounding a body of
water later named Lake Lyndon B. Johnson. Government aid and construction projects helped
the county to get through the depression in spite of the general decline in agriculture. The
population of the county actually grew during the 1930s, to reach 5,990 by 1940. It
subsequently declined during the 1940s and 1950s, but began to grow again during the 1960s,
as more people were attracted to lakeside properties in the area. The census counted
5,377 residents in Llano County in 1950, 5,240 in 1960, and 6,979 in 1970. The population was
10,144 in 1980 and 11,631 by 1990.
Although cattle ranching remains the single most important element of Llano County’s
agricultural economy, the county is also one of the 10 leading producers of hogs in Texas.
Angora goats, although declining in importance, also played a significant role in the area’s postWorld War II economy. In the 1940s, there were as many as 40,000 Angoras in Llano County,
but, by 1983, there were only about 5,000. Turkey production was a significant part of the
economy in the 1970s, when more than 50,000 were produced each year, but, by 1982, no
turkey production was listed for Llano County by the Texas Department of Agriculture.

HJN 100075 AR

15

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
at the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the National
Park Service’s (NPS) online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), and the Texas State Historical Association’s
(TSHA) Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a program of pedestrian survey of the APE. The
assessment of significance, evaluation of NRHP eligibility, and recommendations concerning
the management options for cultural resources recorded during this project are presented in
Chapter 5.0, Results of Investigations, and Chapter 6.0, Summary and Recommendations. The
rest of this chapter presents the results of archival research, the methodological background for
the current investigations, and the specific survey methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing archives for information
on previously recorded cultural resource sites and previous archeological investigations
conducted within a 1.6-km (1.0-mi) radius of the project area. Based on this research,
2 previously recorded archeological sites, 41LL74 and 41LL474, occur within 1.6 km (1.0 mi) of
the project area. Site 41LL74 consists of a surficial scatter of aboriginal chipped and ground
stone artifacts and burned rocks covering approximately 0.4 ha (1.0 ac) of an eroding hill slope
overlooking the Colorado River. A small pocket of midden debris 20- to 30-cm deep was noted
in a road cut, but the site was not considered to be worthy of further investigations. Site
41LL474 is a multiple-component aboriginal and historic-age site situated on the western
shoreline of the Colorado River/Lake LBJ. The aboriginal component consisted of a dense

HJN 100075 AR

17

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

scatter of lithic debitage, chipped and ground stone tools, and burned rocks observed in a 100by-100-m area. The historic-age component consisted of a 5-ft-high stone wall built of large
granite bounders that spanned several isolated granite outcrops. The wall was believed to have
been built prior to 1890. The site was considered to possess some research potential. No
previously recorded cultural resources are located within or in the immediate vicinity of the
current project area, and the APE has not been previously surveyed for cultural resources.
In Central Texas, aboriginal archeological sites are commonly found in upland areas and
on alluvial terraces near stream/river channels and springs. While aboriginal cultural resources
are commonly encountered in deep alluvial sediments adjacent to major streams in Central
Texas, the relative antiquity of the granitic geological formations that underlie the project area
suggests that any cultural resources would be constrained to the modern ground surface, rather
than in buried contexts, in erosional settings lacking integrity. Intact, buried archeological
deposits may occur within alluvial sediments near major streams, though no deep Holocene-age
alluvial sediments are mapped within the current project area. The terrain within the project
area consists of a mix of Pleistocene-age terrace formations and Precambrian granitic
structures adjacent to the Colorado River/Lake LBJ. Erosion has been extensive within the
project area due to shoreline erosive processes associated with Lake LBJ, and very little to no
Holocene-age sediment remains on the modern ground surface of the project area. Other
things being equal, any cultural resources associated with the soils mapped in the APE would
be expected to occur on the modern ground surface in deflated, eroded contexts that would lack
stratigraphic integrity. Historic-age cultural resources may occur in virtually any physiographic
setting and are commonly found near major towns and adjacent to historic-age roadways.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

On June 15, 2010, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd, crew chief, and Jared
Wiersema, field technician, under the overall supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal
Investigator, performed a cultural resource survey of the APE to locate any cultural resource
properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project. The survey
consisted of pedestrian walkover of the APE with shovel testing. Field conditions were
favorable at the time of the survey; the summer sky was clear and visibility was excellent.
T-BAR-O Ranch is proposing to construct an erosion-control bulkhead along the
shoreline in areas where wave action is causing soils to slough off into the lake (Figure 3). The
construction footprint of the proposed bulkhead would measure approximately 0.6 m (2 ft) in
thickness, and a temporary construction easement, which is assumed to measure no more than
about 7.6 m (25 ft) in width, was also surveyed. The Lake LBJ shoreline abutting the T-Bar-O
Ranch tract consists of a mosaic of areas where shoreline soils are being actively eroded by
shoreline wave action as well as erosion-resistant areas where the shoreline consists of granite
boulders or large granite slabs from which all soil has already been eroded. The proposed
bulkhead would be constructed only in areas of soil erosion, which characterize the majority
(75%) of the project area (Figure 4). The remaining portions (25%) of the project area consist of
erosion-resistant shoreline areas, and the bulkhead would not be built in these areas (Figures 5
and 6). However, the entire length of the project area was surveyed for the sake of continuity.

18

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

Figure 3. Overview of Lake LBJ from T-Bar-O Ranch Project Area (Facing East)

Figure 4. Shoreline Formed by Eroding Soil (Bulkhead Construction) (Facing South)

HJN 100075 AR

19

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 5. Shoreline Formed by Granite Boulders (No Bulkhead) (Facing North)

Figure 6. Shoreline Formed by Exposed Granite (No Bulkhead) (Facing North)

20

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

Construction on the Granite Shoals Dam, which impounds Lake LBJ, was finished in
1954, and 56 years of wave action have resulted in extensive erosion along the shoreline of
Lake LBJ. Most, if not all, Holocene-age sediments have long since been scoured from the
shoreline, exposing more erosion-resistant Pleistocene-age terrace sediments and granitic
boulders and bedrock on the modern ground surface. While prior impacts from erosion have
been extensive within the APE, other natural and artificial disturbances appear to be relatively
minimal. Overall, less than 50% of the project area appears to be intact. Vegetation consists
primarily of mixed grasses and scattered cedar trees. Ground surface visibility was good to
excellent across most of the APE due to the extent of wave scour along the Lake LBJ shoreline.
Horizon’s archeologists traversed the project area in parallel transects and the modern
ground surface was thoroughly examined for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. In
addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards
(TSMASS) for cultural resource surveys state that, for linear projects, a minimum of 16 shovel
tests per mile of 30-m- (100-ft-) wide right-of-way is required unless field conditions warrant
excavation of more probes (e.g., due to the presence of culturally sensitive areas) or less
probes (e.g., due to extensive prior disturbances, cultural low-probability areas, or steep
slopes). In the event that a probe yields evidence of subsurface cultural deposits, additional
probes may be necessary to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of the subsurface
deposits associated with the cultural resource. Thus, a minimum of 3 subsurface probes would
be required within the 945-m- (3,100-ft-) long by 8-m- (27-ft-) wide APE. Horizon excavated a
total of 13 shovel tests during the survey, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a
project area of this size (Figure 7). Shovel tests were excavated judgmentally in areas that
either retained some soil deposits or in which ground surface visibility was relatively lower.
In general, shovel tests measured approximately 30 cm (12 in) in diameter and were
excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the top of pre-Holocene
deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable, and all sediments were screened through 6.35millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth. In practice, most shovel tests were terminated at
depths ranging from 5 to 70 cm below surface (cmbs) due to the presence of granitic bedrock or
the local water table, but a few penetrated to a depth of 100 cmbs. Sediments, where present,
generally consisted of light to dark brown silty and sandy loam overlying granitic bedrock. The
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all shovel tests were determined using
hand-held Garmin ForeTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices based on the North
American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83). Specific shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.
In addition to shovel testing, the TSMASS require backhoe trenching on stream terraces
and other areas with the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that
shovel tests are capable of reaching (approximately 80 to 100 cmbs or more in sandy sediments
or 40 to 60 cmbs in clayey sediments). It was determined during the pedestrian survey that
deep Holocene-age alluvial sediments that would require backhoe trenching were not present
within the APE. Consequently, backhoe trenching was not conducted within the APE during the
survey, and the pedestrian walkover with shovel testing is considered to constitute an adequate
survey technique for assessing the potential of the project area to contain cultural resources.

HJN 100075 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 7. Locations of Shovel Tests in Project Area

22

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic
log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and
non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same
location in which they were found. One aboriginal archeological site and 1 isolated artifact
occurrence were recorded during the survey; however, no cultural resources were collected.
One new archeological site, 41LL509, was recorded within the project area during the
survey. This site consists of a surficial scatter of chipped stone debitage observed on the
modern ground surface adjacent to the shoreline of Lake LBJ. Due to the surficial and eroded
context of the cultural materials, the horizontal boundaries of the site were delineated primarily
based on the extent of the surface scatter of artifacts. Five shovel tests were excavated on or in
the immediate vicinity of the site to determine the nature and extent of any subsurface
archeological deposits; however, cultural materials were present only on the modern ground
surface in eroded contexts. A standard site recording form was used to record pertinent
information on location, physiographic setting, and local environmental characteristics; types
and quantities of artifacts observed; distribution and densities of artifacts; types and locations of
cultural features; artificial and natural impacts; and the condition of surface and any subsurface
cultural deposits. A sample of artifacts observed on the site was photographed in the field, and
the artifacts were left where they were found. A scaled sketch map was drawn that illustrates
site boundaries; locations of shovel tests, cultural features, and/or material concentrations; and
notable features of the landscape. The site was thoroughly photo-documented using color
digital photography, and a photographic log was maintained of all photographs taken. A
temporary site identification number was given to the site during the survey. Based on the
information recorded on the site recording form in the field, a Texas Archeological Data Site
Form was completed by Horizon’s laboratory personnel using the most current version of
TARL’s TexSite archeological data collection software, the form was submitted to TARL, and
TARL issued a permanent site trinomial for the site.
In addition to the archeological site described above, 1 isolated artifact occurrence was
observed within the project area during the survey. This artifact, a chipped stone biface, was
encountered on the modern ground surface near the southern end of the project area. The area
surrounding the find was thoroughly inspected for evidence of associated cultural resources,
and 2 shovel tests were excavated in the vicinity of the find, but no additional cultural resources
were encountered. The artifact was recorded as an isolated occurrence rather than as a site
due to the lack of any additional evidence to provide context for the specimen.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project areas as defined in
36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3. The TSMASS requirements for subsurface
probes were exceeded for a project area of this size.
.

HJN 100075 AR

23

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The survey resulted in the documentation of 1 new archeological site, 41LL509, which
consists of a small, surficial scatter of chipped stone debitage observed on an ancient terrace
remnant along the shoreline of Lake LBJ. It is possible, perhaps even likely, that the artifacts
observed at this location are in secondary context, having been washed up from a site located
beneath the waters of Lake LBJ, but any such part of the site that may exist could not be
investigated.
In addition to the archeological site described above, 1 isolated artifact occurrence, a
chipped stone biface, was observed within the project area during the survey. The artifact was
recorded as an isolated occurrence rather than as a site due to the lack of any associated
cultural materials on the modern ground surface or in either of 2 shovel tests excavated
adjacent to the artifact.
No historic-age cultural resources were encountered within the APE.

5.1

SITE 41LL509

Site 41LL509 is a small, surficial scatter of aboriginal chipped stone lithic debris
observed on the edge of an ancient terrace remnant along the current shoreline of Lake LBJ
near the point at which an unnamed tributary stream discharges into the lake (formerly the
Colorado River) (Figures 8 to 10). The site extends approximately 30 m along the shoreline and
about 3 m inland from the shoreline, covering a maximum area of roughly 90 square meters
(m2). Site boundaries were delineated via the distribution of surficial artifacts and subsequently
confirmed through shovel testing. While it is not clear whether or not the artifacts observed at
this location are in primary context due to the shoreline locale and the extent of erosion in the
area, it is conceivable that the site extends down the terrace toward the former Colorado River
bed. However, due to the presence of Lake LBJ, it was not possible to evaluate any portion of
the site that is currently inundated by the lake.
Site 41LL509 consists of a small, surficial concentration of chipped stone debitage
scattered along the current shoreline of Lake LBJ. A total of 36 tertiary flakes, manufactured
from a variety of chert materials ranging in color from off-white to gray, were observed on the
site (Figure 11). All of the flakes represented interior flakes lacking any exterior cortical
surfaces, and all appear to be associated with chipped stone tool manufacture rather than

HJN 100075 AR

25

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 8. Sketch Map of Site 41LL509

retouch or maintenance as no smaller trimming flakes were observed. While no raw material
cores were observed, the site would appear to represent the remnants of a raw material
procurement or short-term flintknapping locality. However, given the extent of erosion in the
area, it is possible the artifacts are in secondary context, and the primary locus of aboriginal
activity may even be located under the waters of the lake.

26

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

Figure 9. Overview of Site 41LL509 (Facing North)

Figure 10. Overview of Shoreline on Site 41LL509 (Facing Northwest)

HJN 100075 AR

27

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 11. Chipped Stone Artifacts Observed on Site 41LL509

A total of 5 shovel tests were excavated on the site. Isolated areas of sediment deposits
were noted on the site, and shovel testing revealed that sediments consist of light brown silty to
sandy loam extending to depths ranging from 25 to 40 cmbs. Underlying granite bedrock was
encountered in all 5 shovel tests. No cultural materials were observed in any of the shovel
tests.
Site 41LL509 consists of a small, surficial scatter of lithic debris that is interpreted as the
remnants of an aboriginal flintknapping station or raw material procurement locality (i.e.,
“quarry”). While the site generally reflects aboriginal land use practices, the lack of temporally
diagnostic artifacts, cultural features, organics remains, and stratified contexts seriously limits
the research value of the site. Given the proximity of Lake LBJ and the active processes of
shoreline erosion that are observable on the site, it is likely that the artifacts on this site have
simply been washed up from a primary habitation locale that is currently under the waters of
Lake LBJ. It is unlikely that this site could be profitably investigated further to provide
information pertinent to the aboriginal past, and it is consequently recommended as ineligible for
inclusion in the NRHP. No further cultural resource investigations are recommended on this
site.

5.2

ISOLATED OCCURRENCE

In addition to the archeological site described above, 1 isolated artifact occurrence
(Isolated Occurrence No. 1) was observed within the project area during the survey. This

28

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

artifact, a chipped stone biface, was encountered on the modern ground surface near the
southern end of the project area (Figure 12). The implement was manufactured from a mediumgrained, off-white chert, apparently via a combination of hard- and soft-hammer percussion.
The specimen represents a complete (i.e., unbroken) tool, though no clear evidence of userelated wear was observed on the artifact. The area surrounding the find was thoroughly
inspected for evidence of associated cultural resources, and 2 shovel tests were excavated in
the vicinity, but no additional cultural resources were encountered.
The artifact was recorded as an isolated occurrence rather than as a site due to the lack
of any additional evidence to provide context for the specimen. This isolated artifact does not
possess integrity of context, retains minimal to no research value, and does not exhibit any
temporally diagnostic characteristics. While the artifact is generally indicative of aboriginal
(presumably prehistoric) activity in the area, it is ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP. No further
archeological investigations are recommended in connection with this isolated artifact.

Figure 12. View of Isolated Biface (Isolated Occurrence No. 1)

HJN 100075 AR

29

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:



Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.



Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP.



Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with
important historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA, archeological resources are
evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of archeological
resources for inclusion in the NRHP.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory
process.

HJN 100075 AR

31

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

6.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The survey resulted in the documentation of 1 new archeological site, 41LL509, a small,
surficial scatter of aboriginal chipped stone debitage scattered along the shoreline of Lake LBJ.

32

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

As documented during the survey, the boundaries of the site are contained entirely within the
current project area, though it is possible, perhaps even likely, that the artifacts are in secondary
context, having been redeposited through wave action from a primary aboriginal occupation
area located beneath the waters of the lake. The site, which consists of a small assemblage of
36 pieces of chert debitage found on the modern ground surface, appears to represent the
remains of an aboriginal flintknapping station, raw material procurement locality (i.e., “quarry”),
or possibly a small campsite. Shovel testing conducted on the site revealed scattered areas
that retained some shallow sediment deposits, though no cultural resources were encountered
in any of the shovel tests. While the site generally reflects aboriginal land use practices, the
lack of temporally diagnostic artifacts, cultural features, organics remains, and stratified contexts
seriously limits the research value of the site. Given the proximity of Lake LBJ and the active
processes of shoreline erosion that are observable on the site, it is likely that the artifacts on this
site have simply been washed up from a primary habitation locale that is currently under the
waters of Lake LBJ. It is unlikely that this site could be profitably investigated further to provide
information pertinent to the aboriginal past, and it is consequently recommended as ineligible for
inclusion in the NRHP. No further cultural resource investigations are recommended on this
site.
In addition to the archeological site described above, 1 isolated artifact occurrence was
observed within the project area during the survey. This artifact, a chipped stone biface, was
encountered on the modern ground surface near the southern end of the project area. The area
surrounding the find was thoroughly inspected for evidence of associated cultural resources,
and 2 shovel tests were excavated in the vicinity, but no additional cultural resources were
encountered. The artifact was recorded as an isolated occurrence rather than as a site due to
the lack of any additional evidence to provide context for the specimen. This isolated artifact
does not possess integrity of context, retains minimal to no research value, and does not exhibit
any temporally diagnostic characteristics. While the artifact is generally indicative of aboriginal
(presumably prehistoric) activity in the area, it is ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP. No further
archeological investigations are recommended in connection with this isolated artifact.

6.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of the T-Bar-O Ranch bulkhead
project area documented in this report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be
affected by the proposed undertaking. In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a
reasonable and good faith effort to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural
resources were identified that meet the criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR
60.4, and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed
undertaking. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in
the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any
point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously
surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the USACE and THC should be notified
of the discovery.

HJN 100075 AR

33

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Butzer, K.W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas.
No. 53, Austin.

Texas Water Development Board, Report

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dice, L.R.
1943
The Biotic Provinces of North America. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

HJN 100075 AR

35

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Fry, T.B.M.
1943
A History of Llano County. Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Texas.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hayward, O.T. (editor)
1988a The Comanchean Section of the Trinity Shelf, Central Texas. In South-Central
Section of the Geological Society of America, Centennial Field Guide, Volume 4, pp.
323-328. Geological Society of America, Boulder, Colorado.
1988b

Gulfian Rocks, Western Margin of the East Texas Basin. In South-Central Section of
the Geological Society of America, Centennial Field Guide, Volume 4, pp. 329-334.
Geological Society of America, Boulder, Colorado.

Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas. Submitted to the US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Long, M.G. (ed.)
1989
Llano County Family Album: A History. Taylor Publishing Co., Dallas, Texas.
Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.

36

100075_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2010
Web Soil Survey, <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed June 18, 2010.
Oatman, W.
1970
Llano, Gem of the Hill Country: A History of Llano County. Pioneer Press, Hereford
Texas.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.

Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology
in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R.A. Ricklis and M.B.
Collins, pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Swisher, B.F.
1878
Historical Sketch of Hays County. American Sketch Book 4.
Tharp, B.C.
1939
The Vegetation of Texas. Texas Academy of Sciences Publications in Natural
History, Non-Technical Series No. 1:i-xvi, 1-74.
Thornwaite, C.W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
38:55-94.

Geographical Review

Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

HJN 100075 AR

37

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 3,100-Foot-Long
Erosion-Control Bulkhead on the T-BAR-O Ranch, Llano County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates

1

ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JW-1

556257

3396411

0-60
60-100

JW-2

556126

3396564

Soils
Light brown silty loam

Artifacts
None

Light brown silt

0-40

Light brown silty loam

40+

Granite bedrock

None

JW-3

556001

3396688

0-100

Reddish-brown silty loam

None

JW-4

555995

3396998

0-50

Reddish-brown silty clay

None

JW-5

556089

3397105

0-50

Dark brown sandy loam

None

50-60

Light brown silty loam

JW-6

MM-1

MM-2

MM-3

MM-4

556125

556272

556146

556121

556035

3396552

3396380

3396547

3396583

3396652

60+

Water table

0-30

Light brown silty loam

30+

Granite bedrock

0-60

Light brown sandy loam

60+

Granite bedrock

0-40

Light brown sandy loam

40+

Granite bedrock

0-5

Dark brown sandy loam

5+

Granite bedrock

0-40

Light brown sandy clay

40+

Light red sandy clay

None

None

None

None

None

MM-5

555943

3396964

0-50

Very dark brown clay

None

MM-6

556114

3397122

0-55

Dark gray wet sand

None

55+

Water table

0-25

Light brown sandy loam

25+

Granite bedrock

MM-7

556115

3396570

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 100075 AR

A-1

