Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
44-Acre Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract,
The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

HJN 100079 PA

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

The Woodlands Operating Company
The Woodlands, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

September 2010

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
44-Acre Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract,
The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

The Woodlands Operating Company
P.O. Box 5050
The Woodlands, Texas 77387-5050

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 100079 PA

September 2010

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The Woodlands Operating Company, L.P. (TWOC), is proposing to develop an
approximately 18-hectare (ha) (44-acre [ac]) tract, designated as Creekside Park, Section 18, in
The Woodlands in Harris County, Texas. The proposed project area is bounded by Creekside
Forest Drive to the southeast and by South Branson Creek Way to the northeast. Proposed
development on the tract would include construction of residential lots, streets, drainage, and
utilities. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed undertaking consists of the entire
18-ha (44-ac) Creekside Park, Section 18, tract.
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by TWOC, a private developer, on
privately owned land. However, an application has been submitted to the US Army Corps of
Engineers, Galveston District (USACE), to permit the project under Nationwide Permit
(NWP) 29; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA). As the project represents a privately sponsored undertaking requiring federal
permit approval with the potential to impact significant cultural resources, TWOC was required
to provide for a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the project’s APE and to assess
the project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. TWOC
subcontracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to conduct a cultural
resource inventory survey of the APE associated with the proposed project.
On July 22, 2010, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The survey consisted of an archival review and pedestrian walkover of the APE
with systematic shovel testing. The APE is situated within a low-lying, partially forested area
with scattered marshy depressions that has been extensively dissected by access roads
adjacent to Clear Pond.
The APE was traversed on foot by Horizon’s archeologist in parallel transects and the
modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. Horizon excavated a total of 22 shovel tests during the survey, thereby meeting the
Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) requirements for a project
area of this size.

HJN 100079 PA

iii

Management Summary

No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey. Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
new cultural resources were identified in the APE as a result of survey activities, and no
previously recorded sites occur in the vicinity of the project area. Furthermore, no listed historic
properties are present in the vicinity of the project area that would be adversely affected by the
proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) according to 36 CFR 60.4,
and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed
undertaking. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in
the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any
point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously
surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the USACE and the Texas Historical
Commission (THC) should be notified of the discovery.

iv

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ..................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology ........................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.......................................................................... 5
2.3
Climate ............................................................................................................ 6
2.4
Flora and Fauna .............................................................................................. 7

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND..................................................................................... 11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) ..................................................... 12
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) ......................................................... 12
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) ........................................................ 13
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) .................................................... 14
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ....................................................... 15
3.6
Historic Period (ca. 1700 A.D. to Present) ..................................................... 15

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................. 21
4.1
Archival Research ......................................................................................... 21
4.2
Survey Methods............................................................................................. 22

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................. 29

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................. 31
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................. 31
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .... 32
6.3
Summary of Inventory Results ...................................................................... 32
6.4
Management Recommendations ................................................................... 33

7.0

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................. 35
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 100079 PA

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.

vi

Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle....................................... 2
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ............................................................. 3
Typical View of Cleared Access Road in Project Area (Facing North) ....................... 23
Overview of Overgrown Access Road in Project Area (Facing North)........................ 23
Typical View of Erosion Associated with Cleared Access Roads (Facing East)......... 24
Typical View of Bulldozer Push Pile Adjacent to Access Road (Facing East) ............ 24
Low Area Adjacent to Slough in Eastern Portion of APE (Facing Northeast) ............. 25
Locations of Shovel Tests in Project Area .................................................................. 26

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The Woodlands Operating Company, L.P. (TWOC), is proposing to develop an
approximately 18-hectare (ha) (44-acre [ac]) tract, designated as Creekside Park, Section 18, in
The Woodlands in Harris County, Texas (Figures 1 and 2). The proposed project area is
bounded by Creekside Forest Drive to the southeast and by South Branson Creek Way to the
northeast. Proposed development on the tract would include construction of residential lots,
streets, drainage, and utilities. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed undertaking
consists of the entire 18-ha (44-ac) Creekside Park, Section 18, tract.
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by TWOC, a private developer, on
privately owned land. However, an application has been submitted to the US Army Corps of
Engineers, Galveston District (USACE), to permit the project under Nationwide Permit
(NWP) 29; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended (P.L. 89-665; 80 Stat. 915; 16 USC §470 et seq.). As the
project represents a privately sponsored undertaking requiring federal permit approval with the
potential to impact significant cultural resources, TWOC was required to provide for a cultural
resources inventory and assessment of the project’s APE and to assess the project’s possible
impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. TWOC subcontracted with Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to conduct a cultural resource inventory survey of the
APE associated with the proposed project.
On July 22, 2010, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive
pedestrian survey of the APE, and the production of a report suitable for review by the State
Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas Historical Commission’s
(THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council of Texas
Archeologists’ (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.
This report presents the
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0
respectively, of the project area.
archival research, and cultural

HJN 100079 PA

results of this cultural resource survey. Following this
and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds,
Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
resource survey methods implemented during the survey.

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

2

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

HJN 100079 PA

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the cultural resource survey, and Chapter 6.0 presents
cultural resource management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the
references cited in the report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

4

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in northern Harris County, Texas, in The Woodlands. Harris
County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas, about 75 kilometers (km)
(51 miles [mi]) inland from the Gulf of Mexico shore. The Gulf of Mexico represents a structural
basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal Plain, which extends as far north
as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment,
consists of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic
origin, that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001). The Houston
area is underlain by rocks and unconsolidated sediments that are quite young in a geological
sense, ranging from modern to Miocene in age. These consist predominantly of a series of
fluviodeltaic bodies arranged in an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian,
littoral, and estuarine facies making up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major
bounding disconformities between these formations are usually interpreted to represent
depositional hiatuses that occurred during periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in
this fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As a result of the geometry of basin filling, successively
younger rock units crop out in subparallel bands from the basin margin toward the modern
coastline.
The project area is situated on the southern terraces and adjacent uplands south of
Spring Creek, a major waterway that forms part of the San Jacinto River system. Spring Creek
flows generally eastwards to its confluence with the West Fork of the San Jacinto River
approximately 30 km (18 mi) east of the project area. The San Jacinto River, in turn, flows
southeastwards and discharges into the Gulf of Mexico about 75 km (51 mi) southeast of the
project area. Elevations across the project area range from about 43 meters (m) (140 feet [ft])
above mean sea level (amsl) in a small, marshy depression in the northeastern portion of the
project area to about 55 m (180 ft) amsl on a broad upland knoll in the southwestern portion of
the project area.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project area is underlain by the Lissie Formation (Shelby et al. 1968). The Lissie
Formation consists of clay, silt, sand, and minor deposits of siliceous gravel of granule to small

HJN 100079 PA

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

pebble size. Specifically, the project area is situated on sandy loam soils of the Segno-Hockley
association (Wheeler 1976). This association consists of nearly level to gently sloping, loamy,
forested soils on uplands that exhibit pimple mounds in scattered areas. This soil association
occurs on the uplands, occupying about 4% of Harris County. Segno soils comprise about 34%
of the association, Hockley soils make up about 32%, and the remainder is composed of a
variety of minor soils.
Specifically, the project area is underlain by Segno fine sandy loam, 0 to 1% slopes
(SeA) a nearly level to gently sloping soil found along ridges and natural drainages (Wheeler
1976). A typical profile of this soil type consists of 13 centimeters (cm) (5 inches [in]) of friable,
very strongly acid, pale brown fine sandy loam underlain by about 30 cm (12 in) of friable, very
strongly acid, yellowish-brown sandy clay loam. This is, in turn, underlain by very strongly acid,
mottled brownish-yellow and red sandy clay loam to a depth of 64 cm (25 in), below which the
soil becomes increasingly mottled with gray sandy clay with depth. This soil is moderately well
drained, surface runoff is slow, internal drainage is moderately slow, and permeability is
moderately low. The available water capacity is medium.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
While the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway
(1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes
3 separate climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late
Glacial Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present).
Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas
was considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region
was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and
Holloway 1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a
slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous
woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway
1985). During the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have
been more stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post
oak savannas. The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued
into the mid-Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more
mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and
Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were
probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern United States and the semiarid to arid west. The climate
reflects the influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which
combine with the urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and
concrete to give the Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and

6

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

moist throughout much of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of
surface water, humidity in the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer
days, and it often exceeds 50% even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of
the relatively high humidity characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate
annual range and a modest diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast.
Average monthly high temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to
63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in January to a high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly
lows range from 4 to 9°C (38 to 47°F) in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August.
Annually, average low temperatures range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high
temperatures range from 27 to 29°C (75 to 79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The Houston region experiences 2 precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott 2001;
Wheeler 1976). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of
infrequent cold fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs
in the late summer to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical
storms and hurricanes from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter
and early spring are relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional
thunderstorms that are relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual
precipitation varies from a low of approximately 100 cm (40 in) to a high of more than 132 cm
(52 in). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5 to 8 cm (2 to 3 in) in March to
more than 19 cm (7.5 in) occurring locally on the coast during September. Almost all of the
measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely rare, occurring in measurable
amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Harris County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texas biotic province (Blair
1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces
and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some species reach
the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahan et al. (1984) further
define 4 broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic province that lies
on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie, (3) coastal gallery
forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are
strongly controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the
seasonal water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically
dominated by little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter
environments are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria,
bulrushes, smooth cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush,
saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal
waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained

HJN 100079 PA

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

environments are characterized by such taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum,
gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass, red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort.
A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon,
nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and
many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish
to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs
and woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the
north and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses
are found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver
bluestem, buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian
sunflower, Engelman daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow
neptunia, snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush,
bluebonnet, ragweed, croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring
in the coastal prairie include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live
oak, elm, hackberry, bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as
the coastal prairie grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland
environment with common stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie
is home to a diverse fauna, including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many
small rodents, amphibians and reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison
and pronghorn were also present at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbrier, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are
grasses such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest
include white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and
rodents, turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various times in the
past, and a number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger
deciduous trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory
vegetation varies from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and
young trees. Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle,
greenbrier, Virginia creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A
variety of fauna is also present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit,

8

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

mink, skunk, various small rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was
also present at times in the past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the
transition zone to the coastal prairie environment.

HJN 100079 PA

9

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21county area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 200 km (124 mi) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline. Much of the
archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern Great
Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990).
Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These 2 subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25 km (16 mi) inland from the coast that covers the area influenced by
Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological variability
characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands, marine
coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable ecological
diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to
denote Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural
characteristics of Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring
regions. For instance, the Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and
Southeast Texas, and Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for
Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time
in Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit
evidence of reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be
associated with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of
subsistence-related activities. Inland sites tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired
clay balls (at some sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites
tend to consist of multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain few lithic artifacts, oyster
shell tools, large quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), and numerous bone tools.

HJN 100079 PA

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (but see Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is
represented by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred endscrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas
are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is
little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian
period (8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far
less pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and
corresponding decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a
diversified resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas,
however, this hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The
appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone
assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural

12

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

stage. Material culture shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in
the application of groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
In Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains.
Many of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and
several new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and
probably the Gary-Kent series.
The Late Archaic period (1,500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is
characterized by Gary, Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos
points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition
developed in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981;
Patterson 1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period
but reached full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as
boatstones and bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang
knives, stingray spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial
practices included the systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre,
and use of locally made grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most
burials are found in extended supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials
are also known. Burial direction is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to
site. Patterson et al. (1993) report that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary
tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area
by about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the
Conroe-Livingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears
to have progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995).
Southeastern Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where
Aten (1983) established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
129 km (80 mi) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal exception of a
few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found on the Gulf
coast west of the Sabine Lake area.

HJN 100079 PA

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods
(Aten 1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility
ware throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown
Plain for about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods
before once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety,
Goose Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor
pottery types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway
(Aten 1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte
types are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste
(like Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined
by the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the
latter part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in
Southeast Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the
Late Prehistoric period (Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995;
Wheat 1953). In fact, Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in
Southeast Texas as early as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points
that consisted of marginally retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a
generalized date of adoption of the bow-and-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca.
A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas. In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to
be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba,
Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial sequence for these point types has not been
established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn points appear to predate Perdiz points
throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto
Plain and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek
pottery remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt
Coated pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

14

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue.
Aten (1983) has
reconstructed the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century,
including the Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (possibly Karankawa), and Tonkawa. The
presence of the Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central
Texas in the 17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought
to have occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the
corresponding mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east
of the San Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe
may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson et al. 1993; 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying
Historic Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno
and Cuney points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually
identified by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1700 A.D. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez
Cabeza de Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near
Galveston Bay; however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until
after 1700. The first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission
system, as well as the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native
culture and social systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where
the burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as
increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the
time heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous
Indian population was greatly diminished. The Alabama/Coushatta Indians who currently reside
in Southeast Texas are migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early
19th centuries (Newcomb 1961).
Although Spain claimed the Texas Gulf Coast, few Europeans visited the future Harris
County between 1528 and 1821 1 . It is possible that de Vaca ascended the San Jacinto River
from Galveston Island around 1529 to trade with the woodland Indians, but his adventures failed

1

The following history of Harris County, Texas, derives from Bolton (1970), Freund (1954), Gray (1965),
Henson and Ladd (1988), Henson (1986), Jenkins (1973), McComb (1981), Pomeroy (1994), Sibley
(1968), Taylor (1955), and Woods (1959), as summarized in The Handbook of Texas Online.

HJN 100079 PA

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

to stimulate interest in the Texas coast. A few French traders from Louisiana visited Indians
living on Spring Creek between the 1730s and 1745, but they established no settlements. A
Spanish mission and presidio complex, El Orcoquisac, was maintained near the mouth of the
Trinity from 1756 to 1771 to monitor and oppose the intrusion of foreigners. In 1746, Captain
Joaquín de Orobio y Basterra from La Bahía visited the Orcoquisac villages along Spring Creek
while looking for French traders. He reported the lack of roads or maps and on his return
blazed a trail westward to find the Old San Antonio Road, on which he had traveled to
Nacogdoches on his way to the lower Trinity and San Jacinto rivers. The first Anglo-Americans
to explore Harris County were members of the various filibustering expeditions launched from
New Orleans between 1815 and 1820 to aid the Mexican Republicans rebelling against Spain.
Using Galveston Island and Bolivar Peninsula as a base, the men belonging to the expeditions
and encampments of Louis Michel Aury, Francisco Xavier Mina, Jean Laffite, and James Long
looked around the San Jacinto estuary for future home sites—their expected reward for freeing
Mexico from Spain. Some of these men were among the pioneer settlers arriving by boat from
Louisiana in early 1822, just after the Mexican War of Independence.
Responding to Stephen F. Austin’s advertisements, the families wrongly assumed that
the San Jacinto estuary was part of his empresario grant. Some moved to the Brazos River in
1824, but merchants and boatmen remained to exploit what turned out to be the best
transportation system in Texas and to petition successfully for inclusion in the Austin grant.
Since Galveston Island and the Gulf shore were forbidden to Anglo settlement, Harris County
was the southeastern border of the colony. The pioneers found no Indians living in the future
Harris County. In July 1824, a state land commissioner, the Baron de Bastrop, arrived and
spent 2 months issuing 29 titles to settlers, even though surveys were incomplete. The
pioneers, including Nathaniel Lynch, William Scott, and John R. Harris, chose sites along
Buffalo Bayou, the San Jacinto River, and the San Jacinto estuary. Between 1828 and 1833,
when Austin’s colonization effort virtually ended, 23 more families secured titles elsewhere in
the county, usually along watercourses. In 1826, John R. Harris laid out Harrisburg on his
league where Brays Bayou joined Buffalo Bayou, the head of navigation. He opened a store
and built a saw and grist mill, while his brothers captained vessels between there and New
Orleans and even Tampico.
By 1833, Harrisburg was an established port of entry for immigrants and freight destined
for the upper Brazos River communities of San Felipe and Washington. Moreover, it was the
hub for east-to-west roads. Eastward from Harrisburg in 1830, travelers crossed the San
Jacinto River on Lynch’s Ferry on their way to Anahuac, Liberty, or Nacogdoches. Opposite
Harrisburg, a road paralleled Buffalo Bayou heading northwest to a community on Spring Creek,
then forked for the Brazos villages. A third important road followed the south bank of Brays
Bayou for 24 km (15 mi) to a community on Oyster Creek near the site of present-day Stafford
in Fort Bend County. This area was known as the San Jacinto District from 1824 until 1833,
when it was renamed the Harrisburg District. From 1824 through 1827, Humphrey Jackson was
the alcalde for the San Jacinto District, which stretched from Lynchburg on the San Jacinto
River to the site of present-day Richmond on the west, and from Spring Creek to Clear Creek.
Jackson reported to Stephen F. Austin until 1828, when the newly instituted ayuntamiento at
San Felipe relieved the empresario and comisarios were named. The final stage of

16

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

development under the Mexican system occurred on 30 December 1835, when the General
Council set the boundaries of Harrisburg Municipality.
Harrisburg Municipality was the home of both President David G. Burnet and Vice
President Lorenzo de Zavala of the new Republic of Texas. They were elected by the
delegates at Washington after midnight on 16 March 1836, and the next morning left for
Harrisburg, where water transportation offered an escape if the Mexican army should win. On
25 March, the group reached Harrisburg, where the president conducted business for the next
2 weeks. Burnet and his bride had moved to Lynchburg from New Jersey in 1831 with
equipment for a steam sawmill that he built on the San Jacinto River above Lynch’s Ferry.
Declining to claim a headright, he bought land from Lynch for his home on a small bay below
the ferry. He was not chosen to represent his neighborhood in 1832, 1833, 1835, or 1836
because of his pro-Mexican views. Delegates, torn by rivalries, chose him because he was not
a delegate. Zavala, a refugee from Santa Antonio López de Santa Anna’s wrath, bought a
house on the north side of Buffalo Bayou below Harrisburg in August 1835, and his New Yorkborn second wife and 2 children joined him in December. The republic’s officials evacuated
Harrisburg by steamboat to Lynchburg on 12 April, when word arrived that Santa Anna’s troops
were crossing the Brazos below Richmond. The steamboat Cayuga later took the officials and
their families to Galveston Island. A constant stream of refugees from the upper Brazos
settlements had been crossing Harrisburg Municipality since mid-March en route to the United
States.
Santa Anna and his advance units reached Harrisburg at midnight on 14 April and, after
a day of looting, set fire to the settlement on 16 April. The general dispatched a cavalry troop to
Morgan’s Point on 16 April that almost captured the Burnet family. The battle of San Jacinto
took place on 20 and 21 April opposite Zavala’s house on widow Peggy McCormick’s farm,
where perhaps 600 dead soldiers remained unburied when neither commander ordered
interment.
Harrisburg County was formed by the First Congress on 22 December 1836. The
lawmakers also named Andrew Briscoe chief justice, and the infant city of Houston the county
seat and national capital. The county encompassed the territory of the old municipality plus
Galveston Island (the mainland was attached to Brazoria County) until May 1838, when its
modern boundaries were established. In December 1839, Congress changed the name to
Harris County in honor of John R. Harris. The county briefly lost its northwest corner in 1841
when Spring Creek residents tried to form a separate county. The first county court, convened
in February 1837, was composed of the chief justice (called the county judge after 1861), the
sheriff, the clerk, and 2 justices of the peace who served as associate justices.
Harrisburg recovered from the Mexican Revolution slowly. By 1853, it had a steam mill
and was the terminus for the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos, and Colorado Railway, which crossed the
county to Stafford’s Point to facilitate the shipment of cotton and sugar. Five other railroads
followed before the Civil War. The Galveston, Houston, and Henderson connected the island to
the mainland, while the Texas and New Orleans constructed tracks along the north side of
Buffalo Bayou to Liberty and Orange, thus enabling Confederate troops from Harris County to
reach the Neches River on their way to Virginia. The Houston and Texas Central ran west from

HJN 100079 PA

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

town to Cypress, Hockley, and Hempstead. The Houston Tap and Brazoria linked Houston with
the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos, and Colorado south of town and had a line to Columbia to serve the
Brazoria County sugar plantations.
Early settlers in Harris County were mainly southerners bringing their black slaves.
Besides cultivating field crops, some of the African Americans worked the cattle on the openrange ranches, particularly in the area south of Buffalo Bayou, which remained ranching country
into the early 20th century. By the 1840s, a number of Germans and French had immigrated to
Harris County. Both groups included city-dwelling artisans, merchants, and farmers—some
Catholic, some Protestant. Many of the immigrant agrarians settled north and west of Houston
and established successful truck and dairy farms that drew Europeans through the turn of the
century. Contrary to legend, few Mexican prisoners chose to remain in Harris County when all
were released on 21 April 1837, by President Sam Houston. The 1850 US census revealed no
Mexican-born males of the right age in Harris County or surrounding counties. A few Mexican
families lived in Houston in the 1880s. It was the economic opportunities offered by the
Houston Ship Channel and the railroads, combined with the unsettled political conditions
following the Mexican Revolution, that brought Mexicans to Houston. Most settled in the city
close to their work and the Catholic churches.
While the first settlers lived along the streams, those arriving after the Civil War chose
sites along the railroads that crisscrossed Harris County. By 1890, land developers in the
Midwest had purchased land along the new North Galveston, Houston, and Kansas City
Railroad, which ran east from Houston along the south side of Buffalo Bayou towards Morgan’s
Point and south to the mouth of Clear Creek. They expected to attract other Midwesterners to
raise fruit, berries, and vegetables or just to seek relief from cold winters. Pasadena, Deer Park,
and La Porte were established in 1892, and Seabrook followed in 1900. South Houston,
Genoa, and Webster developed along the Galveston, Houston, and Henderson Railroad after
the 1870s. Around the turn of the century, Japanese were invited to the Webster area to
develop rice farms on the flat prairies and also at a site on a branch line of the Gulf, Colorado,
and Santa Fe Railway south of Houston that became Mykawa. Between 1911 and 1936, the
Galveston-Houston Electric Railway, called the Interurban, ran parallel to the Galveston,
Houston, and Henderson Railroad and provided 30-minute service from Webster to Houston.
In the 1960s, the land east of Webster became the home of the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) Manned Spacecraft Center, renamed the Lyndon B. Johnson
Space Center in 1973. Houston quickly annexed the area. The development changed the rural
aspect of the area when several new towns sprang up along the north shore of Clear Lake, the
largest being Clear Lake City.
Northern Harris County developed similarly. After the Civil War, other railways such as
the Houston and Great Northern, the Trinity and Brazos Valley, the Houston East and West
Texas, and the Burlington-Rock Island entered north Harris County to converge on Houston.
The lumbering and farming interests established small towns such as Spring and Tomball along
the tracks. The population of Humble, near the Houston East and West Texas Railway,
increased with the oil boom at Moonshine Hill in 1905.

18

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

Harris County east of the San Jacinto River remained an agricultural community
focusing on rice culture in the 1890s. Its only commercial developments were small boatyards
at Lynchburg and Goose Creek and a brick factory on Cedar Bayou that mushroomed during
the 1880s to supply a building boom in Galveston. Between 1903 and 1907, oil was discovered
on the eastern shore of the San Jacinto estuary at Goose Creek and Tabbs Bay. Migrant
roughnecks and their families moved to the area and established a temporary boomtown amid
the derricks between 1915 and 1917. The shantytown was replaced in 1917 by Pelly, which
was built on private land above the noisy and dirty oil camp. In 1919, Ross Sterling and his
Humble Oil and Refining Company (now ExxonMobil) built a refinery on the San Jacinto above
the mouth of Goose Creek. The site was bordered by the Humble company town, Baytown, for
workers, and a middle-class enclave, Goose Creek, for executives and others. Pelly and Goose
Creek vied for dominance, and after Humble sold the company houses to the workers beginning
in the late 1920s, the 3 towns consolidated to become the “Tri-Cities” in the 1930s and finally to
be renamed Baytown in 1948. Eastern Harris County also had an electric interurban train, the
Houston-North Shore Railroad, which in 1925 connected the 3 towns to Crosby and ran along
the north side of Buffalo Bayou to downtown Houston.
The development of Harris County as an industrial power began in 1911, when voters
approved the formation of the Harris County Ship Channel Navigation District. Authorized by
Congress and approved by the state legislature, the district could improve the waterway and
manage the waterfront within the county. It immediately issued bonds to widen and deepen the
channel to make the Houston port accessible to oceangoing vessels. In 1914, the US Army
Corps of Engineers finished deepening the existing 80-km- (50-mi-) long channel to 8 m (25 ft)
from the Gulf through Galveston Bay and up the San Jacinto River and Buffalo Bayou to the
district’s turning basin at the Port of Houston. By 1918, petroleum refineries began locating
along Buffalo Bayou and the San Jacinto River, as did various other industries. Since that time,
the channel has been deepened to 15 m (50 ft) and widened to accommodate larger vessels.
The very profitable Harris County Navigation District owns the wharves and warehouses around
the turning basin (about 3.2 km [2.0 mi] above old Harrisburg), the Long Reach docks, and
various other facilities, including a bulk handling plant at Greens Bayou, the terminal railroad,
and the container facility at the Bayport industrial complex below Morgan’s Point. In addition, in
the 1950s, the district joined national and state governments to build the Washburn Tunnel
under Buffalo Bayou from Pasadena to the north side and the Baytown-La Porte tunnel beneath
the San Jacinto River to reduce the number of hazardous automobile ferries. Exports from the
port include rice, wheat, grain sorghums, cotton, caustic soda, cement, and petroleum products.
Imports include crude oil, iron ore, molasses, coffee, gypsum, and automobiles.
Another venture authorized by Harris County voters was the Harris County Domed
Stadium, which was completed in 1965 and has been leased to the Houston Sports Association.
The Astrodome, the first stadium of its kind, was touted as the “Eighth Wonder of the World.”
The county also maintains 2 public hospitals in Houston and, since 1935, has worked to control
flooding through the Harris County Flood Control District.

HJN 100079 PA

19

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
on the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the
National Park Service’s (NPS) online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas
State Historical Association’s (TSHA) Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a program of
intensive survey of the project area. No cultural resources were documented as a result of this
survey, so the second and third of these goals were not pursued. The rest of this chapter
presents the methodological background for the current investigations and the specific survey
methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey corridor. Archival research revealed that 1 previously
recorded archeological site, 41HR994, has been recorded within a 1.6-kilometer (km) (1.0-mile
[mi]) radius of the current project area. Site 41HR994, recorded in 2005 by Horizon during a
cultural resources survey conducted for the Kuykendahl Road Expansion Project, consists of
the remnants of a historic-age farmstead, including a brick-lined well, a chain-link fence, a
depression, and 2 trash dumps (Owens 2005). No structures, such as the primary residence or
any outbuildings, were extant, and the site was recommended as being ineligible for inclusion in
the NRHP. No aboriginal archeological sites, historic cemeteries, or listed National Register of

HJN 100079 PA

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Historic Places (NRHP) historic properties occur within 1.6 km (1.0 mi) of the project area. No
previously recorded cultural resources are located within or adjacent to the APE, and the project
area has not been previously surveyed for cultural resources.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

On July 22, 2010, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The survey consisted of pedestrian walkover of the APE with systematic shovel
testing. Field conditions were generally favorable at the time of the survey—the summer sky
was partially cloudy and visibility was excellent. The APE is situated off the northwest side of
Creekside Forest Drive and extends from a broad upland knoll in the southwestern portion of
the APE into a broad, low-lying area containing scattered marshy depressions in the
northeastern portion. Vegetation consists of a mix of native grasses, hardwood trees, and
shrubby undergrowth. The entire project area is dissected by a network of cleared access
roads (Figures 3 to 4; also see Figure 2), and the resulting devegetation across much of the
APE has led to localized erosion (Figure 5). Bulldozer push piles adjacent to the access roads,
presumably produced during their construction, are ubiquitous across the APE (Figure 6). The
network of access roads is more extensive in the southwestern half of the APE. The
northeastern portion of the project area consists of a broad, low-lying area containing scattered
depressions in proximity to a larger slough-like depression called Clear Pond (Figure 7).
Between the artificial disturbances associated with clearing for access roads and drainage
modifications, the APE has experienced extensive prior impacts. Approximately 50% of the
project area would appear to be intact.
The project area is situated in a low, relatively flat, fluviodeltaic environment situated on
the southern terraces and uplands of Spring Creek, on mature, sandy loam sediments of the
Lissie Formation. The sediments within the project area were deposited during the Late
Pleistocene epoch and possess low potential to contain intact archeological deposits; however,
other things being equal, the proximity of the project area to Spring Creek would tend to suggest
that the APE possesses at least some potential to contain cultural resources. However, the
project area has been extensively disturbed via prior construction of a network of access roads
and drainage modifications that cover much of the APE, and subsequent erosion has resulted in
extensive natural dissection of the landscape within the project area. Any cultural materials that
may occur within the APE therefore would be expected to occur on or near the modern ground
surface in deflated, erosional contexts and likely would lack integrity.
In general, intensive cultural resource survey activities entail a pedestrian walkover with
surface inspection as well as excavation of subsurface probes, such as shovel tests and/or
backhoe trenches. The APE was traversed on foot by Horizon’s archeologist in parallel, linear
transects spaced no more than 30 m (100 ft) apart, and the modern ground surface was
thoroughly inspected for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The Texas State
Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) for cultural resource surveys state that,

22

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

Figure 3. Typical View of Cleared Access Road in Project Area (Facing North)

Figure 4. Overview of Overgrown Access Road in Project Area (Facing North)

HJN 100079 PA

23

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 5. Typical View of Erosion Associated with Cleared Access Roads (Facing East)

Figure 6. Typical View of Bulldozer Push Pile Adjacent to Access Road (Facing East)

24

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

Figure 7. Low Area Adjacent to Slough in Eastern Portion of APE (Facing Northeast)

for block-area projects, a minimum of 1 subsurface probe per 2 acres is required unless field
conditions warrant excavation of more probes (e.g., due to the presence of culturally sensitive
areas) or less probes (e.g., due to extensive prior disturbances or cultural low-probability areas).
In the event that a probe yields evidence of subsurface cultural deposits, additional probes may
be necessary to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of the subsurface deposits
associated with the cultural resource. Thus, a minimum of 22 subsurface probes would be
required within the 18-ha (44-ac) project area. Horizon excavated a total of 22 shovel tests
during the survey, thereby meeting the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size
(Figure 8). In general, shovel tests measured approximately 30 cm (12 in) in diameter and were
excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the top of pre-Holocene
deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable, and all sediments were screened through 6.35millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth. In practice, some shovel tests were terminated at
depths of 20 to 50 cm below surface (cmbs) due to the presence of dense clay sediments on
and near the modern ground surface; however, many shovel tests approached or reached the
target depth. Specific shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.
In addition to shovel testing, the TSMASS require backhoe trenching in stream terraces
and other areas with the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that
shovel tests are capable of reaching (approximately 80 to 100 cmbs or more in sandy sediments
or 40 to 60 cmbs in clayey sediments). It was determined during the pedestrian survey that
deep Holocene-age alluvial sediments that would require backhoe trenching were not present
within the APE. Consequently, backhoe trenching was not conducted within the APE during the

HJN 100079 PA

25

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 8. Locations of Shovel Tests in Project Area

26

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

survey, and the pedestrian walkover with shovel testing is considered to constitute an adequate
survey technique for assessing the potential of the project area to contain cultural resources.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic
log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and
non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same
location in which they were found. As no cultural resources were observed during the survey,
the collections policy was not brought into play.
The Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all subsurface probes,
including shovel tests and backhoe trenches, were determined using hand-held Garmin
ForeTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices based on the North American Datum of
1983 (NAD 83).
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project areas as defined in
36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3. The TSMASS requirements for subsurface
probes were met for a project area of this size.

HJN 100079 PA

27

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

TWOC is proposing to develop an approximately 18-ha (44-ac) tract, designated as
Creekside Park, Section 18, in The Woodlands in Harris County, Texas. The proposed project
area is bounded by Creekside Forest Drive to the southeast and by South Branson Creek Way
to the northeast. Proposed development on the tract would include construction of residential
lots, streets, drainage, and utilities. The APE of the proposed undertaking consists of the entire
18-ha (44-ac) Creekside Park, Section 18, tract.
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by TWOC, a private developer, on
privately owned land. However, an application has been submitted to the USACE, to permit the
project under NWP 29; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the NHPA of 1966, as
amended. As the project represents a privately sponsored undertaking requiring federal permit
approval with the potential to impact significant cultural resources, TWOC was required to
provide for a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the project’s APE and to assess
the project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. TWOC
subcontracted with Horizon to conduct a cultural resource inventory survey of the APE
associated with the proposed project.
On July 22, 2010, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The APE is situated off the northwest side of Creekside Forest Drive and extends
from a broad upland knoll in the southwestern portion of the APE into a broad, low-lying area
with scattered marshy depressions in the northeastern portion. Vegetation consists of a mix of
native grasses, hardwood trees, and shrubby undergrowth. The entire project area is dissected
by a network of cleared access roads and drainage modifications, and the resulting
devegetation across much of the APE has led to extensive erosion. Bulldozer push piles
adjacent to the access roads, presumably produced during their construction, are ubiquitous
across the APE. The network of access roads is more extensive in the southwestern half of the
APE. The northeastern portion of the project area consists of a broad, low-lying area with
marshy depressions adjacent to a larger slough-like depression called Clear Pond. Between
the artificial disturbances associated with access road construction and drainage modifications,
the APE has experienced extensive prior impacts. Approximately 50% of the project area would
appear to be intact.

HJN 100079 PA

29

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

The APE was traversed on foot by Horizon’s archeologists in parallel, linear transects,
and the modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. Horizon excavated a total of 22 shovel tests during the survey, thereby meeting the
TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size.
No cultural resources, prehistoric or historic, were observed on the modern ground
surface or in any of the shovel tests excavated during the survey.

30

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with
important historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA, archeological resources are
evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of archeological
resources for inclusion in the NRHP.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory
process.

HJN 100079 PA

31

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

6.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologists, the modern ground surface was
thoroughly inspected for cultural resources, and a total of 22 shovel tests were excavated within
32

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

the APE, thereby meeting the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size. No cultural
resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of the survey.

6.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
new cultural resources were identified in the APE as a result of survey activities, and no
previously recorded sites occur in the vicinity of the project area. Furthermore, no listed historic
properties are present in the vicinity of the project area that would be adversely affected by the
proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4, and no further archeological work is
recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the
proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains
or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and the USACE and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 100079 PA

33

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory,
pp. 72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The
Florida State Museum, Gainesville.

Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bolton, H.E.
1970
Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. The University of Texas Press, Austin
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V. M. Bryant, Jr., and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Butzer, K.W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.

HJN 100079 PA

35

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.

Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas.
Reports of Investigations, No. 8,
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Freund, M. (editor and translator)
1954
Gustav Dresel's Houston Journal. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Gray, W.F.
1965
From Virginia to Texas, 1835. Fletcher Young, Houston.
Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Henson, M.S.
1986
History of Baytown. Bay Area Heritage Society, Baytown, Texas.
Henson, M.S., and K. Ladd
1988
Chambers County: A Pictorial History. Donning, Norfolk, Virginia.
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Jenkins, J.H. (editor)
1973
The Papers of the Texas Revolution, 1835-1836, 10 vols. Presidial Press, Austin.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.

36

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
McComb, D.G.
1981
Houston: A History. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
McMahon, C. A., R. G. Frye, and K. L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4:659-663.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:163.

Owens, J.D.
2005
Cultural Resource Survey of 2.4 Miles of Kuykendahl Road, Harris County, Texas.
HJN 050039 AR. Horizon Environmental Services, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R. L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.

HJN 100079 PA

Houston

37

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Pertulla, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Bulletin of the Texas

Pomeroy, C.D., Jr.
1994
Pasadena: The Early Years Pomerosa Press, Pasadena, Texas.
Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc.,
Corpus Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330

Shelby, C. A., M.K. McGowen, S. Aranow, W.L. Fisher, L.F. Brown, Jr., J.H. McGowen, C.G.
Groat, and V.E. Barnes
1968
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Beaumont Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin (revised 1992).
Sibley, M.M.
1968
The Port of Houston. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J. C.
Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Taylor, V.H.
1955
The Spanish Archives of the General Land Office of Texas. Lone Star, Austin.
(USDA) US Department of Agriculture
2008
Harris County, Texas. National Agriculture Imagery Program, Farm Service Agency,
Aerial Photography Field Office.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1979
7.5-minute Series Oklahoma, Texas, Topographic Quadrangle Map.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

38

100079_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

Wheeler, F.F.
1976
Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Woods, H.
1959
Galveston-Houston Electric Railway. Electric Railway Publications, Los Angeles.

HJN 100079 PA

39

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 44-Acre
Creekside Park, Section 18, Tract, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JW1

255602

3338098

0-30
30-100

JW2

JW3

JW4

JW5

JW6

JW7

JW8

JW9

JW10

JW11

JW12

255596

255472

255485

255394

255389

255393

255510

255511

255541

255462

255636

HJN 100079 PA

3338131

3338114

3338055

3338094

3338034

3337943

3337953

3337821

3337835

3337875

3337916

Soils
Pale brown gravelly sand

Artifacts
None

Pale brown sand

0-30

Pale brown sandy clay

30-50

Pale brown sandy clay

50+

Mottled orange-brown clay

0-20

Pale brown silt

20+

Dense reddish-brown clay

0-30

Dense reddish-brown clay

30-60

Reddish-brown sandy clay loam

60-90

Reddish-brown loamy clay

90+

Reddish-brown clay

0-40

Light brown sandy loam

40-70

Orange-brown sandy clay

70+

Orange-brown clay

0-35

Light brown sandy loam

35-75

Orange-brown sandy clay

75+

Orange-brown clay

0-40

Dark brown sandy loam

40-100

Pale brown sandy loam

0-40

Dark brown sandy loam

40-80

Reddish-brown sandy loam

80+

Yellowish-brown sandy clay

0-40

Grayish-brown sandy loam

40-70

Reddish-brown sandy clay

70+

Yellowish-brown sandy clay

0-40

Grayish-brown sandy loam

40-70

Reddish-brown sandy clay

70+

Yellowish-brown sandy clay

0-35

Grayish-brown sandy loam

35-70

Reddish-brown sandy clay

70-100

Yellowish-brown sandy clay

0-40

Pale brown silty sand

40+

Yellowish-brown clay

None

None

None

None

None

None

None

None

None

None

None

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JW13

255606

3338006

0-30

Very light brown silt

30-40

Yellowish-brown sandy clay

JW14

JW15

255537

255690

3337985

3338037

Soils

40+

Yellowish-brown clay

0-20

Very light brown silt

20-40

Yellowish-brown sandy clay

40+

Yellowish-brown clay

0-40

Dark brown sandy loam

40+

Yellowish-brown sandy clay

None

None

None

JW16

255770

3338044

0-20

Very dense orange-brown clay

None

JW17

255828

3338162

0-100

Mottled grayish-brown sandy loam

None

JW18

255846

3338181

0-100

Mottled grayish-brown sandy loam

None

JW19

255849

3338128

0-50

Pale brown gravelly sandy loam

None

50+

Pale brown gravelly sandy loam

JW20

255900

3338181

0-100

Pale brown silty loam

None

JW21

255905

3338211

0-80

Dark brown sandy loam

None

80+

Grayish-brown sandy clay

JW22

255934

3338227

0-100

Dark brown sandy loam

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

A-2

Artifacts

100079_arch_survey_report

None

