Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion,
Fort Griffin State Historic Site,
Shackelford County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5332
HJN 090019 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Texas Historical Commission
Austin, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

February 2010

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion,
Fort Griffin State Historic Site,
Shackelford County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Texas Historical Commission
1511 Colorado Street
Austin, Texas 78701

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 090019 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5332

February 2010

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

ABSTRACT

This report describes the results of an intensive cultural resources survey conducted by
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), on behalf of the Texas Historical Commission
(THC) on Fort Griffin State Historic Site (SHS) in Shackelford County, Texas. The THC is
proposing to construct an expansion of the Fort Griffin Visitor Center at Fort Griffin SHS. The
proposed Crossroad Exhibit Hall expansion would consist of a 40-by-26-foot (ft) expansion at
the rear of the existing visitor center. The proposed expansion would be constructed within the
previously disturbed footprint of the existing visitor center adjacent to a gravel parking lot at the
rear of the building. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed undertaking consists of
the 40-by-26-foot expansion, covering an area of 0.01 hectares (ha) (0.02 acres [ac]). While
design schematics for the proposed construction were not available for inspection, the
maximum depth of impacts based on typical construction design and practices is anticipated to
measure no more than 0.9 to 1.5 meters (m) (3.0 to 5.0 feet [ft]) in depth across the APE.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey. Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
new cultural resources were identified in the APE as a result of survey activities, and no
previously recorded cultural resources occur within the boundaries of the APE.
No
archeological or historic resources associated with the Fort Griffin SHS would be adversely
affected by the proposed undertaking.

HJN 090019 AR

iii

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The THC is proposing to construct an expansion of the Fort Griffin Visitor Center at Fort
Griffin SHS in Shackelford County, Texas. The proposed Crossroad Exhibit Hall expansion
would consist of a 40-by-26-ft expansion at the rear of the existing visitor center. The proposed
expansion would be constructed within the previously disturbed footprint of the existing visitor
center adjacent to a gravel parking lot at the rear of the building. The APE of the proposed
undertaking consists of the 40-by-26-foot expansion, covering an area of 0.01 ha (0.02 ac).
While design schematics for the proposed construction were not available for inspection, the
maximum depth of impacts based on typical construction design and practices is anticipated to
measure no more than 0.9 to 1.5 m (3.0 to 5.0 ft) in depth across the APE.
The proposed Crossroad Exhibit Hall expansion project is being sponsored by the THC
on Fort Griffin SHS. Fort Griffin is a listed National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) historic
property, a Texas State Archeological Landmark (SAL), and a Recorded Texas Historic
Landmark (RTHL). Fort Griffin SHS is owned and operated as a state park by the State of
Texas and managed by the THC; as such, the proposed project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition, the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) is
sponsoring the project under a federal transportation enhancement grant (TxDOT CSJ 0908-28012); as such, the project also falls under the jurisdiction of the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA) via the indirect involvement of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). As the
project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking on state-owned lands with the potential to
impact potentially significant cultural resources, the THC was required to provide for a cultural
resource inventory and assessment of the APE prior to the initiation of any construction-related
activities. The THC contracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to provide
all applicable cultural resources clearances for the proposed project.
On July 14, 2009, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall supervision of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
construction project. A total of approximately 42 person-hours were expended in performance
of the project—Jared Wiersema, archeological field technician, expended approximately
12 person-hours during the field survey; Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, expended
approximately 30 person-hours on project management, preparing the Texas Antiquities Permit
application, analyzing the results of the field survey, and writing the technical report. The survey

HJN 090019 AR

v

Management Summary

was conducted by Horizon under Antiquities Permit No. 5332. The APE, which is situated
entirely on state-owned land, consists of a small, northwest-to-southeast-oriented, 40-by-26-ft
grassy area behind the existing Fort Griffin Visitor Center that is sandwiched between the
existing visitor center on the southeast side, a gravel parking area on the southwest side, and a
gravel driveway on the northwest side. Several restored buildings associated with the old fort
are visible to the northeast from the APE, but all of the historic-age buildings on the site are
located well beyond the boundaries of the APE. The proposed expansion would be constructed
within the previously disturbed footprint of the existing visitor center, and shovel tests excavated
within the APE revealed shallow, disturbed, gravelly clay sediments. The 40-by-26-ft APE was
traversed on foot by Horizon’s archeologist, the modern ground surface was thoroughly
inspected for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources, and a total of 4 shovel tests were
excavated within the APE, thereby exceeding the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) for a project area of this size.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
new cultural resources were identified in the APE as a result of survey activities, and no
previously recorded cultural resources occur within the boundaries of the APE.
No
archeological or historic resources associated with the Fort Griffin SHS would be adversely
affected by the proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as SALs according
to 13 TAC 26, and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the
proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed.
However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently
discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area,
even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the THC and TxDOT
should be notified of the discovery.

vi

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
ABSTRACT ................................................................................................................ iii
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ....................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ..................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology ........................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.......................................................................... 5
2.3
Climate ............................................................................................................ 6
2.4
Flora and Fauna .............................................................................................. 7

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND..................................................................................... 11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 9500 to 6800 B.C.) .................................................. 12
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 6800 B.C. to A.D. 500) ................................................... 13
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. A.D. 500 to 1541) .............................................. 16
3.4
Protohistoric Period (ca. A.D. 1541 to 1750) ................................................. 20
3.5
Historic Period (ca. 1750 to Present) ............................................................. 20

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................. 25
4.1
Archival Research ......................................................................................... 25
4.2
Survey Methods............................................................................................. 27

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................. 33

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................. 35
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................. 35
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .... 36
6.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Archeological Landmark ................... 37
6.4
Summary of Inventory Results ...................................................................... 37
6.5
Management Recommendations ................................................................... 38

7.0

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................. 39
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 090019 AR

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.

Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map ................................................. 2
Location of Project Area on 2008 Aerial Photograph .................................................. 3
Overview of APE on Northwest Side of Visitors Center (Facing Southeast) ............. 28
Overview of APE on Northwest Side of Visitors Center (Facing Northeast) ............. 28
View of Old Fort Area from Visitors Center (Facing Northeast) ................................ 29
View of Shallow Gravelly Clay Sediments in Shovel Test JW-4 ............................... 29
Sketch Map of Project Area Showing Locations of Shovel Tests .............................. 31

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.

viii

Summary of Previously Recorded Archeological Sites in Vicinity of Project Area .... 26

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The Texas Historical Commission (THC) is proposing to construct an expansion of the
Fort Griffin Visitor Center at Fort Griffin State Historic Site (SHS) in Shackelford County, Texas
(Figures 1 and 2). The proposed Crossroad Exhibit Hall expansion would consist of a 40-by-26foot expansion at the rear of the existing visitor center. The proposed expansion would be
constructed within the previously disturbed footprint of the existing visitor center adjacent to a
gravel parking lot at the rear of the building. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed
undertaking consists of the 40-by-26-foot expansion, covering an area of 0.01 hectares (ha)
(0.02 acres [ac]). While design schematics for the proposed construction were not available for
inspection, the maximum depth of impacts based on typical construction design and practices is
anticipated to measure no more than 0.9 to 1.5 meters (m) (3.0 to 5.0 feet [ft]) in depth across
the APE.
The proposed Crossroad Exhibit Hall expansion project is being sponsored by the THC
on Fort Griffin SHS. Fort Griffin is a listed National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) historic
property, a Texas State Archeological Landmark (SAL), and a Recorded Texas Historic
Landmark (RTHL). Fort Griffin SHS is owned and operated as a state park by the State of
Texas and managed by the THC; as such, the proposed project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977 [revised 1987], Title 9,
Chapter 191, VACS, Art. 6145-9, as amended). In addition, the Texas Department of
Transportation (TxDOT) is sponsoring the project under a federal transportation enhancement
grant (TxDOT CSJ 0908-28-012); as such, the project also falls under the jurisdiction of the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966 (P.L. 89-665; 80 Stat. 915; 16 USC §470 et
seq., as amended) via the indirect involvement of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA).
As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact
potentially significant cultural resources, the THC was required to provide for a cultural resource
inventory and assessment of the APE prior to the initiation of any construction-related activities.
The THC contracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to provide all
applicable cultural resources clearances for the proposed project.
On July 14, 2009, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall supervision of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
construction project. The survey was conducted by Horizon under Antiquities Permit No. 5332.

HJN 090019 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map

2

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on 2008 Aerial Photograph

HJN 090019 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

A total of approximately 42 person-hours were expended in performance of the project—
Jared Wiersema, archeological field technician, expended approximately 12 person-hours
during the field survey; Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, expended approximately
30 person-hours on project management, preparing the Texas Antiquities Permit application,
analyzing the results of the field survey, and writing the technical report.
This report presents the results of the cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds
of the project area, respectively. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the survey, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report, and Appendix A presents data collected from shovel tests excavated during the survey.

4

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The Fort Griffin SHS Visitor Center Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion project area is
located in northeastern Shackelford County, Texas, in the North-Central Plains regional
geographic unit within the southeastern edge of the Great Plains physiographic province (Carr
1967:2-3; Fenneman 1938:100-103). The North-Central Plains are characterized by an
erosional surface that developed on upper Paleozoic formations. Meandering rivers traverse
stretches of local prairie where shale bedrock prevails. Hills and rolling plains predominate in
areas of harder bedrock. Local areas of hard sandstones and limestones cap steep slopes that
become severely dissected near rivers. Lengthy dip slopes of strongly fractured limestones
display extensive rectangular patterns. Western rocks and soils are oxidized in red or gray
colors where gypsum predominates, and eastern rocks and soils weather to tan and buff tones.
The project area is situated on a broad upland ridge that overlooks the Clear Fork of the Brazos
River to the north. The APE is situated in a flat, level area on a prominent upland ridge at an
elevation of approximately 387 m (1,270 ft) above mean sea level (amsl).
Hydrologically, the study area is situated within the Brazos River basin. The Clear Fork
of the Brazos River flows immediately north of Fort Griffin SHS, flowing east-northeastward and
discharging into the Brazos River near Graham in south-central Young County. The Brazos
River flows southeastward across the Blackland Prairie and the Gulf Coastal Plain, ultimately
discharging into the Gulf of Mexico a short distance northeast of Matagorda Bay. Drainage in
the vicinity of the project area is primarily by overland sheet flow; aside from the nearby Clear
Fork of the Brazos River, no drainages are located within or immediately adjacent to the project
area.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project area is situated on a prominent upland ridge that overlooks the nearby Clear
Fork of the Brazos River and is underlain by a thick sequence of Permian-age marine strata
more than 250 million years old that consist of shale and thin interbeds of sandstone,
conglomerate, and limestone. Geologically, the APE is situated on the Coleman Junction
Formation, expanded, of the Wichita-Albany Group of the Wolfcamp Series (Fisher 1972). This
Permian-age formation consists of limestone, mudstone, and sandstone. The APE is

HJN 090019 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

characterized by surface exposures of decomposing limestone and shale bedrock.
Geomorphologically, the project area is situated on Hensley stony clay loam, gently undulating
(HsB), which is characterized by residuum weathered from limestone found on hillslopes (NRCS
2009).
Aboriginal cultural resources are relatively common on alluvial terraces adjacent to
prominent streams and springs but are comparatively rare in upland settings. Away from
streams, gravelly clay is ubiquitous on and near the modern ground surface. Due to the relative
antiquity of the sediments and bedrock formations that are exposed on the modern ground
surface throughout the project area, combined with the erosional potential of the exposed
upland that characterizes the area surrounding the APE, aboriginal cultural resources would be
expected to be rather rare in upland contexts and, if they were to occur, to lack integrity due to
the deflated, erosional settings in which they likely would be found. Aboriginal cultural
resources within upland areas in the vicinity of the project area would tend to consist of surficial
scatters of artifacts that lack depth and horizontal or vertical integrity. While significant
aboriginal sites may occur at great depths in stream terraces associated with deep alluvial
packages, significant aboriginal sites are generally rare in the uplands. Historic-age cultural
resources may occur almost anywhere in this region and would tend to be visible on or near the
modern ground surface. The project area is situated within Fort Griffin SHS, a listed NRHP
historic property, SAL, and RTHL. The remains of buildings associated with the old fort are
visible northeast of the APE, but none of these structures is located near the APE

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
Bryant and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central
Texas from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial
period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands
were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985).
During the Post-Glacial period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more
stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas.
The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic
conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway
(1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably
achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Shackelford County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern
climate is typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate

6

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

is influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified
by polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer,
and fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.
On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature in Texas
manifest regional clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east
to west and mean annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast
(Larkin and Bomar 1983). In North-Central Texas, climate has fluctuated from subtropical
humid to subtropical subhumid. Average annual precipitation totals 76 centimeters (cm)
(30 inches [in]) (Carr 1967). During this time, however, drier periods lasting from 3 to 7 years
may be followed by abnormally wet years. Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically
occur in April to May and September to October, are associated with frontal storms that form
when southward-moving cool air masses collide with warm, moist air masses moving inland
from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The topographic discontinuity along the
Balcones Escarpment to the south and east lies directly in the path of the Gulf storm trace and
increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall (Baker 1975).
Lower rainfall amounts are characteristic of winter and late summer. In winter, frontal storms
pass so frequently that there is little time for moisture to increase, and prevailing upper-level
winds from west to east often dominate over meridional flow, meaning that much of the
available moisture is derived from the Pacific rather than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer,
cool fronts rarely penetrate into the region, and rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal
convective storms.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

The North-Central Plains physiographic region is characterized by riparian deciduous
forests of sugarberry and evergreen shrublands of Harvard shin oak, oneseed juniper, redberry
juniper, and sandsage (Diamond et al. 1987). Deciduous shrublands of Mohr’s shin oak,
medium-tall grasslands of little bluestem and sideoats grama, and marshes of saltgrass also are
part of the plant community. Live oak-Ashe juniper parks grade gradually westward into
mesquite lotebush brush across the region.
The project area is located along the approximate boundary between the southeastern
portion of the Kansan biotic province and the southwestern portion of the Texan biotic province
(Blair 1950), and the northern boundary of the Balconian province is located a few counties to
the south. This is an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces (Dice 1943).
Some species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texan province. The
boundary, characterized as “approximate,” between Blair’s (1950) Texan and Kansan provinces
passes through western Palo Pinto County east of the project area. Rainfall in the region is
barely in excess of water need, and the region is classified by Thornwaite (1948) as a C2 (moist
subhumid) climate with a moisture surplus index of from 0 to 20%.
Edaphic controls on vegetation types are important in the region, which is located near
the border between moisture surplus and moisture deficiency. Sandy soils support oak-hickory

HJN 090019 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

forests dominated by post oak (Quercus stellata), blackjack oak (Q. marilandica), and hickory
(Carya buckleyi). Clay soils originally supported a tall-grass prairie, but much of this soil type
has been placed under cultivation. Dominant tall-grass prairie species include western
wheatgrass (Agrophyron smithii), silver beardgrass (Andropogon saccharoides), little bluestem
(Andropogon scoparius), and Texas wintergrass (Stipa leucotricha). Major areas of oak-hickory
forest include the Eastern and Western Cross Timbers, and major tall-grass prairie areas
include the Blackland, Grand, and Coastal prairies. Some characteristic associations of the
Austroriparian province occur locally in the Texan province, such as a mixed stand of loblolly
pine (Pinus taeda) and blackjack and post oak in Bastrop County and a series of peat and bog
marshes distributed in a line extending from Leon to Gonzales counties.
The fauna associated with this region are represented by a mixture of species from the
Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, Kansan, Balconian, and Texan biotic provinces. At
least 49 species of mammals occur in the Texan province, including Virginia opossum
(Didelphis virginiana), eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus), fox squirrel (Sciurus niger), desert
pocket gopher (Geomys breviceps), fulvous harvest mouse (Reithrodontomys fulvescens),
white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus), eastern
cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus floridanus), raccoon (Procyon lotor), striped skunk (Mephitis
mephitis), white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), black-tailed jackrabbit (Sylvilagus
californicus), ground squirrel (Citellus tridecemlineatus), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
virginiana), hispid pocket mouse (Perognathus hispidus), deer mouse (Peromyscus
maniculatus), black-tailed jackrabbit (Lepus californicus), pygmy mouse (Baiomys taylori), ninebanded armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus), and jaguar (Felis onca). Both species of Terrapene
known from the Austroriparian province—eastern box turtle (T. Carolina) and desert box turtle
(T. ornata)—occur in the Texan.
Sixteen species of lizards, including 7 grassland and 9 forest species, are also found,
including green anole (Anolis carolinensis), eastern fence lizard (Sceloporus undulates),
common ground skink (Leiolopisma laterale), glass snake (Ophiosaurus ventralis [grassland
species]), collared lizard (Crotaphytus collaris), Texas spiny lizard (Sceloporus olivaceous),
Texas horned lizard (Phrynosoma cornutum), and Great Plains skink (Eumeces obsoletus
[forest species]). Only 5 species of urodele fauna are known from this area, including smallmouthed salamander (Ambystoma texanum), tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum), and
eastern lesser siren (Siren intermedia), and the Texan province acts as a barrier to urodele
distribution between the endemic Balconian province fauna to the west and the Austroriparian
fauna to the east. Anuran fauna is composed primarily of Austroriparian or otherwise widely
distributed species, including eastern spadefoot toad (Scaphiopus holbrookii), Gulf Coast toad
(Bufo valliceps), Woodhouse’s toad (Bufo woodhousii), southern cricket frog (Acris gryllus),
southern chorus frog (Pseudacris nigrita), gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor), green treefrog (Hyla
cinerea), North American bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana), northern leopard frog (Rana pipiens),
and narrow-mouthed toad (Microhyla carolinensis). Additional anuran species that fail to cross
from the Texan into the Austroriparian province include pacific tree frog (Pseudacris clarkia),
Strecker’s chorus frog (Pseudacris streckeri), and striped whipsnake (Microhyla olivacea).
Other reptile and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include 6-lined racerunner
(Aspidoscelis sexlineata), rat snake (Ptyas mucosus), eastern hognose snake (Heterodon

8

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

platirhinos), rough green snake (Opheodrys aestivus), copperhead (Agkistrodon contortrix),
western diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox), Blanchard’s cricket frog (Acris crepitans),
diamondback water snake (Nerodia rhombifer rhombifer), and Houston toad (Bufo
houstonensis).
Common bird species include northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus), eastern
meadowlark (Sturnella magna), mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), killdeer (Charadrius
vociferus), field sparrow (Spizella pusilla), red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis), turkey vulture
(Cathartes aura), belted kingfisher (Ceyrle alcyon), and mockingbird (Mimus polyglottos).
Small herds of bison and antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early
historic periods, but these species are no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

HJN 090019 AR

9

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located in the Central Rolling Plains archeological region. The
Rolling Plains, or Rolling Mesquite Plains, is one of the least-defined archeological regions in
Texas (Brown et al. 1982; Wulfkuhle 1986). Thoroughly investigated sites are few, and many
lack reliable dates. As a result, the prehistoric chronology for the Central Rolling Plains relies
almost entirely on diagnostic artifacts recovered during surveys and the cultural chronologies
from surrounding regions. 1
Although most of the Central Rolling Plains is characterized by erosion-exposed redbeds
(Triassic and Permian deposits), 2 prominent physiographic features are noteworthy. West of
the current project area, Borden and Howard counties extend up onto the High Plains and
encompass portions of the Caprock Escarpment and the Llano Estacado flatlands underlain by
the Ogallala Formation. The other feature is a series of extensive limestone plateaus—
essentially erosional remnants of the greater Edwards Plateau—that run in a band just south of
Interstate Highway 20 from west to east across Howard, Mitchell, Nolan, Taylor, Callahan, and
Eastland counties. These plateaus collectively are called the Callahan Divide, and they rise as
much as 250 m (820 ft) above the surrounding landscape and constitute the drainage divide
between the Brazos and Colorado Rivers. Thus, although most of the region can be
characterized as archeologically homogeneous, the cultural remains associated with the Llano
Estacado and Callahan Divide are distinctive from those of the Rolling Plains. Perhaps most
significant, the Cretaceous-age limestone bedrock of the Callahan Divide constitutes the
northernmost exposures of Edwards Group formations in Texas and are rich in high-quality
cherts (Frederick and Ringstaff 1994). Primary chert outcrops are encountered on and around
the margins of the divide, and secondary gravel deposits (upland lag and stream channel
gravels) are found for some distance around the isolated Cretaceous-age plateaus.
Not only does the Callahan Divide represent the northernmost Cretaceous-age
limestone outcrops in Texas, but the divide also constitutes the northernmost occurrence of
classic burned rock middens in the state. Creel’s (1986:Fig. 6) dissertation shows that burned
rock middens are found in Jones, Taylor, and Callahan counties, and subsequent researchers
have located additional middens (e.g., Katz and Katz 2001). Various theories have been

1

The prehistoric and protohistoric cultural history presented in this chapter draws heavily upon the summary of the
Central Rolling Plains archeological region developed by Fields et al. (2005).

HJN 090019 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

proposed to explain how and why limestone rocks were used in cooking processes that resulted
in the formation of middens, but there is little doubt that many of the archeological sites in the
Callahan Divide area, especially the burned rock middens, were closely tied to Central Texas
during some cultural periods.
Some of the earliest archeological work in Texas was conducted in and around Abilene
by Cyrus N. Ray, a trained osteopath and avocational archeologist who also was one of the
founders of the Texas Archeological Society in 1928. His primary interest was in the antiquity of
humans in North America. Specifically, Ray (1934:107) sought evidence for “…Pleistocene
man in Texas, if any such existed.” Ray, along with E.B. Sayles and Dr. Otto Watts, began
conducting surveys along the Clear Fork of the Brazos River and Big Elm Creek (Wulfkuhle
1986), ultimately documenting sites scattered over 12 counties. Ray thought that many of the
sites he investigated were ancient because cultural remains were deeply buried in alluvial
terraces. He was correct in a few cases but was incorrect more often than not. Without the aid
of radiocarbon dating to accurately date the deposits, neither Ray nor his contemporaries
realized the complex and dynamic nature of the river systems in the Rolling Plains or
understood the significance of paleoclimatic changes on the archeological record.
Beyond his early man studies, Ray defined several cultural groups from later times, but
most of these designations have long since been discarded or modified.
Wulfkuhle
(1986:Fig. 16) and Creel (1990:13-22) provide good summaries of the various cultural
classification schemes that have been applied to the Central Rolling Plains.
A few large area surveys have been completed within or adjacent to the Central Rolling
Plains region (see Boyd 1997:Tab. 6 and Fig. 13). These include Boyd et al. (1989), Brown and
Anthony (1992), Cliff et al. (1991), Etchieson et al. (1979), Jelks (1952), Lintz et al. (1991),
Lynott (1979), Saunders et al. (1992), Shafer (1971), Staley and Evaskovich (1993), Thurmond
et al. (1981), Tunnell (1960), and Wulfkuhle (1986). More intensive investigations, especially
large-scale excavations, have been rather limited. In general, the archeological data for the
Central Rolling Plains are insufficient to support detailed temporal, spatial, and functional
comparisons of sites for various prehistoric time periods. With some exceptions, much of the
cultural chronology sequence for the Central Rolling Plains must be extrapolated from other
nearby areas, specifically the Panhandle-Plains region, Central Texas, or North-Central Texas.
For this discussion, a blend of the cultural chronologies proposed for Central Texas by Collins
(1995:Tab. 2) and the Caprock Canyonlands by Boyd (1997:Fig. 26) is used—PaleoIndian
(11,500 to 8800 B.P.); Early Archaic (8800 to 6000 B.P.); Middle Archaic (6000 to 4000 B.P.);
Late Archaic (4000 to 1500 B.P., or 2000 B.C. to A.D. 500); Late Prehistoric I (A.D. 500
to 1100/1200); Late Prehistoric II (A.D. 1100/1200 to 1541); Protohistoric (A.D. 1541 to 1750);
and Historic (A.D. 1750 to 1875).

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 9500 TO 6800 B.C.)

PaleoIndian artifacts in the Central Rolling Plains are generally surface finds in isolated
contexts. Identified point types include Clovis, Folsom, Plainview, Scottsbluff, and Angostura
(Meltzer 1986; Meltzer and Bever 1995; Prewitt 1995; Suhm et al. 1954). The bulk of the
information available for the PaleoIndian period is based on documented surface collections and

12

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

surveys conducted from the first half of the 20th century, like those of Ray (1929, 1934, 1938,
1940). He correctly recognized some deeply buried sediments, which he named the “Durst
soils,” as being ancient deposits (Ray 1930:45-46; Ray and Bryan 1938; Sellards 1952:36;
Suhm et al. 1954:99).
Based on the scarcity of sites and the presence of nonlocal materials, some researchers
have concluded that PaleoIndian groups were highly mobile with low-density populations
(Hofman et al. 1989:25). The environment during the PaleoIndian period was most likely much
wetter and cooler than today (Collins 1995; Wendorf and Hester 1975). In terms of subsistence
strategies, researchers have long thought that PaleoIndians relied primarily on big-game
hunting, a rather specialized lifestyle evidenced by killing and butchering tools found in
association with extinct forms of bison (Hofman et al. 1989:25). Although kill sites are common
for this period, small, seasonal campsites and secondary processing sites also are known
(Johnson 1977) but are more difficult to identify. Recent finds are challenging the strict notion of
nomadic big-game hunters and suggest PaleoIndians had a broader hunting-gathering strategy
(Collins 1995:381-383; Collins et al. 1989).
Several PaleoIndian sites are reported in the region, but even the most significant sites
are known only through excavations dating from more than 30 years ago. The Lone Wolf site
near Colorado City (Mitchell County) is not a particularly famous site, but the 1925 finding of
distinctive lanceolate projectile points (now typed as Milnesand and Plainview or Firstview) in
association with extinct bison at this locality pre-dated the now-famous investigations at the
Folsom site that began in 1926 (Wormington 1957:110).
The Office of the State Archeologist conducted excavations at the Adair-Steadman site
(41FS2) in Fisher County in the 1970s, a Folsom campsite situated on a high terrace above the
Clear Fork of the Brazos. The work has yet to be reported, but Tunnell (1975) examined the
stone artifacts and reported on the lithic technology associated with Folsom point production
using local Edwards cherts. Much of the site remains intact, and it is listed on the NRHP and
designated as an SAL.
Mallouf (1989) reported on investigations at the Yellow Hawk site, a Clovis lithic
workshop on the Callahan Divide. This Taylor County site contains rare evidence of a discrete
Clovis point production episode at an upland chert locality in a nondepositional setting. The
time of this event could not be established through independent dating.
Other significant PaleoIndian sites in the region that have been investigated, albeit
minimally, include the McLean site (Wulfkuhle 1986:66) in Taylor County, the Gibson site (Ray
1940) in Shackelford County, and the Biedleman Ranch site in Stonewall County (Wulfkuhle
1986:69).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 6800 B.C. TO A.D. 500)

As originally defined, the Archaic period spans many thousands of years, from 8800 to
1500 B.P. Compared with the preceding PaleoIndian period, Archaic life was significantly
different, reflecting a long period of relative cultural stability (Collins 1995:383). Subsistence

HJN 090019 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

patterns appear to have been more diverse, with evidence for greater exploitation of local
environments (Hofman et al. 1989:45). There is evidence for an increase in the dietary
importance of smaller game animals, fish, and wild plant foods (Cliff et al. 1991:15). A hunting
and gathering lifestyle prevailed, with seasonal traveling to use different food resources in
various localities but a marked decrease in group mobility (Hofman et al. 1989:58; Weir 1976).
The Rolling Plains Archaic often has been divided into Early, Middle, and Late
subperiods (e.g., Etchieson et al. 1979; Kelley 1947; Prewitt 1981, 1985; Story 1985; Suhm et
al. 1954; Weir 1976). Distinctions between these periods are based in large part on changes in
projectile point styles, but the transitions between periods may well coincide with climatic shifts
(Boyd 1997:226-231; Collins 1995:Tabs. 1 and 2). Collins (1995:383) notes for Central Texas
that there were distinctive cultural changes within the broad Archaic tradition, but that the nature
and timing of those shifts are poorly understood. It is clear, however, that the appearance and
proliferation of burned rock middens in Archaic times (Collins 1995:384) is one of the most
significant prehistoric cultural events in this part of Texas.
The Early Archaic period (8800 to 6000 B.P.) is not well represented in the Rolling
Plains, and most of the finds come from mixed contexts. Some archeologists have suggested a
transitional stage between the PaleoIndian and Archaic cultures that exhibits similarities to both
periods (Hofman et al. 1989; McKinney 1981; Sollberger and Hester 1972). The transition from
late PaleoIndian to Early Archaic was a time of considerable environmental change, with a
cooler, wetter climate giving way to much warmer, dryer conditions (Collins 1995). In fact, most
paleoenvironmental evidence suggests that a major period of aridity, originally called the
Altithermal by Antevs (1955), occurred over Central Texas in early to middle Holocene times
from about 8000 to 4000 B.P. (Collins 1995:Tab. 2, 378-380). In the Central Rolling Plains, the
Early Archaic is seen as a period of increasing aridity that led to full-blown drought conditions
during the Middle Archaic. Over much of Texas, these climatic conditions had profound effects
on human populations and on the cultural remains that survive, or failed to survive, in the
archeological record.
In the Central Rolling Plains region, representative Early Archaic dart points include
stemmed, corner-notched with expanding stems, triangular, and heavily barbed forms, including
Angostura, Gower, Martindale, Uvalde, and Wells (Collins 1995:Tab. 2; Turner and Hester
1999). In addition, Clear Fork gouges, burins, and grinding implements are also present. Only
a small number of sites dating to the Early Archaic have been reported for the Central Rolling
Plains region, and no major excavations associated with this period have been reported. The
relative paucity of sites from this time period appears to be a result of a severe erosional
episode (or episodes) in the Southern Plains during Middle Archaic times. Widespread
erosional scouring is thought to have removed significant amounts of early Holocene deposits
and Early Archaic archeological remains (Story 1985:39). It may be the case that the overall
hunter and gatherer population density was low during this period, but the differential
preservation of archeological sites makes it difficult to demonstrate this point.
The Middle Archaic, from 6000 to 4000 B.P., is poorly represented in the region but may
include Ray’s (1945) Clear Fork complex originally assigned to the PaleoIndian-Archaic
transition (Cliff et al. 1991:15). In the Central Texas archeological record, there appears to have
14

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

been a population increase during the Middle Archaic and development of regionally distinct
cultural patterns along with changes in settlement patterns, economic and social systems, and
technology (Collins 1995:384). If these changes occurred in the Rolling Plains, evidence is
extremely limited because of geomorphic reasons. A considerable body of paleoclimatic
evidence suggests that extremely xeric conditions (i.e., the latter half of the Altithermal) and
erosional scouring were prevalent in the Southern Plains from ca. 6500 to 4600 B.P. (Boyd
1997: 226-228; Hughes 1991:19-20). With a combination of low human population density
because of droughts and concurrent erosional scouring, it is not surprising that Middle Archaic
archeological sites are rare.
Although human populations may have been increasing in Central Texas during the
Middle Archaic, there appears to have been minimal human activity on the Llano Estacado and
Rolling Plains (Boyd 1997:52; Hughes 1991:20). In the Central Rolling Plains, Middle Archaic
sites are usually represented by surface scatters, and no substantive investigations of buried
components have been made. Collins (1995:Tab. 2) lists Andice, Bell, Taylor, Nolan, and
Travis points as definitive Middle Archaic points in Central Texas, but these types are rare in the
Central Rolling Plains. Prewitt (1995) shows only a few Nolan points occurring within the
region.
In Central Texas, burned rock middens became common during the Middle and Late
Archaic periods (Black et al. 1997:273-280; Collins 1995:384). The ages of many of the burned
rock middens known in Callahan, Jones, Mitchell, Shackelford, and Taylor counties are
unknown (Creel 1986; Mauldin and Nickels 2003), but some of them may well be Middle to Late
Archaic in age.
The Late Archaic saw the development of an array of new cultural patterns and a
proliferation of new cultural patterns of projectile point styles (Collins 1995:Tab. 1; Story
1985:45). Subsistence patterns in the Central Rolling Plains changed as people became more
reliant on bison hunting, with herds becoming more common after long periods of bison
absence or scarcity during part of the Early Archaic and all of the Middle Archaic (Dillehay
1974). The Late Archaic period in the region is most commonly represented by open campsites
and isolated burials, but bison kill and processing sites are common farther north in the Rolling
Plains (Boyd 1997:Tab. 59, Fig. 78).
Sites in the region contain a variety of Late Archaic dart point styles—Castroville, Darl,
Edgewood, Elam, Ensor, Fairland, Frio, Marcos, Marshall, Nolan—that are often associated with
Central Texas (Boyd 1997:Tab. 60; Collins 1995:Fig. 1), along with some styles common in
North-Central Texas such as Eliasvile, Ellis, and Godley (Cliff et al. 1991:16). Late Archaic
components investigated at Lake Alan Henry in Kent and Garza counties produced Castroville,
Marcos, and Marshall dart points (Boyd 1997:249-250). Mack (1994) reports on an intensive
surface collection of the Van York site (41BD8) in Borden County that yielded Edgewood and
Ellis points. In the 1980s, the Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation
conducted a limited testing project at 41KT32 on the floodplain of the Brazos River in Kent
County. Small expanding-stem dart points indicated Late Archaic occupations (Denton 1983).

HJN 090019 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Late Archaic burials from Kent (Holden 1929) and Mitchell (Ray 1936) counties contain
unusual lunate stones made of exotic rocks as grave offerings. The Mitchell County find was a
cremated burial that had Fairland, Marcos, and Shumla points associated with it. The cultural
significance of lunate stones and cremation as mortuary traits are not fully understood (Boyd
1997:253-257).

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. A.D. 500 TO 1541)

The Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 450 B.P.) was a time of rapid and significant
changes among prehistoric cultures. Technological changes, including emergence of the bow
and arrow, use of ceramics, and adoption of horticulture, occurred at different times in different
locations and should be viewed as a process rather than an event. For whatever reasons,
people in some regions adopted the bow and arrow later than others, and some people never
adopted agriculture while others did. In the Central Plains region, some Late Prehistoric sites
and assemblages continue to show similarities to Central Texas, but there were distinctive
cultural influences in the Rolling Plains that are not evident in Central Texas. Across much of
Central Texas, there is evidence of increasing relationships with Caddoan peoples to the east,
but the Rolling Plains region also has stronger evidence of influences from Plains Woodland
and Plains Village peoples to the north and Puebloan peoples to the west, as well as limited
Caddoan influence (Boyd 1997:491-496; Cliff et al. 1991:16).
In Late Prehistoric I times, which lasted from about A.D. 500 to 1100 or 1200, 2 cultural
complexes are recognized in the region. There were probably more than 2 groups within the
Central Rolling Plains at this time, but only the Palo Duro and Blow Out Mountain complexes
are recognized as definable archeological entities.
The core area of the Palo Duro complex is situated along the Caprock Escarpment and
mainly to the north of the region (Boyd 1997:Fig 84), but the southern end of the culture area
extends into the Rolling Plains. At least 2 sites in the region—the Big Spring site in Howard
County and the South Sage Creek site in Kent County—are attributable to the Palo Duro
complex (Boyd 1997:Figs. 66 and 85). One of the most significant sites of the Palo Duro
complex is the Sam Wahl site (41GR292) in Garza County. The discovery of a circular
pithouse, large subterranean storage pits, and baking pits there led to a comparative study and
redefinition of the Palo Duro complex (Boyd 1995, 1997). The complex is considered to
represent foraging peoples who primarily occupied the canyonlands along the Caprock
Escarpment but also ventured onto the High Plains and Rolling Plains, probably seasonally.
Deadman’s arrow points are the distinctive style for the complex, but Scallorn and stemmed
Alba or Alba-like arrow points also are found. These people do not appear to have made any
pottery, but they imported plain brownware pots from the Jornada Mogollon region to the west.
Bison were of little importance, presumably because they were so scarce from around A.D. 500
to 1000, but hunting deer and smaller animals was important. Paleoclimatic evidence suggests
cooler and wetter conditions during this time, and Palo Duro peoples harvested a range of wild
plant foods, including mesquite beans and shin oak acorns. They used a variety of grinding
tools and baking pits to process these and other plants. Although no cultigen remains have

16

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

been found at any Palo Duro complex sites, the possibility that the people practiced limited
horticulture cannot be ruled out.
The recent finding of corn at the Bear Branch site (41CA13) in Callahan County sheds
new light on agriculture in the Callahan Divide area. A charred corn kernel (Zea mays) was
recovered from a cooking pit associated with a burned rock midden (Katz and Katz 2001), and a
bulk sediment radiocarbon date of A.D. 1150 to 1290 (calibrated, 2-sigma) is associated. This
may be the only documented occurrence of prehistoric corn in the Rolling Plains region and the
westernmost reported occurrence in northern Texas, excluding the Panhandle (see Henrietta
complex below). The cultural affiliation of this site is not certain. Katz and Katz (2001) suggest
the Bear Branch site belongs to the Blow Out Mountain complex (see below), but the cultural
affiliation is complicated by a fairly long span of occupation (estimated to be from A.D. 600
to 1600) and a variety of diagnostic points. Along with a few dart points, the Bear Branch
assemblage includes early arrow point styles, such as Scallorn and Alba, and late arrow point
styles, such as Fresno, Perdiz, and Washita. The site definitely has multiple use episodes, and
it could represent occupations by different groups over time or perhaps contemporaneous use
by multiple groups. Some of the occupations could be associated with the Henrietta or Palo
Duro complexes. The Scallorn and Alba points in particular suggest an affiliation with the late
Palo Duro complex, despite the absence of imported Mogollon brownware pottery. Regardless
of whom the occupants were around A.D. 1200, the corn likely indicates that people were
farming at or close to the Bear Branch site during the transition time from Late Prehistoric I to II.
Creel (1990:15-18) defined the Blow Out Mountain complex based on his work at the
East Levee site, and this culture area encompasses much of the Central Rolling Plains (see
Boyd 1997:280-281). The complex is transitional between Late Prehistoric I and II and
presumably dates from about A.D. 800 to 1300. As it is currently defined, the Blow Out
Mountain complex subsumes Cyrus Ray’s (1929) Sand Dune Culture and Sayles and Ray’s
Brazos River Culture (Sayles 1935; see Ray and Sayles 1941). Blow Out Mountain also
includes many cairn burial sites and “rock-covered mounds” excavated in the region during the
1930s and 1940s. Evidence in many of these graves suggests that intercultural violence was
prevalent in the Rolling Plains during Late Prehistoric times (see Boyd 1997:280-281, 491-496;
Brooks 1994).
The Blow Out Mountain strata at the East Levee site, in contrast to the Late Archaic
strata below and the Toyah phase strata above, contained no bison remains. The stone-lined
hearths, faunal remains, and stone tool assemblage all indicate generalized hunter-gatherers.
No ceramics are associated with the complex. Typical arrow points fall into 1 of 4 categories—
stemmed points often typed as Alba or Bonham; Chadbourne points (Turner and Hester
1999:207) that appear to be smaller versions of Darl or Zephyr dart points; contracting-stem
Cliffton-like points; and side-notched Washita points. Of particular note, many of the Alba-like
points are longer and have serrated blades, and this form is most commonly associated with
human burials. These were named Moran points by Forrester (1987), and many specimens
found in burials appear to be arrow tips that caused death (Boyd 1997:280-281).
There are some interpretive problems with the Blow Out Mountain complex because of
the limited sample of excavated components and the lack of chronological control. It may be

HJN 090019 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

that Blow Out Mountain represents a single culture undergoing rapid changes during a critical
time from A.D. 800 to 1300. Or, it may be that the complex needs to be split into 2 or more
cultural groups as more data come to light.
The transition from the Late Prehistoric I to Late Prehistoric II periods, occurring
sometime around A.D. 1100 to 1200, was a time of significant cultural changes across the
American Southwest and Southern Plains. In the Southern Plains, it is generally linked with a
shift from cooler, wetter conditions to a warmer, dryer climate. These dryer conditions are
presumed to have been more favorable for grasslands and bison. It is at about this time that
bison populations seem to have exploded in the Southern Plains, and most cultures shifted
subsistence strategies to intensify bison hunting pursuits (Dillehay 1974). Many cultures also
intensified their agricultural pursuits at this time, apparently shifting from simple horticultural
practices to more substantial farming primarily involving corn (Brooks 1989; Hofman et al.
1989). The extent to which this Plains Woodland to Plains Village transition occurred, or did not
occur, in the Central Rolling Plains is uncertain because of the lack of substantive archeological
excavations.
During the Late Prehistoric II period, local cultures may have modified their subsistence
base to incorporate or intensify bison hunting while other groups moved into the Southern Plains
from surrounding areas to exploit the expanded bison range. However, some climatic
fluctuations within the Late Prehistoric II period may have been significant, and there is
evidence of 2 major drought periods in the Southern Plains that were extremely long and
severe—1 around A.D. 1275 to 1300 and another around A.D. 1550 to 1600. These periods
certainly would have affected animal and human populations and may have served as catalysts
for cultural changes.
At least 3 different cultural groups are thought to have inhabited part or all of the region
during the Late Prehistoric II period and into Protohistoric times. These groups were associated
with the Garza complex, Henrietta complex, and Toyah phase. All 3 cultures seem to be
present in the region (see Boyd 1997:Fig. 96), and the Central Rolling Plains is within a “shared
area” identified by Johnson (1994:Fig. 105) as a place where several cultural groups lived and
interacted. Because of the dynamic cultural nature of this shared area during Late Prehistoric II
times, the archeological remains are diverse, intriguing, and confusing.
The Garza complex (Boyd 1997:495) is represented by bison kill and processing sites,
short-term hunting camps, rockshelters, and residential base camps with evidence of tipi-like
dwellings. Isolated burials also are associated. Material culture includes a triad of bison
hunting and skinning tools—the distinctive Garza and Lott points, Plains-style end scrapers, and
beveled knives. Stone tool assemblages are strictly functional at most Garza sites, particularly
those related to bison hunting and processing, and striated pottery sherds from plainware pots
are often associated. In contrast, at residential bases where more intensive occupations
occurred, a range of imported Puebloan items is usually found. Obsidian, turquoise, and
Olivella shell beads are sometimes present, and decorated Puebloan pottery is abundant at
some sites. Further evidence of Puebloan trade is found at 17th-century sites in the form of
historic-age materials (e.g., majolica pottery, gunflints and lead, cow and horse bones) that were
obtained from Spanish colonial settlement or mission pueblos like Pecos.
18

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

The Garza complex extends into the northwestern counties of the region, and the
longhorn and Headstream sites in Kent County (41KT53 and 41KT51) are 2 Garza complex
sites that have been intensively investigated (Boyd 1997:380-381). Garza peoples were major
players in the Southern Plains-Pueblo interaction during the middle to late 1600s and appear to
have processed large numbers of bison hides for the Pueblo trade. The intensity of PlainsPuebloan trading increased through time, and it is notable that prehistoric Garza sites (i.e.,
those before A.D. 1541) may look very different from protohistoric Garza sites dating after about
A.D. 1650.
Krieger (1946) defined the Henrietta complex based primarily on late 1930s excavations
at the Harrell site (Hughes 1942) to the east of the region in Young County. Most of the sites
attributed to this complex are east of the Central Rolling Plains region, but the westernmost
extent of this culture appears to include Callahan, Eastland, Shackelford, and Stephens
counties. The Henrietta complex represents the southernmost Plains Village manifestation in
Texas (Boyd 1997:360-361). It is characterized by small, circular to oval houses (with walls
lined with posts and having 3 or 4 interior posts), storage pits, a variety of arrow points (Fresno,
Harrell, Scallorn, and Washita being most common; Alba, Bonham, Eddy, and Perdiz being less
common), and Nocona Plain pottery tempered with limestone or shell. Henrietta peoples did
some farming. Charred corn has been recovered from sites in Young and Cooke counties, and
bison scapula hoes were used as gardening tools. Henrietta peoples were tied into
interregional exchange networks, with trade to the west and northwest as indicated by obsidian,
Alibates flint, and Puebloan pottery, and trade to the east as indicated by celts and Caddoan
pottery.
The Henrietta complex is somewhat confusing because of the low number of
investigated sites and the lack of chronological control. It shows similarities to the Blow Out
Mountain complex to the west and to the Sanders and Wylie phases to the east (Boyd
1997:361; Brooks 1989:85-86). One thing that is clear, however, is that there is a high
frequency of violence in burials, and warfare seems to have been prevalent in this culture (Boyd
1997:360-361).
The Toyah phase was first proposed by Kelley and later revised by Jelks (1962). More
recently, Toyah culture was redefined by Johnson (1994) based on his work at the Buckhollow
site in Kimbell County. He defined what he called a Classic Toyah culture area that extends
northward up into the Rolling Plains region and to the southern edge of the region. He also
defines a shared culture area that encompasses the Central Rolling Plains region (Johnson
1994:Fig. 105). Classic Toyah culture is identified by Perdiz arrow points, Plains-style end
scrapers, beveled knives, and bone-tempered plainware pottery (often called Leon Plain).
Toyah phase artifacts are found outside the Classic Toyah area, particularly to the north
and northwest, but they seem to be mixed with traits and materials from other cultures.
Evidence indicates that Toyah people ventured into the Rolling Plains sites to the south (e.g.,
the Elm Creek site in Concho County and the Rush site in Tom Green County), but Perdiz arrow
points are found as far north as the southern Llano Estacado (Boyd 1997:82). One particularly
interesting find in the region is the Weaver-Ramage cache in Kent County (Tunnell 1978),
containing more than 800 items of high-quality Edwards chert, including a Perdiz point. It is

HJN 090019 AR

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

thought to be a cache made by Toyah people. Within the shared area of the Rolling Plains,
Perdiz points are found alongside other distinctive arrow points styles (such as Cliffton, Garza,
Harrell, Lott, and Washita) and with a wide range of ceramic types. As noted with the Henrietta
complex above, violence in Toyah phase burials indicates that the groups in the shared area
were not always friendly toward each other (Boyd 1997:364; Prewitt 1981:83).

3.4

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. A.D. 1541 TO 1750)

The Historic period begins with Coronado’s entrada in A.D. 1541. The Central Rolling
Plains region was undoubtedly occupied at various times by Apaches, Jumanos, Comanches,
and other Native American groups, but recognizing the archeological remains of these historic
cultures is difficult at best.
When Coronado entered the northern part of Texas in 1541, he met 2 different groups—
Querechos and Teyas—and they were enemies (Boyd 2001). Most researchers agree that the
Querechos were Apache peoples, and an Apache presence in the Southern Plains seems
certain in the latter 1500s and 1600s. There is less certainty as to the identity of the Teyas, but
the most prominent theory is that they represent Jumano peoples described in Spanish
accounts from the 17th and 18th centuries (Boyd 2001; Kenmotsu 2001). The Jumano culture
area probably extended up into the Rolling Plains, but its precise boundaries are not well
documented (Hickerson 1994:Map 6; Kenmotsu 2001:Fig. 1). No archeological sites in the
region have been attributed to the historic Apache or Jumano.
The cultural dynamics in the Southern Plains changed radically once again between
A.D. 1700 and 1725 when the Comanches suddenly appeared (Wallace and Hoebel 1985:6-8).
To combat the Comanche threat, it appears that the Jumano and Apache may have become
allies in the early 1700s (Kenmotsu 2001:33), but these and other groups were ultimately
displaced by the more powerful Comanche bands. They remained the dominant force in the
Southern Plains until the 1870s, when the US Army launched several campaigns and finally
removed the Comanches and their allies from the region (Newcomb 1961:155-157). With
2 prominent Indian Wars, military posts in Shackelford County (Fort Griffin), and many important
historic-age military roads, the Central Rolling Plains region has the potential to contain historicage Indian encampments, US military sites, and Indian Wars battle sites.

3.5

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1750 TO PRESENT)

In 1788, a Spanish expedition led by José Mares may have touched the southwest
corner of Shackelford County, but the first real explorer of the region was Capt. Randolph B.
Marcy, who investigated the area for the US Army 2 . The first Anglo-American to settle in

2

The following discussion of the history of Shackelford County and the town and military sites of Fort Griffin derives
from Baker (1986), Conkling (1947), Grant (1936), Holden (1982), Lynch (1965), Matthews (1982), Richardson
(1963), Rister (1956), Rye (1967), St. Clair (1974, 1982), and UTSA 1968), as summarized on TSHA Online (2009a,
2009b, 2009c).

20

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

Shackelford County was probably Jesse Stem, an Indian agent who established a farm in 1852
on the Clear Fork 6 miles downstream from the site of present-day Lueders. Two years after
Stem arrived, Captain Marcy looked over the area and suggested to the War Department that a
fort be built on the Clear Fork. The establishment of a cordon of such protective frontier forts,
including Camp Cooper just north of Shackelford County in Throckmorton County, brought the
first influx of white settlers into Shackelford County. Jesse Stem made the first attempt at
agriculture in Shackelford County in 1853 by raising a good crop of corn and oats, which he sold
at Fort Belknap in Young County. C.C. Cooper and John C. Lynch established ranches in
Shackelford County, and, in 1861, with employees and their families, established a fortified
settlement that they called Fort Hubbard. Two years later, W.H. Ledbetter, later the first judge
of Shackelford County, began manufacturing salt by evaporating water of the Salt Prong of
Hubbard Creek. In 1867, Joe Matthews settled on the Clear Fork in northeastern Shackelford
County, about 2 miles downstream from where Fort Griffin was established the same year.
Below the hill on which Fort Griffin was constructed, the civilian community of Fort
Griffin, commonly called the Flat or Hidetown, developed. This community served as a
marketplace and supply point for buffalo hunters and as a watering place for soldiers, hunters,
and trail hands driving cattle over the Western Trail, which crossed the Clear Fork nearby. The
combination of buffalo hunters, soldiers, and cowboys, mixed with Indians from the nearby
Tonkawa camp, was volatile, and law enforcement was erratic. The long trip to the county court
in Jack County to do jury duty or deal with legal matters was hazardous; so, in 1874, residents
of the area petitioned the county court of Jack County for permission to organize their own
county. The new county was named in honor of Dr. Jack Shackelford, a Texas revolutionary
hero. Fort Griffin became the temporary county seat on October 12, 1874. On November 8 of
that year, the founders of the county called an election to determine the permanent location, and
Albany, named by William R. Cruger for his hometown, Albany, Georgia, was founded. In 1884,
the county finished construction of a courthouse built of limestone that was quarried a few miles
southwest of Albany. The structure still functions in its original capacity, and, in 1962, was
recorded as a Texas Historical Landmark. The county’s population peaked at 6,695 in 1930,
dropped to 3,323 by 1970, then climbed back to the 1980 figure of 3,915. Of the 1980
population, 3,761 were white (including 211 Hispanics), 36 black, 6 Indian (in 1884 the federal
government moved the Tonkawa Indians to Indian Territory), 4 Asian, and 108 of other origins.
Of these residents, 2,450 lived in Albany; the remainder were in Lueders (which is partly in
Jones County), Moran, and Spring Creek, or on farms and ranches. In 1990, Shackelford
County had 3,316 inhabitants.
Fort Griffin, a strategic unit in the string of border and frontier outposts defending Texas
settlers against hostile Indians and outlaws, was established in 1867 on the Clear Fork of the
Brazos River in northeast Shackelford County. Lt. Col. Samuel D. Sturgis chose the site and
led 4 companies of the 6th United States Cavalry (F, I, K, and L) there on July 31, 1867. On
June 3, 1868, companies of the 17th Infantry under Lt. Col. S. B. Hayman joined the garrison.
The new post was first called Camp Wilson but was soon renamed Fort Griffin after Gen.
Charles Griffin, commander of the Military District of Texas from 1866 to 1867. Stone buildings
were planned to replace the original picket, log, and frame structures, but soldiers’ quarters,
stables, and even the hospital were always temporary, some mere canvas-covered shelters.

HJN 090019 AR

21

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

The older posts of Belknap, Phantom Hill, and Chadbourne became subposts of the new
Fort Griffin, which supplied garrisons for the first two. These subposts furnished escorts for
stagecoaches, wagon trains, and surveying parties. In time, Fort Griffin became the nucleus of
the border-defense line from Fort Richardson at Jacksboro to the Big Bend country. Law
enforcement at Fort Griffin was strengthened in 1877 by the arrival of more than 2 dozen Texas
Rangers led by Capt. G. W. Campbell. In July 1878, Campbell was replaced by Lt. George W.
Arrington, whose Indian-fighting talents were preferred over those of the US Army by the
townspeople.
By 1879, the southern buffalo herd was depleted, and the fort and its outposts were
within a settled area. On May 31, 1881, Capt. J.B. Irvine closed Fort Griffin and marched the
single remaining army unit, Company A, 22nd Infantry, southward to Fort Clark. Exodus from
the town proper soon followed. Now, only the ruins of Fort Griffin stand in Fort Griffin SHS,
located about 15 miles north of Albany off of US Highway 283.
The town of Fort Griffin grew up on the level bottomland between the military fort bearing
the same name and the Clear Fork of the Brazos River. The fort stood on a hill, and the town
site was frequently called the Bottom or the Flat. The town, begun in the late 1860s, grew and
quickly gained the reputation of a lawless frontier outpost that attracted such women as Lottie
Deno and Mollie McCabe; lawmen Patrick F. Garrett, Doc Holiday, and Wyatt Earp; outlaws
such as John Wesley Hardin; and men such as John Selman and John M. Larn, who lived on
both sides of the law. By 1874, the lawlessness of the community had become so extreme that
the commander of the fort placed the town under government control and forced a number of
undesirable residents to leave. This situation lasted until the organization of Shackelford
County later in the year. The community served as a major supply source for buffalo hunters,
especially during the busy seasons from 1874 to 1876-1877. The sale of hides and salted meat
was brisk during this period. The Butterfield Overland Mail route passed west and north of the
town site at Clear Fork Crossing, and herds on the Western Trail after 1875 passed it en route
to Kansas railheads. A newspaper, the Fort Griffin Echo, was published from 1879 to 1882, and
a local academy operated for several years. At its height, Fort Griffin had a permanent
population of about 1,000 and an estimated transient population of nearly twice that. With the
buffalo gone, the trail drivers’ needs served by Albany to the south, and the contingent of
soldiers greatly reduced, the town declined. When the fort closed in 1881 and the Texas
Central Railroad laid tracks through Albany instead of Fort Griffin, the end came rapidly.
Although it survived into the 20th century as a rural community with a school and country store,
virtually nothing remains of this once riotous, flourishing town. The site is preserved as Fort
Griffin SHS.
Railroad construction did not begin in the area until the 1880s. In 1882, the Texas
Central Railroad Company completed its line into Albany, which became a central shipping
point. Farming, ranching, and oil production are currently the bases of the county’s economy.
Oil was discovered in Shackelford County in 1910, and, in 1946, the discovery of oil in the
Ellenberger formation encouraged exploration for deeper production. By 1982, the county was
producing 5,659 barrels a day. In 1980, 50,000 acres of land were under cultivation, but the
trend was away from row crops toward stock farming. The breeding of quarter horses had also

22

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

become economically important in the county. In 1983, Shackelford County produced about
$12.5 million in agricultural goods. More than 78% came from livestock, mainly beef cattle.
Cotton, grain, and hay accounted for 16%. Other significant income is derived from oil field
equipment manufacture and supply, well service, and crude-oil hauling.

HJN 090019 AR

23

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
on the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the
National Park Service’s (NPS) online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas
State Historical Association’s (TSHA) Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a program of
intensive survey of the project area. No cultural resources were documented as a result of this
survey, so the second and third of these goals were not pursued. The rest of this chapter
presents the methodological background for the current investigations and the specific survey
methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey corridor. A total of 13 previously recorded aboriginal
and historic archeological sites occur within approximately 1.0 mi (1.6 km) of the APE (Table 1).
The project area is situated on the Fort Griffin SHS, a listed NRHP historic property, SAL, and
RTHL, and 12 of the 13 previously recorded sites are located within the boundaries of Fort
Griffin SHS. Fort Griffin (41SF4) was originally recorded as an archeological site in 1969,
though the rest of the sites on Fort Griffin SHS were recorded in 1998 and consist of a mix of
historic trash scatters and farmsteads and aboriginal campsites. Site forms on the THC’s online
Atlas contain minimal information about the sites recorded in 1998. The historic sites

HJN 090019 AR

25

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Table 1. Summary of Previously Recorded Archeological Sites in Vicinity of Project Area
Site
No.

Cultural
Affiliation

Site Type

NRHP/SAL
Eligibility

Date
Recorded

NRHP-listed

1969

41SH4

Historic (19th century)

Fort Griffin military fort & battlefields

41SF6

Historic (19th century)

Fort Griffin town (“The Flat”)

Unknown

1969

41SF21

Unknown prehistoric
(Late Archaic to Late Prehistoric?)

Aboriginal Campsite

Unknown

1990

41SF63

Historic (19th century?)
Unknown prehistoric

Historic farmstead
“Prehistoric workshop”

Unknown

1995

41SF65

Historic (19th century?)

Historic trash scatter

Unknown

1998

41SF66

Unknown prehistoric

Aboriginal campsite & cemetery

Unknown

1998

41SF67

Unknown prehistoric

Aboriginal campsite?

Unknown

1998

41SF68

Unknown prehistoric

Aboriginal campsite

Unknown

1998

41SF69

Historic (19th century?)
Unknown prehistoric

Historic trash scatter?
Aboriginal campsite

Unknown

1998

41SF70

Historic (19th century?)
Unknown prehistoric

Historic trash scatter?
Aboriginal campsite

Unknown

1998

41SF71

Unknown prehistoric

Aboriginal campsite

Unknown

1998

41SF72

Unknown prehistoric

Aboriginal raw material
procurement site (“quarry”)

Unknown

1998

41SF73

Historic (20th century)

CCC construction camp

Unknown

1998

ac
APE
m

Acre
Area of Potential Effect
Meters

NRHP
CCC
SAL

National Register of Historic Places
Civilian Conservation Corps
State Archeological Landmark

presumably date mostly to the time frame of Fort Griffin’s military occupation (ca. 1867 to 1881),
though no dates are provided on the site forms. The aboriginal sites consist of aboriginal
campsites, a raw material procurement site (i.e., “quarry”), and 1 cemetery. Aside from Fort
Griffin (41SF4), which is a listed NRHP historic property, an SAL, and an RTHL, the NRHP
and/or SAL eligibility of the remaining 11 previously recorded sites on Fort Griffin SHS are
unknown. None of the documented locations of previously recorded sites are located within or
in immediate proximity to the APE.
One of the previously recorded sites, 41SF6, is located north of Fort Griffin SHS, below
the military fort, on the broad floodplain of Collins Creek. Site 41SF6, also known as “The Flat,”
represents the location of the original Fort Griffin town site. As currently documented, the site
extends approximately 1.6 kilometers (km) (1.0 miles [mi]) along an improved dirt road that
leads from Fort Griffin to an old iron bridge that crosses the Brazos River west of the current
US 283 bridge.
Fort Griffin (41SF4) was constructed in 1867 and deactivated in 1881. Fort Griffin SHS,
located 24 km (15 mi) north of Albany, consists of a 205-ha (506-ac) property with 457 m

26

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

(1,500 ft) of river access on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River. The land was deeded to the
state by Shackelford County in 1935, and, in 1936, the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC)
began building many of the park’s facilities. The park opened to the public in 1938. The
partially restored ruins of Old Fort Griffin are located on a bluff overlooking the old town site of
Fort Griffin and the Clear Fork of the Brazos River Valley. In addition to the remains of Old Fort
Griffin, facilities at the park include trails and a visitor center, camping, hiking, bicycling, fishing,
picnicking, and educational programs. According to available archival data and information
provided by Mitchell Baird, Fort Griffin SHS site manager, no historic buildings associated with
the old fort are located on the site of the existing Fort Griffin Visitor Center or the proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall expansion that would be constructed at the rear of the existing building.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

On July 14, 2009, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall supervision of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
construction project. Field conditions were favorable at the time of the survey—the sky was
clear and the weather excellent. The APE consists of a small, northwest-to-southeast-oriented,
40-by-26-ft grassy area behind the existing Fort Griffin Visitor Center that is sandwiched
between the existing visitor center on the southeast side, a gravel parking area on the
southwest side, and a gravel driveway on the northwest side (Figures 3 to 4). Several restored
buildings associated with the old fort are visible to the northeast from the APE, but all of the
historic-age buildings on the site are located well beyond the boundaries of the APE (Figure 5).
The proposed expansion would be constructed within the previously disturbed footprint of the
existing visitor center, and shovel tests excavated within the APE revealed shallow, disturbed,
gravelly clay sediments (Figure 6). The APE was lightly covered in mowed grasses and
discontinuous patches of gravels. Ground surface visibility was generally good, and disturbed
gravelly clay sediments were visible on the modern ground surface.
Due to the extent of prior impacts within the small APE and the presence of shallow,
disturbed, gravelly clay sediments on the modern ground surface, the project area possesses
minimal potential to contain intact archeological deposits. However, due to the fact that the APE
is situated within Fort Griffin SHS, the APE was considered to have at least some potential to
contain cultural resources. Due to the geomorphological characteristics of the upland landform
on which the APE is situated, any aboriginal or historic-age cultural materials within the APE
would likely be visible on the modern ground surface or would be shallowly buried in disturbed
sediments and would be retrievable via shovel testing.
In general, intensive cultural resource survey activities entail a pedestrian walkover with
surface inspection as well as subsurface shovel testing. The 40-by-26-foot APE was traversed
on foot by Horizon’s archeologist and the modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for
aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) for cultural resource surveys state that, for block-area projects, a
minimum of 3 shovel tests per acre are required in project areas of this size unless field
conditions warrant excavation of more shovel tests (e.g., due to the presence of culturally

HJN 090019 AR

27

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 3. Overview of APE on Northwest Side of Visitors Center (Facing Southeast)

Figure 4. Overview of APE on Northwest Side of Visitors Center (Facing Northeast)

28

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

Figure 5. View of Old Fort Area from Visitors Center (Facing Northeast)

Figure 6. View of Shallow Gravelly Clay Sediments in Shovel Test JW-4

HJN 090019 AR

29

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

sensitive areas) or fewer shovel tests (e.g., due to extensive prior disturbances or cultural lowprobability areas). Thus, a minimum of 3 shovel tests would be required in the 0.01-ha (0.02ac) project area. In the event that a shovel test yields evidence of subsurface cultural deposits,
additional shovel tests may be necessary to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of the
subsurface deposits associated with the cultural resource. In general, shovel tests measure
approximately 30 centimeters (cm) (12 inches [in]) in diameter and are excavated to a target
depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the top of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the
maximum depth practicable, and all sediments are screened through 6.35-millimeter (mm)
(0.25-in) hardware cloth. Horizon excavated a total of 4 shovel tests in the 0.01-ha (0.02-ac)
APE (Figure 7), thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of this size. Due to the
presence of dense, ancient, gravelly clayey sediments derived from Permian-age limestone
formations across the APE, shovel tests were terminated at depths ranging from 10 to
25 centimeters (cm) below surface (cmbs). The entire APE is situated on land that is owned
and operated by the state of Texas; as such, all 4 shovel tests were excavated on publicly
owned land. Shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching in stream terraces and other areas with
the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are
capable of reaching (approximately 80 to 100 cmbs or more in sandy sediments or 40 to
60 cmbs in clayey sediments). Due to the presence of dense, pre-Holocene-age gravelly clayey
sediments on the modern ground surface of the upland landform on which the APE is located,
Holocene-age soils with the potential to contain intact, buried archeological deposits were not
present within the project area. As such, pedestrian survey and shovel testing constituted an
effective and adequate technique for penetrating to the bottom of sediments with the potential to
contain cultural resources, and backhoe trenching was not necessary.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken and a photographic
log was maintained. In the event that any cultural resources were encountered, they would be
collected and placed in resealable plastic bags labeled with relevant provenience information,
processed, and curated at an approved curation facility. No cultural materials were encountered
during the survey, so the collections policy was not brought into play. The Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all shovel tests and backhoe were determined using hand-held
Garmin ForeTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices based on the North American
Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project areas as defined in
36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3. The TSMASS requirements were exceeded for a
project area of this size, and the program of surface survey and shovel testing is considered to
represent an adequate and effective technique for evaluating the cultural resource potential of
the project area.

30

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

Figure 7. Sketch Map of Project Area Showing Locations of Shovel Tests

HJN 090019 AR

31

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The THC is proposing to construct an expansion of the Fort Griffin Visitor Center at Fort
Griffin SHS in Shackelford County, Texas. The proposed Crossroad Exhibit Hall expansion
would consist of a 40-by-26-foot expansion at the rear of the existing visitor center. The
proposed expansion would be constructed within the previously disturbed footprint of the
existing visitor center adjacent to a gravel parking lot at the rear of the building. The APE of the
proposed undertaking consists of the 40-by-26-foot expansion, covering an area of 0.01 ha
(0.02 ac). While design schematics for the proposed construction were not available for
inspection, the maximum depth of impacts based on typical construction design and practices is
anticipated to measure no more than 0.9 to 1.5 m (3.0 to 5.0 ft) in depth across the APE.
The proposed Crossroad Exhibit Hall expansion project is being sponsored by the THC
on Fort Griffin SHS. Fort Griffin is a listed NRHP historic property, an SAL, and an RTHL. Fort
Griffin SHS is owned and operated as a state park by the State of Texas and managed by the
THC; as such, the proposed project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas.
In addition, TxDOT is sponsoring the project under a federal transportation enhancement grant
(TxDOT CSJ 0908-28-012); as such, the project also falls under the jurisdiction of the NHPA via
the indirect involvement of the FHWA. As the project represents a publicly sponsored
undertaking on state-owned lands with the potential to impact potentially significant cultural
resources, the THC was required to provide for a cultural resource inventory and assessment of
the APE prior to the initiation of any construction-related activities. The THC contracted with
Horizon to provide all applicable cultural resources clearances for the proposed project.
On July 14, 2009, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall supervision of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
construction project. The survey was conducted by Horizon under Antiquities Permit No. 5332.
The APE, which is situated entirely on state-owned land, consists of a small, northwest-tosoutheast-oriented, 40-by-26-ft grassy area behind the existing Fort Griffin Visitor Center that is
sandwiched between the existing visitor center on the southeast side, a gravel parking area on
the southwest side, and a gravel driveway on the northwest side. Several restored buildings
associated with the old fort are visible to the northeast from the APE, but all of the historic-age
buildings on the site are located well beyond the boundaries of the APE. The proposed
expansion would be constructed within the previously disturbed footprint of the existing visitor
center, and shovel tests excavated within the APE revealed shallow, disturbed, gravelly clay

HJN 090019 AR

33

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

sediments. The 40-by-26-ft APE was traversed on foot by Horizon’s archeologist, the modern
ground surface was thoroughly inspected for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources, and
a total of 4 shovel tests were excavated within the APE, thereby exceeding the TSMASS
requirements for a project area of this size.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey.

34

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological and historic resources that occur
within the designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with
important historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of
Texas, archeological resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the
significance of archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs,
respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory
process.

HJN 090019 AR

35

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

36

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

6.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ARCHEOLOGICAL LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are
located in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any
county, city, or political subdivision of the state are state archeological landmarks and are
eligible for designation.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under
Section 26.8 of Part 2 of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may
designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

6.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologist, the modern ground surface was
thoroughly inspected for cultural resources, and a total of 4 shovel tests were excavated within
the 0.01-ha (0.02-ac) APE; thus, the TSMASS requirements were exceeded for a project area of
this size. Due to the presence of pre-Holocene, gravelly clay sediments and existing
disturbance from prior construction of the existing Fort Griffin Visitor Center immediately
adjacent to the proposed site of the Crossroad Exhibit Hall expansion that constitutes the APE,
the project area has minimal potential to contain intact archeological deposits. However, as the
APE is situated on the Fort Griffin SHS, a listed NRHP historic property, SAL, and RTHL, the
project area was considered to possess at least some potential to contain cultural resources.
Based on the extent of prior disturbance within the APE and the geomorphological
characteristics of the upland landform on which the project area is located, the program of

HJN 090019 AR

37

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

surface survey and shovel testing represents an adequate and effective technique for evaluating
the cultural resource potential of the project area.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey.

6.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
new cultural resources were identified in the APE as a result of survey activities, and no
previously recorded cultural resources occur within the boundaries of the APE.
No
archeological or historic resources associated with the Fort Griffin SHS would be adversely
affected by the proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as SALs according
to 13 TAC 26, and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the
proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed.
However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently
discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area,
even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the THC and TxDOT
should be notified of the discovery.

38

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Antevs, E.
1955
Geologic-Climatic Dating in the West. American Antiquity 20:317-335.
Baker, T.L.
1986
Ghost Towns of Texas. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Baker, V.R.
1975
Flood Hazards Along the Balcones Escarpment in Central Texas—Alternative
Approaches to the Recognition, Mapping, and Management. Geological Circular No.
75-5. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Black, S.L., L.W. Ellis, D.G. Creel, and G.T. Goode
1997
Hot Rock Cooking on the Grater Edwards Plateau: Four Burned Rock Midden Sites
in West Central Texas, Volumes 1 and 2. Studies in Archeology 22. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin. Archeology
Studies Program, Report No. 2. Archeology Studies Program, Environmental Affairs
Department, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Boyd, D.K.
1995
The Palo Duro Complex: Redefining the Early Ceramic Period in the Caprock
Canyonlands. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:461-518.
1997

Caprock Canyonlands Archeology: A Synthesis of the Late Prehistory and History of
Lake Henry and The Texas Panhandle Plains, Volumes I-II. Report of

2001

Querechos and Teyas: Protohistoric Hunters and Gatherers in the Texas Panhandle
Plains, A.D. 1540-1700. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 72:5-22.

HJN 090019 AR

39

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Boyd, D.K., M.D. Freeman, M.D. Blum, E.R. Prewitt, and J.M. Quigg
1989
Phase I Cultural Resources Investigations at Justiceburg Reservoir on the Double
Mountain Fork of the Brazos River, Garza and Kent Counties, Texas. 2 Volumes.
Reports of Investigations No. 66. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Brooks, R.L.
1989
Village Farming Societies. In From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview
of the Southern Great Plains, by J.L. Hoffman, R.L. Brooks, J.S. Hays, D.W. Owsley,
R.L. Jantz, M.K. Marks, and M.H. Manhein, pp. 71-90. Research Series No. 35.
Arkansas Archeological Society, Fayetteville.
1994

Warfare on the Southern Plains. In Skeletal Biology in the Great Plains: Migration,
Warfare, Health, and Subsistence, edited by D.W. Owsley and R.L. Jantz, pp. 317323. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Brown, D.O., and D. Anthony
1992
Archeological Survey of the Proposed Salt Creek II Substation and Electric
Transmission Line, Kent County, Texas. Summary Report No. 10. Hicks and
Company, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Brown, T.M., K.L. Killen, H. Simons
1982
Resource Protection Planning Process for Texas.
Austin.

Texas Historical Commission,

Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas.
No. 53, Austin.

Texas Water Development Board, Report

Cliff, M.B., R. Martynec, S.N. Allday, and D.E. Peter
1991
Cultural Resources Sample of the Elm Creek Detention and Channelization Area,
Abilene, Taylor County, Texas. Miscellaneous Report of Investigations No. 21. GeoMarine, Inc., Plano, Texas.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66: 361-400.
Collins, M.B., G.L. Evans, T.N. Campbell, M.C. Winans, and C.E. Mear
1989
Clovis Occupation at Kincaid Rockshelter, Texas.
Current Research in the
Pleistocene 6:3-4.
Conkling, R.P., and M.B.
1947
The Butterfield Overland Mail, 1857-1869, 3 vols. Glendale, California: Clark.

40

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

Creel, D.
1986
A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas. Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.
1990

Excavations at 41TG91, Tom Green County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology
Report No. 38. Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
Highway Design Division, Austin.

Denton, J.T.
1983
Test Excavations at Site 41KT32, Kent County, Texas.
Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

Texas Department of

Diamond, D.D., D.H. Riskind, and S.L. Orzell
1987
A Framework for Plant Community Classification and Conservation in Texas. The
Texas Journal of Science 39:203-221.
Dice, L.R.
1943
The Biotic Provinces of North America. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Dillehay, T.D.
1974
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
Anthropologist 19(64):180-196.

Plains

Etchieson, G.M., R.D. Speer, and J.T. Hughes
1979
Archeological Investigations in the Crowell Reservoir Area, King and Knox Counties,
Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West Texas
State University, Canyon.
Fenneman, N.M.
1938
Physiography of the Eastern United States. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company,
Inc.
Fields, R.C., K.W. Kibler, E.F. Gadus, D.K. Boyd, and T.B. Griffith
2005
Archeological Impact Evaluations and Surveys in the Texas Department of
Transportation’s Abilene, Austin, Brownwood, Bryan, Fort Worth, Waco, and Yoakum
Districts, 2001-2003. Reports of Investigations No. 143, Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin, Texas, and TxDOT Archeology Studies Program Report No. 83, Archeology
Studies Program, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of
Transportation, Austin, Texas.
Fisher, W.L.
1972
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Abilene Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Forrester, R.E.
1987
The Moran Point from North-Central Texas.
Anthropological Society 36:131-136.

HJN 090019 AR

Bulletin of the Oklahoma

41

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Frederick, C.D., and C. Ringstaff
1994
Lithic Resources at Fort Hood: Further Investigation. In Archeological Investigation
on 571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas.
Management Series, Research Report No. 31. US Army, Fort Hood.
Grant, B.O.
1936
The Early History of Shackelford County. M.A. thesis, Hardin-Simmons University.
Hickerson, N.P.
1994
The Jumanos, Hunters and Traders of the Southern Plains. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Hofman, J.L., R.L. Brooks, J.S. Hays, D.W. Owsley, R.L. Jantz, M.K. Marks, and M.H. Manhein
1989
From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great Plains.
Research Series No. 35. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Holden, F.M.
1982
Lambshead Before Interwoven: A Texas Range Chronicle, 1848-1878.
Station: Texas A&M University Press.
Holden, W.C.
1929
Some Recent Explorations and Excavations in Northwest Texas.
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 1:23-35.

College

Bulletin of the

Hughes, J.T.
1942
An Archeological Excavation on the Harrell Site of North Central Texas. Unpublished
Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
1991

Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the Texas High Plains. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 60:1-55.

Jelks, E.B.
1952
Appraisal of the Archeological and Paleontological Resources of the Colorado City
Reservoir, Borden and Scurry Counties, Texas. River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian
Institution, Washington, D.C.
1962

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas.
Archeology Series No. 5. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Johnson, E. (editor)
1977
Paleoindian Lifeways. The Museum Journal XVII. West Texas Museum Association,
Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1994
The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk as Seen from the Buckhollow
Encampment, Site 31KM16, of Kimble County, Texas.
Office of the State
Archeologist Report No. 38. Texas Department of Transportation and Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

42

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas. Submitted to the US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Katz, P., and S.R. Katz
2001
Data Recovery at the Bear Branch Site (41CA13), Callahan County, Texas. PRIAM,
Panhandle, Texas.
Kelley, J.C.
1947
The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork Focus.
American Antiquity 13(2):97-109.
Kenmotsu, N.A.
2001
Seeking Friends, Avoiding Enemies:
The Jumano Response to Spanish
Colonization, A.D. 1580-1750. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 72:23-43.
Krieger, A.D.
1946
Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas with Extension of Puebloan
Dating to the Mississippi Valley. University of Texas Publication No. 4640. Austin.
Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

Texas Department of Water

Lintz, C.R., W.N. Trierweiler, F. Oglesby, P. O’Neill, W. Doering, and M. McFaul
1991
A Cultural Resource Survey at Mitchell Reservoir, Mitchell County, Texas. Technical
Report No. 433. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.
Lynch, V.
1965
1879 in the Echo: A Year at Fort Griffin on the Texas Frontier. West Texas Historical
Association Year Book 41.
Lynott, M.J.
1979

Survey and Testing in the Elm Creek Watershed, Upper Colorado River Drainage,
Texas (Floodwater Retarding Structures 1-10).
Research Report No. 106.
Archeological Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Mack, S.R.
1994
Archaeological Investigations at the Van York Site (41BD8): A Late Archaic Lithic
Scatter in the Western Rolling Plains of Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis,
Department of Anthropology, University of Tulsa.
Mallouf, R.J.
1989
A Clovis Quarry Workshop in the Callahan Divide: The Yellow Hawk Site. Plains
Anthropologist 34(124):81-103.

HJN 090019 AR

43

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Matthews, S.R.
1982
Interwoven: A Pioneer Chronicle. 4th ed. College Station: Texas A&M University
Press.
Mauldin, R.P., and D.L. Nickels
2003
Burned Rock Middens in Texas. In Archaeological Testing to Determine the National
Register Eligibility Status of 18 Prehistoric Sites on Camp Bowie, Brown County,
Texas, by R.P. Mauldin, D.L. Nickels, and C.J. Broehm, pp. 217-231. Archaeological
Survey Report No. 334, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.
McKinney, W.W.
1981
Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southwestern Texas: The Problem of the
Paleoindian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeology Society 52:91-120.
Meltzer, D.J.
1986
The Clovis PaleoIndian Occupation of Texas: Results of the Texas Fluted Point
Survey. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:27-68.
Meltzer, D.J., and M.R. Bever
1995
Paleoindians of Texas: An Update on the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 66:47-81.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2009
Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed August 7, 2009.
Newcomb, W.W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Prewitt, E.R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-89.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.

1995

Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:83-173.

Ray, C.N.
1929
A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene Region. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 1:7-22.
1930

Report on Some Research in the Abilene Section.
Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:45-58.

1934

Flint Cultures of Ancient Man in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 5:14-24.

44

Bulletin of the Texas

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

1936

Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found near Colorado, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 8:9-16.

1938

The Clear Fork Cultural Complex.
Paleontological Society 10:193-207.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and

1940

The Deeply Buried Gibson Site.
Paleontological Society 12:223-237.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and

1945

Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 16:117-147.

Ray, C.N., and K. Bryan
1938
Folsomoid Point Found in Alluvium Beside Mammoth’s Bones.
88(2281):257-258.

Science

Ray, C.N., and E.B. Sayles
1941
An Agreement on Abilene Region Terminology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 13:175-176.
Richardson, R.N.
1963
The Frontier of Northwest Texas, 1846 to 1876. Glendale, California: Clark.
Rister, C.C.
1956
Fort Griffin on the Texas Frontier. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Rye, E.
1967

The Quirt and the Spur: Vanishing Shadows of the Texas Frontier. Austin: SteckVaughn.

Saunders, J.W., C.S. Mueller-Willie, and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1992
An Archeological Survey of the Proposed South Bend Reservoir Area: Young,
Stephens, and Throckmorton Counties, Texas. Archeological Surveys No. 6.
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Sayles, E.B.
1935
An Archeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers No. 17. Gila Pueblo, Globe,
Arizona.
Sellards, E.H.
1952
Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Shafer, H.
1971
Investigations into South Plains Prehistory, West Central Texas. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project No. 20. The University of Texas at Austin.
Sollberger, J.B., and T.R. Hester
1972
The Stonehacker Site: A Review of Pre-Archaic Manifestations in Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 17(58, part 1):326-344.

HJN 090019 AR

45

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

St. Clair, K.E., and C.R., eds.
1974
Shackelford County.
Committee.
1982

Albany, Texas:

Shackelford County Historical Survey

Little Towns of Texas. Jacksonville, Texas: Jayroe Graphic Arts.

Staley, D.P., and J.A. Evaskovich
1993
A Cultural Resource Survey for Cap Rock Electric Cooperative Proposed
Transmission Lines, Borden, Howard, Martin, and Midland Counties, Texas. Project
No. 695. Mariah and Associates, Inc., Albuquerque.
Story, D.A.
1985
Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric
Food Production in North America, edited by R.I. Ford, pp. 19-56. Anthropological
Papers 75. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Suhm, D.A., A.D. Krieger, and E.B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 25.
Texas State Historical Association Online (TSHA Online)
2009a Fort
Griffin,
Texas
(town
site).
Handbook
of
Texas
Online.
<http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/FF/hnf35.html>.
Accessed
July 31, 2009.
2009b

Fort Griffin, Texas (military fort).
<http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/
articles/FF/uef4.html>. Handbook of Texas Online. Accessed July 31, 2009.

2009c

Shackelford County, Texas. <http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/
SS/hcs8.html>. Handbook of Texas Online. Accessed July 31, 2009.

Thornwaite, C.W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
38:55-94.

Geographical Review

Thurmond, J.P., M.D. Freeman, and S.L. Andrews
1981
A Preliminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources in the Brazos Natural Salt
Pollution Control Project, Kent, Kind, and Stonewall Counties, Texas. Reports of
Investigations No. 18. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Tunnell, C.
1960
Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Champion Creek Reservoir, Mitchell
County, Texas. Report Submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
1975

46

Fluted Projectile Points as Revealed by Lithic Specimens from the Adair-Steadman
Sites in Northwest Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report No. 18.
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

090019_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

1978

The Gibson Lithic Cache from West Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Report
No. 30. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Turner, E.S., and T.R. Hester
1999
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Third Edition. Lanham: Gulf
Publishing.
(USDA) US Department of Agriculture
2008
Digital orthophoto quarter-quadrangle, Shackelford County, Texas. National
Agriculture Imagery Program, Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
(USGS) US Geological Survey
1981
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Fort Griffin, Texas, quadrangle.
University of Texas School of Architecture (UTSA)
1968
Texas Historic Forts: Architectural Research, 5 vols. Austin: Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department.
Wallace, E., and E.A. Hoebel
1985
The Comanches: Lords of the Southern Plains.
Norman.

University of Oklahoma Press,

Weir, F.A.
1976
The Central Texas Archaic. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
Washington State University, Pullman.
Wendorf, F., and J.J. Hester
1975
Pleistocene Environments of the Southern High Plains.
Burgwin Research Center, Taos, New Mexico.
Wormington, H.M.
1957
Ancient Man in North America.
Colorado.

Publication No. 9.

Fort

Denver Museum of Natural History, Denver,

Wulfkuhle, V.A.
1986
Investigations into the Prehistory of the Upper Clear Fork of the Brazos River: Fisher
and Jones Counties, Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, The University of Texas at
Austin.

HJN 090019 AR

47

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Crossroad Exhibit Hall Expansion, Fort Griffin State Historic Site, Shackelford County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JW-1

478106

3643168

0-20

Dense, dry reddish-brown clay w/
abundant small limestone inclusions

20+

Indurated limestone bedrock

0-25

Gravelly reddish-brown clay

25+

Indurated limestone bedrock

0-10

Disturbed reddish-brown clay

10+

Indurated limestone bedrock

0-15

Disturbed reddish-brown clay

15+

Indurated limestone bedrock

JW-2

JW-3

JW-4

478101

478093

478102

3643172

3643170

3643166

Soils

Artifacts
None

None

None

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 090019 AR

A-1

