Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract,
San Marcos, Hays County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

HJN 100055 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Breckenridge Properties
Austin, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

June 2010

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract,
San Marcos, Hays County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Breckenridge Properties
7004 Bee Cave Road, Building 3, Suite 330
Austin, Texas 78746

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 100055 AR

June 2010

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Breckenridge Properties (Breckenridge) is proposing to develop the 8.8-hectare (ha)
(21.6-acre [ac]) Kalentari tract of land located off of Briar Meadow Road between Post Road
and Interstate Highway (IH) 35 in San Marcos, Hays County, Texas. The Area of Potential
Effect (APE) of the proposed undertaking would consist of the entire 8.8-ha (21.6-ac) tract
proposed for development.
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by Breckenridge, a private developer, on
privately owned land. As the proposed development would occur within the San Marcos city
limits, it would be regulated by the San Marcos City Code and the San Marcos Horizons Master
Plan. As such, the undertaking falls under the jurisdiction of the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA). As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to
impact significant cultural resources, Breckenridge was required to provide for a cultural
resource inventory of the project’s APE and to assess the project’s possible impacts on any
significant cultural resources in the APE. To meet its responsibilities under existing state and
local statutes, Breckenridge subcontracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon),
to conduct a cultural resource inventory survey of the APE associated with the proposed project.
From May 5 to 6, 2010, Horizon archeologist Michael Mudd, under the overall direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources survey of
the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed undertaking. The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologist, the modern ground
surface was thoroughly inspected for cultural resources, and a total of 32 shovel tests were
excavated within the APE; thus, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards
(TSMASS) requirements were exceeded for a project area of this size.
The survey resulted in the documentation of 1 new archeological site (41HY475), which
consists of the collapsing remains of an early 20th-century house (which has been relocated to
its current site from elsewhere) and a low-density scatter of aboriginal, historic-age, and modern
debris. A modern residence and tool shed or workshop is present within the project area
adjoining the historic-age house. No cultural materials, prehistoric or historic, were encountered
beyond the documented boundaries of site 41HY475.
The historic-age component of site 41HY475 consists of a large, abandoned, 2-story,
wood-frame house with a double-pyramid-hipped roof and a northeast-facing covered entrance

HJN 100055 AR

iii

Management Summary

with a single-gabled roof. The house is currently resting on a concrete foundation, though its
general architectural characteristics suggest an original construction date of 1915 to 1925. As
early 20th-century houses of this type were typically constructed on pier-and-beam foundations,
this house has likely been moved onto its current site relatively recently. Historic US Geological
Survey (USGS) maps were reviewed to determine when the structure was established on this
lot. The 1973 (revised) edition of the USGS San Marcos North, 7.5-minute topographic
quadrangle does not show any structures at this location. The 1994 (revised) USGS map,
however, shows this structure as well as the nearby modern residence, indicating that the house
on site 41HY475 was moved to its current location sometime between 1973 and 1994 and has
therefore been on its current site less than 40 years. The house is surrounded by a variety of
modern features, including a wooden deck, a dog run, and a picnic table, and the yard is
bounded by a chain-link fence. Modern debris is abundant in the yard surrounding the house.
Aside from the fact that the house itself was originally constructed in the early 20th century,
probably between 1915 and 1925, the bulk of the evidence indicates that the occupation of the
current site occurred entirely during the modern era (specifically, beginning sometime after
1973).
The house appears to retain at least some architectural integrity as the wood siding and
windows appear to be original to the house, and the only recent additions to the structure itself
appear to consist of a wood-sided, enclosed back porch and a wooden deck. However, the
house was moved to its current location within the past 40 years, prior to which no historic
structures were present at this location. The main house therefore lacks integrity of location as
it has been moved from the site of its original construction. In addition, the current setting of the
house is compromised severely by the deteriorated condition of the main house and the lack of
any outbuildings or other features associated with earlier historic occupations or uses of the
locale. This prevents the house or site from conveying a feeling of how the building originally
functioned. The setting has been modernized by the addition of an enclosed back porch and
wood deck and by installation of modern chain-link fencing surrounding the property. A modern
residence and associated workshop or tool shed are sited immediately west of the abandoned
house that compromise any historic context of the house. Due to the amount of deterioration of
the house and the likelihood that the most recent inhabitants of the house were squatters, the
house has likely been “officially” vacant for many years; thus, there is no continuity of farming
practices associated with the site. Therefore, the site does not have strong integrity of setting
owing to the condition of the structure and surrounding modern development. The building does
not have strong integrity of workmanship as its dilapidated condition cannot communicate
sufficient details about the craftsmanship that went into it. Overall, it lacks the ability to convey
the history of early 20th-century farming or trends in the historic settlement of the area, and the
site lacks significance under National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) Criteria A, B, or C. No
significant archeological deposits are associated with the house site that would warrant eligibility
under NRHP Criterion D.
The aboriginal component of site 41HY475 consists of a sparse scatter of aboriginal
lithic artifacts, including chert flakes, chert cores, and limestone burned rock, found in a formerly
plowed field extending southward and southeastward from the historic-age house. This portion
of the site currently consists of a shortgrass meadow with scattered prickly pear cactus. A total

iv

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

of 12 shovel tests were excavated in this portion of the site, 8 of which produced evidence of
subsurface archeological deposits. Counting the single positive shovel test excavated in the
front yard of the historic-age house, which contained a single chert flake at a depth of 0 to
25 centimeters below surface (cmbs), a total of 9 positive (i.e., culture-bearing) shovel tests
were excavated on the site. Artifacts observed in shovel tests consist of a total of 13 pieces of
lithic debitage, 2 chert cores (1 of which was subsequently burned), and 1 piece of limestone
burned rock. Artifacts were encountered at depths of 10 to 40 cmbs. The upper 30 cm of
deposits consist of dense, disturbed black marly clay with abundant calcium carbonate nodules
that appears to represent a former plow zone. Most of the artifacts were recovered from the
plow zone stratum, though a few were encountered in the clayey sediments immediately
underlying the plow zone. In addition to the artifacts observed in shovel tests, several chert
cores were observed on the modern ground surface. No aboriginal cultural features or
temporally diagnostic artifacts were observed on the site.
The aboriginal component on site 41HY475 appears to possess relatively limited
research value. The scatter of aboriginal artifacts is found predominantly in a formerly plowed
field, and most of the subsurface archeological deposits were found to occur within the
disturbed plow zone that characterizes the upper 30 cm of sediment. No temporally diagnostic
artifacts or cultural features associated with the aboriginal occupation were observed. Based on
available evidence, the aboriginal component can be dated only to an unknown aboriginal
(presumably prehistoric) timeframe. While the site appears to represent the remains of an
aboriginal campsite, historic agricultural practices have churned and scattered the cultural
materials associated with the occupation. It is unlikely that the aboriginal component of this site
could be profitably investigated to provide information pertinent to the aboriginal past. The
aboriginal component of the site is recommended as ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D.
Thus, site 41HY475 is recommended as ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP under any of
the 4 NRHP eligibility criteria for both its aboriginal and historic-age components. No further
cultural resource investigations are recommended at this site.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of the Kalentari tract project area
documented in this report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the
proposed undertaking. In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and
good faith effort to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were
identified that meet the criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4, and no further
archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It is
recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely event
that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during
construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed
areas, all work should cease immediately and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 100055 AR

v

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ..................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 6
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 6
2.4
Biota.............................................................................................................. 8

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 12,000 to 8500 B.P.) ...............................................11
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 8500 to 1200 B.P.) ........................................................12
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1200 to 350 B.P.) ..............................................12
3.4
Historic Period (ca. 350 B.P. to Present) ......................................................12

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................17
4.1
Archival Research ........................................................................................17
4.2
Survey Methods ...........................................................................................18

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................23
5.1
Site 41HY475 ...............................................................................................23

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................37
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................37
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....38
6.3
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................39
6.4
Management Recommendations ..................................................................41

7.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................43
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 100055 AR

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.
Figure 11.
Figure 12.
Figure 13.
Figure 14.
Figure 16.
Figure 17.
Figure 18.
Figure 19.

Location of Project Area on 1994 USGS Topographic Map ...................................... 2
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 3
Overview of Project Area Consisting of Open Pasture (Facing Southeast) ..............20
Location of Shovel Tests in Project Area .................................................................21
Sketch Map of Site 41HY475 ...................................................................................24
Frontal Overview of Historic House on Site 41HY475 (Facing Southwest) ...............26
Front Façade of Historic House on Site 41HY475 (Facing West) .............................26
View of Back Yard of Historic House on Site 41HY475 (Facing East) ......................27
Rear Façade of Historic House on Site 41HY475 (Facing North) .............................27
Northwest Façade of Historic House on Site 41HY475 (Facing Southeast) .............28
Back Porch Addition and Paved Walkway on Site 41HY475 (Facing Northwest) .....28
View of Living Room on Ground Floor of House ......................................................29
View of Kitchen on Ground Floor of House ..............................................................29
Sample of Aboriginal Lithic Debitage and Cores on Site 41HY475 ..........................31
Location of Project Area on 1973 USGS Topographic Map .....................................32
Occupied Modern Residence West of Site 41HY475 (Facing Southeast) ................34
Modern Workshop/Tool Shed West of Site 41HY475 (Facing West) ........................34

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.

viii

Previously Recorded Cultural Resources in Vicinity of Project Area ........................18

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Breckenridge Properties (Breckenridge) is proposing to develop the 8.8-hectare (ha)
(21.6-acre [ac]) Kalentari tract of land located off of Briar Meadow Road between Post Road
and Interstate Highway (IH) 35 in San Marcos, Hays County, Texas (Figures 1 and 2). The
Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed undertaking would consist of the entire 8.8-ha
(21.6-ac) tract proposed for development.
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by Breckenridge, a private developer, on
privately owned land. As the proposed development would occur within the San Marcos city
limits, it would be regulated by the San Marcos City Code and the San Marcos Horizons Master
Plan. As such, the undertaking falls under the jurisdiction of the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA) of 1966 (P.L. 89-665; 80 Stat. 915; 16 USC §470 et seq., as amended). As the
project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact significant
cultural resources, Breckenridge was required to provide for a cultural resource inventory of the
project’s APE and to assess the project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources
in the APE. To meet its responsibilities under existing state and local statutes, Breckenridge
subcontracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to conduct a cultural
resource inventory survey of the APE associated with the proposed project.
From May 5 to 6, 2010, Horizon archeologist Michael Mudd, under the overall direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources survey of
the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed undertaking. The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an
intensive pedestrian survey of the APE, and the production of a report suitable for review by the
State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas Historical
Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council
of Texas Archeologists’ (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports. The
cultural resources investigations were conducted by Horizon under contract to Breckenridge.
This report presents the results of this cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural background,
respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the cultural resource survey and describes cultural

HJN 100055 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on 1994 USGS Topographic Map

2

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

HJN 100055 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

resources documented during the fieldwork, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

4

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The Kalentari tract project area is located within the city limits of San Marcos in southern
Hays County, Texas, near the boundary of 2 significant physiographic provinces—the Edwards
Plateau and the Blackland Prairie. The Blackland Prairie, the narrow physiographic zone
situated between the Edwards Plateau on the west and the Gulf Coastal Plain on the east, is a
low, rolling land that extends in a narrow band along the eastern edge of the Balcones fault
zone from the Red River Valley in northeastern Texas to the southern edge of the Edwards
Plateau. This is an area of low topographic relief and poor drainage in which water often ponds
after rainstorms and streams flow at very gentle gradients. The Edwards Plateau and Balcones
Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that arcs across Texas to form a distinct
boundary between uplands composed primarily of limestone bedrock and lower plains
composed mostly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary is marked by an abrupt scarp (the
Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational ramp, but the entire length of this
transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography, bedrock, hydrology, soil, vegetation,
and animal life. The project area is situated on an upland knoll that consists of an ancient
alluvial terrace remnant overlooking the Blanco River to the east. The project area slopes down
gently toward the south and southeast, and elevations across the project area range from
approximately 188 to 192 m (615 to 630 ft) above mean sea level (amsl).
Hydrologically, the project area is situated within the Guadalupe River basin. Hays
County’s numerous streams generally flow in an easterly direction. The principal waterways are
Bear, Cypress, and Onion creeks as well as the Blanco and San Marcos rivers. The Edwards
Aquifer underlies the eastern portion of the county, and the San Marcos Springs, located near
the southern edge of the county north of the City of San Marcos, are the second largest in
Texas, delivering over 102 million gallons daily. The proposed Kalentari tract project area is
situated on an old alluvial terrace remnant overlooking the Blanco River to the east. The Blanco
River flows generally southeastwards to its confluence with the San Marcos River, which in turn
flows generally southeastwards to discharge into the Guadalupe River. The Guadalupe River
eventually discharges into the Gulf of Mexico at San Antonio Bay, which is situated southeast of
Victoria between Calhoun and Refugio counties.

HJN 100055 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project area is underlain by a thick sequence of Cretaceous-age, sedimentary rock
strata; specifically, the project area is underlain by Late Pleistocene Fluviatile terrace deposits
(Qt), which consist of gravel sand, silt, and clay (Barnes 1981). Specifically, the project area is
situated on the Lewisville-Gruene-Krum soil association (Batte 1984). The Lewisville-GrueneKrum Association is composed of shallow to deep, gently sloping soils over loamy, clayey and
gravelly sediments on stream terraces and valley fills in the Blackland Prairie and Edwards
Plateau physiographic regions. The parent material of in situ soils in the vicinity of the project
area is the indurated limestone bedrock that underlies the region. Closer to the major rivers,
soils formed over alluvium of recent and Pleistocene age, but no substantial alluvial deposits are
present in the vicinity of the project area.
The project area is situated on roughly equal proportions of 3 specific soil series—Krum
clay, 0 to 1% slopes (KrA); Krum clay, 1 to 3% slopes (KrB); and Purves clay, 1 to 5% slopes
(Batte 1984). The PuC soil unit characterizes approximately the middle one-third of the project
area on the southern slopes of an upland knoll. The Kra and KrB soil units are located toward
the southeastern and northwestern ends of the project area, respectively. All 3 soil types
consist of shallow clayey deposits that formed during the Late Pleistocene epoch and are
situated over limestone bedrock.
While aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in deep alluvial
sediments adjacent to major streams in Central Texas, the relative antiquity of the preHolocene-age terraces in the project area suggests that any cultural resources would be
constrained to the modern ground surface, rather than in buried contexts, in erosional settings
lacking integrity. Intact, buried archeological deposits may occur within alluvial sediments near
major streams, though no deep Holocene-age alluvial sediments are mapped within the current
project area. The terrain within the project area consists of a Pleistocene-age marly clay terrace
situated above the more recent Holocene-age terraces of the Blanco River. Erosion has been
relatively extensive within the project area, and very little Holocene-age sediment remains on
the surface of the terrace structure. No deep alluvial sediments with the potential to contain
buried, intact archeological deposits are mapped within the project area. Other things being
equal, any cultural resources associated with the soils mapped in the APE would be expected to
occur on the modern ground surface in deflated, eroded contexts that would lack stratigraphic
integrity.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
Bryant and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central
Texas from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial
period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was

6

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands
were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985).
During the Post-Glacial period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more
stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas.
The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic
conditions lasting from roughly 6,000 to 5,000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway
(1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably
achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Hays County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern climate is
typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate is
influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified by
polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer, and
fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.
On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature in Texas
manifest regional clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east
to west and mean annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast
(Larkin and Bomar 1983). In Central Texas, climate has fluctuated from subtropical humid to
subtropical subhumid. Average annual precipitation totals 81 cm (32 in) and temperature
averages 19°Celsius (C) (67°Fahrenheit [F]) annually, ranging from 36°C (96°F) in August (the
warmest month) to 15°C (59°F) in January (the coldest month). During this time, however, drier
periods lasting from 3 to 7 years, when total annual rainfall ranged from 30 to 64 cm (12 to
25 in), were followed by abnormally wet years with 114 to 127 cm (45 to 50 in) of rainfall.
Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are
associated with frontal storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with
warm, moist air masses moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The
topographic discontinuity along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf
storm trace and increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall.
Two extreme examples are the excess of 91 cm (36 in) of rain that fell within an 18-hour period
in the vicinity of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 56-cm (22-in) deluge that fell in less
than 3 hours near O’Harris, Texas, in May 1935. Lower rainfall amounts are characteristic of
winter and late summer. In winter, frontal storms pass so frequently that there is little time for
moisture to increase, and prevailing upper-level winds from west to east often dominate over
meridional flow, meaning that much of the available moisture is derived from the Pacific rather
than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer, cool fronts rarely penetrate into the region, and
rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal convective storms.

HJN 100055 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.4

BIOTA

The project area is situated in the southwestern portion of the Texan biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces (Dice 1943).
Some species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texan province. The
boundary, characterized as “approximate,” between Blair’s (1950) Texan and Balconian
provinces passes through western Williamson County, northwest of the project area. Rainfall in
the Texan province is barely in excess of water need, and the region is classified by Thornwaite
(1948) as a C2 (moist subhumid) climate with a moisture surplus index of from 0 to 20%.
Edaphic controls on vegetation types are important in the Texan biotic province, which is
located near the border between moisture surplus and moisture deficiency. Sandy soils support
oak-hickory forests dominated by post oak (Quercus stellata), blackjack oak (Q. marilandica),
and hickory (Carya buckleyi). Clay soils originally supported a tall-grass prairie, but much of this
soil type has been placed under cultivation. Dominant tall-grass prairie species include western
wheatgrass (Agrophyron smithii), silver beardgrass (Andropogon saccharoides), little bluestem
(Andropogon scoparius), and Texas wintergrass (Stipa leucotricha). Major areas of oak-hickory
forest include the Eastern and Western Cross Timbers, and major tall-grass prairie areas
include the Blackland, Grand, and Coastal prairies. Some characteristic associations of the
Austroriparian province occur locally in the Texan province, such as a mixed stand of loblolly
pine (Pinus taeda) and blackjack and post oak in Bastrop County, as well as a series of peat
and bog marshes distributed in a line extending from Leon to Gonzales counties.
The fauna associated with this region are represented by a mixture of species from the
Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, Kansan, Balconian, and Texan biotic provinces. At
least 49 species of mammals occur in the Texan province, including Virginia opossum
(Didelphis virginiana), eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus), fox squirrel (Sciurus niger), desert
pocket gopher (Geomys breviceps), fulvous harvest mouse (Reithrodontomys fulvescens),
white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus), eastern
cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus floridanus), raccoon (Procyon lotor), striped skunk (Mephitis
mephitis), ground squirrel (Citellus tridecemlineatus), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginiana),
hispid pocket mouse (Perognathus hispidus), deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus), blacktailed jackrabbit (Lepus californicus), pygmy mouse (Baiomys taylori), 9-banded armadillo
(Dasypus novemcinctus), and jaguar (Felis onca). Both species of Terrapene known from the
Austroriparian province—eastern box turtle (T. Carolina) and desert box turtle (T. ornata)—
occur in the Texan.
Sixteen species of lizards, including 7 grassland and 9 forest species, are also found,
including green anole (Anolis carolinensis), eastern fence lizard (Sceloporus undulates),
common ground skink (Leiolopisma laterale), and glass snake (Ophiosaurus ventralis)
(grassland species), as well as collared lizard (Crotaphytus collaris), Texas spiny lizard
(Sceloporus olivaceous), Texas horned lizard (Phrynosoma cornutum), and Great Plains skink
(Eumeces obsoletus) (forest species). Only 5 species of urodele fauna are known from this
area, including small-mouthed salamander (Ambystoma texanum), tiger salamander

8

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

(Ambystoma tigrinum), and eastern lesser siren (Siren intermedia), and the Texan province acts
as a barrier to urodele distribution between the endemic Balconian province fauna to the west
and the Austroriparian fauna to the east.
Anuran fauna is composed primarily of Austroriparian or otherwise widely distributed
species, including eastern spadefoot toad (Scaphiopus holbrookii), Gulf Coast toad (Bufo
valliceps), Woodhouse’s toad (Bufo woodhousii), southern cricket frog (Acris gryllus), southern
chorus frog (Pseudacris nigrita), gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor), green treefrog (Hyla cinerea),
North American bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana), northern leopard frog (Rana pipiens), and narrowmouthed toad (Microhyla carolinensis). Additional anuran species that fail to cross from the
Texan into the Austroriparian province include Pacific tree frog (Pseudacris clarkia), Strecker’s
chorus frog (Pseudacris streckeri), and striped whipsnake (Microhyla olivacea). Other reptile
and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include 6-lined racerunner (Aspidoscelis
sexlineata), rat snake (Ptyas mucosus), eastern hognose snake (Heterodon platirhinos), rough
green snake (Opheodrys aestivus), copperhead (Agkistrodon contortrix), western diamondback
rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox), Blanchard’s cricket frog (Acris crepitans), diamondback water
snake (Nerodia rhombifer rhombifer), and Houston toad (Bufo houstonensis).
Common bird species include northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus), eastern
meadowlark (Sturnella magna), mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), killdeer (Charadrius
vociferus), field sparrow (Spizella pusilla), red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis), turkey vulture
(Cathartes aura), belted kingfisher (Ceyrle alcyon), and mockingbird (Mimus polyglottos).
Small herds of bison and antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early
historic periods, but these species are no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

HJN 100055 AR

9

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) Central Texas Archeological
Region. The indigenous human inhabitants of Central Texas practiced a generally nomadic
hunting and gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory, and, in contrast to much of the rest of
North America, mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly
through time in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 12,000 TO 8500 B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (cf. Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (12,000 to 8500 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various
periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted,
lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers,
gravers, and bone foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized
into egalitarian bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic
subsistence and settlement pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence
patterns in Central Texas are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence
focused on the exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the
PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as
has been documented elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern
appears to have been practiced throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the
PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point
styles. These include the Early PaleoIndian period, which is recognized based on large, fluted
projectile points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late

HJN 100055 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

PaleoIndian period, which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 8500 TO 1200 B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(8500 to 1200 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Central Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture
shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of
groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these
3 subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as well. Perhaps most
markedly, burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod, continuing into the
Late Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic subperiod. In
addition, the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered to constitute
evidence of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least partially
accounts for the lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1200 TO 350 B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 350 B.P.) (Collins 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas,
unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The
Late Prehistoric period is generally divided into 2 phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin
phase sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to
suggest that the Austin-phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north, and
lack the ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 B.P. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay.
However, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The

12

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994) as well as increased participation
on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time that heavy settlement
of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was
greatly diminished.
During the Spanish period, the region lay at the edge of the main route from San Antonio
to East Texas, the Old San Antonio Road1. In 1691, Domingo Terán de los Ríos crossed the
southern edge of the county on his way to the East Texas missions and the Red River. The
Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre expedition explored the upper San Marcos River in 1709, and Louis
Juchereau de St. Denis was attacked by Apaches in 1714 at the San Marcos River crossing. A
mission to be called San Marcos was authorized in 1729 near the site of present San Marcos,
but the authorization was later rescinded in favor of San Antonio. San Xavier Mission and San
Francisco Xavier Presidio were located briefly at the site in 1755-56, but no permanent
settlement was attempted until 1807, when some 80 persons were moved to the Old San
Antonio Road crossing of the San Marcos River. San Marcos de Neve, 1 of a chain of defense
settlements, was abandoned 4 years later, after flooding and attacks by Comanche and
Tonkawa Indians. To encourage settlement after the Mexican War for Independence, the
government of Coahuila and Texas issued land grants in the county to Juan Martín Veramendi
in 1831, Juan Vicente Campos in 1832, and Thomas Jefferson Chambers in 1834. The first
Anglo-American settler in Hays County, Thomas G. McGehee, was issued a league of land in
1835 by the Mexican government and was farming north of the site of present San Marcos in
1846.
On 1 March 1848, the state legislature formed Hays County from territory formerly part
of Travis County. William W. Moon, Eli T. Merriman, and Mike Sessom, original settlers and
members of John Coffee Hays’ company of Texas Rangers, worked with General Edward
Burleson, a member of the Texas Senate, to have the new county named for Hays. County
organization and the designation of San Marcos as the county seat gave impetus to settlement;
the population grew from 387 in 1850 to 2,126 in 1860. The county shrank slightly on
12 February 1858, when it lost acreage to the new Blanco County and gained a portion of
Comal County. On 10 January 1862, the legislature again transferred another small area to
Blanco County. Boundaries remained stable for nearly a century, until resurvey of the HaysTravis county line in 1955 added more than 16,000 acres to Hays County.
A stage line from Austin to San Antonio crossed the county in 1848, the year that
Edward Burleson built the first sawmill. W.A. Thompson built the first cotton gin in the early
1850s, and, between 1855 and 1885, Ezekiel Nance built and operated 5 gins, 5 gristmills, a
sawmill, a shingle mill, and a beef packery. Alfred B.F. Kerr organized the first church in Hays

1

The following history of Hays County has been compiled from Barkley (1970), Dobie (1936), Swisher (1878), and
Wyatt (1977), as summarized in the online Handbook of Texas History.

HJN 100055 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

County in 1847, and a school was built at San Marcos in 1849. Another school was opened at
Snake Lake in 1851, and John D. Pitts built a school in Stringtown before 1860. The Johnson
Institute, founded in 1852 by Thomas Jefferson Johnson, drew students from a large area of
Central Texas until it closed in 1872.
The early settlers of Hays County were a mix of old Texans and Georgia and Arkansas
immigrants. With the coming of the Civil War, most of the residents favored secession. Colonel
Peter C. Woods’ 36th Texas Cavalry regiment was organized at Camp Clark, in neighboring
Guadalupe County, in 1862; Company A was primarily made up of Hays County men. During
the war, county beef helped to feed Confederate forces. Shortly after the war’s end, Colonel
George F. Snyder, a Georgian, established the first newspaper in Hays County, the Pioneer.
During Reconstruction, a Ku Klux Klan group was formed, and, in May 1876, a military
organization, the San Marcos Greys, was formed.
George Neill drove the first herd of cattle from Hays County to Kansas in 1867, and
other drives followed. Farming also became more profitable in the eastern part of the county
and helped encourage a fresh influx of settlers. By 1878, the county was out of debt, several
new communities had been organized, and schools had grown in number to match the
increased population. The Coronal Institute was founded in 1866 followed by the San Marcos
public school system in 1870. Southwest Texas Normal School was authorized at the turn of
the century and opened in 1903 as a teacher-training institution; it became Southwest Texas
State University in 1969. San Marcos Baptist Academy was established in 1907.
In 1880, the first Hays County rail line, built by the International-Great Northern Railroad,
was completed to San Marcos from Austin; it later extended to San Antonio. Another population
boom followed the railroad. The county population nearly doubled, from 7,555 in 1880 to
14,142 in 1900, and then remained virtually unchanged for the next 50 years despite the
influences of World War I and the depression of the 1930s. Even the economic stimulus of
World War II had only momentary effect. Hays County remained predominantly agricultural;
almost 90% of the mid-1960s farm income came from livestock. Not until the establishment of
the Gary Job Corps Training Center on the site of the former Gary Air Force Base in 1964 and
the growth of enrollment at the university in San Marcos did Hays County begin a period of
steady growth—from 19,934 in 1960 to 27,642 in 1970; 40,594 in 1980; and 65,614 in 1990.
Although agriculture remained significant in county economics, nonagricultural income, primarily
at the educational and training facilities, played an even larger role. The 1979 per capita
income of $6,009, however, remained well below the state average of $8,778.
Since early in the century, Hays County has enjoyed a steady influx of tourists attracted
by the caves, springs, and spas of Wimberley and San Marcos. Aquarena Springs and Wonder
Caves are particularly well known. Camp Ben McCulloch, near Driftwood, was organized in
1896 as a site for reunions of the United Confederate Veterans; their descendents continue the
annual tradition. More recently, the county caught the attention of environmentalists. Ezell
Cave, a watery cavern in San Marcos, is the habitat of several rare animal species, including
the Texas blind salamander, and 6 of the 10 known varieties of aquatic cave fauna are found
only in this cave and its underground waters. The only known habitat of the San Marcos
salamander is San Marcos Springs, and 2 other unique fish of the springs, the fountain darter
14

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

and San Marcos gambusia, were classed as endangered in 1990. Also on the endangered list
is Texas wild rice, which is not known to exist outside a small area near the springs.
During the 1970s and 1980s, growth in the northern and eastern parts of the county was
influenced by the expanding Austin metropolitan area and the Austin-San Antonio urban strip
along Interstate Highway 35. In 1973, Hays County became part of the Austin Metropolitan
Statistical Area. In addition to the county seat, San Marcos, which had a population of 28,743 in
1990, other county population centers are Wimberley (2,403), Kyle (2,225), Buda (1,795),
Dripping Springs (1,033), and Hays (252).
The city of San Marcos, in which the current project area is located, is the county seat of
Hays County. It was the site of several Spanish attempts at colonization before it became the
center of Anglo-American settlement in the area. The first such attempt, in 1755, saw the shortlived establishment of the San Xavier missions and the presidio of San Francisco Xavier. These
were relocated less than a year later, and the headwaters of the San Marcos River remained
unsettled for another half-century. In 1808, the Spanish governor of Texas, Manuel Antonio
Cordero y Bustamante, sponsored the civil settlement of San Marcos de Neve near the same
site, but floods and Indian raids prompted its abandonment in 1812. In November 1846,
Thomas G. McGehee became the first Anglo-American to settle in the vicinity of the San Marcos
Springs, but William W. Moon has been identified as the original resident of the site that became
San Marcos proper. Moon was soon joined by other former members of John C. Hays's
company of Texas Rangers and by Gen. Edward Burleson. Caton Erhard opened the first store
and post office by 1847, and the First Methodist Church began soon after. The Texas
Legislature organized Hays County on March 1, 1848, and designated the young community as
the county seat. In 1851, General Burleson, William Lindsey, and Dr. Eli T. Merriman took
possession of a 640-ac section of the Juan Veramendi grant and laid out the town center.
Tarbox and Brown stagecoaches linked San Marcos with Austin and San Antonio in 1848, and
the town began its development as the commercial center for the cart trade between area
farmers and ranchers and coastal commission merchants. It also became a center for ginning
and milling local agricultural products. Slowed for a while by the Civil War, the population in
1870 had grown only to 742, but, in the decade following the arrival of the International-Great
Northern Railroad in 1881, it reached 2,335. In that decade the town supported 2 banks, an
opera house, and a variety of stores, saloons, and other businesses.
Cattle and cotton production in the area provided the basis for the gradual but steady
growth of San Marcos as a center for commerce and transportation. The chartering in 1899 and
subsequent opening in 1903 of Southwest Texas State Normal School and of the San Marcos
Baptist Academy in 1907 established education as an important local industry. By the second
decade of the 20th century, San Marcos counted more than 4,000 residents. On the eve of
World War II, the population was estimated to be 5,500, and the town had 200 businesses.
During and after World War II, the city's economy began to diversify, and growth accelerated.
Wartime demand provided the initial stimulus for development of a light industrial and
manufacturing sector; it was reported after the war that the financial resources of the city had
increased 500% from prewar levels. In the 1960s, with the emergence of Aquarena Springs
and Wonder Cave as important attractions, the tourist industry became a reliable and growing

HJN 100055 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

source of income. The expansion of Southwest Texas State University into an important
regional institution, as well as the establishment in 1965 of the Gary Job Corps Training Center,
not only made education the single largest employer in the city but also helped to account for a
48% increase in population, from 12,713 in 1962 to 18,860 in 1972. Industrial development
continued apace through the 1970s; among the 400 businesses recorded by 1980 were
manufacturers of furniture, sheet metal products, plastics, woolens, lighting fixtures,
telecommunication devices, baked goods, construction materials, and tortillas. Austin's
emergence as a regional metropolitan center is another cause of the growth of San Marcos
since the 1950s; in 1973, Hays County and San Marcos became part of the Austin Standard
Metropolitan Statistical Area.

16

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
at the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the National
Park Service’s (NPS) online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), and the Texas State Historical Association’s
(TSHA) The Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a program of intensive pedestrian survey of
the APE. The assessment of significance, evaluation of NRHP eligibility, and recommendations
concerning the management options for cultural resources recorded during this project are
presented in Chapter 5.0, Results of Investigations, and Chapter 6.0, Summary and
Recommendations. The rest of this chapter presents the results of archival research, the
methodological background for the current investigations, and the specific survey methods used
in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing archives for information
on previously recorded cultural resource sites and previous archeological investigations
conducted within a 1.6-km (1.0-mi) radius of the project area. Based on this research,
5 previously recorded archeological sites and 1 listed National Register Historic District (NRHD)
occur within 1.6 km (1.0 mi) of the project area (Table 1). Three of the 5 previously recorded
archeological sites are aboriginal campsites dating to the Early, Middle, and Late Archaic
periods (41HY3311, 41HY341, and 41HY342), though 1 site could only be dated within an
unknown prehistoric timeframe due to a lack of temporally diagnostic artifacts (41HY317). No
information is available about 1 of the 5 previously recorded sites (41HY217).

HJN 100055 AR

17

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Table 1. Previously Recorded Cultural Resources in Vicinity of Project Area
Site No./Name

Cultural
Affiliation

41HY217

Site Size
(meters)

Site Type

NRHP Eligibility

No information available

41HY311 (Rattlesnake Cave)

Middle to Late Archaic

Aboriginal campsite

Unknown

Unknown

41HY317

Unknown prehistoric

Aboriginal campsite

120 x 80

Unknown

41HY341

Early Archaic

Aboriginal campsite

Unknown

Unknown

41HY342 (Holt Site)

Early Archaic

Aboriginal campsite

Unknown

Eligible

CenTex Wool Mill Historic District

Early to mid-19th century

Historic cotton mill

Unknown

Listed

NRHP

National Register of Historic Places

In addition to the 5 previously recorded archeological sites, 1 listed NRHD occurs within
the archival search area. This historic property, the CenTex Wool Mill Historic District, also
known as Planters and Manufacturers Cotton Mill, is located southwest of the current project
area east of the intersection of Post and Uhland roads. The CenTex Wool Mill is listed on the
NRHP under the domestic commerce/trade category as a manufacturing facility dating from the
periods of 1925 to 1949 and 1950 to 1974.
The CenTex Wool Mill Historic District and the 5 previously recorded archeological sites
within the search area are located well beyond the boundaries of the current project area and
would not be disturbed as a result of the proposed undertaking. No previously recorded cultural
resources are located within or in the immediate vicinity of the current project area, and the APE
has not been previously surveyed for cultural resources.
In Central Texas, aboriginal archeological sites are commonly found in upland areas and
on alluvial terraces near stream/river channels and springs. Due to the relatively high density of
previously recorded archeological sites in the vicinity of the current project area and its proximity
to the Blanco River, the APE would appear to have at least moderate potential to contain
cultural resources. However, the project area is situated in an erosional setting characterized
by shallow clayey sediments overlying limestone bedrock on an ancient, Pleistocene-age
alluvial terrace remnant. No Holocene-age sediments with the potential to contain intact
archeological deposits are mapped in the project area. Other things being equal, any cultural
resources in the APE would be expected to occur on the modern ground surface in deflated,
eroded contexts or in shallowly buried contexts lacking stratigraphic integrity. Historic-age
cultural resources may occur in virtually any physiographic setting and are commonly found
near major towns and adjacent to historic-age roadways.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

From May 5 to 6, 2010, Horizon archeologist Michael Mudd, under the overall direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources survey of
the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed undertaking. The survey consisted of pedestrian walkover of the APE with systematic
shovel testing. Field conditions were favorable at the time of the survey. The APE covers a

18

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

8.8-ha (21.6-ac), privately owned tract that is currently the site of 2 rural residences, an open
meadow, and a maintained road. Large areas of the property have been cleared of trees, and
much of the project area formerly served as agricultural cropland, though the landscape has
since given over to open, grassy meadows that may serve as occasional pasturage (Figure 3).
Two rural residential properties are situated on the tract, including 1 abandoned historicage house and its associated facilities (recorded as archeological site 41HY475) as well as
1 adjoining modern residence. Briar Meadow Road, a maintained caliche-base roadway,
traverses the northern corner of the project area, connecting Post Road to the northwest with
Briarwood Drive to the southeast, and provides access to the area for local residents. Most of
the project area had been historically cleared of vegetation associated with agricultural
operations, and vegetation consists primarily of discontinuous patches of short to medium
pasture grasses dotted with isolated stands of oak and cedar trees and occasional prickly pear
cactus. Shovel testing conducted during the survey revealed the presence of a former
agricultural plow zone extending across much of the property, and sheet erosion has affected
areas with lighter vegetation cover. Limestone gravels derived from decomposing bedrock were
ubiquitous across the project area, and soils in the project area were typically shallow and
stony. Aside from prior disturbances introduced by historic plowing and some degree of rural
residential development and landscaping, the APE appears to be at least partially intact.
Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area in parallel transects spaced no more
than 30 m (98 ft) apart, and the modern ground surface was thoroughly examined for aboriginal
and historic-age cultural resources. Visibility was good in most areas (>50%), though thicker
vegetation growth obscured the ground surface in some areas (<30%). In addition to pedestrian
walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) for cultural
resource surveys state that, for block-area projects, a minimum of 1 subsurface probe per 2 ac
is required for a project area of this size unless field conditions warrant excavation of more
probes (e.g., due to the presence of culturally sensitive areas) or less probes (e.g., due to
extensive prior disturbances or cultural low-probability areas). In the event that a probe yields
evidence of subsurface cultural deposits, additional probes may be necessary to determine the
horizontal and vertical extent of the subsurface deposits associated with the cultural resource.
Thus, a minimum of 11 subsurface probes would be required within the 8.8-ha (21.6-ac) project
area. Horizon excavated a total of 32 shovel tests during the survey, thereby exceeding the
TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size (Figure 4). In general, shovel tests
measured approximately 30 cm (12 in) in diameter and were excavated to a target depth of
1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the top of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum
depth practicable, and all sediments were screened through 6.35-millimeter (mm) (0.25-in)
hardware cloth. In practice, most shovel tests were terminated at depths of 10 to 35 cm below
surface (cmbs) due to the presence of dense, gravelly sediments and/or dense, marly clay
sediments, though a few shovel tests were excavated as deep as 70 cmbs before encountering
indurated limestone bedrock or impenetrable marly clay deposits. The Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all shovel tests were determined using hand-held Garmin
ForeTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices based on the North American Datum of
1983 (NAD 83). Specific shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.

HJN 100055 AR

19

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 3. Overview of Project Area Consisting of Open Pasture (Facing Southeast)

In addition to shovel testing, the TSMASS require backhoe trenching on stream terraces
and other areas with the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that
shovel tests are capable of reaching (approximately 80 to 100 cmbs or more in sandy sediments
or 40 to 60 cmbs in clayey sediments). It was determined during the pedestrian survey that
deep Holocene-age alluvial sediments with the potential to contain intact archeological deposits
that would require backhoe trenching were not present within the APE. Consequently, backhoe
trenching was not conducted within the APE during the survey, and the pedestrian walkover
with shovel testing is considered to constitute an adequate survey technique for assessing the
potential of the project area to contain cultural resources.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic
log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and
non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location in
which they were found. No cultural materials were collected.
One previously undocumented archeological site, 41HY475, was recorded within the
project area during the survey. Site 41HY475 is a multiple-component site containing an early
20th century rural homestead with an associated scatter of features and historic-age artifacts. A
sparse scatter of aboriginal artifacts, including lithic debitage, cores, and burned rock, was

20

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

Figure 4. Location of Shovel Tests in Project Area

HJN 100055 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

encountered in plow zone deposits within the area of the historic-age artifact scatter. The
horizontal boundaries of the site were delineated based on the extent of aboveground structures
and cultural features associated with the historic-age occupation as well as the distribution of
aboriginal and historic artifacts encountered in subsurface contexts in shovel tests. A minimum
of 6 shovel tests was excavated on or in the immediate vicinity of the site per the TSMASS site
recording standards to determine the nature and extent of any subsurface archeological
deposits. A standard site recording form was used in the field to record pertinent information on
location, physiographic setting, and local environmental characteristics; types and quantities of
artifacts observed; distribution and densities of artifacts; types and locations of cultural features;
artificial and natural impacts; and the condition of surface and any subsurface cultural deposits.
A sample of artifacts identified in the field was described and photographed, though no artifacts
were collected. A scaled sketch map was drawn that illustrates site boundaries; locations of
shovel tests, cultural features, and/or material concentrations and notable features of the
landscape. The site was thoroughly photo-documented using color digital photography, and a
photographic log was maintained of all photographs taken. A temporary site identification
number was given to the site during the survey. Based on the information recorded on the
standard archeological site recording form in the field, a Texas Archeological Data Site Form
was completed by Horizon’s laboratory personnel using the most current version of TARL’s
TexSite archeological data collection software, the form was submitted to TARL, and TARL
issued a permanent site trinomial.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project areas as defined in
36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3. The TSMASS requirements for subsurface
probes were exceeded for a project area of this size.

22

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The survey resulted in the documentation of 1 new archeological site (41HY475), which
consists of the collapsing remains of an early 20th-century house (which has been relocated to
its current site from elsewhere) and a low-density scatter of aboriginal, historic-age, and modern
debris. A modern residence and tool shed or workshop is present within the project area
adjoining the historic-age house. No cultural materials, prehistoric or historic, were encountered
beyond the documented boundaries of site 41HY475.

5.1

SITE 41HY475

Site 41HY475 is a multiple-component site containing an early 20th-century house that
appears to have been relocated onto this site from elsewhere and a sparse scatter of aboriginal
and historic-age debris (Figure 6). The historic component consists of a large, abandoned, 2story, wood-frame house with a double-pyramid-hipped roof. The house is surrounded by a
variety of modern features, including a wooden deck, a dog run, and a picnic table, and the yard
is bounded by a chain-link fence. Modern debris is abundant in the yard surrounding the house.
The aboriginal component consists of a sparse scatter of lithic debitage, cores, and burned rock
in a formerly plowed field extending southward and southeastward from the house. The historic
and aboriginal cultural components are horizontally separated to a large degree with minimal
overlap, though the site was recorded as a single archeological site due to their proximity.
The site is situated on the south-facing slopes of an upland knoll that represents the
remains of a Pleistocene-age alluvial terrace overlooking the Blanco River 0.8 km (0.5 mi) to the
east. Most of the site area appears to have been historically cleared of vegetation associated
with agricultural operations, and vegetation consists primarily of discontinuous patches of short
to medium pasture grasses dotted with isolated stands of oak and cedar trees and occasional
prickly pear cactus. The relocated early 20th-century structure is situated at the northwestern
corner of the documented site area, which is accessed via a driveway extending off of Briar
Meadow Road. Briar Meadow Road is a maintained, caliche-base roadway that cuts through
the northern corner of the overall project area, articulating Post Road to the northwest with
Briarwood Drive to the southeast, and provides access to the area for local residents. An
occupied, modern, single-story residence with an accompanying workshop or tool shed is
located at the end of the driveway immediately west of the yard associated with the historic-age
house.

HJN 100055 AR

23

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 6. Sketch Map of Site 41HY475

24

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

The site occupies a relatively large proportion (approximately 30%) of the overall project
area, extending from the northeastern to southwestern boundaries in the approximate center of
the project area. As currently documented, the site measures roughly 200 m north to south by
150 m east to west, covering a total area of approximately 3.0 ha (7.4 ac). Site boundaries may
extend farther northeast and/or southwest beyond the boundaries of the current project area,
but the northwestern and southeastern boundaries were fully delineated within the project area
via a combination of surface inspection and shovel testing.
The historic-age component of site 41HY475 consists of a large, abandoned, 2-story,
wood-frame house with a double-pyramid-hipped roof and a northeast-facing covered entrance
with a single-gabled roof (Figures 7 and 8). The house is currently resting on a concrete
foundation, though its general architectural characteristics suggest an original construction date
of 1915 to 1925. As early 20th-century houses of this type were typically constructed on pierand-beam foundations, this house has likely been moved onto its current site relatively recently.
The house retains its original wood siding, though the house has fallen into a state of disrepair
and is currently collapsing from lack of maintenance. The front façade of the house sports
7 single-and double-panel, single-pane windows that may be original to the house (see
Figure 8). The rear façade of the house is a mirror image of the front façade; however, a
relatively modern enclosed back porch with wood siding has been added onto the back of the
house (Figures 9 and 10). The windows in the house appear to be associated with the house’s
original construction, though at least 1 of the windows on the northwest façade of the house has
been altered to install a portable air-conditioning unit in 1 of the upstairs bedrooms (Figure 11).
Extensive roof damage is visible from the back of the house (Figure 10). A concrete walkway,
which is actually just a part of the concrete foundation, extends along the back and southeast
sides of the house, providing access from the enclosed back porch addition to a wooden deck
on the southeast side of the house. The enclosed back porch, concrete walkway, and deck all
appear to be relatively recent additions to the house.
Despite its current dilapidated condition, the house appears to have been occupied until
relatively recently, possibly by squatters. The house is filled with a remarkable collection of
mismatched furnishings that appear to have been scavenged from various places, and the
house and surrounding yard are overflowing with modern trash (Figures 13 and 14). The
ceilings on the ground floor of the house exhibit signs of extensive water damage associated
with the damaged roof, and the wooden flooring throughout the house has apparently been
shredded by animals or vandals. A newspaper dated to 2004 was found in the living room area,
indicating a relatively recent occupation of the house; however, given the poor condition of the
house, it seems likely that squatters are responsible for the current assortment of domestic
debris on the property.
The apparent boundaries of the house and surrounding yard are marked by a modern
chain link fence. While the material observed within the house and surrounding yard is modern,
a total of 7 shovel tests were excavated in the yard to determine if any subsurface artifacts may
be present that would provide evidence of earlier occupations. Only 1 of these 7 shovel tests
(ST MM-5) produced subsurface artifacts, consisting of 3 solarized (purple) glass shards,
1 amber glass shard, 1 chert flake, and 1 unidentifiable faunal bone fragment from a 25-cm-

HJN 100055 AR

25

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 7. Frontal Overview of Historic House on Site 41HY475 (Facing Southwest)

Figure 8. Front Façade of Historic House on Site 41HY475 (Facing West)

26

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

Figure 9. View of Back Yard of Historic House on Site 41HY475 (Facing East)

Figure 10. Rear Façade of Historic House on Site 41HY475 (Facing North)

HJN 100055 AR

27

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 11. Northwest Façade of Historic House on Site 41HY475 (Facing Southeast)

Figure 12. Back Porch Addition and Paved Walkway on Site 41HY475 (Facing Northwest)

28

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

Figure 13. View of Living Room on Ground Floor of House

Figure 14. View of Kitchen on Ground Floor of House

HJN 100055 AR

29

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

deep deposit of dense black marly clay. The presence of solarized glass on the site suggests
that historic-age activity occurred in the vicinity; however, considering that the house is not
currently residing at the site of its original construction, these materials likely just represent field
scatter. Based on its architectural characteristics, the house was probably constructed between
1915 and 1925; however, the abundance of modern trash on the property and inside the house
obscures or obliterates any evidence of earlier historic-age activity associated with the structure.
The appliances and furniture on the ground floor of the house appear to date no earlier than the
mid- to late 20th century. Horizon’s archeologist did not venture to the upper floor of the house
due to the dangerous condition of the collapsing structure.
The aboriginal component of site 41HY475 consists of a sparse scatter of aboriginal
lithic artifacts, including chert flakes, chert cores, and limestone burned rock, found in a formerly
plowed field extending southward and southeastward from the historic-age house. This portion
of the site currently consists of a shortgrass meadow (see Figure 3) with scattered prickly pear
cactus. A total of 12 shovel tests were excavated in this portion of the site, 8 of which produced
evidence of subsurface archeological deposits. Counting the single positive shovel test
excavated in the front yard of the historic-age house, which contained a single chert flake at a
depth of 0 to 25 cmbs, a total of 9 positive (i.e., culture-bearing) shovel tests were excavated on
the site. Artifacts observed in shovel tests consist of a total of 13 pieces of lithic debitage,
2 chert cores (1 of which was subsequently burned), and 1 piece of limestone burned rock
(Figure 16). Artifacts were encountered at depths of 10 to 40 cmbs. The upper 30 cm of
deposits consist of dense, disturbed black marly clay with abundant calcium carbonate nodules
that appears to represent a former plow zone. Most of the artifacts were recovered from the
plow zone stratum, though a few were encountered in the clayey sediments immediately
underlying the plow zone. In addition to the artifacts observed in shovel tests, several chert
cores were observed on the modern ground surface. No aboriginal cultural features or
temporally diagnostic artifacts were observed on the site.
The aboriginal component on site 41HY475 appears to posses relatively limited research
value. The scatter of aboriginal artifacts is found predominantly in a formerly plowed field, and
most of the subsurface archeological deposits were found to occur within the disturbed plow
zone that characterizes the upper 30 cm of sediment. No temporally diagnostic artifacts or
cultural features associated with the aboriginal occupation were observed. Based on available
evidence, the aboriginal component can be dated only to an unknown aboriginal (presumably
prehistoric) timeframe. While the site appears to represent the remains of an aboriginal
campsite, historic agricultural practices have churned and scattered the cultural materials
associated with the occupation. It is unlikely that the aboriginal component of this site could be
profitably investigated to provide information pertinent to the aboriginal past. The aboriginal
component of the site is recommended as ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP under Criterion D
and is considered to be non-contributing to any potential eligibility of the historic component on
the site.
The historic-age component of the site consists of the dilapidated remains of an early
20th-century house. The historic-age component of the site is recommended as ineligible for
the inclusion of historic places under NRHP Criterion D based on the lack of archeological

30

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

Figure 16. Sample of Aboriginal Lithic Debitage and Cores on Site 41HY475

deposits associated with earlier historic occupations. While modern trash left by recent tenants
is abundant on the property and within the house, the only evidence of earlier historic activity
consists of several shards of solarized glass found in a shovel test excavated in the front yard
that likely represents field scatter. Only 1 of the 7 shovel tests excavated in the yard yielded
any subsurface deposits, and no exterior cultural features associated with the earlier historic
occupation of the house are extant.
Historic US Geological Survey (USGS) maps were reviewed to determine when the
structure was established on this lot. The 1973 (revised) edition of the USGS San Marcos
North, 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle does not show any structures at this location
(Figure 17). The 1994 (revised) USGS map, however, shows this structure as well as the
nearby modern residence (see Figure 1), indicating that the house on site 41HY475 was moved
to its current location sometime between 1973 and 1994 and has therefore been on its current
site less than 40 years. The fact that the house is currently sitting on a concrete foundation, as
opposed to a pier-and-beam foundation (which would be more consistent with its architectural
style) reinforces the fact that this house is not currently in its original location.
The house on site 41HY475 appears to lack significance under NRHP Criterion A.
Although the site may be associated with early 20th-century agriculture in San Marcos, this
house does not stand out as a significant example of the trend. As an altered and deteriorated
example of a historic-age house of uncertain provenance, site 41HY475 does not rise to a level
of significance under Criterion A.

HJN 100055 AR

31

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 17. Location of Project Area on 1973 USGS Topographic Map

32

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

Site 41HY475 also lacks significance under NRHP Criterion B. Chain-of-title information
on the Kalentari tract is available going back to as early as 1946; however, information about
earlier owners could not be located. The “Sands” tract and the smaller “Kalentari” tracts were
parts of a larger 33.3-ac tract. A portion of the overall tract was conveyed by Eston Rodgers to
Leonard Parker in a deed dated February 17, 1964. Rodgers had purchased the land in 1946
from unknown sellers. In 1954, the front and southwestern parts of the larger Kalentari tract
were sold to Cone Mills Corporation, which presumably farmed the tract to provide cotton for the
local textile industry. Later owners consist of various private developers, though no actual
development has yet occurred on the property.
While information about the earliest owners of the tract could not be found, neither of the
earliest owners of record—Eston Rodgers, who bought the land in 1946, and Leonard Parker,
who bought it from Eston Rodgers in 1964—appear to have figured prominently into local
history, nor do they appear to have even resided on the property. The Cone Mills Corporation,
who owned portions of the tract in the mid-20th century, was a world leader in textile
manufacturing of corduroy, flannel, denim, and other cotton fabric throughout much of the 20th
century. The corporation presumably used the tract to grow cotton for export to its textile
factories. Historic properties associated with the 20th-century textile industry are listed on the
NRHP—in fact, 1 such historic property, the CenTex Wool Mill Historic District, also known as
Planters and Manufacturers Cotton Mill, is nearby the project area east of the intersection of
Post and Uhland roads. However, no industrial structures associated with 20th-century textile
manufacturing are present within the current project area, and the tract appears to have been
operated exclusively as an agricultural field at this time. In fact, there is no evidence to suggest
the tract was ever used for anything other than an agricultural field until recently. Archival
research has uncovered no connections between the owners of this property and people of
significance in the history of San Marcos or Hays County.
The house appears to retain at least some architectural integrity as the wood siding and
windows appear to be original to the house, and the only recent additions to the structure itself
appear to consist of a wood-sided, enclosed back porch and a wooden deck. However, the
house was moved to its current location within the past 40 years, prior to which no historic
structures were present at this location. The main house therefore lacks integrity of location as
it has been moved from the site of its original construction. In addition, the current setting of the
house is compromised severely by the deteriorated condition of the main house and the lack of
any outbuildings or other features associated with earlier historic occupations or uses of the
locale. This prevents the house or site from conveying a feeling of how the building originally
functioned. The setting has been modernized by the addition of an enclosed back porch and
wood deck and by installation of modern chain-link fencing surrounding the property. A modern
residence and associated workshop or tool shed are sited immediately west of the abandoned
house that compromise any historic context of the house (Figures 18 and 19). Due to the
amount of deterioration of the house and the likelihood that the most recent inhabitants of the
house were squatters, the house has likely been “officially” vacant for many years; thus, there is
no continuity of farming practices associated with the site. Therefore, the site does not have
strong integrity of setting owing to the condition of the structure and surrounding modern
development. The building does not have strong integrity of workmanship as its dilapidated

HJN 100055 AR

33

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 18. Occupied Modern Residence West of Site 41HY475 (Facing Southeast)

Figure 19. Modern Workshop/Tool Shed West of Site 41HY475 (Facing West)

34

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

condition cannot communicate sufficient details about the craftsmanship that went into it.
Overall, it lacks the ability to convey the history of early 20th-century farming or trends in the
historic settlement of the area, and the site lacks significance under NRHP Criterion C.
Thus, site 41HY475 is recommended as ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP under any of
the 4 NRHP eligibility criteria for both its aboriginal and historic-age components. No further
cultural resource investigations are recommended at this site.

HJN 100055 AR

35

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:



Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.



Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP.



Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
resources are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with
important historic events, personages, and/or architectural trends. Under the NHPA, cultural
resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine their significance based
on their eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory
process.

HJN 100055 AR

37

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.
In addition to qualifying for significance under 1 or more of the criteria listed above, a
National Register property must also retain historical integrity of those features necessary to
convey its significance. The Keeper of the National Register has identified and defined

38

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

7 aspects of integrity. An understanding of why the property is significant is important in
determining which of these aspects of integrity are most important in any particular case:



Location is the place where the historic property was constructed or the place where
the historic event occurred.



Design is the combination of elements that create the form, plan, space, structure,
and style of a property.



Setting is the physical environment of a historic property.



Materials are the physical elements that were combined or deposited during a
particular period of time and in a particular pattern or configuration to form a historic
property.



Workmanship is the physical evidence of the crafts of a particular culture of people
during any given period in history or prehistory.



Feeling is a property’s expression of the aesthetic or historic sense of a particular
period of time.



Association is the direct link between an important historic event, person, or period
and a historic property.

For eligibility under Criteria A and B, a significant property is eligible if it retains the
essential physical features that made up its character or appearance during the period of its
association with the important event [or] historic pattern. While it is preferable under Criteria A
or B for all aspects of integrity to be present, eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP under these
criteria is less dependent on design and workmanship than on historical associations, materials,
setting, location, and feeling.
Properties eligible under Criterion C are significant as good examples of an architectural
style, a building form, a type or method of construction, or an architect’s or builder’s body of
work. Therefore, they must retain a high degree of physical integrity as well as have a relation
to the historic context. The most important aspects of integrity under Criterion C are design,
materials, and workmanship. Location and setting are also important for those properties
whose design is a reflection of their immediate environment.
In all cases, except for archeological sites eligible for inclusion in the NRHP exclusively
under Criterion D, the physical features of the site must be visible enough to convey their
significance. The integrity of the resource is questionable if its significant features are
concealed under modern construction.

6.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologist, the modern ground surface was
thoroughly inspected for cultural resources, and a total of 32 shovel tests were excavated within
the APE; thus, the TSMASS requirements were exceeded for a project area of this size.

HJN 100055 AR

39

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

The survey resulted in the documentation of 1 new archeological site (41HY475), which
consists of the collapsing remains of an early 20th-century house (which has been relocated to
its current site from elsewhere) and a low-density scatter of aboriginal, historic-age, and modern
debris. A modern residence and tool shed or workshop is present within the project area
adjoining the historic-age house. No cultural materials, prehistoric or historic, were encountered
beyond the documented boundaries of site 41HY475.
The historic-age component of site 41HY475 consists of a large, abandoned, 2-story,
wood-frame house with a double-pyramid-hipped roof and a northeast-facing covered entrance
with a single-gabled roof. The house is currently resting on a concrete foundation, though its
general architectural characteristics suggest an original construction date of 1915 to 1925. As
early 20th-century houses of this type were typically constructed on pier-and-beam foundations,
this house has likely been moved onto its current site relatively recently. Historic USGS maps
were reviewed to determine when the structure was established on this lot. The 1973 (revised)
edition of the USGS San Marcos North, 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle does not show any
structures at this location. The 1994 (revised) USGS map, however, shows this structure as
well as the nearby modern residence, indicating that the house on site 41HY475 was moved to
its current location sometime between 1973 and 1994 and has therefore been on its current site
less than 40 years. The house is surrounded by a variety of modern features, including a
wooden deck, a dog run, and a picnic table, and the yard is bounded by a chain-link fence.
Modern debris is abundant in the yard surrounding the house. Aside from the fact that the
house itself was originally constructed in the early 20th century, probably between 1915 and
1925, the bulk of the evidence indicates that the occupation of the current site occurred entirely
during the modern era (specifically, beginning sometime after 1973).
The house appears to retain at least some architectural integrity as the wood siding and
windows appear to be original to the house, and the only recent additions to the structure itself
appear to consist of a wood-sided, enclosed back porch and a wooden deck. However, the
house was moved to its current location within the past 40 years, prior to which no historic
structures were present at this location. The main house therefore lacks integrity of location as
it has been moved from the site of its original construction. In addition, the current setting of the
house is compromised severely by the deteriorated condition of the main house and the lack of
any outbuildings or other features associated with earlier historic occupations or uses of the
locale. This prevents the house or site from conveying a feeling of how the building originally
functioned. The setting has been modernized by the addition of an enclosed back porch and
wood deck and by installation of modern chain-link fencing surrounding the property. A modern
residence and associated workshop or tool shed are sited immediately west of the abandoned
house that compromise any historic context of the house. Due to the amount of deterioration of
the house and the likelihood that the most recent inhabitants of the house were squatters, the
house has likely been “officially” vacant for many years; thus, there is no continuity of farming
practices associated with the site. Therefore, the site does not have strong integrity of setting
owing to the condition of the structure and surrounding modern development. The building does
not have strong integrity of workmanship as its dilapidated condition cannot communicate
sufficient details about the craftsmanship that went into it. Overall, it lacks the ability to convey
the history of early 20th-century farming or trends in the historic settlement of the area, and the

40

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

site lacks significance under NRHP Criteria A, B, or C. No significant archeological deposits are
associated with the house site that would warrant eligibility under NRHP Criterion D.
The aboriginal component of site 41HY475 consists of a sparse scatter of aboriginal
lithic artifacts, including chert flakes, chert cores, and limestone burned rock, found in a formerly
plowed field extending southward and southeastward from the historic-age house. This portion
of the site currently consists of a shortgrass meadow with scattered prickly pear cactus. A total
of 12 shovel tests were excavated in this portion of the site, 8 of which produced evidence of
subsurface archeological deposits. Counting the single positive shovel test excavated in the
front yard of the historic-age house, which contained a single chert flake at a depth of 0 to
25 cmbs, a total of 9 positive (i.e., culture-bearing) shovel tests were excavated on the site.
Artifacts observed in shovel tests consist of a total of 13 pieces of lithic debitage, 2 chert cores
(1 of which was subsequently burned), and 1 piece of limestone burned rock. Artifacts were
encountered at depths of 10 to 40 cmbs. The upper 30 cm of deposits consist of dense,
disturbed black marly clay with abundant calcium carbonate nodules that appears to represent a
former plow zone. Most of the artifacts were recovered from the plow zone stratum, though a
few were encountered in the clayey sediments immediately underlying the plow zone. In
addition to the artifacts observed in shovel tests, several chert cores were observed on the
modern ground surface. No aboriginal cultural features or temporally diagnostic artifacts were
observed on the site.
The aboriginal component on site 41HY475 appears to posses relatively limited research
value. The scatter of aboriginal artifacts is found predominantly in a formerly plowed field, and
most of the subsurface archeological deposits were found to occur within the disturbed plow
zone that characterizes the upper 30 cm of sediment. No temporally diagnostic artifacts or
cultural features associated with the aboriginal occupation were observed. Based on available
evidence, the aboriginal component can be dated only to an unknown aboriginal (presumably
prehistoric) timeframe. While the site appears to represent the remains of an aboriginal
campsite, historic agricultural practices have churned and scattered the cultural materials
associated with the occupation. It is unlikely that the aboriginal component of this site could be
profitably investigated to provide information pertinent to the aboriginal past. The aboriginal
component of the site is recommended as ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP under Criterion D.
Thus, site 41HY475 is recommended as ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP under any of
the 4 NRHP eligibility criteria for both its aboriginal and historic-age components. No further
cultural resource investigations are recommended at this site.

6.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of the Kalentari tract project area
documented in this report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the
proposed undertaking. In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and
good faith effort to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were
identified that meet the criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4, and no further
archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It is
recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely event

HJN 100055 AR

41

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during
construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed
areas, all work should cease immediately and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

42

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Barkley, M.S.
1970
A History of Central Texas. Austin Printing, Austin, Texas.
Barnes, V.E.
1981
Geologic Atlas of Texas, Llano Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Batte, C.D.
1984
Soil Survey of Comal and Hays Counties. US Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Washington, D.C.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Butzer, K.W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas.
No. 53, Austin.

HJN 100055 AR

Texas Water Development Board, Report

43

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dice, L.R.
1943
The Biotic Provinces of North America. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Dobie, D.R.
1936
San Marcos Record, September 25, 1936.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas. Submitted to the US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.

44

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.

Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology
in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R.A. Ricklis and M.B.
Collins, pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Swisher, B.F.
1878
Historical Sketch of Hays County. American Sketch Book 4.
Thornwaite, C.W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
38:55-94.

Geographical Review

US Geological Survey (USGS)
1973
7.5-minute series topographic maps, San Marcos North, Texas, quadrangle.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1994
7.5-minute series topographic maps, San Marcos North, Texas, quadrangle.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Wyatt, T.T.
1977
Historical Markers in Hays County.
Marcos, Texas.

HJN 100055 AR

Hays County Historical Commission, San

45

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates

1

ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

MM-1

605194

3308492

0-25

Very dark brown marly clay

None

MM-2

605180

3308498

0-25

Very dark brown marly clay

None

MM-3

605194

3308515

0-25

Very dark brown marly clay

None

MM-4

605205

3308517

0-25

Black marly clay

None

MM-5

605200

3308507

0-25

Black marly clay

3 solarized glass
shards; 1 amber
glass shard; 1 chert
flake; 1 bone
fragment

MM-6

605191

3308497

0-30

Black marly clay

None

MM-7

605219

3308513

0-30

Black marly clay

None

MM-8

605165

3308539

0-5

Black marly clay

None

5+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-2

Brown gravelly loam

None

Limestone bedrock

None

0-15

Brown silty gravelly clay

None

15+

Dark brown marly gravelly clay

None

MM-9

MM-10

605084

605264

3308568

3308448

Soils

Artifacts

MM-11

605329

3308321

0-20

Black marly clay

None

MM-12

605264

3308340

0-20

Black marly clay

None

20-40

Mottled light brown and black
silty clay

0-25

Dense black marly clay

None

25-50

Dark brown marly clay

None

50-60

Dark brown clay with limestone
gravels

None

0-15

Dense black clay

None

15-55

Dark brown marly gravelly clay

None

0-10

Dense black clay with heavy
gravels

None

10+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-10

Dense black clay with CaCO3
inclusions

10-45

Black clay with brown silty
mottles

None

45-67

Dense brown mottled clay with
CaCO3 inclusions

None

MM-13

MM-14

MM-15

MM-16

605153

605077

605021

605266

HJN 100055 AR

3308457

3308519

3308580

3308309

3 chert flakes

1 burned chert
chunk

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates

1

ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

MM-17

605236

3308344

0-10

Dense black clay

10-70

Dark brown marly clay

MM-18

MM-19

MM-20

605273

605291

605317

3308365

3308328

3308299

Soils

Artifacts
None
1 chert flake; 1 chert
core

70+

Fractured bedrock

None

0-20

Black marly clay

20+

Fractured bedrock

None

0-20

Dense black marly clay

None

20+

Fractured bedrock

None

0-25

Black clay with CaCO3
inclusions

None

25+

Black marly clay

None

1 chert flake

MM-21

605277

3308283

0-30

Black clay with CaCO3
inclusions

None

MM-22

605231

3308371

0-20

Dense black clay

None

20-30

Black marly clay with heavy
gravels

None

0-30

Black clay with CaCO3
inclusions

30+

Dense dark brown marly clay

None

0-40

Dense black clay with CaCO3
inclusions

3 chert flakes

40+

Dense brown marly clay

None

0-30

Dense black clay with CaCO3
inclusions

None

30+

Dense marly clay

None

0-25

Dense dark brown clay with
CaCO3 inclusions

25+

Dense marly clay

None

0-30

Dense black clay

1 chert flake

30+

Dense brown marly clay

None

0-35

Dark brown clay with CaCO3
inclusions

None

35+

Dense brown marl

None

0-10

Dense black clay

None

10+

Fractured bedrock

None

MM-23

MM-24

MM-25

MM-26

MM-27

MM-28

MM-29

A-2

605210

605181

605156

605233

605211

605190

605265

3308324

3308350

3308376

3308412

3308436

3308462

3308446

1 chert flake

1 burned rock

100055_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
21.6-Acre Kalentari Tract, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates

1

ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

MM-30

605281

3308419

MM-31

MM-32

605335

605224

3308368

3308482

Soils

Artifacts

0-20

Dense black clay with CaCO3
inclusions

None

20+

Dense marly clay

None

0-15

Black gravelly clay

None

15+

Fractured bedrock

None

0-25

Dense black gravelly clay

None

25+

Fractured bedrock

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 100055 AR

A-3

