Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a
13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed Fort Bend County
MUD No. 116 Wastewater Treatment Plant Project,
Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5617
HJN 100047 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Fort Bend MUD No. 116
Richmond, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

June 2010

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a
13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed Fort Bend County
MUD No. 116 Wastewater Treatment Plant Project,
Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Fort Bend Municipal Utility District No. 116
3200 Southwest Freeway, Suite 2600
Houston, Texas 77027

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 100047 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5617

June 2010

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Fort Bend County Municipal Utility District (MUD) No. 116 is proposing to construct a
wastewater treatment plant facility and outfall structure on a 5.6-hectare (ha) (13.9-acre [ac])
tract of land southeast of Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas. The 5.6-ha (13.8-ac) tract is
situated off the southern bank of Rabbs Bayou in a lightly forested area approximately
250 meters (m) (820 feet [ft]) north of Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 762 between Benton Road
and Gonyo Lane. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) consists of the entire 5.6-ha (13.9-ac)
tract.
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by Fort Bend County MUD No. 116, a
political subdivision of the state of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas. The proposed project may also fall under the auspices of the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) under the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality’s (TCEQ) existing Programmatic Agreement with the US Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to
impact significant cultural resources, Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 was required to provide
for a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the project’s APE and to assess the
project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. Fort Bend County
MUD No. 116 subcontracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), via its
engineering contractor RG Miller Engineers, Inc. (RG Miller), to conduct a cultural resource
inventory survey of the APE associated with the proposed project.
On May 6, 2010, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The survey consisted of pedestrian walkover of the APE with systematic shovel
testing. The survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5617.
The APE was traversed on foot by Horizon’s archeologist in parallel transects, and the
modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. Horizon excavated a total of 7 shovel tests during the survey, thereby meeting the
Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) requirements for a project
area of this size.

HJN 100047 AR

iii

Management Summary

No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey. Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
new cultural resources were identified in the APE as a result of survey activities, and no
previously recorded sites occur in the vicinity of the project area. Furthermore, no listed historic
properties are present in the vicinity of the project area that would be adversely affected by the
proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) according to 36 CFR 60.4
or for designation as State Archeological Landmarks (SALs) according to 13 TAC 26, and no
further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It is
recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely event
that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during
construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed
areas, all work should cease immediately and the Texas Historical Commission (THC) should
be notified of the discovery.

iv

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ..................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology ........................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.......................................................................... 5
2.3
Climate ............................................................................................................ 6
2.4
Flora and Fauna .............................................................................................. 8

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND..................................................................................... 11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5,000 B.C.) .................................................... 12
3.2
Archaic Period (5,000 B.C. to A.D. 100) ........................................................ 12
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) ........................................................ 13
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) .................................................... 14
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ....................................................... 15
3.6
Historic Period (A.D. 1700 to Present) .......................................................... 15

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................. 21
4.1
Archival Research ......................................................................................... 21
4.2
Survey Methods............................................................................................. 23

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................. 29

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................. 31
6.1
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .... 32
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Archeological Landmark ................... 33
6.3
Summary of Inventory Results ...................................................................... 33
6.4
Management Recommendations ................................................................... 33

7.0

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................. 35
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 100047 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.

vi

Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map .................................................. 2
Overview of Project Area from Northeast Property Corner (Facing Southwest) ......... 24
Overview of Rabbs Bayou (Facing Northwest) ........................................................... 24
Modern Workshop Building South of Project Area (Facing Southeast) ...................... 25
Modern Residential Yard South of Project Area (Facing South)................................. 25
Modern Manufactured House West of Project Area (Facing West) ............................ 26
Modern Estate North of Project Area (Facing North) .................................................. 26
Locations of Shovel Tests in Project Area .................................................................. 27

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Fort Bend County Municipal Utility District (MUD) No. 116 is proposing to construct a
wastewater treatment plant facility and outfall structure on a 5.6-hectare (ha) (13.9-acre [ac])
tract of land southeast of Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas (Figure 1). The 5.6-ha (14.8-ac)
tract is situated off the southern bank of Rabbs Bayou in a lightly forested area approximately
250 meters (m) (820 feet [ft]) north of Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 762 between Benton Road
and Gonyo Lane. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) consists of the entire 5.6-ha (13.9-ac)
tract.
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by Fort Bend County MUD No. 116, a
political subdivision of the state of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977, Title 9, Chapter 191, VACS,
Art. 6145-9, as amended). The proposed project may also fall under the auspices of the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966 (P.L. 89-665; 80 Stat. 915; 16 USC §470 et
seq., as amended) via the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality’s (TCEQ) existing
Programmatic Agreement with the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). As the project
represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural
resources, Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 was required to provide for a cultural resources
inventory and assessment of the project’s APE and to assess the project’s possible impacts on
any significant cultural resources in the APE. Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 subcontracted
with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), via its engineering contractor RG Miller
Engineers, Inc. (RG Miller), to conduct a cultural resource inventory survey of the APE
associated with the proposed project.
On May 6, 2010, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive
pedestrian survey of the APE, and the production of a report suitable for review by the State
Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas Historical Commission’s
(THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council of Texas
Archeologists’ (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports. The survey was
conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5617.

HJN 100047 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map

2

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

This report presents the results of this cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds,
respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the cultural resource survey and describes cultural
resources documented during the fieldwork, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

HJN 100047 AR

3

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in central Fort Bend County, Texas, southeast of the City of
Richmond. Fort Bend County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas about
80 km (50 mi) inland from the Gulf of Mexico shore. The Gulf of Mexico represents a structural
basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal Plain, which extends as far north
as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment,
consists of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic
origin, that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001). The Houston
area is underlain by rocks and unconsolidated sediments that are quite young in a geological
sense, ranging from modern to Miocene in age. These consist predominantly of a series of
fluviodeltaic bodies arranged in an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian,
littoral, and estuarine facies making up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major
bounding disconformities between these formations are usually interpreted to represent
depositional hiatuses that occurred during periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in
this fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As a result of the geometry of basin filling, successively
younger rock units crop out in subparallel bands from the basin margin toward the modern
coastline.
The project area is situated on the southern bank and terrace of Rabbs Bayou, a
tributary of the Brazos River. Elevations across the project area range from approximately 27 m
(90 ft) above mean sea level (amsl) along the southern boundary to 23 m (75 ft) amsl along its
northern boundary on the bank of Rabbs Bayou. Rabbs Bayou is a channelized stream that
flows eastward, discharging directly into the Brazos River approximately 7.5 km (4.7 mi) east of
the project area. The Brazos River, in turn, flows generally southeastwards to empty into the
Gulf of Mexico near Freeport about 80 km (50 mi) to the south-southeast.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project area is underlain by the Beaumont Formation (Fisher 1982). The Beaumont,
or Prairie, terrace is the youngest continuous coastwise terrace fronting the modern Gulf (Abbott
2001). The Beaumont Formation consists of clay, silt, and fine sand arranged in spatial patterns
that reflect the distribution of fluvial (e.g., channel, point bar, levee, and backswamp) and

HJN 100047 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

mudflat/coastal marsh facies (Van Siclen 1985). Sandy deposits associated with littoral facies
are also frequently considered part of the Beaumont. Many investigators (cf. DuBar et al. 1991;
Fisk 1938, 1940) have correlated the Beaumont terrace with the Sangamon Interglacial (ca.
130 to 75 thousand years ago [kya]), although age estimates range from Middle Wisconsinan
(Alford and Holmes 1985) to 100 to 600 kya (Blum and Price 1994). While debate about the
temporal affiliations of and correlations among the deposits that underlie the major coastline
terraces remain active, they are of little direct geoarcheological relevance because virtually all
investigators agree that these deposits considerably predate the earliest demonstrated dates of
human occupation in North America.
Specifically, the project area is situated on dark-colored clayey soil of the Lake CharlesBernard association (Mowery et al. 1960). This association consists of clay and clay loam soil,
with Lake Charles clay and Bernard clay loam comprising the greater part. This soil association
occurs throughout the uplands of Fort Bend County.
Four specific soil units are mapped within the boundaries of the project area (Mowery et
al. 1960). From south to north, these 4 soil series consist of the Bernard-Edna complex, 0 to
1% slopes (Be), on the upper terrace of Rabbs Bayou; roughly equal proportions of BernardEdna clay loams, 4 to 8% slopes (Bd), and Edna fine sandy loam, 1 to 4% slopes (Ea), on the
mid-terrace; and Pledger clay (Pa) on the floodplain of Rabbs Bayou. The Bernard and Edna
soil complexes (including the Be, Bd, and Ea soil units) consist of loamy and clayey fluviomarine
deposits of Late Pleistocene age on meander scrolls and pimple mounds on coastal plains.
Pledger clay (Pa) consists of clayey alluvium of Quaternary age on floodplains. Locally, these
soil types are referred to as “blackland,” though in this context the use of this term is not
intended to signify the Blackland Prairie, a physiographic unit composed of clayey subsoil and
grassland vegetation that characterizes a narrow strip of the north-central Texas landscape
north and west of the project area.
While aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in deep alluvial
sediments adjacent to major streams in Texas, the relative antiquity of the fluviodeltaic loamy
and clayey sediments that constitute the soils on the coastal plain, such as those that comprise
the current project area, suggests that any cultural resources would be constrained to the
modern ground surface, rather than in buried contexts, in erosional settings lacking integrity.
Intact, buried archeological deposits may occur within alluvial sediments near major streams,
though no deep Holocene-age alluvial sediments are mapped within the current project area,
and Rabbs Bayou, the only stream in the vicinity of the APE, is a channelized canal. Historicage cultural resources may occur in any physiographic setting and tend to be observable on the
modern ground surface.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
While the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway
(1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes 3
separate climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late

6

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

Glacial Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present).
Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas
was considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region
was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and
Holloway 1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a
slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous
woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway
1985). During the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have
been more stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post
oak savannas. The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued
into the mid-Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more
mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6,000 to 5,000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and
Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were
probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern United States and the semiarid to arid west. The climate
reflects the influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which
combine with the urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and
concrete to give the Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and
moist throughout much of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of
surface water, humidity in the early morning can approach 100 percent even on cloudless
summer days, and it often exceeds 50% even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a
consequence of the relatively high humidity characteristic of the region, temperature patterns
exhibit a moderate annual range and a modest diurnal range that increases slightly with
distance from the coast. Average monthly high temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°C
(59 to 63°F) in January to a high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows
range from 4 to 9°C (38 to 47°F) in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August.
Annually, average low temperatures range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high
temperatures range from 27 to 29°C (75 to 79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The Houston region experiences 2 precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott 2001;
Mowery et al. 1960). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of
infrequent cold fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs
in the late summer to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical
storms and hurricanes from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter
and early spring are relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional
thunderstorms that are relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual
precipitation varies from a low of approximately 100 cm (40 in) to a high of more than 132 cm
(52 in). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5 to 8 cm (2 to 3 in) in March to
more than 19 cm (7.5 in) occurring locally on the coast during September. Almost all of the
measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely rare, occurring in measurable
amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

HJN 100047 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Fort Bend County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texas biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahan et al.
(1984) further define 4 broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic
province that lies on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie,
(3) coastal gallery forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are
strongly controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the
seasonal water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically
dominated by little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter
environments are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria,
bulrushes, smooth cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush,
saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal
waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained
environments are characterized by taxa like seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum, gulfdune
paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass, red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort. A variety
of fauna are characteristic of the shore zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon, nutria,
alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and many
smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish to
hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs
and woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the
north and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses
are found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver
bluestem, buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian
sunflower, Engelman daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow
neptunia, snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush,
bluebonnet, ragweed, croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring
in the coastal prairie include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live
oak, elm, hackberry, bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as
the coastal prairie grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland
environment with common stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie
is home to a diverse fauna, including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many
small rodents, amphibians and reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison
and pronghorn were also present at various times in the past.

8

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous, trees and
associated understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott
2001:26). Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm,
sugarberry, ash, loblolly pine, water oak, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut
oak, willow oak, sweetgum, hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow,
cottonwood, and sumac. Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbrier, yaupon,
coralberry, possumhaw, elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the
understory, as are grasses such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of
the gallery forest include white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small
mammals and rodents, turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various
times in the past, and a number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the
streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger
deciduous trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory
vegetation varies from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and
young trees. Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle,
greenbrier, Virginia creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A
variety of fauna is also present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit,
mink, skunk, various small rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was
also present at times in the past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the
transition zone to the coastal prairie environment.
According to Mowery et al. (1960), about 95% of the upland vegetation consisted of
coarse bunchgrasses when Fort Bend County was first settled. However, many of the original
bunchgrasses have been eliminated by heavy grazing over the past 20 or 30 years, and the
vegetation is now of much lower quality. Introduced plants such as bermudagrass, dallisgrass,
and burclover are now common in many pastures.

HJN 100047 AR

9

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Southeast Texas archeological region. In broad
terms, much of the archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between
the Southern Great Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995;
Story 1990). Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin
subregions of Southeast Texas. These 2 subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the
inland subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast
Texas comprises a zone about 25 km (16 mi) inland from the coast that covers the area
influenced by Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable
ecological variability characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes,
wetlands, marine coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses
considerable ecological diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney
woods.
In discussions of the prehistory of Texas, Fort Bend County is often treated as part of a
cultural transition zone. Following Patterson (1995), Southeast Texas is defined as a 21-county
area (including Fort Bend County) that lies between the Colorado River on the west and the
Sabine River on the east, extending about 200 km (124 mi) inland from the coastline.
Archeological research has shown that it is especially important to consider the archeology of
Fort Bend and Austin counties together with the eastern part of Wharton County, as this seems
to be an area in which much mixing of technologies occurred, and it has a distinctive Late
Archaic mortuary tradition as well.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to
denote Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural
characteristics of Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring
regions. For instance, the Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and
Southeast Texas, and Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for
Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time
in Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit
evidence of reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be
associated with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of

HJN 100047 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

subsistence-related activities. Inland sites tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired
clay balls (at some sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites
tend to consist of multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain few lithics, oyster shell
tools, large quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), and numerous bone tools.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5,000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (but see Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is
represented by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5,000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end
scrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas
are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period.
There is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8,000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian
period (8,000 to 5,000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e.,
Plainview, Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5,000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signals the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5,000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far
less pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and

12

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

corresponding decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a
diversified resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas,
however, this hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The
appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone
assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural
stage. Material culture shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in
the application of groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
In Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5,000 to 3,000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains.
Many of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3,000 to 1,500 B.C.) and
several new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and
probably the Gary-Kent series.
The Late Archaic period (1,500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is
characterized by Gary, Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos
points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition
developed in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981;
Patterson 1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period,
but reached full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as
boatstones and bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang
knives, stingray spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial
practices included the systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre,
and use of locally made grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most
burials are found in extended supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials
are also known. Burial direction is usually consistent within single sites, but varies from site to
site. Patterson et al. (1993) report that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary
tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area
by about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the
Conroe-Livingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears
to have progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995).
Southeastern Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where
Aten (1983) established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte

HJN 100047 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
129 km (80 mi) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal exception of a
few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found on the Gulf
coast west of the Sabine Lake area.
Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods
(Aten 1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility
ware throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown
Plain for about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods
before once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety,
Goose Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor
pottery types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway
(Aten 1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte
types are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste
(like Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined
by the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the
Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas.
Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e., spearthrower) and spear
was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though they continued to be used
in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Ensor
and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In fact,
Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in Southeast Texas as
early as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points that consisted of
marginally retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a generalized date of
adoption of the bow-and-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca. A.D. 600) in Central
and Southeast Texas. In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with
a small prismatic blade technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba, Catahoula, Perdiz,
and Scallorn. A serial sequence for these point types has not been established in Southeast
Texas, though Scallorn points appear to predate Perdiz points throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (crushed sherd) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto
Plain and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek
pottery remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt

14

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

Coated pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue.
Aten (1983) has
reconstructed the territories of native groups present in this region in the early eighteenth
century, including the Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (Karankawa?), and Tonkawa. The
presence of the Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central
Texas in the 17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought
to have occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the
corresponding mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east
of the San Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe
may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1993; 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic
Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and
Cuney points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified
by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1700 TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay.
However, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The
first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where the burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as increased
participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time that
heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian
population was greatly diminished. The Alabama/ Coushatta Indians who currently reside in
Southeast Texas are migrants who were displaced from the east in the late eighteenth to early
nineteenth centuries (Newcomb 1961).
The settlement of Fort Bend County began in the early 1820s as part of the AngloAmerican colonization of Texas under the auspices of the Spanish government (McMillan 1926;
Puryear and Winfield 1976; Texas State Historical Association 2002; Wharton 1939; Yelderman
1979). Authorization to settle 300 families in the valleys of the Brazos and Colorado rivers was
initially granted to Moses Austin, but plans were delayed by his death in June 1821 and by

HJN 100047 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Mexican independence from Spain. Stephen F. Austin assumed the responsibility of leadership
from his father and gained confirmation of the original Spanish grants from the newly
established Mexican government in 1823. Following arrangements with Austin, a group of
colonists sailed from New Orleans in November 1821 on the schooner Lively and anchored near
the mouth of the Brazos River on the Texas coast, a few miles south of the project area. In
1822, a small party from this group left the ship and traveled inland some 90 mi and, on a bluff
near a deep bend in the river, built a 2-room cabin. As the settlement grew, the cabin became
known as both Fort Settlement and Fort Bend; the latter name, in time, prevailed. In 1824, the
Mexican government issued documents officially granting to the colonists their leagues of land.
Of the 297 grants, 53 were issued to Fort Bend settlers. Karankawa Indians lived near the new
colonial settlements. The first settlers had a few skirmishes, but as the colonies increased, the
Karankawas began moving out of the area. By the 1850s, they had migrated as far south as
Mexico.
In May 1837, the Congress of the Republic of Texas passed an act incorporating
19 towns, including Richmond. Robert Eden Handy of Pennsylvania and William Lusk of
Richmond, Virginia, both of whom had arrived in Texas shortly before the war for independence
from Mexico, founded and named the town with 8 other proprietors, including Branch T. Archer,
Thomas Freeman McKinney, and Samuel May Williams. An act establishing Fort Bend County
and fixing its boundaries was passed on December 29, 1837, and Wyly Martin was appointed
the first chief justice. On January 13, 1838, the citizens voted to make Richmond the county
seat. The county was formed from portions of Austin, Brazoria, and Harris counties. Its
irregular shape was, in part, the result of using waterways to form the western and segments of
the southern and eastern boundaries. Several efforts have been made to change the lines but
they have met with little success.
Some of the first settlers in Fort Bend County played prominent roles in early Texas
history. Nathaniel F. Williams and Matthew R. Williams cultivated and milled sugar on their
Oakland Plantation near Oyster Creek in the early 1840s, thus laying the groundwork for an
industry that continued to develop and thrive in Sugar Land; in 1837, Jane Long opened a
boarding house in Richmond, where she lived until her death in 1880; and Mirabeau B. Lamar
moved to Richmond in 1851 and built a plantation home on land purchased from Jane Long.
Both Mrs. Long and Lamar are buried in Morton Cemetery, Richmond. During the Texas
Revolution, many of the people of Fort Bend fled in great haste as Antonio López de Santa
Anna’s army marched through the area. Part of this army camped at Thompson's Ferry on the
Brazos River while part marched on to meet defeat at the battle of San Jacinto. Fort Bend
settlers returned from the Runaway Scrape to find their homes plundered or burned and their
livestock scattered or dead.
Soon after its founding, Richmond developed into a prosperous trade center for the
surrounding agricultural region of the lower Brazos valley. Barges and steamboats plied the
Brazos River, transporting cotton and other products to the port at Galveston, as merchants of
Richmond and other river towns vied with Houston for the lucrative agricultural trade.
Transportation facilities were greatly improved in 1853, when the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos, and
Colorado Railway was completed to Stafford’s Point from Harrisburg, which was located on

16

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

Buffalo Bayou’s navigable channel to Galveston.
however, ended with the Civil War.

The prosperity of the 1840s and 1850s,

In antebellum Texas, slaves were essential to the development of the valley plantations.
As early as 1840, there were already 572 slaves in Fort Bend County, and by 1845 that number
had risen to 1,172, placing Fort Bend near the top of counties with the largest slave populations.
In 1850, Fort Bend was 1 of only 6 counties in the state with a black majority. The labor
provided by the burgeoning slave population made possible the growth of the plantation
economy. In 1860, there were 159 farms in Fort Bend County, with about 12,000 acres in
cotton, 7,000 acres in corn, and 1,000 acres in sugarcane; the slave population totaled 4,127,
more than twice that of the 2,016 whites. Fort Bend planters, believing that their economic and
social successes, among other reasons, justified the institution of slavery, strongly supported
the Confederacy, and in 1861 voted 486 to 0 for secession from the United States. Most of the
county’s men volunteered for Confederate service; many joined the Eighth Texas Cavalry
(Terry’s Texas Rangers), a regiment organized by Benjamin Franklin Terry, a wealthy sugar
planter from Sugar Land.
Although battle never reached Fort Bend, the war’s duration and ultimate loss imposed
economic hardships and social and political stress on the community. During Reconstruction,
efforts to live in peace with politics dominated by Radical Republicans and black officeholders
brought no more than an uneasy compromise. White Democrats, outnumbered by blacks more
than 2 to 1, were unable to regain control of local government until the late 1880s, when their
all-out campaign to attract black as well as white votes led to the Jaybird-Woodpecker War.
This brief but violent conflict, which took place on August 16, 1889, abruptly ended the
Republican, or “Woodpecker” rule, and the Democrats quickly formed the Jaybird Democratic
Association. With a constitution that declared as its purpose the “protection of the white race”
and “an honest and economical government,” the association controlled local politics mainly
through the white primary, which excluded blacks until the US Supreme Court supported a lower
court’s ruling forbidding the practice in 1953. The Jaybird Association accepted the ruling,
continued for a few years, and then disbanded in 1959.
Fort Bend County remained a state Democratic party stronghold until the 1970s, when
the combination of population growth and the growing association of conservative political ideas
with the Republican party broke the trend. In a special election held in April 1976, the people of
the county elected Ron Paul, a physician from Lake Jackson in Brazoria County, as
congressman, the first Republican elected to office in Fort Bend County since Reconstruction.
Paul focused his campaign on the evils of “big government” and the “ultraliberalism” of his
Democratic opponent.
New towns and a new demography began to develop in the last quarter of the 19th
century as railroads branched out across the county. In 1878, the Gulf, Colorado, and Santa Fe
line from Galveston crossed the Galveston, Harrisburg, and San Antonio (the former Buffalo
Bayou, Brazos, and Colorado) line 1.6 km (1 mi) west of Richmond. This junction, called
Rosenberg, became a community when the developers of the New York, Texas, and Mexican
Railway made it their headquarters in 1882. With the addition of the San Antonio and Aransas
pass and the Texas and New Orleans railroads, all parts of the county were served. The new

HJN 100047 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

lines, with routes passing through potentially productive farmlands, attracted new settlers, many
of whom were immigrants from Central Europe. Germans, Austrians, and Bohemians (i.e.,
Czechs) comprised 400 of the 5,259 new residents entering the county from 1890 to 1900.
They were primarily agrarian in orientation—small farmers or merchants serving farmers—and
many were Catholic. Their distinctly different cultural and linguistic characteristics added a new
dimension to the established Anglo-Protestant community, and their agricultural achievements
contributed to the county’s economic stability and development. Among the many towns
founded in the 1890s by or for these immigrants were Beasley, Needville, and Orchard, which
still exist as small rural communities serving farmers.
Missouri City, on the far eastern edge of the county near Houston, was founded in 1894;
Katy, a tri-county town in Fort Bend, Waller, and Harris counties, developed after the Missouri,
Kansas, and Texas (Katy) Railroad was completed to that point. In the 1890s, a million-dollar
refinery was built at Sugar Land and a new cane mill was constructed; in 1907, they were
purchased by the Imperial Sugar Company, a major industry in the county and the only canesugar refinery in Texas.
In 1920, Rosenberg’s population edged past Richmond's by the thin margin of 1,279 to
1,273; by 1950, Rosenberg residents overshadowed those of Richmond 6,210 to 2,030. Two
decades later, Rosenberg-Richmond, as the “twin cities” population center, had counts of
12,098 and 5,777, respectively, in a county of 52,134 residents. Fort Bend County’s population
declined between 1940 and 1950; however, in the same period, Rosenberg grew by nearly 1/3
and Richmond held steady, a fact that reflects the national rural-to-urban movement.
Fort Bend County produces substantial quantities of minerals. Throughout the county,
subterranean salt domes hold concentrated deposits of oil, gas, sulfur, and salt that made early
development possible. Gulf Oil Company brought in the first commercially producing oil well in
1919 at Blue Ridge and located another major field at Big Creek 3 years later. Thompsons had
a major oilfield in 1921. In 1926, Gulf discovered a major sulfur and gas deposit in Orchard; the
Humble Oil Company (now Exxon Company, U.S.A.) opened a high-producing gas field near
Katy in 1935 and later built a gas plant that produced 450 million cubic feet of gas daily in the
mid-1980s. Between 1954 and 1957, oil production in the county averaged 30,000 barrels per
day, as compared to the 21,600 barrels per day in 1963. As demand for petroleum increased in
the mid-1970s, developers managed to bring in 40 new wells in 1976 and 1977, providing the
county with $121 million from the sale of crude oil. Since that time, a recession in the petroleum
industry has caused development in the county to drop sharply. In 1976, the top 3 taxpayers in
the county were, in order, Exxon, Gulf, and Houston Lighting and Power Company; in 1983, the
top 3 taxpayers were Houston Lighting and Power, Exxon, and Utility Fuels. Gulf had dropped
to fourth place.
Farming and ranching have been the central focus of Fort Bend County’s economic and
social life since its inception. The influx of new settlers in the 1880s and 1890s helped county
agriculture to change from antebellum plantations to productive small farms. The county had
2,365 farms with 183 acres each in 1900, in contrast to 995 farms with 154 acres each in 1890.
The national recession of the 1890s, a major flood on the Brazos River in June 1899, and the
great Galveston hurricane of 1900 forced many farmers into tenantry. By 1910, 61% of the
18

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

county’s farmers were working as cash or share tenants. By 1925, of the 3,659 farms in the
county, approximately 72% were operated by tenants, a partial result of a statewide economic
recession and adverse summer weather from 1919 to 1922. During the World War II years, with
the rural to urban movement and military service, farm tenantry dropped, and full ownership of
farms increased. Since the 1960s, home developments, industry, business, and commerce in
the county have forced a trend toward fewer commercial farms. The 1974 Census of
Agriculture reported 1,340 farms in the county, but only 758 of these reported cash sales in
excess of $2,500. Among the 4 top agricultural commodities for cash income in the mid-1980s
were cotton, sorghum, beef cattle, and rice. Cotton culture, a source of income for nearly
700 families in the county, varies greatly with seasonal weather, allocated acreage, and selling
prices. Sorghum culture has increased in recent years due to favorable selling prices and more
consistent profit. The total value of the crop in the county in 1976 was $11 million. Rice culture
began as early as 1901 with plantings on acreage once considered worthy only of grazing; rice
yielded 18 to 20 bags per acre in 1903. The 1990 annual acreage was just above 25,000 acres,
with a yield of 4,488 pounds per acre. In 1982, agriculture provided more than $90 million in
average annual income for the county.
Ample grazing land and free-roaming herds of longhorn cattle encouraged the first
settlers in Fort Bend County to combine cattle raising with farming. The Fort Bend County Book
of Brands indicates that landowners with minimal acreage tried to turn a profit in the cattle
business. As elsewhere in Texas, the boom years of the 1870s and early 1880s culminated in
the bottom falling out of the market by 1886. Local cattlemen began fencing their pastures and
upgrading their herds with shorthorns, Brahmans, and Herefords. Today, more farms in the
county produce cattle than any other cash crop.
Transportation facilities for Fort Bend County include the Southern Pacific and the Santa
Fe railroad systems, 2 commercial lines of motor-freight services, and 2 airports for private and
commercial aircraft. The major highways are Interstate 59, which joins US Highway 90
Alternate in the county and runs northeast to southwest; Interstate 10, an east-to-west route
through Katy; State Highway 6, which runs north-to-south through Sugar Land; and State
Highway 36, which runs north-to-south through Rosenberg. Numerous farm roads serve the
rural areas.
Until the last decade, commerce and industry have been associated with the
development and transport of oil, gas, and sulfur in the county. Local businesses provided
agricultural needs and products and services for the communities. As the population increased
in east Fort Bend County as a result of Houston’s westward expansion, industry and commerce
became more diverse. Among the top 10 commercial taxpayers in Fort Bend County in 1983
were 3 property-development corporations and 2 high-technology corporations.
In the last decades of the 20th century Fort Bend was among the fastest-growing
counties in the US. Between 1980 and 1990, the population nearly doubled, from 130,960 to
225,421. In 1990, 62.6% of the population was white, 20.7% black, 19.5% Hispanic, 6.4%
Asian, and 0.2% American Indian. The largest communities were Rosenberg (20,183), Houston
(with 27,027 in Fort Bend County), Missouri City (32,219 in Fort Bend County), and Sugar Land
(24,529). Two major social and cultural events characteristic of the county and its people are

HJN 100047 AR

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

the Fort Bend County Fair, first held in 1933 and still held annually each October, and the Fort
Bend County Czech Fest, first held in 1976 as a spring tourist attraction and continued annually
each May.

20

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and for
designation as State Archeological Landmarks (SALs)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
on the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the
National Park Service’s (NPS) online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas
State Historical Association’s (TSHA) Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a program of
intensive survey of the project area. No cultural resources were documented as a result of this
survey, so the second and third of these goals were not pursued. The rest of this chapter
presents the methodological background for the current investigations and the specific survey
methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey corridor. Four archeological sites (41FB105,
41FB106, 41FB114, and 41FB286) have been previously recorded within 1.6 km (1.0 mi) of the
project area. These sites consist of the remains of 3 late 19th-century and early 20th-century
farmsteads (41FB105, 41FB106, and 41FB114), 1 of which (41FB106) also contained
ephemeral evidence of a possible aboriginal cultural component, and 1 historic-age cemetery
(41FB286).

HJN 100047 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Site 41FB105 consists of the reported location of the early 20th-century Rosenzweig
house and farmstead. Recorded in 1985, no standing structures, cultural features, or artifact
scatters associated with the Rosenzweig farm were observed; however, the mapped location of
the site was identified based on a historic 1915 US Geological Survey (USGS) map and the
recollections of local informants. As the site lacks any extant remains associated with the
historic occupation, it was not considered to possess cultural significance.
Site 41FB106 consists of a small, surficial scatter of historic-age and possible
prehistoric-age artifacts. Recorded in 1985, the site was described as a dump of historic-age
domestic debris, including bricks, concrete, wood planks, tin roofing, pipe plumbing, an oven
door, tin cans, brown and clear glass shards, a metal saw blade, and brownware crockery.
Several pieces of possible aboriginal lithic debitage were also found along the edges of a road
that ran through or near the site that were thought to have been carried into the area during the
construction of the road; as such, these pieces of “lithic debitage” may simply represent broken
pieces of chert gravels imported as road fill and may not be of cultural origin at all. No historicage structures, such as the primary residence of the historic-age occupation, or any associated
cultural features were observed on the site. Archival research and information obtained from
local informants revealed that the site was the former location of a wood-frame, shotgun-plan
house owned by the Thomas B. Pearson family between 1914 and 1946 and by Lucinda Autrey
between 1946 and 1968. It was likely constructed as a tenant house and retained that function
until it collapsed. The site was not considered to possess significance, and the site was
described as severely disturbed.
Site 41FB114 consists of an ephemeral scatter of historic-age artifacts, including square
and wire nails, shards of window glass and milk glass, a white china ceramic sherd, a machinemade brick, and a piece of rubber. Recorded in 1985, no historic-age structures or cultural
features associated with the historic-age occupation were extant. Based on archival research,
the site was determined to represent the location of the Samuel Thompson house and
farmstead. The site formed part of a 50-ac farm constructed in 1881 by a freed black slave
named Samuel Thompson, his wife, and their 5 children. No historical documents recorded the
precise location of the house, which does not appear on the historic 1915 USGS map of the
area, though the artifacts found on the site appear to be associated with the late 19th-century
Thompson occupation. Based on the lack of extent structural remains and the overall disturbed
context of the site, site 41FB114 was not considered to possess significance.
Scant information is available regarding 41FB286, the Joseph Kuykendall Family
Cemetery. Originally recorded as an archeological site in 2002, the site was simply described
as a cemetery containing at least 1 headstone that was found under 2 inches of soil.
The 3 historic-age farmstead sites (41FB105, 41FB106, and 41FB114) are all located
well to the east of the current project area, and the historic-age cemetery (41FB286) is located
at least 300 m west of the project area. None of these previously recorded cultural resources
would be disturbed during the current proposed undertaking. No previously recorded cultural
resource sites occur within or immediately adjacent to the current project area, and the project
area itself has not been previously surveyed for cultural resources.

22

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

On May 6, 2010, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall supervision of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resource survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
construction project. The survey consisted of pedestrian walkover of the APE with systematic
shovel testing. Field conditions were generally favorable at the time of the survey—the spring
sky was slightly overcast, but visibility was good. The APE is situated off the southern bank of
Rabbs Bayou in a lightly forested area interspersed with grassy meadows (Figure 2). Rabbs
Bayou, which forms the northern boundary of the project area, is a shallow, channelized canal
that contained a few centimeters of standing water at the time of the survey (Figure 3). While
the project area itself shows no signs of any previous development aside from construction of
boundary fences, the surrounding tracts all supported modern houses and equipment shops
(Figures 4 to 7). The project area appeared to be relatively intact, with no obvious signs of
disturbance aside from 2-track field roads that run along some of the property boundaries.
The project area is situated in a low, moderately sloping, fluviodeltaic environment
situated off Rabbs Bayou, a partially channelized canal, on mature, loamy and clayey sediments
of the Beaumont Formation. The sediments within the project area were deposited primarily
during the Late Pleistocene epoch and possess low potential to contain intact archeological
deposits. Any cultural materials that may occur within the APE therefore would be expected to
occur on or near the modern ground surface in deflated, erosional contexts and likely would lack
integrity.
In general, intensive cultural resource survey activities entail a pedestrian walkover with
surface inspection as well as excavation of subsurface probes, such as shovel tests and/or
backhoe trenches. The APE was traversed on foot by Horizon’s archeologists in parallel
transects, and the modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for aboriginal and historicage cultural resources. The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS)
for cultural resource surveys state that, for block-area projects, a minimum of 1 subsurface
probe per 2 acres is required in a project area of this size unless field conditions warrant
excavation of more probes (e.g., due to the presence of culturally sensitive areas) or less
probes (e.g., due to extensive prior disturbances or cultural low-probability areas). In the event
that a probe yields evidence of subsurface cultural deposits, additional probes may be
necessary to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of the subsurface deposits associated
with the cultural resource. Thus, a minimum of 7 subsurface probes would be required within
the 5.6-ha (13.9-ac) APE. Horizon excavated a total of 7 shovel tests during the survey, thereby
meeting the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size (Figure 8). In general, shovel
tests measured approximately 30 cm (12 in) in diameter and were excavated to a target depth
of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the top of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum
depth practicable, and all sediments were screened through 6.35-millimeter (mm) (0.25-in)
hardware cloth. In practice, shovel tests were terminated at depths of 10 to 25 cm below
surface (cmbs) due to the presence of dense clay sediments on and near the modern ground
surface. Specific shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.

HJN 100047 AR

23

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 2. Overview of Project Area from Northeast Property Corner (Facing Southwest)

Figure 3. Overview of Rabbs Bayou (Facing Northwest)
24

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

Figure 4. Modern Workshop Building South of Project Area (Facing Southeast)

Figure 5. Modern Residential Yard South of Project Area (Facing South)

HJN 100047 AR

25

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 6. Modern Manufactured House West of Project Area (Facing West)

Figure 7. Modern Estate North of Project Area (Facing North)
26

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

Figure 8. Locations of Shovel Tests in Project Area

HJN 100047 AR

27

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

In addition to shovel testing, the TSMASS require backhoe trenching in stream terraces
and other areas with the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that
shovel tests are capable of reaching (approximately 80 to 100 cmbs or more in sandy sediments
or 40 to 60 cmbs in clayey sediments). It was determined during the pedestrian survey that
deep Holocene-age alluvial sediments that would require backhoe trenching were not present
within the APE. Consequently, backhoe trenching was not conducted within the APE during the
survey, and the pedestrian walkover with shovel testing is considered to constitute an adequate
survey technique for assessing the potential of the project area to contain cultural resources.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic
log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and
non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same
location in which they were found. As no cultural resources were observed during the survey,
the collections policy was not brought into play.
The Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all subsurface probes,
including shovel tests and backhoe trenches, were determined using hand-held Garmin
ForeTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices based on the North American Datum of
1983 (NAD 83).
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project areas as defined in
36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3. The TSMASS requirements for subsurface
probes were met for a project area of this size.

28

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 is proposing to construct a wastewater treatment plant
facility and outfall structure on a 5.6-ha (13.9-ac) tract of land southeast of Richmond, Fort Bend
County, Texas. The 5.6-ha (13.8-ac) tract is situated off the southern bank of Rabbs Bayou in a
lightly forested area approximately 250 m (820 ft) north of FM 762 between Benton Road and
Gonyo Lane. The APE consists of the entire 5.6-ha (13.9-ac) tract.
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by Fort Bend County MUD No. 116, a
political subdivision of the state of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas. The proposed project may also fall under the auspices of the NHPA
under the TCEQ’s existing Programmatic Agreement with the US EPA.
As the project
represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural
resources, Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 was required to provide for a cultural resources
inventory and assessment of the project’s APE and to assess the project’s possible impacts on
any significant cultural resources in the APE. Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 subcontracted
with Horizon via its engineering contractor RG Miller to conduct a cultural resource inventory
survey of the APE associated with the proposed project.
On May 6, 2010, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The survey consisted of pedestrian walkover of the APE with systematic shovel
testing. The APE is situated off the southern bank of Rabbs Bayou in a lightly forested area
interspersed with grassy meadows. Rabbs Bayou, which forms the northern boundary of the
project area, is a shallow, channelized canal that contained a few centimeters of standing water
at the time of the survey. While the project area itself shows no signs of any previous
development aside from construction of boundary fences, the surrounding tracts all supported
modern houses and equipment shops. The project area appeared to be relatively intact, with no
obvious signs of disturbance aside from 2-track field roads that run along some of the property
boundaries. Horizon excavated a total of 7 shovel tests during the survey, thereby meeting the
TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size.
No cultural resources, prehistoric or historic, were observed on the modern ground
surface or in any of the shovel tests excavated during the survey.

HJN 100047 AR

29

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with
important historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of
Texas, archeological resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the
significance of archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs,
respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory
process.

HJN 100047 AR

31

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.1

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

32

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ARCHEOLOGICAL LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are
located in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any
county, city, or political subdivision of the state are state archeological landmarks and are
eligible for designation.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under
Section 26.8 of Part 2 of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may
designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

6.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologists, the modern ground surface was
thoroughly inspected for cultural resources, and a total of 7 shovel tests were excavated within
the APE, thereby meeting the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size. No cultural
resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of the survey.

6.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
new cultural resources were identified in the APE as a result of survey activities, and no
previously recorded sites occur in the vicinity of the project area. Furthermore, no listed historic

HJN 100047 AR

33

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

properties are present in the vicinity of the project area that would be adversely affected by the
proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as SALs according
to 13 TAC 26, and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the
proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed.
However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently
discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area,
even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the THC should be
notified of the discovery.

34

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J. T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Alford, J. J., and J. C. Holmes
1985
Meander Scars as Evidence of Major Climate Changes in Southeast Louisiana.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 75:395-403.
Aten, L. E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory,
pp. 72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The
Florida State Museum, Gainesville.

Adovasio, J. M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Blum, M. D., and D. M. Price
1994
Glacio-Eustatic and Climatic Controls on Quaternary Alluvial Plain Deposition, Texas
Coastal Plain. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies
44:85-92.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V. M. Bryant, Jr., and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.

HJN 100047 AR

35

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Butzer, K. W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Collins, M. B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dincauze, D. F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Dillehay, T. D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.

DuBar, J. R., T. E. Ewing, E. L. Lundelius, E. G. Otvos, and C. D. Winkler
1991
Quaternary Geology of the Gulf of Mexico Coastal Plain. In The Geology of North
America, Volume K2: Quaternary Non-Glacial Geomophology, Conterminous United
States, edited by R. B. Morrison, pp. 583-610. Geological Society of America,
Boulder, Colorado.
Ensor, H. B., and D. L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas.
Reports of Investigations, No. 8,
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Fisher, W. L.
1982
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Houston Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Fisk, H. N.
1938
Geology of Grant and LaSalle Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 10.
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.
1940

Louisiana

Geology of Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 18. Louisiana
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.

Hall, G. D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Haynes, C. V., Jr., D. J. Donahue, A. J. T. Hull, and T. H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.

36

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

Hudgins, J. D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Keller, J. E., and F. A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R. L., and L. C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T. J., and G. W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T. F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
McMahan, C. A., R. G. Frye, and K. L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
McMillan, S. A.
1926
The Book of Fort Bend County. Richmond, Texas.
Meltzer, D. J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D. J., D. K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A. W. Barker, D. F. Dincauze, C. V. Haynes, F. Mena,
L. Nuñez, and D. J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4:659-663).
Mowery, I. C., G. S. McKee, F. Matanzo, and E. Francis.
1960
Soil Survey—Fort Bend County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Newcomb, W. W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:163.

HJN 100047 AR

37

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Patterson, L. W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1993

Identifying Historic Indian Sites in Southeast Texas. Houston Archeological Society
Journal 106:23-26.

1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Patterson, L. W., J. D. Lockwood, R. L. Gregg, and S. M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T. K., M. R. Miller, R. A. Ricklis, D. J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Puryear, P. A., and N. Winfield, Jr.
1976
Sandbars and Sternwheelers: Steam Navigation on the Brazos.
University Press, College Station.

Texas A&M

Ricklis, R. A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc.,
Corpus Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330.

Story, D. A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J. C.
Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Texas State Historical Association
2002
Fort Bend County. The Handbook of Texas Online: A Digital Gateway to Texas
History. http://www/tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/view/FF/hcf7.html.
US Geological Service (USGS)
1980
Sugarland Quad.
Van Siclen, D. C.
1985
Pleistocene Meander-Belt Ridge Patterns in the Vicinity of Houston, Texas.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 41:651-666.
38

100047_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

Wharton, C.
1939
Wharton’s History of Fort Bend County. Naylor, San Antonio, Texas.
Wheat, J. B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, U. S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Yelderman, P.
1979

The Jay Bird Democratic Association of Fort Bend County. Waco: Texian Press.

HJN 100047 AR

39

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a 13.9-Acre Tract for the Proposed
Fort Bend County MUD No. 116 WWTP Project, Richmond, Fort Bend County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JW-1

236352

3271318

0-25

Dense, mottled gray and brown clay

None

JW-2

236428

3271466

0-25

Dense, mottled gray and brown clay

None

JW-3

236574

3271468

0-10

Dense, mottled gray and brown clay

None

JW-4

236480

3271309

0-20

Dense, mottled red and brown clay

None

JW-5

236435

3271229

0-20

Dense, mottled red and brown clay

None

JW-6

236308

3271234

0-25

Dense, mottled gray and brown clay

None

JW-7

236358

3271235

0-20

Dense, mottled red and brown clay

None

Soils

Artifacts

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 100047 AR

A-1

