Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a
Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant,
Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens and Jesse O. Dalton

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9064
LJA-E210-0900

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

LJA Engineering, Inc.
Houston, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

September 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a
Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant,
Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens and Jesse O. Dalton

Prepared for:

LJA Engineering, Inc.
2929 Briarpark Drive, Suite 600
Houston, Texas 77042

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
LJA-E210-0900

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9064

September 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by LJA Engineering, Inc.
(LJA), to conduct a cultural resources inventory survey and assessment for the proposed
construction of a new wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) on an approximately 2.3-hectare (5.8acre) tract southeast of Woodbranch in Montgomery County, Texas. The project area is located
west of the intersection of Creekside and Athens Drive in Roman Forest, Montgomery County,
Texas. For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area was considered to consist
of the entire 2.3-hectare (5.8-acre) tract. However, the southeastern portion of the project area
contains an existing WWTP facility that covers approximately 0.7 hectare (1.7 acres) of the project
area; this area was not accessed during the survey, and inspection of this area indicates that it
has been extensively disturbed. The footprint of the proposed new WWTP facility covers an area
of only approximately 0.1 hectare (0.3 acre) of the overall project area, and this area represents
the only portion of the project area that would experience deep construction-related impacts
extending to depths of 3.0 meters (10.0 feet) or more below surface. The remainder of the project
area would be devegetated but would otherwise be maintained as a buffer zone and left
undeveloped.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the Roman Forest Consolidated
Municipal Utility District (CMUD), which represents a political subdivision of the state of Texas; as
such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition,
the project may require the use of Nationwide Permits (NWP) issued by the US Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE), Galveston District, under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA). In this
case, those portions of the overall project that fall under the purview of federal permits would also
fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966,
as amended. As the proposed project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the project
sponsor is required to provide the applicable federal agencies, in this case the USACE, and the
Texas Historical Commission (THC), which serves as the State Historic Preservation Office
(SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an opportunity to review and comment on the project’s
potential to adversely affect historic properties listed on or considered eligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) under the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA)
and for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) under the Antiquities Code of Texas,
as appropriate.

LJA-E210-0900

v

Management Summary

On September 10, 2019, Horizon archeological technicians Jared Wiersema and Mckinzie
Froese conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Jeffrey D. Owens
acted as Principal Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit
No. 9064. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that
potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologists traversed
the tract and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age
cultural resources. The eastern portion of the project area consists of an existing WWTP facility,
including a 65.6-foot- (20.0-meter-) diameter concrete retention pond and two small concreteroofed buildings. The undeveloped portions of the project area to the west of the existing WWTP
are heavily vegetated, resulting in poor ground surface visibility (<20%).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of two shovel tests per acre for project areas between
1.2 and 4.0 hectares (3.0 and 10.0 acres) in size. As such, a minimum of 12 shovel tests would
be required within the current 2.3-hectare (5.8-acre) project area. Horizon excavated a total of
14 shovel tests within the project area, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project
area of this size. Shovel testing typically revealed deep deposits of sand and fine sandy loam
extending to depths of 23.6 to 39.4 inches (60.0 to 100.0 centimeters) below surface. As
construction-related impacts would be limited to devegetation and subsurface impacts would be
relatively surficial, shovel testing was capable of penetrating Holocene-age soils with the potential
to contain subsurface archeological resources across the majority of the project area.
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching on stream terraces and other areas with the
potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are capable
of reaching (approximately 3.3 feet [1.0 meter] below surface depending on soil type). Deep
construction-related impacts associated with the current project would be limited to the
approximately 0.1-hectare (0.3-acre) footprint of the proposed new WWTP facility. Based on the
physiographic setting of the project area on alluvial terraces adjacent to Peach Creek, two
backhoe trenches were excavated within the proposed WWTP footprint to assess the potential
for deeply buried archeological deposits. Backhoe trenching typically revealed deep deposits of
sandy loam and silty loam overlying dense sandy clay loam at depths ranging from 83.0 to
160.0 centimeters (32.7 to 63.0 inches) below surface, which extended to the bottoms of the
trenches at 220.0 to 300.0 centimeters (86.6 to 118.1 inches) below surface.
No cultural resources, historic-age or prehistoric, were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests or backhoe trenches within the project area during the
survey. A review of historical aerial photographs and US Geological Survey (USGS) topographic
maps indicates that no historic-age structures have been present within the project area since at
least the mid-20th century.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or for inclusion in the
NRHP under 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected”,
vi

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking.
However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and
Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered
at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent
discovery, and the THC should be notified immediately. Following completion of the project, all
project records will be prepared for permanent curation at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL).

LJA-E210-0900

vii

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 7
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 7
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 7
2.3
Climate .........................................................................................................10
2.4
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................11

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................13
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 10,000 to 6000 BC B.P.) .........................................13
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 6000 BC to AD 700 B.P.)...............................................14
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) .......................................................15
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. AD 700 to 1600 B.P.) ........................................16
3.5
Historic Period (ca. 350 B.P. to Present) ......................................................17

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................23

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................25

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................33

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................35
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................35
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....36
7.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................37
7.4
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................38
7.5
Management Recommendations ..................................................................39

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................41
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data
APPENDIX B: Backhoe Trench Data

LJA-E210-0900

ix

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1-1.
Figure 1-2.
Figure 1-3.
Figure 2-1.
Figure 5-1.
Figure 5-2.
Figure 5-3.
Figure 5-4.
Figure 5-5.
Figure 5-6.
Figure 5-7.
Figure 5-8.
Figure 5-9.
Figure 5-10.

Vicinity Map of Project Area ................................................................................ 2
Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle .............................. 3
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph .................................................... 4
Distribution of Soils Mapped within Project Area ................................................. 8
Dense Wooded Vegetation in Central Portion of Project Area (Facing West) .....26
Existing WWTP in the Southeastern Portion of Project Area (Facing South) ......26
Overview of Existing WWTP and Athens Drive (Facing East) ............................27
Existing WWTP in Southeastern Portion of Project Area (Facing Southeast) .....27
Western Boundary of Existing WWTP (Facing East) ..........................................28
Debris Near Western Boundary of Existing WWTP (Facing Southwest) .............28
Southwestern Portion of Project Area near Peach Creek (Facing Southwest) ....29
Overview of Upper Terrace along Western Boundary of Project Area (Facing
North).................................................................................................................29
Peach Creek Along Western Boundary of Project Area (Facing Southwest) ......30
Shovel Test and Backhoe Trench Locations in Project Area ..............................31

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 2-1.

x

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area .................................................... 9

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by LJA Engineering, Inc.
(LJA), to conduct a cultural resources inventory survey and assessment for the proposed
construction of a new wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) on an approximately 2.3-hectare (5.8acre) tract southeast of Woodbranch in Montgomery County, Texas. The project area is located
west of the intersection of Creekside and Athens Drive in Roman Forest, Montgomery County,
Texas. For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area was considered to consist
of the entire 2.3-hectare (5.8-acre) tract (Figures 1-1 to 1-3). However, the southeastern portion
of the project area contains an existing WWTP facility that covers approximately 0.7 hectare
(1.7 acres) of the project area; this area was not accessed during the survey, but inspection of
this area indicates that it has been extensively disturbed. The footprint of the proposed new
WWTP facility covers an area of only approximately 0.1 hectare (0.3 acre) of the overall project
area, and this area represents the only portion of the project area that would experience deep
construction-related impacts extending to depths of 3.0 meters (10.0 feet) or more below surface.
The remainder of the project area would be devegetated but would otherwise be maintained as a
buffer zone and left undeveloped.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the Roman Forest Consolidated
Municipal Utility District (CMUD), which represents a political subdivision of the state of Texas; as
such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition,
the project may require the use of Nationwide Permits (NWP) issued by the US Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE), Galveston District, under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA). In this
case, those portions of the overall project that fall under the purview of federal permits would also
fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966,
as amended. As the proposed project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the project
sponsor is required to provide the applicable federal agencies, in this case the USACE, and the
Texas Historical Commission (THC), which serves as the State Historic Preservation Office
(SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an opportunity to review and comment on the project’s
potential to adversely affect historic properties listed on or considered eligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) under the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA)
and for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) under the Antiquities Code of Texas,
as appropriate.

LJA-E210-0900

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1-1. Vicinity Map of Project Area

2

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 1-2. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

LJA-E210-0900

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1-3. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

4

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

On September 10, 2019, Horizon archeological technicians Jared Wiersema and Mckinzie
Froese conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Jeffrey D. Owens
acted as Principal Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit
No. 9064. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that
potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. The cultural resources investigation
consisted of an archival review, an intensive pedestrian survey of the project area, and the
production of a report suitable for review by the SHPO in accordance with the THC’s Rules of
Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 26, and the Council of Texas Archeologists’ (CTA)
Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.
Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses cultural resources survey methods.
Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources survey, and Chapter 7.0 presents
management recommendations. Chapter 8.0 presents a bibliography of references cited in the
report. Shovel test data are provided in Appendix A, and backhoe trenching data are provided in
Appendix B.

LJA-E210-0900

5

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in southeastern Montgomery County, Texas. Montgomery
County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas approximately 96.6 kilometers
(60.0 miles) northwest of the Gulf of Mexico shoreline. The Gulf of Mexico represents a structural
basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal Plain, which extends as far north
as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists
of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin,
that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001). The Houston region
is underlain by rocks and unconsolidated sediments that are quite young in a geological sense,
ranging from modern to Miocene in age. These consist predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic
bodies arranged in an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and
estuarine facies making up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding
disconformities between these formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional
hiatuses that occurred during periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in this fill are of
Late Cretaceous age. As a result of the geometry of basin filling, successively younger rock units
crop out in subparallel bands from the basin margin toward the modern coastline.
Physiographically, the project area is located on an alluvial terrace on the eastern side of
Peach Creek within the San Jacinto River basin. Peach Creek flows southward and discharges
into Caney Creek approximately 5.6 kilometers (3.5 miles) south of the project area. Caney Creek
flows southeastward a short distance into the East Fork of the San Jacinto River. The East Fork
drains into Lake Houston, an artificial impoundment, and continues southeastward to discharge
into the Gulf of Mexico at Trinity Bay.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Geologically, the project area is situated on the mid-Pleistocene-age Lissie Formation (Ql)
(USGS 2019). The Lissie Formation consists of gently rolling fluviatile deposits of clay, silt, and
sand, with a minor component of siliceous gravels. Geomorphologically, the project area is
situated on a mix of Holocene-age alluvial terraces and older Pleistocene- and Quaternary-age
fluviomarine structures (Figure 2-1; Table 2-1). The western margin of the APE is situated on

LJA-E210-0900

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Figure 2-1. Distribution of Soils Mapped within Project Area

8

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

Table 2-1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code

Soil Name

Parent Material

BelB

Belrose loamy fine
sand, 0 to 3%
slopes

Loamy alluvium of Quaternary age
on stream terraces

HatA

Hatliff-Pluck-Kian
complex, 0 to 1%
slopes, frequently
flooded

Clayey alluvium of Holocene age on
floodplains

Typical Profile
(inches)
0-5: Loamy fine sand (A)
5-13: Loamy very fine sand (E1)
13-20: Loamy very fine sand (E2)
20-31: Loamy very fine sand (Bt/E1)
31-44: Loamy very fine sand (Bt/E2)
44-63: Loamy very fine sand (Bt/E3)
63-75: Very fine sandy loam (Bt/E4)
75-80: Loamy fine sand (Bt/E5)
Hatliff
0-3: Fine sandy loam (A)
3-24: Fine sandy loam (Bw1)
24-29: Fine sandy loam (Bw2)
29-41: Fine sandy loam (Bw3)
41-75: Loamy fine sand (Bw4)
75-80: Loamy sand (Bw5)
Pluck
0-6: Fine sandy loam (A)
6-21: Loam (Bg1)
21-34: Loam (Bg2)
34-44: Loam (Bg3)
44-60: Loam (Bg4)
60-80: Loam (Bg5)
Kian
0-3: Loam (A)
3-16: Loam (Bw1)
16-27: Fine sandy loam (Bw2)
37-37: Fine sandy loam (Bg1)
27-49: Fine sandy loam (Bg2)
49-71: Loamy sand (Bg3)
71-80: Sand (Bg4)

WeuA

Westcott-Urban
land complex, 0 to
1% slopes

Loamy fluviomarine deposits on
interfluves

0-5: Very fine sandy loam (A)
5-12: Very fine sandy loam (E)
12-21: Loam (B/Et1)
21-32: Loam (B/Et2)
32-45: Loam (B/Et3)
45-61: Loam (B/Et4)
61-80: Loam (Btg/E)

Source: NRCS (2019)
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

Holocene-age age alluvial deposits of the Hatliff-Pluck-Kian soil series. The remainder of the
project area is situated on the Quaternary-age Belrose and Westcott-Urban soil units.
In southeast Texas, aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in deep
alluvial sediments adjacent to streams, rivers, and creeks as well as in upland settings. Based
on the proximity of the project area to Peach Creek, the project area as a whole is considered to
possess moderate to high potential for aboriginal cultural resources. The terraces immediately

LJA-E210-0900

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

adjacent to the Peach Creek channel within the western portion of the project area contain
Holocene-age alluvium that has some potential for subsurface aboriginal resources at depth. The
remainder of the project area is characterized by terrace and upland soils of considerable antiquity
(Quaternary and Pleistocene). As such, any aboriginal archeological resources within the
remainder of the project area would be expected to be constrained to the modern ground surface
or in relatively shallowly buried contexts. Historic-age cultural resources may be found in virtually
any physiographic setting but are most common in urban environments and rural settings suitable
for agriculture. Based on the upland setting of the project setting and its proximity to the city of
Houston, the project area is considered to possess at least moderate potential for historic-age
cultural resources.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). While
the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway (1985)
present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes three separate
climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late Glacial
Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were
gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During
the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable.
The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The
drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions
lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate
that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by
1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern US and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects the
influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with the
urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and concrete to give the
Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout much
of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water, humidity in
the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often exceeds 50%
even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high humidity
characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and a modest
diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly high
temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in January to a

10

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to 9°C (38 to 47°F)
in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average low temperatures
range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range from 27 to 29°C (75 to
79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The Houston region experiences two precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott
2001). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of infrequent cold
fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs in the late summer
to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical storms and hurricanes
from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter and early spring are
relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional thunderstorms that are
relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual precipitation varies from
a low of approximately 100.0 centimeters (40.0 inches) to a high of more than 132.0 centimeters
(52.0 inches). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 2.0 to 3.0 inches (5.0 to
8.0 centimeters) in March to more than 19.0 centimeters (7.5 inches) occurring locally on the
coast during September. Almost all of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is
extremely rare, occurring in measurable amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Montgomery County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texas biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. Four broad
communities characterize the portion of the Texas biotic province that lies on the Gulf Coastal
Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie, (3) coastal gallery forest, and (4) pinehardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are strongly
controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the seasonal
water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically dominated by
little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter environments
are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria, bulrushes, smooth
cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush, saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh
aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and
other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained environments are characterized by such
taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum, gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass,
red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxeye, and glasswort. A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore
zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon, nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many
birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth
of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal
marsh/barrier island zone.

LJA-E210-0900

11

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs and
woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001). This community
is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the north and east
and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses are found in the
prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem, indiangrass,
eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver bluestem,
buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian sunflower,
Engelmann daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow neptunia,
snoutbean, prairie clover, tick clover, wild bean, western indigo, paintbrush, bluebonnet, ragweed,
croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring in the coastal prairie
include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live oak, elm, hackberry,
bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as the coastal prairie
grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland environment with common
stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie is home to a diverse fauna,
including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many small rodents, amphibians and
reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and pronghorn were also present
at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbrier, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are grasses
such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and Indian grass. The fauna of the coastal gallery forest
include white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and
rodents, turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various times in the
past, and a number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001). Riparian environments often support larger deciduous
trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory vegetation varies
from relatively open to quite dense and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and young trees.
Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle, greenbrier, Virginia
creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A variety of fauna is also
present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit, mink, skunk, various small
rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was also present at times in the
past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the transition zone to the coastal
prairie environment.

12

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21-county
area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 200.0 kilometers (124.3-miles) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline. Much
of the archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern
Great Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990).
Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These two subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25.0 kilometers (15.5 miles) inland from the coast that covers the area
influenced by Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological
variability characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands,
marine coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable
ecological diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to denote
Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural characteristics of
Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring regions. For instance, the
Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and Southeast Texas, and
Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time in
Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit evidence of
reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be associated
with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of subsistence-related
activities. Inland sites tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired clay balls (at some
sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites tend to consist of
multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain few lithic artifacts, oyster shell tools, large
quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), and numerous bone tools.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 10,000 TO 6000 BC B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;

LJA-E210-0900

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago while more recent
discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for human occupation in South
America by at least 12,500 years ago (Adovasio et al. 1990; Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer et al.
1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation during
the Pleistocene glacial period.
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.; Patterson 1995). This period coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end-scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas are
known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the exploitation of
small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in
this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented elsewhere in North
America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been practiced during all
prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into two periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period
(8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura). An extraordinary number of Clovis points in association
with elephant tusks have been excavated from the McFaddin Beach site in Jefferson County,
indicating an early PaleoIndian occupation history; additionally, several isolated Folsom points
have been found in situ at two sites in Harris County and on site 41WH19 in Wharton County
(Ricklis 2003).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 6000 BC TO AD 700 B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic period
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this time period. Material culture shows

14

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods. In
Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of Bell,
Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The Bell
point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains. Many of
the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and several new
types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and probably the GaryKent series. The Late Archaic period (1500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is characterized by Gary, Kent,
Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos points (Ricklis 2003).
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition developed
in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981; Patterson
1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period but reached
full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as boatstones and
bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang knives, stingray
spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial practices included the
systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre, and use of locally made
grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most burials are found in extended
supine position, though some extended prone, and bundle burials are also known. Burial direction
is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to site. Patterson et al. (1993) report
that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton
counties. One notable Late Archaic mortuary site is the Ernest Witte site (41AU36), where two
distinct cemeteries have yielded more than 206 bodies interred with an array of lithics, shell
artifacts, and pedants (Ricklis 2003). Additionally, the Crestmont site in Wharton County, the
Albert George site in Fort Bend County, and the Morhiss site in Victoria County all have led
researchers to hypothesize that these Late Archaic cultures were beginning to systematically and
communally inter their dead as a response to surges in population growth (Ricklis 2003). This
population growth may have been brought on by the climatic changes in the early Holocene, such
as an increase of floodplains from regional streams, which indirectly created locales with an
abundance of food and other resources (Ricklis 2003).

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area by
about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the ConroeLivingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears to have
progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995). Southeastern
Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area where Aten (1983)
established a detailed chronological sequence.

LJA-E210-0900

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
128.7 kilometers (80.0 miles) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal
exception of a few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found
on the Gulf coast west of the Sabine Lake area.
The distinctive Woodland period archeological manifestation known as the Mossy Grove
Culture/Tradition occupies the inland coastal plain and coastal margins that extend from the
Brazos River Delta upwards to the Sabine River Delta (Ellis 2013). The Mossy Grove culture first
appears in the archeological record around 2,500 years ago and consists of a sandy-paste
ceramic technology similar to several styles of the Lower Mississippi River Valley cultures, such
as Coles Creek and Fourche Maline (Ellis 2013). However, in contrast to the latter two cultures,
Mossy Grove ceramics included rounded bottoms, floated surfaces, and thinner walls; overall,
these wares typically demonstrate lower frequencies of decoration. Important Woodland
components that contain Mossy Grove assemblages have been found at Jonas Short (41PK8),
Crawford (41PK69), and site 41PK21; the latter site contains both Gary and Kent projectile points
as well as evidence of Marksville Stamped ceramic sherds (Ellis 2013), hinting at regional trading
patterns and an economic affinity of Mossy Grove with Lower Mississippi Valley cultures.
Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods (Aten
1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility ware
throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown Plain for
about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods before
once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety, Goose
Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor pottery
types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway (Aten
1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte types
are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste (like
Goose Creek) while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas, such as the Caddo and Toyah cultures, is not common in
Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. AD 700 TO 1600 B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 700 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the latter
part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in Southeast
Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e., spear thrower) and
spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though they continued to be

16

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the Late Prehistoric period
(Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In fact,
Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in Southeast Texas as early
as the end of the Middle Archaic period using arrow points that consisted of marginally retouched
unifacial flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a generalized date of adoption of the bowand-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca. A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas.
In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade
technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba, Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial
sequence for these point types has not been established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn
points appear to predate Perdiz points throughout the rest of Texas. The Late Prehistoric site,
Mitchell Ridge (41GV66), is an example of an incipient bow and arrow culture that adapted and
shifted to large game hunting subsistence strategies. This technocomplex shift is expressed by
a change in its lithic technology and game procurement and processing toolkits (Ricklis 2003).
Scallorn arrow points were replaced by smaller Perdiz arrow points (which are indicative of the
Toyah horizon), and bison faunal remains began to appear in assemblages along with unifacial
end scrapers, thin bifacial knives, and expanded base drills (Ricklis 2003). By A.D. 1300, an
influx of bison had made their way down to the coastal prairies, and local populations responded
through these technological adaptations.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto Plain
and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that are
often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek pottery
remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphaltum Coated
pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in Southeast Texas
during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods. Notable Late Prehistoric sites include the
McGloin Bluff site (41SP11), where a large sample of Rockport ceramic sherds were found
(approximately 28,275 specimens), and the Anaqua site (41JK8), where plain sandy-paste Goose
Creek sherds were found with Scallorn arrow points, the style most often associated with the
Rockport phase (Ricklis 2013). The presence of Rockport Phase ware at certain Spanish
missions has linked this archeological ceramic culture with the historic Karankawa Indians of the
South Texas Coast.

3.5

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 B.P. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519 when Álvarez
de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay;
however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The
first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernible at the Mitchell Ridge site, where the burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as increased participation
on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time heavy settlement of

LJA-E210-0900

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was
greatly diminished. The Alabama-Coushatta Indians who currently reside in Southeast Texas are
migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early 19th centuries (Newcomb
1961).
By 1519, Spain had claimed much of the Texas Coast, stretching across the southeast
Texas coastal and interior landscape, including present-day Montgomery, Galveston, Chambers,
and Harris counties. Between the Neches and Trinity rivers there was a small tribe of Native
Americans called the Orcoquisac by the Spaniards, who may have been akin to the Atakapan
speakers who occupied western Louisiana and ther inner-coastal Texas woodlands (Newcomb
1961; Swanton 1911). Little is known about the Texas sect of Atakapans, whose name is a
Choctaw word for “man-eaters” (Newcomb 1961). Their language was likely of Tunican stock,
but scant data are available about their linguistic origins (Swanton 1911). According to Newcomb,
the Akokisas settled on the lower Trinity and San Jacinto rivers as well as the eastern shores of
Galveston Bay; to the north lived a lesser known group, the Patiris, and, to their north, the Bidais
(Newcomb 1961; Swanton 1911). Altogether, their population estimates are around 3,500 people
(Newcomb 1961). The Galveston Bay focus likely practiced a hunter-gatherer subsistence
strategy, for the salt water flooding in the region would be cumbersome to any agricultural
practices (Newcomb 1961).
It is possible that Cabeza de Vaca and/or members of the Narvaez expedition encountered
the Atakapan communities as early as 1528, and it is also possible that La Salle’s excursions in
1684 would have encountered these groups. However, the first documented European account
of the Atakapans was left by French naval officer Simars de Bellisle in 1719 (Newcomb 1961).
During his expedition, de Bellisle was stranded on the shore of Galveston Bay after a mishap on
a supply run for fresh water, and he was taken captive and forcibly inducted into a tribe of Akokisas
(Newcomb 1961). After taking a widowed wife, escaping to live with the Caddo tribe to the north,
and living with a Hasinai woman, Angelica, the Frenchman eventually escaped native captivity
and returned to Galveston Bay to work as a guide for Bernard de la Harpe, who led the first French
expedition into present-day Oklahoma (Newcomb 1961). The Atakapans in southeastern Texas
continued to trade deer and bison skins with the encroaching French settlers in Louisiana
throughout the 1730s and 1740s until the Spanish Crown sent Captain Joaquin de Orobio
Bazterra to investigate alleged French settlements in 1745 or 1746 (Henson 2010; Newcomb
1961). During this incursion, Bazterra visited several Orcoquisac villages along Spring Creek, a
tributary of the San Jacinto River. He found no identifiable roads, maps, or any indications of
French presence (Henson 2010; Newcomb 1961).
Around 1756, the Spanish erected an outpost near the mouth of the Trinity River in what
is now Chambers County to combat the French presence in the region. This settlement consisted
of a presidio named San Augustin de Ahumada and a mission named Nuestra Senora de la Luz
(Ladd 2010). Atakapans were intermixed with 50 families of Tlascalan Indians brought in from
central Mexico to help “pacify [them] more successfully” (Newcomb 1961). Collectively, this shortlived outpost was known as El Orcoquisac, named after the tribe. After a series of misfortunate
events that included mutinous internal fighting and ravaging by hurricanes, the fort outpost was
abandoned by the Spanish in 1771 (Ladd 2010). The Bidais to the north were subjected to

18

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

Spanish violence after trading firearms with the Lipan Apaches, who were enemies of the Spanish
Crown (Newcomb 1961). A group of Atakapans settled somewhere along the Colorado River to
the west of present-day Harris County in the mid-19th century, but they virtually disappeared from
any records (Newcomb 1961). It is speculated that the remainder of the Atakapans who were not
decimated by European epidemics or warfare either married into neighboring tribes, such as the
displaced Alabama-Coushatta or the Caddo, or returned to Louisiana to join their linguistic and
cultural kin, the eastern band of Atakapans (Newcomb 1961). Either way, all Atakapan speakers
were gone from Texas by 1859.
When Stephen F. Austin received his empresario grant in 1824 to allow 300 settlers to
move to an allotment of 67,000 acres granted by the Mexican government, 42 Anglo-American
families settled in what is now western Montgomery County (Long 2010a). The empresario
contract specifically forbade Galveston Island and the Gulf shore to colonial settlement, so
Austin’s colonizers turned northward and northwestward to the lands that now comprise Harris
and Montgomery counties (Henson 2010). During this time, there were no indications of Native
American habitation in the former Atakapan lands (Henson 2010). By then, the local indigenous
populations and social matrices had completely dissolved.
One of the first Anglo-American settlers in the area was filibuster, adventurer, and
businessman Andrew Jackson Montgomery, who by 1823 had established a successful trading
post on the lower Coushatta Trace between the Brazos and Trinity rivers (Montgomery 2010).
Montgomery’s business sat on the nexus of the famous Coushatta trail and the Lomo del Toro,
another locally used Native American trail (Montgomery 2010). By 1827, Montgomery’s business
and settlement fostered a growing community, out of which grew the town of Montgomery;
however, the actual town may have been named after William Montgomery, the father of two
heroes of the Battle of San Jacinto (Grandy 1952). During the following decade, more settlers
and businesses moved into the town and region, and in 1837, Montgomery County was carved
from Washington County by an official decision made by the Republic of Texas Congress (Long
2010a). Originally, the county stretched from the Brazos River to the Trinity River and from the
Old San Antonio Road on the north to the San Jacinto on the south, but Montgomery was
subdivided amongst Grimes, Walker, San Jacinto, Madison, and Waller counties when Waller
County was established in 1870 (Long 2010a). Being the largest town within the county,
Montgomery was chosen as the county seat; other, smaller towns included Danville, Bay’s
Chapel, and Cincinnati. In 1838, the first log-structure court house was built, and in 1855, it was
replaced by a large Greek Revival-style structure (Long 2010a). Also in 1838, Isaac Lemuel
Gillespie Strickland, a pioneer Methodist missionary, was appointed by elder Littleton Fowler at
the Texas Mission to organize a Methodist church between the Trinity and Brazos rivers. There,
Rev. Strickland proselytized to the nascent settlement of Montgomery. By the 1850s, the
Montgomery Academy had been established, which became one of the first prominent religious
institutions in the region (Long 2010a).
By the onset of the Civil War, Montgomery County had transitioned from a subsistence
farming-based economy to a slave-labor-based plantation economy that focused on cash crops,
such as sugar and cotton. By 1860, the county contained 2,106 slaves out of a total population
of 5,479, making it one of the largest slave-owning counties in the state (Grandy 1952). In early

LJA-E210-0900

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

February 1861, the majority of the county’s white male residents (318 of 416) voted in favor of
Texas seceding from the Union (Long 2010a). Many citizens, which included almost every ablebodied man in the county, volunteered for the Confederate cause and joined regiments such as
the Fourth Texas Regiment of Hood’s Texas Brigade, Company H, and Terry’s Texas Rangers;
by the end of the war, more than three-quarters of the volunteer soldiers would be killed or
wounded in action (Grandy 1952; Long 2010a). The costs and aftermath of the economic vacuum
caused by the Civil War had drastic effects on the town of Montgomery. The slave-owning
population suffered a huge decline in property values as slaves made up half of all taxable
property in Montgomery County before the war (Long 2010a). Many ex-slaves became
sharecroppers and tenant farmers.
There was no Freedman’s Bureau, an agency initiated by President Abraham Lincoln
whose goal was to educate ex-slaves and incorporate them into society, nor was there a federal
garrison positioned in Montgomery County, and several acts of violence and intimidation toward
African-American officials occurred during the Reconstruction period (Long 2010a). By 1872, due
to the rise of the Ku Klux Klan violence across the South, the newly freed African-American
population was disenfranchised and marginalized through threats, the use of the White Primary
poll tax, and other racially targeted literacy tests (Long 2010a). By the 1880s, the local Democratic
white elites had taken back the reigns of the post-war Republican-controlled government and
ousted many African-Americans, who would not see positions in office until after the Civil Rights
movements of the 1960s. Racial tensions were so high that white citizens who taught school to
African-Americans or represented their legal rights were drowned, shot, or hung by the local Ku
Klux Klan, mobs, and vigilante posses (Grandy 1952).
During the antebellum and Reconstruction periods, Montgomery County suffered a
prolonged economic depression. However, this was alleviated somewhat by the introduction of
the railroad. In 1871, the Houston and Great Northern Railroad laid its tracks across Montgomery
County, which ignited a business boom for the towns that were adjacent to the lines. Willis, a
town that sat right on the Houston and Great Northern Railroad, feuded with Montgomery after
the war for contender for county seat, and many businesses and citizens moved from Montgomery
to Willis after the war (Grandy 1952). However, Montgomery remained the county seat until a
vote in 1889 moved it to Conroe, then a popular fledgling sawmill and timber town (Grandy 1952).
Conroe was also chosen because it was positioned at the nexus of both the International-Great
Northern and the newly built Gulf, Colorado, and Santa Fe Railway lines (Long 2010a). As a
result of the feuds with Willis, especially during 1873, the town of Montgomery petitioned for a
new railway, which was partially funded with citizen contributions (Grandy 1952). In 1877, a rightof-way was granted to the newly founded Central and Montgomery Railroad, and this independent
line was maintained and operated from the 1880s until the 1940s (Grandy 1952). From 1879 to
1880, two more railroads were constructed—the Houston, East, and West Texas, and the
Houston and Texas Central (Grandy 1952; Long 2010a). With these economic advances, the
county’s population boomed from a mere 6,483 citizens in 1870 to 10,154 citizens by 1880.
Until the 1870s and early 1880s, Montgomery County suffered a dismal agricultural
depression. Prices of cotton slumped during the late 1860s, and the plantation economy based
on free slave labor had disappeared virtually overnight. Many plantations maintained a

20

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

dependence on cotton and utilized the same African-American ex-slave labor force now under
the guise of sharecropping, only to deplete the region’s soils of nutrients. By the 1880s, overfarming, the lack of livestock rotation, and the introduction of the boll weevil took a toll on cotton
production; in some areas, one acre of farmland produced as a little as one-third of a bale (Long
2010a). Other farmers turned to animal husbandry or switched to other crops such as corn and
wheat, but cotton remained the largest export of the county until the early 1900s (Long 2010a).
Many farmers turned to tobacco in the 1880s as the county began to recover from its
economic slump during the Reconstruction period. The town of Willis became known as a tobacco
town and, at one point, had seven cigar factories employing hundreds of people (Grandy 1952).
The favored and special variety was a fine-grade type known as Vuelta Abajo, and seeds were
imported from Cuba every year (Grandy 1952). This successful industry prospered until the US
government lifted a tariff on Cuban tobacco, which deflated the import taxes, making prices
plummet; thereafter, no tobacco was grown in Montgomery County until the 1910s (Grandy 1952).
As the tobacco market subsided, the lumber industry began to boom. After the arrival of
the railroads in the 1880s, the rich timber resources of the piney hardwoods of Montgomery
County were harvested and exported to sawmills throughout the county (Grandy 1952). Before
the Civil War, the cost of transporting natural resources out of the county over rough wagon roads
made the timber industry unsustainable. With the emerging lumber boom came the establishment
of 45 steam sawmills, and the ensuing systematic deforestation of the county would permanently
alter the county’s landscape and transform it from an area covered in thick pine forests to one
that was more suitable for livestock and farming (Grandy 1952; Long 2010a). Lumber hubs
included the towns of Bobville, Cowl Spur, Dobbin, Egypt, Fostoria, Honea, Karen, Keenan,
Mostyn, Leonides, and Security (Long 2010a). Towns like Willis that had suffered from the
collapse of the tobacco industry were saved by the wealth of the lumber industry. By the turn of
the century, the population had grown from 11,765 in 1890 to 17,067 in 1900.
In 1932, while most counties were suffering the economic tribulations of the Great
Depression, oil was discovered southeast of Conroe. Prior to this discovery, traces of oil and
natural gas were known to occur in the county from exploration conducted by the Santa Fe
Railroad Company, and later, leases were acquired by natural gas companies, but these were all
ill-fated (Long 2010a). However, wildcatter and business adventurer George William Strake
successfully tapped two oil wells in 1931 and 1932; the latter year produced a well that yielded
more than 900 barrels daily (Long 2010a). Strake’s discoveries sparked an oil boom, and by early
1932, a transient population of fortune-seekers had moved into Conroe (Grandy 1952). By early
1933, more than 100 wells would produce more than 25,000 barrels of oil per day, and at the end
of the year, that number would double to more than 52,000 barrels per day (Long 2010a). Local
infrastructure development in the county included public buildings, banks, paved roads, and new
monuments erected from direct or indirect proceeds from the oil business (Long 2010a). By the
second World War, Montgomery was one of the largest oil-producing counties in the entire nation,
and Conroe, at one point in time, was considered the “third largest oil field in the United States”
(Grandy 1952). Soon, the county saw the construction of several oil refineries, a carbon black
manufacturing plant, and two creosoting plants (Grandy 1952). Population growth followed the
boom, and the population jumped from 14,588 people in 1930 to 23,055 in 1940.

LJA-E210-0900

21

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Today, Montgomery County still produces a vast amount of natural resources; in 2004,
more than 1,000,000 barrels of oil and 12,615,000 cubic feet of gas were produced in the county
(Long 2010a). The Sam Houston National Forest, administered by the US Forest Service, is
currently used for lumbering, grazing, oil production, and hunting (Long 2010b). The pine-wood
forests and lumber industry in the area provided $73,108,000 in local income for the resident
population in the year 1994 (Long 2010b). The expansion of the greater Houston population
through urbanization has been a direct impetus for the population growth in Montgomery County
over the last decade. The current population is 590,925, and the county currently oversees six
public school districts, several private schools, and more than 100 churches (Long 2010a). The
lumber, agriculture, and oil industries dominate the local economy. Lake Conroe and Lake
Woodlands are popular tourist destinations as well as the W. Goodrich Jones State Forest, which
strives to protect the endangered red cockaded woodpecker (Etienne-Gray 2010).

22

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon performed background archival research on the THC’s
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA) for information on previously recorded cultural
resources sites and historic properties in and near the proposed project area as well as previous
cultural resources investigations conducted in the vicinity of the project area. Based on this
archival research, no known archeological sites, cemeteries, or historic properties listed on the
National Registered Historic Places (NRHP) or designated as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL)
are located within a 1.6-kilometer (1.0-mile) radius of the project area (THC 2019).
A review of historical aerial photographs dating from 1957 to the present and US
Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps dating from 1960 to the present indicate that no
structures have been present within the project area since at least 1973 when the existing WWTP
on the eastern half of the project area appears on both aerials and USGS topographic maps
(NETR 2019, UT 2019).
No portion of the project area has been previously surveyed for cultural resources. The
closest prior survey is located approximately 0.5 kilometer (0.3 mile) to the west on the
Friendswood Development and was conducted by HRA Gray & Pape for Berg-Oliver Associates,
Inc. in 2013.

LJA-E210-0900

23

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

On September 10, 2019, Horizon archeological technicians Jared Wiersema and Mckinzie
Froese conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Horizon’s
archeologists traversed the tract and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for
aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The eastern portion of the project area consists of
an existing WWTP facility, including a 65.6-foot- (20.0-meter-) diameter concrete retention pond
and two small concrete-roofed buildings. The undeveloped portions of the project area to the
west of the existing WWTP are heavily vegetated, resulting in poor ground surface visibility
(<20%) (Figures 5-1 to 5-9).
In addition to a pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of two shovel tests per acre for project areas between
1.2 and 4.0 hectares (3.0 and 10.0 acres) in size. As such, a minimum of 12 shovel tests would
be required within the current 2.3-hectare (5.8-acre) project area. Horizon excavated a total of
14 shovel tests within the project area, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project
area of this size (Figure 5-10). Shovel tests generally measured 30.0-centimeters (11.8-inches)
in diameter and were excavated to a target depth of 1.0 meter (3.3 feet) below surface, to the top
of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable. All sediments were screened
through 0.25-inch (6.35-millimeter) hardware cloth. Standard shovel test logs were completed for
each shovel test describing the location, strata, soil texture and color, archeological materials (if
present), and any unusual characteristics of the surrounding landscape. All sediments excavated
from shovel tests were replaced in the shovel test hole upon completion of recording. The
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of each shovel test were determined using
hand-held Garmin eTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices using the North American
Datum of 1983 (NAD 83). Shovel testing typically revealed deep deposits of sand and fine sandy
loam extending to depths of 23.6 to 39.4 inches (60.0 to 100.0 centimeters) below surface. As
construction-related impacts would be limited to devegetation and subsurface impacts would be
relatively surficial, shovel testing was capable of penetrating Holocene-age soils with the potential
to contain subsurface archeological resources across the majority of the project area. Specific
shovel test data are presented in Appendix A.
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching on stream terraces and other areas with the
potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are capable
of reaching (approximately 3.3 feet [1.0 meter] below surface depending on soil type). Deep

LJA-E210-0900

25

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5-1. Dense Wooded Vegetation in Central Portion of Project Area (Facing West)

Figure 5-2. Existing WWTP in the Southeastern Portion of Project Area (Facing South)

26

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 5-3. Overview of Existing WWTP and Athens Drive (Facing East)

Figure 5-4. Existing WWTP in Southeastern Portion of Project Area (Facing Southeast)

LJA-E210-0900

27

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5-5. Western Boundary of Existing WWTP (Facing East)

Figure 5-6. Debris Near Western Boundary of Existing WWTP (Facing Southwest)

28

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 5-7. Southwestern Portion of Project Area near Peach Creek
(Facing Southwest)

Figure 5-8. Overview of Upper Terrace along Western Boundary of Project Area
(Facing North)

LJA-E210-0900

29

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5-9. Peach Creek Along Western Boundary of Project Area (Facing Southwest)

construction-related impacts associated with the current project would be limited to the
approximately 0.1-hectare (0.3-acre) footprint of the proposed new WWTP facility. Based on the
physiographic setting of the project area on alluvial terraces adjacent to Peach Creek, two
backhoe trenches were excavated within the proposed WWTP footprint to assess the potential
for deeply buried archeological deposits (see Figure 5-10). Excavation of backhoe trenches was
monitored by Horizon archeologists. Trench walls, floors, and spoil piles were inspected during
and after excavation for evidence of archeological materials, distinctive stratigraphic anomalies,
and/or soil discolorations that may be indicative of past cultural activities. Horizon personnel
recorded notes on the stratigraphic character of soil deposits observed in trench walls, though at
no time did any personnel enter a backhoe trench that was more than 4.0-feet (1.2-meters) deep
per current Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) guidelines. The UTM
coordinates of all backhoe trenches were determined using hand-held Garmin eTrex GPS devices
based on the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83). Backhoe trenching typically revealed
deep deposits of sandy loam and silty loam overlying dense sandy clay loam at depths ranging
from 83.0 to 160.0 centimeters (32.7 to 63.0 inches) below surface, which extended to the
bottoms of the trenches at 220.0 to 300.0 centimeters (86.6 to 118.1 inches) below surface.
Specific backhoe trenching data are presented in Appendix B.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel testing and backhoe trenching results. Digital photographs were
taken, and a photographic log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for

30

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 5-10. Shovel Test and Backhoe Trench Locations in Project Area

LJA-E210-0900

31

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

cultural resources. Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with
maker’s marks) and non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and
metal scrap) were to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced
in the same location in which they were found. As no cultural materials were observed during the
survey, the collection policy was not enacted. Following completion of the project, all project
records will be prepared for permanent curation at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL).
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project tract as defined in 36 CFR
800.3.

32

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

On September 10, 2019, Horizon archeological technicians Jared Wiersema and Mckinzie
Froese conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Jeffrey D. Owens
acted as Principal Investigator. Horizon’s archeologists traversed the tract and thoroughly
inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The
eastern portion of the project area consists of an existing WWTP facility, including a 65.6-foot(20.0-meter-) diameter concrete retention pond and two small concrete-roofed buildings. The
undeveloped portions of the project area to the west of the existing WWTP are heavily vegetated,
resulting in poor ground surface visibility (<20%).
In addition to a pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of two shovel tests
per acre for project areas between 1.2 and 4.0 hectares (3.0 and 10.0 acres) in size. As such, a
minimum of 12 shovel tests would be required within the current 2.3-hectare (5.8-acre) project
area. Horizon excavated a total of 14 shovel tests within the project area, thereby exceeding the
TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size. Shovel testing typically revealed deep
deposits of sand and fine sandy loam extending to depths of 23.6 to 39.4 inches (60.0 to
100.0 centimeters) below surface. As construction-related impacts would be limited to
devegetation and subsurface impacts would be relatively surficial, shovel testing was capable of
penetrating Holocene-age soils with the potential to contain subsurface archeological resources
across the majority of the project area.
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching on stream terraces and other areas with the
potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are capable
of reaching (approximately 3.3 feet [1.0 meter] below surface depending on soil type). Deep
construction-related impacts associated with the current project would be limited to the
approximately 0.1-hectare (0.3-acre) footprint of the proposed new WWTP facility. Based on the
physiographic setting of the project area on alluvial terraces adjacent to Peach Creek, two
backhoe trenches were excavated within the proposed WWTP footprint to assess the potential
for deeply buried archeological deposits. Backhoe trenching typically revealed deep deposits of
sandy loam and silty loam overlying dense sandy clay loam at depths ranging from 83.0 to
160.0 centimeters (32.7 to 63.0 inches) below surface, which extended to the bottoms of the
trenches at 220.0 to 300.0 centimeters (86.6 to 118.1 inches) below surface.

LJA-E210-0900

33

Chapter 6.0: Results of Investigations

No cultural resources, historic-age or prehistoric, were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests or backhoe trenches within the project area during the
survey. A review of historical aerial photographs and US Geological Survey (USGS) topographic
maps indicates that no historic-age structures have been present within the project area since at
least the mid-20th century.
.

34

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with three
primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the project area and to make preliminary determinations of whether or
not the resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important
historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of Texas,
archeological resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the
significance of archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs,
respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

LJA-E210-0900

35

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The four criteria of eligibility are applied following the identification of
relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or
history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant. This
concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures, districts,
or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent research
questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by three requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least one of the four criteria for eligibility listed
above, and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As
discussed here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory
and history according to various periods of development in various times and at various places.
Thus, the significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic
development and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular
period of development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP
under Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding
of prehistory. All four criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought
to bear for historic sites.

36

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

7.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

LJA-E210-0900

37

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

On September 10, 2019, Horizon archeological technicians Jared Wiersema and Mckinzie
Froese conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Jeffrey D. Owens
acted as Principal Investigator. Horizon’s archeologists traversed the tract and thoroughly
inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The
eastern portion of the project area consists of an existing WWTP facility, including a 65.6-foot(20.0-meter-) diameter concrete retention pond and two small concrete-roofed buildings. The
undeveloped portions of the project area to the west of the existing WWTP are heavily vegetated,
resulting in poor ground surface visibility (<20%).
In addition to a pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of two shovel tests
per acre for project areas between 1.2 and 4.0 hectares (3.0 and 10.0 acres) in size. As such, a
minimum of 12 shovel tests would be required within the current 2.3-hectare (5.8-acre) project
area. Horizon excavated a total of 14 shovel tests within the project area, thereby exceeding the
TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size. Shovel testing typically revealed deep
deposits of sand and fine sandy loam extending to depths of 23.6 to 39.4 inches (60.0 to
100.0 centimeters) below surface. As construction-related impacts would be limited to
devegetation and subsurface impacts would be relatively surficial, shovel testing was capable of
penetrating Holocene-age soils with the potential to contain subsurface archeological resources
across the majority of the project area.
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching on stream terraces and other areas with the
potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are capable
of reaching (approximately 3.3 feet [1.0 meter] below surface depending on soil type). Deep
construction-related impacts associated with the current project would be limited to the
approximately 0.1-hectare (0.3-acre) footprint of the proposed new WWTP facility. Based on the
physiographic setting of the project area on alluvial terraces adjacent to Peach Creek, two
backhoe trenches were excavated within the proposed WWTP footprint to assess the potential
38

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

for deeply buried archeological deposits. Backhoe trenching typically revealed deep deposits of
sandy loam and silty loam overlying dense sandy clay loam at depths ranging from 83.0 to
160.0 centimeters (32.7 to 63.0 inches) below surface, which extended to the bottoms of the
trenches at 220.0 to 300.0 centimeters (86.6 to 118.1 inches) below surface.
No cultural resources, historic-age or prehistoric, were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests or backhoe trenches within the project area during the
survey. A review of historical aerial photographs and USGS topographic maps indicates that no
historic-age structures have been present within the project area since at least the mid20th century.

7.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or for inclusion in the
NRHP under 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected”,
and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking.
However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and
Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered
at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent
discovery, and the THC should be notified immediately. Following completion of the project, all
project records will be prepared for permanent curation at TARL.

LJA-E210-0900

39

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory, pp.
72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The Florida
State Museum, Gainesville.

Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

LJA-E210-0900

41

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Ellis, L.W.
2013
Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84:137-180.
Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 8, Archeological
Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Etienne-Gray, T.
2010
Goodrich Jones State Forest. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org
/handbook/online/articles/gkwsk>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 2, 2019.
Grandy, W.H.
1952
A History of Montgomery County, Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, University of
Houston, Texas.
Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Henson, M.S.
2010
Harris County. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/hch07>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 27, 2019.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Ladd, K.
2010

El Orcoquisac. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/hve49>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 27, 2019.

Larkin, T. J., and G. W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.

42

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

Long, C.
2010a Montgomery County. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/hand
book/online/articles/hcm17>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 1, 2019.
2010b

Sam Houston National Forest. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.
org/handbook/online/articles/gks02>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 2,
2019.

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Montgomery, R.N.
2010
Montgomery, Andrew Jackson. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.
org/handbook/online/articles/fmo90>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 1,
2019.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2019
Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed September 16, 2019.
National Environmental Title Research (NETR)
2019
Historic Aerials by NETR Online.
September 13, 2019.

<http://www.historicaerials.com>.

Accessed

Newcomb, W.W. Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press:
Austin.
Open Street Map (OSM)
2019
OpenStreetMap. <http://www.openstreetmap .org>. Available under the Open
Database License:
<www.opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl>.
Accessed
September 13, 2019.
Patterson, L. W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1993

Identifying Historic Indian Sites in Southeast Texas. Houston Archeological Society
Journal 106:23-26.

LJA-E210-0900

43

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C.Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus
Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330

2003

The Archeology of the Native American Occupation of Southeast Texas. In The
Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Press:
College Station.

2013

The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast: Form, Technology, Style, and
Ethnic Affiliation. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84:85-111.

Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose,
D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes. Research
Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Swanton, J.R.
1911
Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of the Gulf of Mexico.
Bureau of American Ethnology: Bulletin 43. Smithsonian: Washington, D.C.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2019
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas. Access-restricted online database. Texas Historical
Commission. <https://atlas.thc.state.tx.us/>. Accessed September 13, 2019.
University of Texas at Austin (UT)
2019
Perry-Castañeda Library Map Collection. <http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/>. The
University of Texas at Austin, University of Texas Libraries. Accessed September 13,
2019.

44

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2016
Digital orthophoto, Montgomery County, Texas. National Agriculture Imagery
Program, Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1979
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Splendora, Texas, quadrangle.
2019

Texas Geology Web Map Viewer. <https://txpub.usgs.gov/txgeology/>. Accessed
September 13, 2019.

Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

LJA-E210-0900

45

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

MF01

290314

3339743

0-20

290282

3339747

None

Fine yellowish-brown sand

None

0-10

Fine pale grayish-brown sandy loam

None

10-25

Fine yellowish-brown sandy loam

None

Fine yellow very sand with silica pebbles

None

Fine pale grayish-brown sandy loam

None

Pale yellowish-brown sand

None

Very hard pale brown sandy loam

None

10-70+

Compact yellowish-brown gravelly sand

None

25-100+
MF03

290254

3339721

0-20
20-100+

MF04

290253

3339666

Artifacts

Fine pale grayish-brown sandy loam

20-100+
MF02

Soils

0-10

MF05

290287

3339681

0-60+

Very compact, hard yellowish-brown
sandy loam with sandstone formations

None

MF06

290327

3339671

0-15

Fine pale yellowish-brown sandy loam

None

Fine yellowish-brown sandy loam

None

Fine pale yellowish-brown sandy loam

None

Fine yellowish-brown sandy loam

None

Very compact, fine pale brown sandy
loam

None

Very compact, fine brownish-yellow
sandy loam

None

Very compact, fine pale brown sandy
loam

None

Very compact, fine brownish-yellow
sandy loam

None

Very compact, fine pale brown sandy
loam

None

60-80+

Very compact, fine brownish-yellow
sandy loam

None

0-100+

Pale brown sand

None

Pale brown sandy loam

None

Yellowish-brown sand

None

15-100+
MF07

290327

3339696

0-20
20-85+

JW01

290391

3339576

0-50
50-80+

JW02

290359

3339558

0-60
60-90+

JW03

290309

3339550

JW04

290272

3339558

JW05

290248

3339594

0-60

0-70
70-100+

JW06

JW07

290268

290321

3339633

3339613

Pale brown sandy loam

None

60-90+

0-60

Yellowish-brown sand

None

0-100+

Pale brown sand

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

LJA-E210-0900

A-1

APPENDIX B:

Backhoe Trench Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

Table B-1. Backhoe Trench 1 (BHT 1)
Trench No.:
UTM Coordinates1:
Comment:

Zone

Depth
(cmbs)

1

0-55

2

BHT 1
290295 E, 3339616 N
BHT 1 was excavated within the southern half of the proposed wastewater
treatment plant footprint (east of Peach Creek and west of Riverside Road). The
trench was oriented east to west, perpendicular to Riverside Road, and measured
5.0 meters (16.4 feet) in length. The trench was excavated to a depth of
1.6 meters (5.2 feet) below surface, profiled, and then excavated to a final depth
of 3.0 meters (10.0 feet) below surface.

Description

Cultural Materials

Fine pale brown sandy loam; granular, crumbly, friable
structure; roots (60%); gradual, wavy lower boundary

None

55-105

Fine yellowish-brown silty loam; granular, crumbly, friable,
slightly hard, non-sticky structure; roots (30%); abrupt, wavy
lower boundary

None

3

105-160

Fine yellowish-brown silty loam with red clay mottles; granular,
crumbly, friable, very hard, slightly sticky structure; roots
(10%); lower boundary not observed

None

4

160-300

Fine reddish-yellow sandy clay loam; granular, crumbly,
friable, very hard, slightly sticky structure; lower boundary not
observed

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

LJA-E210-0900

B-1

Appendix B: Backhoe Trench Data

Figure B-1. Overview of BHT 1 (Facing Northwest)

Figure B-2. Profile of BHT 1, North Wall

B-2

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Roman Forest CMUD
5.8-acre Wastewater Treatment Plant, Roman Forest, Montgomery County, Texas

Table B-2. Backhoe Trench 2 (BHT 2)
Trench No.:
UTM Coordinates1:
Comment:

BHT 2
290293 E, 3339641 N
BHT 2 was excavated within the northern half of the proposed wastewater
treatment plant footprint (east of Peach Creek and west of Riverside Road). The
trench was oriented east to west, perpendicular to Riverside Road, and measured
5.3 meters (17.4 feet) in length. The trench was excavated to a depth of 1.4 meters
(4.6 feet) below surface, profiled, and then excavated to a total depth of 2.2 meters
(7.2 feet) below surface.

Zone

Depth
(cmbs)

1

0-30

Fine yellowish-brown silty loam; granular, crumbly, friable,
slightly hard, non-sticky structure; roots (40%); abrupt, clear
lower boundary

None

2

30-83

Fine very pale brown silty loam; granular, crumbly, friable,
slightly hard, non-sticky structure; roots (10%); abrupt, wavy
lower boundary

None

3

83-174

Strong brown sandy loam; granular, crumbly, friable, slightly
hard, blocky, non-sticky structure; abrupt, clear lower boundary

None

4

174-220

Strong brown sandy loam; granular, crumbly, friable, very
hard, non-sticky structure; lower boundary not observed

None

Description

Cultural Materials

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

LJA-E210-0900

B-3

Appendix B: Backhoe Trench Data

Figure B-3. Overview of BHT 2 (Facing Northwest)

Figure B-4. Profile of BHT 2, North Wall

B-4

E210-0900_arch_survey_report

