Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of
USACE Jurisdictional Areas on the Sunchase Tract,
Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

HJN 080079 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Qualico Communities
Austin, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

August 2008

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of
USACE Jurisdictional Areas on the Sunchase Tract,
Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Qualico Communities
7940 Shoal Creek Boulevard, Suite 201
Austin, Texas 78757

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 080079 AR

August 2008

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Qualico Communities (Qualico) is proposing to develop the approximately 649-hectare
(ha) (1,600-acre [ac]) Sunchase Tract for residential development. The majority of the
Sunchase Tract is located in southeast Travis County, Texas, southeast of Austin-Bergstrom
International Airport, though a small area in the southeastern corner of the tract extends into
Bastrop County. The proposed residential subdivision would be built on privately owned land,
though proposed construction may result in potential impacts to several intermittent, unnamed
tributaries of Dry Creek and therefore may be subject to permitting by the US Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE) under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA). As a federal permit may
be required for the proposed action, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of
the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended. As the project represents
a federally permitted undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural resources,
Qualico was required to provide for a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the
project’s Area of Potential Effect (APE) and to assess the project’s possible impacts on any
significant cultural resources in the APE.
The 649-ha (1,600-ac) Sunchase Tract is privately owned, and no federal or state lands
are being utilized in support of the proposed development. The APE therefore consists only of
areas within the overall development that potentially may be subject to permitting under
Section 404 of the CWA. These areas consist of 14.3 kilometers (km) (8.9 miles [mi]) of
unnamed tributary streams within the overall tract, herein labeled Unnamed Tributaries A to J
for convenience, that constitute potential USACE jurisdictional areas. Specifically, the APE for
cultural resources consists of the linear 14.3 km (8.9 mi) of streams subject to potential USACE
jurisdiction, plus a 30-meter- (100-feet-) wide buffer on either side of the defined stream banks,
covering a collective total area of 86 ha (211 ac).
To meet its responsibilities under the NHPA, Qualico contracted with Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to conduct a cultural resources survey of the potential
USACE jurisdictional areas within the overall 649-ha (1,600-ac) Sunchase Tract. The purpose
of the survey was to determine if any archeological and/or historical sites are located within the
USACE jurisdictional areas, and, if any exist, to determine their eligibility for inclusion in the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP).

HJN 080079 AR

iii

Management Summary

From June 9 to 11, 2008, Horizon conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of
the APE. Jeffrey D. Owens served as the Principal Investigator for the project, Reign Clark
served as project archeologist, and Michael Mudd served as field technician. The purpose of
the survey was to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by
the proposed construction project.
The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologists and the modern ground was
thoroughly inspected for evidence of historic and prehistoric cultural resources. Horizon
excavated a total of 196 shovel tests within the APE, thereby exceeding the Texas State
Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS)requirements. All segments of the APE
consisted of stream channels incised into local argillic clay sediments; no alluvial sediments or
settings conducive to the preservation of intact, buried cultural resources were encountered, so
no backhoe trenching was conducted. Channel depths ranged from shallow divots that were
barely discernable in the landscape to moderately deeply incised streams. Many streams had
been dammed at various locations to create stock ponds, and 1 stream (Unnamed Tributary F)
had been dammed to create a sizeable lake located adjacent to a rural residence. Many
streams contained water at the time of the survey, though water in some of the shallower
streams consisted of stagnant standing water rather than flowing streams. At the time of the
survey, the private property on which the APE is situated consisted of rural agricultural land,
primarily cattle pastures, with some residential landscaping. Vegetation consisted of various
short to tall grasses, weeds, and reedy marsh understory as well as scattered deciduous
hardwood trees. Moderately extensive erosion was evident in most segments of the APE. The
natural landscape appeared to be largely intact overall; however, as noted, several stream
segments had been dammed at various locations to create artificial stock ponds and lakes. The
project area is located in an upland setting, and no alluvial sediments are mapped within the
APE (and none were observed during the field survey). Sediments encountered in shovel tests
excavated during the survey revealed shallow deposits of dense, dark grayish-brown to black,
calcareous clay sediments in surface and near-surface contexts. Such mature sediments are
characteristics of Blackland Prairie settings and possess no demonstrable potential for intact,
buried cultural deposits.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of the USACE jurisdictional areas
on the Sunchase Tract documented in this report, no potentially significant cultural resources
would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No new cultural resources were identified in
the remainder of the project area as a result of intensive survey activities, and no previously
documented cultural resources are present in the vicinity of the project area that would be
adversely affected by the proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. As no cultural resources were identified that meet
the criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4, no further archeological work is
recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the
proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains
or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and the USACE and the Texas Historical Commission (THC) should be notified of
the discovery.

iv

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ..................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology ........................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.......................................................................... 6
2.3
Climate ............................................................................................................ 7
2.4
Biota ................................................................................................................ 8

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND..................................................................................... 11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 12,000 to 8500 B.P.) ............................................... 11
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 8500 to 1200 B.P.) ......................................................... 12
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1200 to 350 B.P.) .............................................. 12
3.4
Historic Period (ca. 350 B.P. to Present) ....................................................... 12

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................. 19
4.1
Archival Research ......................................................................................... 19
4.2
Survey Methods............................................................................................. 19

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................. 27

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................. 29
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................. 29
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .... 30
6.3
Summary of Inventory Results ...................................................................... 30
6.4
Management Recommendations ................................................................... 31

7.0

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................. 33
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 080079 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.

vi

Location of Project Area .............................................................................................. 2
Typical View of Unnamed Tributary A (Facing North) ............................................... 21
Typical View of Unnamed Tributary C (Facing North) ............................................... 21
Typical View of Unnamed Tributary D (Facing Southeast) ....................................... 22
Typical View of Unnamed Tributary E (Facing North) ............................................... 22
Typical View of Unnamed Tributary F (Facing Northeast) ........................................ 23
Typical View of Stock Pond on Unnamed Tributary G (Facing East) ........................ 23
Typical View of Unnamed Tributary H (Facing Southeast) ....................................... 24
Typical View of Lake on Unnamed Tributary F (Facing Northwest) .......................... 24
Locations of Shovel Tests in Project Area................................................................. 25

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Qualico Communities (Qualico) is proposing to develop the approximately 649-hectare
(ha) (1,600-acre [ac]) Sunchase Tract for residential development (Figure 1). The majority of
the Sunchase Tract is located in southeast Travis County, Texas, southeast of AustinBergstrom International Airport, though a small area in the southeastern corner of the tract
extends into Bastrop County. The proposed residential subdivision would be built on privately
owned land, though proposed construction may result in potential impacts to several
intermittent, unnamed tributaries of Dry Creek and therefore may be subject to permitting by the
US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA). As a
federal permit may be required for the proposed action, the project would fall under the
jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as
amended. As the project represents a federally permitted undertaking with the potential to
impact significant cultural resources, Qualico was required to provide for a cultural resources
inventory and assessment of the project’s Area of Potential Effect (APE) and to assess the
project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE.
The 649-ha (1,600-ac) Sunchase Tract is privately owned, and no federal or state lands
are being utilized in support of the proposed development. The APE therefore consists only of
areas within the overall development that potentially may be subject to permitting under
Section 404 of the CWA. These areas consist of 14.3 kilometers (km) (8.9 miles [mi]) of
unnamed tributary streams within the overall tract, herein labeled Unnamed Tributaries A to J
for convenience, that constitute potential USACE jurisdictional areas. Specifically, the APE for
cultural resources consists of the linear 14.3 km (8.9 mi) of streams subject to potential USACE
jurisdiction, plus a 30-meter- (m) (100-feet- [ft]) wide buffer on either side of the defined stream
banks, covering a collective total area of 86 ha (211 ac).
To meet its responsibilities under the NHPA, Qualico contracted with Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to conduct a cultural resources survey of the potential
USACE jurisdictional areas within the overall 649-ha (1,600-ac) Sunchase Tract. The purpose
of the survey was to determine if any archeological and/or historical sites are located within the
USACE jurisdictional areas, and, if any exist, to determine their eligibility for inclusion in the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). The cultural resources investigation consisted of
an archival review, an intensive pedestrian survey of the defined APE, and the production of a
report suitable for review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with

HJN 080079 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area

2

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26,
Section 27, and the Council of Texas Archeologists’ (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources
Management Reports.
From June 9 to 11, 2008, Horizon conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of
the APE. Jeffrey D. Owens served as the Principal Investigator for the project, Reign Clark
served as project archeologist, and Michael Mudd served as field technician. The purpose of
the survey was to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by
the proposed construction project. The survey was conducted by Horizon under subcontract to
Qualico.
This report presents the results of the cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds
of the project area, respectively. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the survey, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report, and Appendix A presents data collected from shovel tests excavated during the survey.

HJN 080079 AR

3

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The Sunchase Tract project area is located in southeastern Travis County and
northwestern Bastrop County, Texas, near the boundary of 3 significant physiographic
provinces—the Blackland Prairie, the Edwards Plateau, and the Gulf Coastal Plain. The
Blackland Prairie, within which the project area is situated, is a narrow physiographic zone
between the Edwards Plateau to the west and the Gulf Coastal Plain to the east. It is a low,
rolling land that extends in a narrow band along the eastern edge of the Balcones fault zone
from the Red River Valley in northeastern Texas to the southern edge of the Edwards Plateau.
This is an area of low topographic relief and poor drainage in which water often ponds after
rainstorms and streams flow at very gentle gradients. The Edwards Plateau and Balcones
Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that arcs across Texas to form a distinct
boundary between uplands composed primarily of limestone bedrock and lower plains
composed mostly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary is marked by an abrupt scarp (the
Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational ramp, but the entire length of this
transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography, bedrock, hydrology, soil, vegetation,
and animal life. The Sunchase Tract project area is situated in an upland environment at the
headwaters of several intermittent, unnamed streams that discharge to the north into Dry Creek.
Elevations in the jurisdictional areas that comprise the APE range from approximately 131 to
155 m (430 to 510 ft) above mean sea level (amsl).
Hydrologically, the study area is situated within the Colorado River basin on uplands
south of Dry Creek. The overall Sunchase Tract project area spans the headwaters of
10 intermittent, unnamed drainages that flow generally northward and discharge into Dry Creek,
a lower-order tributary that discharges into the Colorado River northeast of the project area.
The Colorado River, in turn, flows southeastward across the Blackland Prairie and the Gulf
Coastal Plain, ultimately discharging into the Gulf of Mexico a short distance northeast of
Matagorda Bay. The project area is situated in an upland environment, and the channels of the
intermittent drainages in the APE range from shallow divots to moderately deeply incised
channels that cut through local Blackland Prairie clay sediments. No alluvial sediments are
present within the APE.

HJN 080079 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project area is underlain by a thick sequence of Cretaceous-age, sedimentary rock
strata. In Travis County, soils formed primarily over sedimentary deposits of Upper Cretaceous
age, and soil parent material consists of chalk, marl, limestone, and marly limestone (Werchan
et al. 1974). In the eastern part of Travis County, soils formed over Taylor Marl and the Navarro
Group of Upper Cretaceous age and the Midway Group of Paleocene age. Taylor Marl has
been further broken down into Bergstrom Clay, Pecan Gap Chalk, and Sprinkle Clay. These
formations are about 213 m (700 ft) thick. Sprinkle Clay and Bergstrom Clay consist of
calcareous clay, and Pecan Gap Chalk is chalky marl. An important feature of this geologic
group and the soils overlying it is the high shrink-swell potential (Werchan et al. 1974).
Specifically, the project area is situated on the Navarro Group (which consists of the Kemp Clay,
Corsicana Marl, and Neylandville Formation) and the Marlbrook Marl (the “upper Taylor marl”)
(Kknm) (Proctor et al. 1974). This geological complex consists predominantly of thick deposits
of calcareous clay measuring up to 183 m (600 ft) in thickness.
Geomorphologically, the project area is situated on the Houston Black-Heiden
Association, which consists of deep, nearly level and gently sloping, calcareous, clayey soils
overlying marl on the Blackland Prairie (Werchan et al. 1974). The Houston Black series
consists of deep, moderately well-drained, clay soils that developed in calcareous marls, alluvial
clays, and chalk under tall-grass prairie cover. The Heiden series consists of well-drained,
deep, clay soils that developed in calcareous marl. In most places, the topography is gently
undulating and is characterized by gently sloping ridges and hilly sideslopes ranging in slope
from 1 to 20% (Werchan et al. 1974).
Regional climate has a profound effect on the morphology and formation of soil profiles
in Travis County (Werchan et al. 1974). Winter precipitation occurs primarily in the form of
persisting fogs, drizzles, and light showers that contribute to low soil temperature, poor aeration
of soils, and reduction of animal activity and plant growth. Spring rains are generally of short
duration and high intensity, and they tend to retard soil development through erosion. During
hot, dry summers, the clay soils of Travis County crack deeply, and subsequent rains wash the
surface soil into the cracks. This mixing of soils prevents the development of a B horizon in
most places. Rainfall quantities are sufficient to leach the calcium carbonate from the upper
horizons of some soils, but not enough to leach it out entirely. Most of the soils in the county
have specks, threads, or nodules of calcium carbonate throughout the profile. In a few soils,
most of the lime and plant nutrients are leached to a depth below the rooting zone, and clay
particles have moved down to form very slowly permeable horizons.
Aboriginal cultural resources are relatively common on alluvial terraces adjacent to
prominent streams and springs but are comparatively rare in upland settings. Away from
streams, clayey sediments are common on and near the modern ground surface throughout the
Blackland Prairie. Due to the relative antiquity of these sediments, combined with their shrinkswell characteristics and erosional potential, aboriginal cultural resources are rare in the
uplands. Where they do occur, they tend to consist of surficial scatters of artifacts that lack
depth and horizontal or vertical integrity. While significant aboriginal sites may occur at great

6

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

depths in stream terraces associated with deep alluvial packages, significant aboriginal sites are
exceedingly rare in the uplands. Historic-age cultural resources may occur almost anywhere in
this region and tend to be visible on or near the modern ground surface.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
Bryant and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central
Texas from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial
period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands
were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985).
During the Post-Glacial period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more
stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas.
The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic
conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway
(1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably
achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Travis County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern climate is
typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate is
influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified by
polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer, and
fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.
On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature in Texas
manifest regional clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east
to west and mean annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast
(Larkin and Bomar 1983). In Central Texas, climate has fluctuated from subtropical humid to
subtropical subhumid. Average annual precipitation totals 81 centimeters (cm) (32 inches [in])
and temperature averages 19°C (67°F) annually, ranging from 36°C (96°F) in August (the
warmest month) to 15°C (59°F) in January (the coldest month). During this time, however, drier
periods lasting from 3 to 7 years, when total annual rainfall ranged from 30 to 64 cm (12 to
25 in), were followed by abnormally wet years with 114 to 127 cm (45 to 50 in) of rainfall.
Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are
associated with frontal storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with
warm, moist air masses moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The
topographic discontinuity along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf

HJN 080079 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

storm trace and increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall
(Baker 1975). Two extreme examples are the excess of 91 cm (36 in) of rain that fell within an
18-hour period in the vicinity of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 56-cm (22-in) deluge
that fell in less than 3 hours near O’Harris, Texas, in May 1935 (Baker 1975). Lower rainfall
amounts are characteristic of winter and late summer. In winter, frontal storms pass so
frequently that there is little time for moisture to increase, and prevailing upper-level winds from
west to east often dominate over meridional flow, meaning that much of the available moisture
is derived from the Pacific rather than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer, cool fronts rarely
penetrate into the region, and rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal convective storms.

2.4

BIOTA

The project area is situated in the southwestern portion of the Texan biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces (Dice 1943).
Some species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texan province. The
boundary, characterized as “approximate,” between Blair’s (1950) Texan and Balconian
provinces passes through western Williamson County, northwest of the project area. Rainfall in
the Texan province is barely in excess of water need, and the region is classified by Thornwaite
(1948) as a C2 (moist subhumid) climate with a moisture surplus index of from 0 to 20%.
Edaphic controls on vegetation types are important in the Texan biotic province, which is
located near the border between moisture surplus and moisture deficiency. Sandy soils support
oak-hickory forests dominated by post oak (Quercus stellata), blackjack oak (Q. marilandica),
and hickory (Carya buckleyi). Clay soils originally supported a tall-grass prairie, but much of this
soil type has been placed under cultivation. Dominant tall-grass prairie species include western
wheatgrass (Agrophyron smithii), silver beardgrass (Andropogon saccharoides), little bluestem
(Andropogon scoparius), and Texas wintergrass (Stipa leucotricha). Major areas of oak-hickory
forest include the Eastern and Western Cross Timbers, and major tall-grass prairie areas
include the Blackland, Grand, and Coastal prairies. Some characteristic associations of the
Austroriparian province occur locally in the Texan province, such as a mixed stand of loblolly
pine (Pinus taeda) and blackjack and post oak in Bastrop County and a series of peat and bog
marshes distributed in a line extending from Leon to Gonzales counties.
The fauna associated with this region are represented by a mixture of species from the
Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, Kansan, Balconian, and Texan biotic provinces. At
least 49 species of mammals occur in the Texan province, including Virginia opossum
(Didelphis virginiana), eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus), fox squirrel (Sciurus niger), desert
pocket gopher (Geomys breviceps), fulvous harvest mouse (Reithrodontomys fulvescens),
white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus), eastern
cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus floridanus), raccoon (Procyon lotor), striped skunk (Mephitis
mephitis), white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), black-tailed jackrabbit (Sylvilagus
californicus), ground squirrel (Citellus tridecemlineatus), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
virginiana), hispid pocket mouse (Perognathus hispidus), deer mouse (Peromyscus
maniculatus), black-tailed jackrabbit (Lepus californicus), pygmy mouse (Baiomys taylori), nine-

8

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

banded armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus), and jaguar (Felis onca). Both species of Terrapene
known from the Austroriparian province—eastern box turtle (T. Carolina) and desert box turtle
(T. ornata)—occur in the Texan.
Sixteen species of lizards, including 7 grassland and 9 forest species, are also found,
including green anole (Anolis carolinensis), eastern fence lizard (Sceloporus undulates),
common ground skink (Leiolopisma laterale), glass snake (Ophiosaurus ventralis [grassland
species]), collared lizard (Crotaphytus collaris), Texas spiny lizard (Sceloporus olivaceous),
Texas horned lizard (Phrynosoma cornutum), and Great Plains skink (Eumeces obsoletus
[forest species]). Only 5 species of urodele fauna are known from this area, including smallmouthed salamander (Ambystoma texanum), tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum), and
eastern lesser siren (Siren intermedia), and the Texan province acts as a barrier to urodele
distribution between the endemic Balconian province fauna to the west and the Austroriparian
fauna to the east. Anuran fauna is composed primarily of Austroriparian or otherwise widely
distributed species, including eastern spadefoot toad (Scaphiopus holbrookii), Gulf Coast toad
(Bufo valliceps), Woodhouse’s toad (Bufo woodhousii), southern cricket frog (Acris gryllus),
southern chorus frog (Pseudacris nigrita), gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor), green treefrog (Hyla
cinerea), North American bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana), northern leopard frog (Rana pipiens),
and narrow-mouthed toad (Microhyla carolinensis). Additional anuran species that fail to cross
from the Texan into the Austroriparian province include pacific tree frog (Pseudacris clarkia),
Strecker’s chorus frog (Pseudacris streckeri), and striped whipsnake (Microhyla olivacea).
Other reptile and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include 6-lined racerunner
(Aspidoscelis sexlineata), rat snake (Ptyas mucosus), eastern hognose snake (Heterodon
platirhinos), rough green snake (Opheodrys aestivus), copperhead (Agkistrodon contortrix),
western diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox), Blanchard’s cricket frog (Acris crepitans),
diamondback water snake (Nerodia rhombifer rhombifer), and Houston toad (Bufo
houstonensis).
Common bird species include northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus), eastern
meadowlark (Sturnella magna), mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), killdeer (Charadrius
vociferus), field sparrow (Spizella pusilla), red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis), turkey vulture
(Cathartes aura), belted kingfisher (Ceyrle alcyon), and mockingbird (Mimus polyglottos).
Small herds of bison and antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early
historic periods, but these species are no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

HJN 080079 AR

9

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) Central Texas Archeological
Region. Prewitt (1981, 1985) demarcated the southeastern boundary of his Central Texas
Archeological Region at the town of Bastrop in Bastrop County, which borders Travis County on
the southeast. The indigenous human inhabitants of Central Texas practiced a generally
nomadic hunting and gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory, and, in contrast to much of
the rest of North America, mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed
markedly through time in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 12,000 TO 8500 B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (cf. Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (12,000 to 8500 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various
periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted,
lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers,
gravers, and bone foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized
into egalitarian bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic
subsistence and settlement pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence
patterns in Central Texas are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence
focused on the exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the
PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as
has been documented elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern
appears to have been practiced throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the
PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point

HJN 080079 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

styles. These include the Early PaleoIndian period, which is recognized based on large, fluted
projectile points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late
PaleoIndian period, which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 8500 TO 1200 B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(8500 to 1200 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Central Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture
shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of
groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these
3 subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as well. Perhaps most
markedly, burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod, continuing into the
Late Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic subperiod. In
addition, the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered to constitute
evidence of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least partially
accounts for the lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1200 TO 350 B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 350 B.P.) (Collins 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas,
unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The
Late Prehistoric period is generally divided into 2 phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin
phase sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to
suggest that the Austin-phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north, and
lack the ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 B.P. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de

12

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay.
However, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The
first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994) as well as increased participation
on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time that heavy settlement
of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was
greatly diminished.
The Tonkawa and the Lipan Apache Indians were well established in Central Texas by
the 14th century, and Comanche and Kiowa tribes arrived in the area by the 18th century 1 . The
first European known to have crossed the region was Domingo Terán de los Ríos, who made an
inspection tour to East Texas in 1691. When the Spanish moved their missions out of East
Texas in 1730, they relocated the missions of San Francisco de los Neches, Nuestra Señora de
la Purísima Concepción de los Hasinai, and San José de los Nazonis to locations near Barton
Springs. In 1827, the Mexican government granted Stephen F. Austin his third colony, Little
Colony, which was located east of the Colorado River and north and west of the Old San
Antonio Road. Mina (later Bastrop) became the headquarters of the colony, and Travis County
developed as an offshoot of Mina. Settlers moving into the area in the early 1830s included
Josiah and Mathias Wilbarger, Reuben Hornsby, Jacob M. Harrell, and John F. Webber. The
onset of the Texas Revolution delayed further settlement activity, and the news of the fall of the
Alamo prompted those settlers already in residence to flee.
Settlement resumed after the revolution, but it proceeded slowly because of the constant
threat of raids by the Comanche Indians. During the 1830s, a chain of small forts extended
from Bastrop northwest along Wilbarger’s Bend, Coleman Branch, Webber’s Prairie, and
Gilleland Creek, to Fort Colorado or Fort Prairie, 8 kilometers (5 miles) east of the site of
present-day Austin. In June 1835, Thomas Jefferson Chambers surveyed part of an 8-league
grant covering the present-day site of Austin and the capitol. Sometime before 1837, William
Barton settled near the springs that were to bear his name. In 1837 or 1838, President
Mirabeau B. Lamar was on a buffalo hunt in the area and commented on its possibilities as a
permanent site for the capital. In 1838, the community of Waterloo (later Austin) consisted of
4 families, and about 20 families established homes at nearby Montopolis in 1839. When the
Congress of the Republic of Texas chose Waterloo as the site of the new capital, opponents
were quick to point out the disadvantages—the site's proximity to the frontier, the lack of timber,
the poor soil, and the threat of Indian raids. In spite of this opposition, however, the new
capital—renamed Austin in honor of Stephen F. Austin—was approved on 19 January 1840. A
few days later, the Congress established Travis County, naming it in honor of William Barret
Travis and making Austin its county seat. An election for county officials was held in February
1840, at which time the population was reported to be 856. The initial boundaries of Travis

1

Much of the following historical summary derives from Barkley (1963), Hardy (1938), Humphrey (1985),
Noize (1990), and Willoughby (1981).

HJN 080079 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

County included roughly 40,000 square miles. Counties that were later carved from Travis
County include Callahan (1858), Coleman (1858), Comal (1846), Gillespie (1848), Hays (1848),
Burnet (1852), Brown (1856), Lampasas (1856), Eastland (1858), Runnels (1858), and Taylor
(1858). Sam Houston moved the government of the Republic of Texas from Austin to Houston
when Mexican troops invaded San Antonio in March 1842. When he tried to have the
government archives removed as well, Austin citizens resisted with the Archives War. The
Texas Congress held sessions at Washington-on-the-Brazos from 1842 to 1845, but the
convention that drafted the Constitution of 1845 met in Austin in July 1845, and by October the
rest of the government had returned to the capital city. The first legislature of the new state
convened in Austin in February 1846.
The late 1840s and early 1850s were building years for Austin and Travis County, with
much of the growth fed by the presence of the state government—the Governor's Mansion,
office buildings, hotels, new homes, and newspapers. In 1850, Travis County had a population
of 3,138, of whom 2,336 were white, 791 were slaves, and 11 were free blacks; by 1860, the
number of residents had more than doubled to 8,080, with 4,931 of them white, 3,136 slaves,
and 13 free blacks. Although the city of Austin grew faster than the county as a whole—its
population rose from 629 in 1850 to 3,494 in 1860—most county residents lived in small
communities. Pflugerville and Del Valle were the most prominent of these communities, but
rural post offices were also established at Bluff Springs, Webberville, Merrilltown, Gilleland,
Cage’s Mill, and Hornsby Bend. During the 1850s, the amount of land in farms in what was
then Travis County increased from 73,300 acres to 1,363,500 acres. Corn was the primary field
crop, while cattle and sheep were the principal livestock. In 1860, farmers produced
137,700 bushels of corn and 27,900 bushels of wheat and had 58,000 cattle and 11,800 sheep.
The earliest schools in Travis County were private institutions that usually met in private
homes or in space donated by a church or Masonic lodge. More elaborate private facilities
began to appear by the late 1840s, including Colorado Female College in 1848, Austin Male
and Female Academy in 1849, Austin Female Academy in 1850, and Austin Collegiate Female
Institute in 1852. By 1850, Travis County also had 6 public schools serving a scholastic
population of 183. The county was divided into 19 common school districts in 1852. The state
established the Asylum for the Blind in Austin in 1856 and the Deaf and Dumb School in 1857.
Travis County became a center for higher education in the 1880s with the establishment of the
University of Texas in 1881, Tillotson Collegiate and Normal Institute in 1881, and Saint
Edward's University in 1885. Samuel Huston College began holding classes in the 1890s. The
Austin Presbyterian Theological Seminary opened in 1902, Texas Wesleyan College Academy
in 1912, Concordia Lutheran College in 1926, and the Episcopal Theological Seminary of the
Southwest in 1952. Austin Community College began operations in 1972. The availability of
schools resulted in a high level of education for a large portion of the county’s population. In the
1940s, while more rural areas of the state reported that less than 10% of their population over
the age of 25 had high school diplomas, nearly 20% of Travis County residents had graduated.
By 1980, that number had jumped to 75%.
The earliest churches in Travis County were the Catholic missions relocated to the area
by the Spanish in 1730, but these were moved to San Antonio in 1731, and it was more than a

14

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

century before any organized religious practices were firmly established. In the 1830s, a variety
of religious groups began to appear—Methodist circuit riders held services along Gilleland
Creek in 1837 or 1838; Presbyterians organized a church in Austin in October 1839; Mormons
settled near Fort Coleman, Webberville, and Hornsby Bend in the late 1830s; and Catholic
priests, among them Jean Marie Odin, returned to the area in 1840. A Baptist church and a
Church of Christ were organized in Austin in 1847, a Lutheran church was established in New
Sweden and a Jewish synagogue in Austin began in 1876, and a Christian Science church
formed in Austin in 1889. In the early 1980s, Travis County’s 266 churches had an estimated
combined membership of 194,194; Catholic, Southern Baptist, and United Methodist were the
largest denominations.
In spite of the rapid growth that Travis County experienced during the 1850s, the area
was at that time still very much at the edge of the frontier. The absence of railroads meant that
goods had to be shipped by wagon to and from Houston and Port Lavaca, and poor roads
meant that goods sometimes could not be shipped at all. In 1852, the Austin Railroad
Association was established to encourage railroad construction to the area, and considerable
progress had been made by the late 1850s; however, the Civil War intervened, and work on
railroad acquisition was postponed. The Secession Convention convened in Austin on
28 January 1861. Although a group of Austin citizens staged a demonstration in favor of
secession, Unionist sentiment was high, and Travis County residents voted against secession,
704 to 450. Nevertheless, when the Civil War began, Travis County provided several hundred
volunteers, among them the Travis Rifles, the Tom Green Rifles, the Capitol Guard, and the
Austin City Light Infantry. In the 2 months between the end of the war and the arrival of federal
troops in the county, looting of farms and businesses was common. Although the inevitable
clashes between the Unionist forces and the former rebels resulted in the arrest of as many as
30 people per day, the presence of federal troops served to curb much of the lawlessness. By
early 1866, most of the federal soldiers had been mustered out of service, leaving only about
200 men to police the Austin area until the end of the military occupation in 1870. Austin was
the site of the constitutional conventions of 1866 and 1868-69 and witnessed both the removal
of Governor James W. Throckmorton in 1867 and the Coke-Davis Controversy in 1874. In the
gubernatorial election of 1869, Travis County residents favored Andrew J. Hamilton to Edmund
J. Davis by a margin of 798 to 593.
Like most areas in the south, Travis County suffered considerable economic hardship
immediately after the Civil War and throughout the Reconstruction period. Between 1864 and
1866, the county as a whole experienced a 49% loss in property tax receipts. Roughly twothirds of this property loss was in slaves, with the rest coming from declines in farm and
livestock values, each of which fell 25 to 40%. The county began to show signs of recovery by
1880. The overall population rose from 13,153 in 1870 to 27,028 in 1880, and the 1880 census
reported 1,912 farms, an increase of 656 over the 1870 totals. The amount of improved land
rose from 83,200 acres in 1870 to 139,800 in 1880. Field crops such as corn, cotton, wheat,
and oats took up nearly half of the improved farmland, while livestock dominated the rest.
Economic recovery was facilitated by the arrival of the Houston and Texas Central
Railway, which completed its track to Austin in 1871, and the International and Great Northern

HJN 080079 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Railroad, which was built between Rockdale and Austin in 1876 and completed from Austin to
Laredo in 1881. The Austin and Northwestern Railroad laid track between Austin and Burnet in
1882, and the Missouri, Kansas and Texas line arrived in 1904. Communities besides Austin
that benefited directly from easy railroad access included Pflugerville, Manor, Oak Hill, and
Manchaca. After the war, many former slaves remained in the area. In the year after the war,
the black population increased by 60%, while the white population rose by only 12%. By 1870,
black residents numbered 4,647, comprising 35% of the county's total population. Clarksville,
Kincheonville, Masontown, and Wheatville were among the communities established by former
slaves. The number of black residents in Travis County continued to increase steadily, reaching
13,299 in 1900. It fluctuated between 13,000 and 15,000 from 1900 to 1930, but increased
rapidly thereafter, rising to 22,493 in 1950, 32,270 in 1970, and 63,173 in 1990. Because other
segments of the population grew at an even faster rate, the percentage of black residents, with
respect to the total population, declined significantly, falling to 20% by 1930 and 11% by 1990.
Contributing to the shift in the ethnic makeup of the county was a variety of immigrant groups,
the most prominent of which were German, Swedish, and Mexican. By the turn of the century,
8% of the population was composed of natives of 1 of these countries. Although the early
Swedish and German settlers contributed to the diversity of Travis County through their religious
and educational institutions, the Mexican influence was also reinforced by the continued arrival
of large numbers of new immigrants fleeing the unrest of the Mexican Revolution in the early
20th century. The 1930 census reported that 10,225 residents, or 13% of the county’s total
population, were of Hispanic descent; by 1990, the number of Hispanic residents had risen to
121,689, or 21%.
In 1890, Travis County had 36,322 residents. Of these, 14,575 lived in Austin, which
was fast outgrowing its efforts to become a modern city. Innovations and improvements in
progress at that time included a trolley system and water-generated electricity, but most of its
streets remained unpaved. By the turn of the century several hundred assorted businesses
filled the needs of the 22,000 Austin residents. Yet, in spite of this rapid increase in Austin’s
population, the majority of the county’s residents lived on farms or in smaller towns, and
agriculture dominated the area economy. Cotton became the principal field crop in the late
1880s and remained so for more than 60 years. The 1890 census reported 65,000 acres—
nearly 30% of the county's improved farmland—planted in cotton; by the turn of the century, the
amount of land devoted to cotton had increased to 113,300 acres, or 56% of the improved
farmland. However, as more marginal land was used and the soil became depleted, production
levels fell; in 1930, 143,000 acres produced only 19,000 bales. By the late 1950s, cotton
accounted for only 26% of the total cropland harvested, and by 1980 it had fallen to only 8%.
Farm tenancy had increased steadily since the 1890s and peaked in 1930, with tenants
operating two-thirds of the 3,642 farms. The number of farms fell by more than 1,000 in the
1930s, as many tenant farmers either moved away or turned to other occupations. Farmers
who remained in the area began to devote more of their resources to crops other than cotton
and to livestock. The number of cattle increased from 32,000 in 1920 and to 51,000 in 1950;
the number of sheep and goats increased as well, boosting wool and mohair production from
23,600 and 4,292 pounds, respectively, in 1920, and to 127,800 and 183,600 pounds in 1959.
By the late 1960s, hay and sorghum combined to account for 60% of the cropland harvested.

16

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

The Great Depression was slow to hit Travis County, but, by the mid-1930s, many
people were unemployed and very glad of the New Deal programs that resulted in work paving
streets; building bridges, sewers, and parks; and constructing the tower of the University of
Texas campus. In part because of the job opportunities made available through relief projects,
state government, and the university community, the population increased by 43% in the 1930s,
rising from 77,777 in 1930 to 111,053 in 1940. One major job-producing project in the 1930s
was the construction of a series of dams on the Colorado River. Austin and Travis County had
begun efforts to tame the Colorado as early as 1869, when the army built a pontoon bridge
across the river. In 1893, the City of Austin completed a dam designed to provide power for its
water and electrical systems. By 1899, the city was already experiencing power shortfalls, and
a major flood in 1900 destroyed the dam. Another flood in 1915 washed out the repairs that
were underway, and the project was abandoned. The flood of 1935 put much of downtown
Austin under water, and the area’s interest in a lasting flood-control system was renewed. The
Lower Colorado River Authority was established and a series of dams was built, forming Lake
Austin, Lake Travis, Lake Buchanan, Lake Lyndon B. Johnson, Inks Lake, and Lake Marble
Falls. Travis County also profited from the establishment of several military bases. Camp
Mabry in northwest Austin, established as the main Texas National Guard facility in 1890,
served as an army training center during World War I. After the US became involved in World
War II, the Del Valle Army Air Base, soon renamed Bergstrom Army Air Field, was established
in southeast Travis County. After the war was over, the presence of military personnel
continued to bring changes to the county. Thousands of returning veterans enrolled in the local
colleges and universities, greatly increasing the student population as well as intensifying the
demand for housing and the growth of service industries.
In the 1950s and 1960s, Travis County underwent 2 significant developments. The first
of these was desegregation. The Sweatt v. Painter decision in 1950 pushed the University of
Texas to the forefront in the fight for civil rights, leading it to become the first southern university
to admit blacks as undergraduates, although it was not until 1962 that all of the university’s
facilities were fully integrated. Public schools in Travis County began to follow suit in 1955.
Local Mexican-American organizations also achieved a measure of success against
discriminatory practices. Some local businesses resisted these changes, prompting strikes and
protests in the 1960s, but in the end desegregation was accomplished without the violence
prevalent in other urban areas of the country. The change became even more visible as blacks
and Hispanics were elected to public office—Wilhelmina Delco to the school board in 1968 and
to the Texas House of Representatives in 1976; Berl Handcox to the Austin city council in 1971;
Richard Moya to the Travis County commissioner’s court in 1970; and Gonzalo Barrientos to the
Texas House of Representatives in 1974.
The second major development was the
establishment of several high-tech industries. In 1951, a small, local company became Texas
Instruments, and in 1955 Tracor, Incorporated, made Austin its base of operations.
International Business Machines opened an Austin branch in 1967, followed by Motorola in
1974. These companies, along with Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation
(1983), Dell Computers (1984), and Sematech (1988), became the county’s largest employers.
From the end of Reconstruction to the present, most Travis County residents chose to
support Democratic presidential candidates, with exceptions in 1896, 1928, 1952, 1956, 1972,

HJN 080079 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

and 1984. Occasionally, a third-party candidate drew a sizable portion of the vote, but only 3 of
them—the Greenback-Labor candidate in 1880, George Wallace in 1968, and John Anderson in
1984—garnered sufficient support to affect the county’s overall election results. In state
elections, Travis County residents were staunchly Democratic. In the early 1980s, 63% of the
land in Travis County was devoted to farms and ranches. About 23% of the farmland was under
cultivation, with sorghum, hay, wheat, and cotton accounting for nearly 70% of the 94,000 acres
harvested; other crops included potatoes, sweet potatoes, peaches, and pecans. Sixty-six
percent of the county’s $32 million in agricultural receipts came from livestock and livestock
products, the most important ones being cattle, milk, sheep, wool, and hogs. Although
agriculture remained an important aspect of the local economy, farm receipts were greatly
surpassed by the income generated by non-agricultural industries. Professional and related
services, manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, and government administration involved
70% of the work force in the 1980s; of the rest, 7% were self-employed and 3% employed
outside the county. Since shortly after the turn of the century, the majority of Travis County
residents had resided in the City of Austin. The jobs made available by the growth of the hightech industries reinforced that trend, and, by 1970, 85% of the 295,516 residents lived in the
capital city. In the 1970s and 1980s, however, residential development near Lake Travis
encouraged many people to move away from the city, and although Austin continued to grow at
a rapid pace, the number of residents choosing to live near the lake and in northern and
southern suburbs increased at an even faster rate. By 1990, Lago Vista (2,199), Jonestown
(1,250), Briarcliff (335), Lakeway (4,044), and Pflugerville (4,444) in Travis County, as well as
Round Rock and even Georgetown in Williamson County, had become popular alternatives to
living in Austin. Like the rest of Texas, Travis County weathered a serious economic downturn
in the mid-1980s; newly-built office space sat empty, and many people lost their jobs. Added to
this was news that Bergstrom Air Force Base was scheduled to close. In the early 1990s,
however, plans were underway to convert the Bergstrom site into a new municipal airport, and
the county was looking forward to a period of growth. The population of Travis County was
reported at 576,407 in 1990, an increase of 37% from 1980. Among the area’s most prevalent
concerns was that future growth should not destroy the ecological balance of environmentally
sensitive areas in the western hills.

18

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated APE
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the NRHP
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
on the THC’s online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the National Park Service’s (NPS’s) online
National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas State Historical Association’s and the
General Libraries at The University of Texas at Austin’s Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a
program of intensive survey of the project area. No cultural resources were documented as a
result of this survey, so the second and third of these goals were not pursued. The rest of this
chapter presents the methodological background for the current investigations and the specific
survey methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey area. Based on this archival research, no previously
recorded archeological sites have been documented in the vicinity of the project area, and no
prior cultural resource surveys have been conducted within the APE.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

From June 9 to 11, 2008, Horizon archeologists Reign Clark, project archeologist, and
Michael Mudd, field technician, under the direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator,
conducted an intensive survey of the 86 ha (211 ac) of USACE jurisdictional areas on the

HJN 080079 AR

19

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

overall 649-ha (1,600-ac) Sunchase Tract that constitute the APE to locate any cultural resource
properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project. All
segments of the APE consisted of stream channels incised into local argillic clay sediments.
Channel depths ranged from shallow divots that were barely discernable in the landscape to
moderately deeply incised streams. Many streams had been dammed at various locations to
create stock ponds, and 1 stream (Unnamed Tributary F) had been dammed to create a
sizeable lake located adjacent to a rural residence. Many streams contained water at the time
of the survey, though water in some of the shallower streams consisted of stagnant standing
water rather than flowing streams. At the time of the survey, the private property on which the
APE is situated consisted of rural agricultural land, primarily cattle pastures, with some
residential landscaping. Vegetation consisted of various short to tall grasses, weeds, and reedy
marsh understory as well as scattered deciduous hardwood trees. Moderately extensive
erosion was evident in most segments of the APE. The natural landscape appeared to be
largely intact overall; however, as noted, several stream segments had been dammed at various
locations to create artificial stock ponds and lakes. Figures 2 to 9 present representative
images of the APE.
The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologists and the modern ground was
thoroughly inspected for evidence of historic and prehistoric cultural resources. As the majority
of the APE was covered in moderately dense undergrowth, the modern ground surface was
partially obscured in many areas, and ground surface visibility typically ranged from
approximately 30% to 50%. Where present, erosional gullies and stream cutbanks were
examined for cultural resources, evidence of buried paleosols, and other stratigraphic anomalies
that might be indicative of past cultural activity.
The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) for block-area
cultural resource surveys state that approximately 1 shovel test per 3 acres be excavated within
project areas of the size of the current project’s APE. The shovel testing density may be
increased in areas with higher probabilities to contain cultural resources, such as stream
terraces, and decreased in areas with low probabilities for cultural resources, such as heavily
disturbed areas or upland settings with minimal soil cover. For the current project, a minimum
of 70 shovel tests would be required in the approximately 86-ha (211-ac) APE. Horizon
excavated a total of 196 shovel tests within the APE, thereby exceeding the TSMASS
requirements (Figure 10). Appendix A presents the stratigraphy and soil characteristics
observed in the 196 shovel tests.
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching in stream terraces and other areas with
the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are
capable of reaching (approximately 1.0 m [3.3 ft] below surface). The project area is located in
an upland setting, and no alluvial sediments are mapped within the APE (and none were
observed during the field survey). Sediments encountered in shovel tests excavated during the
survey revealed shallow deposits of dense, dark grayish-brown to black, calcareous clay
sediments in surface and near-surface contexts. Such mature sediments are characteristics of
Blackland Prairie settings and possess no demonstrable potential for intact, buried cultural
deposits. Aboriginal cultural materials associated with these types of soils tend to be exposed

20

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

Figure 2. Typical View of Unnamed Tributary A (Facing North)

Figure 3. Typical View of Unnamed Tributary C (Facing North)

HJN 080079 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 4. Typical View of Unnamed Tributary D (Facing Southeast)

Figure 5. Typical View of Unnamed Tributary E (Facing North)

22

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

Figure 6. Typical View of Unnamed Tributary F (Facing Northeast)

Figure 7. Typical View of Stock Pond on Unnamed Tributary G (Facing East)

HJN 080079 AR

23

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 8. Typical View of Unnamed Tributary H (Facing Southeast)

Figure 9. Typical View of Lake on Unnamed Tributary F (Facing Northwest)

24

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

Figure 10. Locations of Shovel Tests in Project Area

HJN 080079 AR

25

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

on the modern ground surface or in very shallow subsurface contexts. Shovel testing is
therefore considered to constitute an adequate survey technique for identifying cultural
resources within the APE. Stream crossings within the APE are relatively ephemeral and
consist of areas near the headwaters of the streams. No settings conducive to preservation of
deeply buried cultural deposits were identified in the project area.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic
log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and
non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same
location in which they were found. As no cultural resources were observed during the survey,
the collections policy was not brought into play.

26

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

Qualico is proposing to develop the approximately 649-ha (1,600-ac) Sunchase Tract for
residential development. The majority of the Sunchase Tract is located in southeast Travis
County, Texas, southeast of Austin-Bergstrom International Airport, though a small area in the
southeastern corner of the tract extends into Bastrop County. The proposed residential
subdivision would be built on privately owned land, though proposed construction may result in
potential impacts to several intermittent, unnamed tributaries of Dry Creek and therefore may be
subject to permitting by the USACE under Section 404 of the CWA. As a federal permit may be
required for the proposed action, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of
the NHPA of 1966, as amended. Since the project represents a federally permitted undertaking
with the potential to impact significant cultural resources, Qualico was required to provide for a
cultural resources inventory and assessment of the project’s APE and to assess the project’s
possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE.
The 649-ha (1,600-ac) Sunchase Tract is privately owned, and no federal or state lands
are being utilized in support of the proposed development. The APE therefore consists only of
areas within the overall development that potentially may be subject to permitting under
Section 404 of the CWA. These areas consist of 14.3 km (8.9 mi) of unnamed tributary streams
within the overall tract, herein labeled Unnamed Tributaries A to J for convenience, that
constitute potential USACE jurisdictional areas. Specifically, the APE for cultural resources
consists of the linear 14.3 km (8.9 mi) of streams subject to potential USACE jurisdiction, plus a
30-m- (100-ft) wide buffer on either side of the defined stream banks, covering a collective total
area of 86 ha (211 ac).
To meet its responsibilities under the NHPA, Qualico contracted with Horizon to conduct
a cultural resources survey of the potential USACE jurisdictional areas within the overall 649-ha
(1,600-ac) Sunchase Tract. The purpose of the survey was to determine if any archeological
and/or historical sites are located within the USACE jurisdictional areas, and, if any exist, to
determine their eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP. The cultural resources investigation
consisted of an archival review, an intensive pedestrian survey of the defined APE, and the
production of a report suitable for review by the SHPO in accordance with the THC’s Rules of
Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the CTA’s Guidelines for Cultural
Resources Management Reports.

HJN 080079 AR

27

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

From June 9 to 11, 2008, Horizon conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of
the APE. Jeffrey D. Owens served as the Principal Investigator for the project, Reign Clark
served as project archeologist, and Michael Mudd served as field technician. The purpose of
the survey was to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by
the proposed construction project.
The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologists and the modern ground was
thoroughly inspected for evidence of historic and prehistoric cultural resources. Horizon
excavated a total of 196 shovel tests within the APE, thereby exceeding the TSMASS
requirements. All segments of the APE consisted of stream channels incised into local argillic
clay sediments; no alluvial sediments or settings conducive to the preservation of intact, buried
cultural resources were encountered, so no backhoe trenching was conducted. Channel depths
ranged from shallow divots that were barely discernable in the landscape to moderately deeply
incised streams. Many streams had been dammed at various locations to create stock ponds,
and 1 stream (Unnamed Tributary F) had been dammed to create a sizeable lake located
adjacent to a rural residence. Many streams contained water at the time of the survey, though
water in some of the shallower streams consisted of stagnant standing water rather than flowing
streams. At the time of the survey, the private property on which the APE is situated consisted
of rural agricultural land, primarily cattle pastures, with some residential landscaping.
Vegetation consisted of various short to tall grasses, weeds, and reedy marsh understory as
well as scattered deciduous hardwood trees. Moderately extensive erosion was evident in most
segments of the APE. The natural landscape appeared to be largely intact overall; however, as
noted, several stream segments had been dammed at various locations to create artificial stock
ponds and lakes. The project area is located in an upland setting, and no alluvial sediments are
mapped within the APE (and none were observed during the field survey). Sediments
encountered in shovel tests excavated during the survey revealed shallow deposits of dense,
dark grayish-brown to black, calcareous clay sediments in surface and near-surface contexts.
Such mature sediments are characteristics of Blackland Prairie settings and possess no
demonstrable potential for intact, buried cultural deposits.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey.

28

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is the determination
of whether or not an archeological site possesses the potential to make a contribution to 1 or
more previously defined research questions. Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey
level are rarely sufficient to contribute in a meaningful manner to such research issues. The
objective is rather to determine which archeological sites could be most profitably investigated
further in pursuance of regional, methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore,
adequate information on site function, context, and chronological placement from archeological
and, if appropriate, historical perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because
research questions vary as a function of geography and temporal period, determination of the
site context and chronological placement of cultural properties is a particularly important
objective during the inventory process.
Ultimately, management decisions regarding archeological properties are a function of
the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs. Archeological
resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of
archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP.

HJN 080079 AR

29

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

6.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologists, the modern ground surface was
thoroughly inspected for cultural resources, and a total of 196 shovel tests were excavated
30

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

within the 86-ha (211-ac) APE, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project area
of this size. No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a
result of the survey.

6.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of the USACE jurisdictional areas
on the Sunchase Tract documented in this report, no potentially significant cultural resources
would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No new cultural resources were identified in
the remainder of the project area as a result of intensive survey activities, and no previously
documented cultural resources are present in the vicinity of the project area that would be
adversely affected by the proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. As no cultural resources were identified that meet
the criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4, no further archeological work is
recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the
proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains
or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and the USACE and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 080079 AR

31

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Baker, V.R.
1975
Flood Hazards Along the Balcones Escarpment in Central Texas—Alternative
Approaches to the Recognition, Mapping, and Management. Geological Circular No.
75-5. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Barkley, M.S.
1963
History of Travis County and Austin, 1839-1899. Texian Press, Waco.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Butzer, K.W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas.
No. 53, Austin.

Texas Water Development Board, Report

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.

HJN 080079 AR

33

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Dice, L.R.
1943
The Biotic Provinces of North America. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Hardy, A.W.
1938
A History of Travis County, 1832-1865.
Texas.

Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of

Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Humphrey, D.C.
1985
Austin: An Illustrated History. Windsor, Northridge, California.
Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas. Submitted to the US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.

34

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4:659-663).
Noize, E.A.
1990
Austin: Deep in the Heart of Texas. National Geographic, June.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.

Proctor, C.V., Jr., T.E. Brown, J.H. McGowen, and N.B. Wachter
1974
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Austin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology
in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R.A. Ricklis and M.B.
Collins, pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Thornwaite, C.W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
38:55-94.

Geographical Review

Werchan, L.E., A.C. Lowther, and R.N. Ramsey
1974
Soil Survey of Travis County, Texas.
US Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Washington, D.C.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Willoughby, L. (ed.)
1981
Austin: A Historical Portrait. Donning, Norfolk, Virginia.

HJN 080079 AR

35

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

Soils

Artifacts

AM‐1
AM‐2
AM‐3
AM‐4
AM‐5
AM‐6
AM‐7
AM‐8
AM‐9
AM‐10
AM‐11
AM‐12
AM‐13
AM‐14
AM‐15
AM‐16
AM‐17
AM‐18
AR‐1
AR‐2
AR‐3
AR‐4
AR‐5
AR‐6
AR‐7
AR‐8
AR‐9
AR‐10
AR‐11
AR‐12
AR‐13
AR‐14
AR‐15
AR‐16
AR‐17
AR‐18
AR‐19
AR‐20
AR‐21

635453
635415
635387
635413
635430
635461
635513
635537
635618
635575
635508
635515
635523
635528
635570
635568
635647
635712
635506
635437
635408
635391
635429
635440
635483
635502
635630
635621
635623
635612
635640
635543
635479
635486
635484
635536
635554
635617
635668

3335612
3335747
3335852
3335963
3336105
3336192
3336320
3336417
3336561
3336826
3336911
3337004
3337105
3337210
3337297
3337394
3337451
3337526
3335502
3335703
3335797
3335887
3336030
3336142
3336260
3336366
3336431
3336514
3336615
3336688
3336754
3336863
3336949
3337047
3337149
3337273
3337368
3337414
3337492

0‐5
0‐10
0‐10
0‐20
0‐10
0‐15
0‐20
0‐15
0‐10
0‐5
0‐15
0‐15
0‐20
0‐25
0‐20
0‐15
0‐10
0‐20
0‐5
0‐5
0‐10
0‐10
0‐5
0‐10
0‐5
0‐10
0‐5
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10

Black argillic clay over bedrock
Black very gravelly argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black very gravelly clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None

HJN 080079 AR

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

Soils

Artifacts

BM‐1
BM‐2
BR‐1
BR‐2
CM‐1
CM‐2
CM‐3
CM‐4
CM‐5
CM‐6
CM‐7
CM‐8
CM‐9
CM‐10
CM‐11
CM‐12
CM‐13
CM‐14
CM‐15
CM‐16
CM‐17
CM‐18
CM‐19
CM‐20
CM‐21
CM‐22
CM‐23
CM‐24
CM‐25
CR‐1
CR‐2
CR‐3
CR‐4
CR‐5
CR‐6
CR‐7
CR‐8
CR‐9
CR‐10
CR‐11

635656
635844
635752
635944
635008
634990
634958
634939
635919
636134
636097
636157
636186
636201
636215
636273
636369
636492
636558
635815
635560
635450
635349
635251
635179
635099
636677
636871
636911
634946
635004
634953
635884
635985
636134
636150
636194
636198
636232
636305

3336388
3336375
3336347
3336306
3337301
3337195
3337178
3337104
3337645
3337671
3337629
3337783
3337832
3337958
3337998
3338093
3338106
3338018
3337897
3337581
3337570
3337573
3337633
3337660
3337593
3337642
3337937
3337831
3337737
3337333
3337246
3337140
3337624
3337623
3337662
3337732
3337851
3337959
3338044
3338115

0‐10
0‐15
0‐10
0‐10
0‐20
0‐15
0‐10
0‐20
0‐25
0‐20
0‐20
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐20
0‐15
0‐10
0‐15
0‐10
0‐15
0‐25
0‐20
0‐15
0‐20
0‐10
0‐15
0‐20
0‐25
0‐15
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10

Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Dense black argillic clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly argillic clay
Black gravelly argillic clay
Black gravelly argillic clay
Black gravelly argillic clay
Black gravelly argillic clay
Black gravelly argillic clay
Black gravelly argillic clay
Black gravelly argillic clay
Black gravelly argillic clay
Black gravelly argillic clay
Black gravelly argillic clay
Black gravelly argillic clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None

A-2

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

Soils

Artifacts

CR‐12
CR‐13
CR‐14
CR‐15
CR‐16
CR‐17
CR‐18
CR‐19
CR‐20
CR‐21
CR‐22
CR‐23
CR‐24
CR‐25
CR‐26
DM‐1
DM‐2
DM‐3
DM‐4
DM‐5
DM‐6
DM‐7
DM‐8
DM‐9
DM‐10
DM‐11
DM‐12
DM‐13
DM‐14
DM‐15
DM‐16
DM‐17
DM‐18
DR‐1
DR‐2
DR‐3
DR‐4
DR‐5
DR‐6
DR‐7

636428
636510
635721
635759
635613
635513
635411
635300
635153
635062
636614
636724
636812
636893
636984
637899
637953
638011
638100
638162
638510
638440
638378
638309
638331
638306
638267
638195
638646
638622
638621
638585
638562
637676
637713
637834
637892
637984
638035
638134

3338094
3337917
3337583
3337578
3337580
3337554
3337602
3337666
3337656
3337590
3337902
3337903
3337851
3337787
3337731
3337461
3337428
3337348
3337298
3337213
3336934
3336927
3336968
3337013
3337067
3337131
3337186
3337182
3336713
3336764
3336818
3336867
3336910
3337624
3337589
3337497
3337302
3337344
3337258
3337220

0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐20
0‐15
0‐20
0‐25
0‐20
0‐20
0‐25
0‐15
0‐20
0‐20
0‐25
0‐10
0‐20
0‐15
0‐15
0‐15
0‐15
0‐20
0‐15
0‐15
0‐15
0‐15
0‐15
0‐15
0‐15

Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dark brown argillic clay
Dense dark brown clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None

HJN 080079 AR

A-3

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

Soils

Artifacts

EM‐1
EM‐2
EM‐3
EM‐4
EM‐5
EM‐6
EM‐7
EM‐8
EM‐9
EM‐10
EM‐11
EM‐12
EM‐13
EM‐14
EM‐15
ER‐1
ER‐2
ER‐3
ER‐4
FM‐1
FM‐2
FM‐3
FM‐4
FM‐5
FM‐6
FM‐7
FM‐8
FM‐9
FM‐10
FM‐11
FM‐12
FM‐13
FM‐14
FM‐15
FM‐16
FM‐17
FM‐18
FR‐1
FR‐2
FR‐3

637607
637550
637482
637398
637283
637241
637201
637167
637125
637082
637045
637003
636981
637024
637019
637613
637511
637458
637358
637660
637673
637623
637209
637271
637328
637371
637398
637677
637449
637500
637547
637646
637747
637783
637856
637798
637807
637667
637641
637630

3336559
3336457
3336365
3336334
3336347
3336314
3336282
3336248
3336200
3336178
3336113
3336071
3336020
3336013
3335942
3336766
3336457
3336376
3336356
3336369
3336467
3336555
3335815
3335817
3335824
3335806
3335776
3336338
3335793
3335800
3335772
3335795
3335958
3336013
3336096
3336090
3336176
3336300
3336404
3336605

0‐25
0‐15
0‐20
0‐20
0‐20
0‐15
0‐20
0‐10
0‐15
0‐20
0‐20
0‐20
0‐20
0‐20
0‐20
0‐15
0‐15
0‐15
0‐15
0‐20
0‐20
0‐20
0‐15
0‐25
0‐15
0‐15
0‐20
0‐20
0‐20
0‐15
0‐20
0‐20
0‐15
0‐20
0‐15
0‐20
0‐20
0‐15
0‐15
0‐15

Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black gravelly clay
Dense black gravelly clay
Dense black gravelly clay
Dense black gravelly clay
Dense black gravelly clay
Dense black gravelly clay
Dense black gravelly clay
Dense black gravelly clay
Dense black gravelly clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Black argillic clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Black argillic clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Grayish‐brown argillic clay

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None

A-4

080079_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Sunchase Tract, Austin, Travis and Bastrop Counties, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

Soils

Artifacts

FR‐4
GM‐1
GM‐2
GM‐3
GM‐4
GM‐5
GM‐6
GM‐7
GM‐8
GM‐9
GM‐10
GM‐11
HM‐1
HM‐2
HM‐3
HM‐4
IM‐1
IM‐2
IM‐3
IM‐4
IM‐5
IM‐6
IM‐7
IM‐8
IM‐9
JM‐1
JM‐2
JM‐3
JM‐4
JM‐5
JM‐6
JM‐7
JM‐8
JM‐9
JM‐10
JM‐11
JM‐12

637610
638056
638025
638003
637916
637913
637889
637925
637886
637878
637838
637750
637615
637654
637649
637654
637916
637989
638047
638105
638159
638224
638284
638317
638372
636772
636803
636804
636869
636896
636940
636937
636925
636957
636908
636955
636890

3336659
3335455
3335492
3335552
3335566
3335664
3335712
3335779
3335854
3335912
3335961
3335866
3335762
3335699
3335642
3335592
3336164
3336159
3336143
3336128
3336123
3336123
3336108
3336090
3336068
3337038
3337100
3337153
3337210
3337275
3337319
3337379
3337460
3337535
3337600
3337660
3337724

0‐15
0‐20
0‐25
0‐15
0‐20
0‐25
0‐15
0‐20
0‐15
0‐10
0‐10
0‐15
0‐20
0‐25
0‐15
0‐20
0‐20
0‐15
0‐15
0‐5
0‐15
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐10
0‐20
0‐20
0‐20
0‐20
0‐25
0‐20
0‐20
0‐15
0‐20
0‐25
0‐20
0‐15

Grayish‐brown argillic clay
Black clay
Black clay
Black clay
Black clay
Black clay
Black clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Dense gravelly black clay
Dense gravelly black clay
Dense gravelly black clay
Dense gravelly black clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black very gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Black gravelly clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay
Dense black clay

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None

1 All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 080079 AR

A-5

