Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of
the Orange County Sewer and Natural Gas
Infrastructure Improvements Project,
Orange County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6064
HJN 110121 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Future Link Technologies, Inc.
Austin, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

November 2011

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of
the Orange County Sewer and Natural Gas
Infrastructure Improvements Project,
Orange County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Future Link Technologies, Inc.
5184 W. Highway 290, Suite A
Austin, Texas 78735

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 110121 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6064

November 2011

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Orange County (the County) is proposing to install approximately 2.9 kilometers (km)
(1.8 miles [mi]) of subsurface sewer and natural gas pipeline for the Orange County
Infrastructure Improvements Project in Orange County, Texas. The proposed project would
involve excavation of approximately 1.0 km (0.6 mi) of drainage ditches and approximately
1.9 km (1.2 mi) of subsurface sewer force main and natural gas pipelines. These improvements
would be constructed within the existing rights-of-way (ROW) of Farm-to-Market Road
(FM) 1422, Interstate Highway (IH) 10, and Old US Highway (US) 90. Due to the extent of prior
impacts within these existing road and highway ROWs resulting from prior construction, use,
and ongoing maintenance of roadway and bridge facilities, initial consultation conducted with
the Texas Historical Commission (THC) resulted in the determination that the project area did
not need to be surveyed for cultural resources in its entirety. However, the THC required that
3 short segments of the project area should be surveyed for cultural resources. Specifically,
these 3 segments consist of (1) an approximately 122-meter- (m-) (400-foot- [ft-]) long segment
of the eastbound frontage road of IH 10 where it crosses Cole Creek; (2) an approximately 137m- (450-ft-) long segment of the eastbound frontage road of IH 10 that passes in front of the
Bland Cemetery; and (3) an approximately 137-m- (450-ft-) long segment of Old US 90 where it
passes in front of the Autumn Oaks Memorial Park Cemetery. The proposed subsurface utilities
would be installed along the south sides of their respective highways within ROWs measuring
approximately 15 m (50 ft) in width. Thus, the Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed
undertaking consists of 3 separate segments of proposed pipeline ROW measuring a total of
396 m (1,300 ft) and covering a total area of about 0.6 hectares (ha) (1.5 acres [ac]).
The project is being sponsored by Orange County, a political subdivision of the State of
Texas, utilizing disaster-relief grant funding provided by the General Land Office (GLO); as
such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition,
the County may be applying to the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) for permitting to
construct project facilities under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA); as such, the
proposed undertaking may also fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 (NHPA), as amended. As the project represents a publicly sponsored
undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural resources, the County was required
to provide for a cultural resource inventory of the project’s APE and to assess the project’s
possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. To meet its responsibilities
under applicable federal and state laws, the County’s environmental services provider, Future

HJN 110121 AR

iii

Management Summary

Link Technologies, Inc. (FLT), contracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon),
to obtain all necessary clearances for cultural resources. The survey was performed under
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6064.
On October 13 to 14, 2011, Horizon archeologist Michael Mudd, under the overall
supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resource survey of
the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed construction project. The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologist, the modern
ground surface was thoroughly inspected for historic and prehistoric cultural resources, and a
total of 4 shovel tests were excavated within a 122-meter- (m-) (400-foot- [ft-]) long segment of
the eastbound frontage road of IH 10 where it crosses Cole Creek. Thus, the Texas State
Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) were met for a project area of the size of
this segment of the APE. No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within this
segment of the APE as a result of the survey.
Shovel tests were not excavated within the 2 segments of proposed ROW that pass in
front of the Bland and Autumn Oaks Memorial Park cemeteries; rather, investigations in these
areas focused on assessing the potential for unmarked graves to be present within the
proposed ROW. Both of these segments of the project area consist of narrow existing highway
ROWs that are characterized by grassy embankments and drainage ditches. Based on the
physical characteristics of the existing ROWs where they pass in front of the cemeteries, there
does not appear to be any potential for unmarked graves to be present within the road ROWs.
In order to obtain more information about the potential for unmarked graves beyond the marked
cemetery boundaries, Horizon’s Principal Investigator contacted local informants with specific
knowledge of the cemeteries.
The Autumn Oaks Memorial Park Cemetery, located off the south side of Old US 90
near the eastern end of the project area, was established in the early 1970s. The Autumn Oaks
Memorial Park Cemetery is owned and operated by the Dorman Funeral Home in Orange,
Texas. The Dorman family, the owners and operators of the Dorman Funeral Home, purchased
the Autumn Oaks Memorial Park Cemetery in 1986. Mr. Woody Dorman, Jr., the Funeral
Director and co-owner of the Dorman Funeral Home, reports that he is in possession of a
complete plot map and records extending back to the founding of the cemetery in the early
1970s. Mr. Dorman reports that no unmarked graves are located within the highway ROW
beyond the cemetery boundaries.
The Bland Cemetery is a historic-age cemetery located off the south side of the
eastbound frontage road of IH 10 near the western end of the project area. Horizon contacted
Mr. Pete Frederick, the manager of the Bland Cemetery. Mr. Frederick, a 78-year resident of
the area, reports that his parents, grandparents, and great grandparents are buried in the
cemetery. Mr. Frederick states that the eastbound frontage road of IH 10 that currently passes
in front of the cemetery was constructed within the former ROW of Old US 90 and that the
existing road ROW and the northern cemetery boundary have not moved in his memory. While
the earliest interments in the cemetery occurred in the latter quarter of the 19th century and
would therefore be beyond Mr. Frederick’s living memory, Mr. Frederick indicated that the
earliest interments are all along the southern side of the cemetery opposite the highway. The
iv

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

portion of the cemetery located near the highway contains only the most recent interments, and
Mr. Frederick does not believe there is any potential for unmarked graves to occur beyond the
cemetery boundaries on the highway side of the cemetery.
Based on the negative results of the survey-level investigations documented in this
report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed
undertaking. No new cultural resources were identified as a result of intensive survey activities
at the crossing of IH 10 over Cole Creek, and no previously documented cultural resources are
present in the vicinity of the project area that would be adversely affected by the proposed
undertaking. Furthermore, based on the physical characteristics of existing highway ROWs that
pass in front of the Bland and Autumn Oaks Memorial Park cemeteries and the results of
informant interviews, no unmarked graves are believed to exist with the existing road ROWs
beyond the marked cemetery boundaries that would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Thus, no mechanical scraping operations to prospect for unmarked graves appear to be
warranted in connection with the proposed undertaking, and no further investigations are
recommended.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. As no cultural resources were identified that meet
the criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as State
Archeological Landmarks (SALs) according to 13 TAC 26, no further archeological work is
recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the
proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains
or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 110121 AR

v

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ..................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 5
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 6
2.4
Flora and Fauna ............................................................................................ 7

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) ....................................................12
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) ........................................................12
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) .......................................................13
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) ...................................................14
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ......................................................15
3.6
Historic Period (ca. A.D. 1700 to Present) ....................................................15

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................19
4.1
Archival Research ........................................................................................19
4.2
Survey Methods ...........................................................................................20

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................25
5.1
IH 10 at Cole Creek ......................................................................................25
5.2
IH 10 at Bland Cemetery ..............................................................................26
5.3
Old US 90 at Autumn Oaks Memorial Park Cemetery ..................................27

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................31
6.1
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....32
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Archeological Landmark ...................33
6.3
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................33
6.4
Management Recommendations ..................................................................34

7.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................37
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Summary Data

HJN 110121 AR

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.

viii

Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle ..................................... 2
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ........................................................... 3
View of IH 10 at Cole Creek Crossing (Facing W) .....................................................21
View of West Bank of IH 10 at Cole Creek Crossing (Facing E) ................................21
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated in Project Area................................................22
View of IH 10 Frontage Road ROW in Front of Bland Cemetery (Facing E) ..............26
Bland Cemetery Historical Marker .............................................................................27
View of Old US 90 ROW in Front of Autumn Oaks Cemetery (Facing E) ..................29
Close-up of Unmarked Boundary of Autumn Oaks Cemetery (Facing E) ..................29

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Orange County (the County) is proposing to install approximately 2.9 kilometers (km)
(1.8 miles [mi]) of subsurface sewer and natural gas pipeline for the Orange County
Infrastructure Improvements Project in Orange County, Texas (Figures 1 and 2). The proposed
project would involve excavation of approximately 1.0 km (0.6 mi) of drainage ditches and
approximately 1.9 km (1.2 mi) of subsurface sewer force main and natural gas pipelines. These
improvements would be constructed within the existing rights-of-way (ROW) of Farm-to-Market
Road (FM) 1422, Interstate Highway (IH) 10, and Old US Highway (US) 90. Due to the extent
of prior impacts within these existing road and highway ROWs resulting from prior construction,
use, and ongoing maintenance of roadway and bridge facilities, initial consultation conducted
with the Texas Historical Commission (THC) resulted in the determination that the project area
did not need to be surveyed for cultural resources in its entirety. However, the THC required
that 3 short segments of the project area should be surveyed for cultural resources.
Specifically, these 3 segments consist of (1) an approximately 122-meter- (m-) (400-foot- [ft-])
long segment of the eastbound frontage road of IH 10 where it crosses Cole Creek; (2) an
approximately 137-m- (450-ft-) long segment of the eastbound frontage road of IH 10 that
passes in front of the Bland Cemetery; and (3) an approximately 137-m- (450-ft-) long segment
of Old US 90 where it passes in front of the Autumn Oaks Memorial Park Cemetery. The
proposed subsurface utilities would be installed along the south sides of their respective
highways within ROWs measuring approximately 15 m (50 ft) in width. Thus, the Area of
Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed undertaking consists of 3 separate segments of
proposed pipeline ROW measuring a total of 396 m (1,300 ft) and covering a total area of about
0.6 hectares (ha) (1.5 acres [ac]).
The project is being sponsored by Orange County, a political subdivision of the State of
Texas, utilizing disaster-relief grant funding provided by the General Land Office (GLO); as
such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition,
the County may be applying to the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) for permitting to
construct project facilities under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA); as such, the
proposed undertaking may also fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 (NHPA), as amended. As the project represents a publicly sponsored
undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural resources, the County was required
to provide for a cultural resource inventory of the project’s APE and to assess the project’s
possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. To meet its responsibilities

HJN 110121 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

2

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

HJN 110121 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

under applicable federal and state laws, the County’s environmental services provider, Future
Link Technologies, Inc. (FLT), contracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon),
to obtain all necessary clearances for cultural resources. The survey was performed under
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6064.
On October 13 to 14, 2011, Horizon archeologist Michael Mudd, under the overall
supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resource survey of
the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed construction project and to assess the potential for unmarked graves associated with
the Bland and Autumn Oaks Memorial Park cemeteries to occur beyond the marked cemetery
boundaries within the APE.
This report presents the results of the cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds
of the project area, respectively. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the survey, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report, and Appendix A presents data collected from shovel tests excavated during the survey.

4

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in central Orange County, Texas. Orange County is situated
on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas, and the project area is located about 47 km
(29 mi) north of the Gulf of Mexico shoreline. The Gulf of Mexico represents a structural basin
formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal Plain, which extends as far north as the
Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists of
seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin, that
reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001). The Houston area is
underlain by rocks and unconsolidated sediments that are quite young in a geological sense,
ranging from modern to Miocene in age. These consist predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic
bodies arranged in an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and
estuarine facies making up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding
disconformities between these formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional
hiatuses that occurred during periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in this fill are of
Late Cretaceous age. As a result of the geometry of basin filling, successively younger rock
units crop out in subparallel bands from the basin margin toward the modern coastline.
The 3 segments of the project area are situated on low, clayey stream terraces and
“uplands” located in the vicinity of Cole Creek and Sandy Creek. Both streams flow generally
southward and discharge into Cow Bayou, which in turn flows southeastward into the Sabine
River just north of Sabine Lake. Local topography is extremely flat, and elevations across the
project area average approximately 3 to 5 m (10 to15 ft) above mean sea level (amsl) with
minimal natural topographic relief. Most of the topographic variability within the project area
results from the construction of thick fill sections underlying bridge approaches and roadbeds
and the excavation of drainage ditches.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project area is underlain by the Beaumont Formation (Crout et al. 1965; Fisher
1982; Shelby et al. 1968). The Beaumont, or Prairie, terrace is the youngest continuous
coastwise terrace fronting the modern Gulf (Abbott 2001). The Beaumont Formation consists of
clay, silt, and fine sand arranged in spatial patterns that reflect the distribution of fluvial (e.g.,

HJN 110121 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

channel, point bar, levee, and backswamp) and mudflat/coastal marsh facies (Van Siclen 1985).
Sandy deposits associated with littoral facies are also frequently considered part of the
Beaumont. Many investigators (cf. DuBar et al. 1991; Fisk 1938, 1940) have correlated the
Beaumont terrace with the Sangamon Interglacial (ca. 130 to 75 thousand years ago [kya]),
although age estimates range from Middle Wisconsinan (Alford and Holmes 1985) to 100 to
600 kya (Blum and Price 1994). While debate about the temporal affiliations of and correlations
among the deposits that underlie the major coastline terraces remains active, they are of little
direct geoarcheological relevance because virtually all investigators agree that these deposits
considerably predate the earliest demonstrated dates of human occupation in North America.
The 3 separate segments of the project area are characterized by 4 separate soil units
(NRCS 2011). The IH 10 at Cole Creek segment of the APE is situated on a combination of
Bleakwood loam, 0 to 1% slopes, frequently flooded (BwA), and the Orcadia-Aris complex, 0 to
1% slopes (OsA), which consist of loamy alluvium of Holocene age and loamy fluviomarine
deposits Late Pleistocene age, respectively. The Bland Cemetery segment of the APE is also
situated on soils of the Orcadia-Aris complex, 0 to 1% slopes (OsA). The Autumn Oaks
Memorial Park Cemetery segment is situated on soils of the Orcadia-Anahuac complex, 0 to 1%
slopes (OcA), which consists of loamy fluviomarine deposits of Late Pleistocene age.
While aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in deep alluvial
sediments adjacent to major streams in Texas, the relative antiquity of the fluviodeltaic clayey
sediments that constitute the terraces and “upland” soils on the coastal plain, such as those that
comprise the current project area, suggests that any cultural resources would be constrained to
the modern ground surface, rather than in buried contexts, in erosional settings lacking integrity.
Intact, buried archeological deposits may occur within alluvial sediments near major streams.
Holocene-age clayey alluvial sediments are present within the IH 10 at Cole Creek segment of
the APE; however, the extent of impacts from prior construction of IH 10 and the associated
frontage roads has resulted in extensive disturbances to native sediments within the APE.
Historic-age cultural resources may occur in any physiographic setting.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
While the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway
(1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes
3 separate climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late
Glacial Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present).
Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas
was considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region
was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and
Holloway 1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a
slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous
woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway
1985). During the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have

6

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

been more stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post
oak savannas. The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued
into the mid-Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more
mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and
Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were
probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott
2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional zone between the humid southeastern US
and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects the influences of latitude, low elevation, and
proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with the urban heat islands formed by the
tremendous concentrations of asphalt and concrete in the larger cities, such as Houston and
Beaumont, to create a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout
much of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water,
humidity in the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often
exceeds 50% even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high
humidity characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and
a modest diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly
high temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in
January to a high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to
9°C (38 to 47°F) in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average
low temperatures range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range
from 27 to 29°C (75 to 79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The region experiences 2 precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott 2001; Crout et
al. 1965). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of infrequent
cold fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs in the late
summer to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical storms and
hurricanes from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter and early
spring are relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional thunderstorms
that are relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual precipitation
varies from a low of approximately 100 cm centimeters (cm) (40 inches [in]) to a high of more
than 132 cm (52 in). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5 to 8 cm (2 to 3 in) in
March to more than 19 cm (7.5 in) occurring locally on the coast during September. Almost all
of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely rare, occurring in measurable
amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Jefferson County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texan biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahan et al.
(1984) further define 4 broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic

HJN 110121 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

province that lies on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie,
(3) coastal gallery forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are
strongly controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the
seasonal water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically
dominated by little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter
environments are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria,
bulrushes, smooth cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush,
saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal
waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained
environments are characterized by such taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum,
gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass, red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort.
A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon,
nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and
many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish
to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs
and woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the
north and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses
are found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver
bluestem, buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian
sunflower, Engelmann daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow
neptunia, snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush,
bluebonnet, ragweed, croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring
in the coastal prairie include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live
oak, elm, hackberry, bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as
the coastal prairie grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland
environment with common stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie
is home to a diverse fauna, including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many
small rodents, amphibians, reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and
pronghorn were also present at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbrier, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,

8

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are
grasses such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest
include white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and
rodents, turtles, snakes, and many birds. A number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are
present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger
deciduous trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory
vegetation varies from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and
young trees. Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle,
greenbrier, Virginia creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A
variety of fauna is also present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit,
mink, skunk, various small rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bears were
also present at times in the past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the
transition zone to the coastal prairie environment.

HJN 110121 AR

9

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21county area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 200 km (124 mi) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline. Much of the
archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern Great
Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990).
Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These 2 subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25 km (16 mi) inland from the coast that covers the area influenced by
Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological variability
characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands, marine
coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable ecological
diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to
denote Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural
characteristics of Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring
regions. For instance, the Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and
Southeast Texas, and Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for
Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time
in Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit
evidence of reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be
associated with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of
subsistence-related activities. Inland sites also tend to contain modest pottery assemblages,
fired clay balls (at some sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal
sites tend to consist of multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain oyster shell tools,
large quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), numerous bone tools, and only a few
lithic artifacts.

HJN 110121 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period.
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is
represented by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred endscrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas
are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is
little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian
period (8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far
less pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and
corresponding decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a
diversified resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas,
however, this hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The
appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone
assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural

12

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

stage. Material culture shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in
the application of groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
In Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains.
Many of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and
several new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and
probably the Gary-Kent series.
The Late Archaic period (1,500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is
characterized by Gary, Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos
points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition
developed in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981;
Patterson 1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period
but reached full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as
boatstones and bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang
knives, stingray spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial
practices included the systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre,
and use of locally made grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most
burials are found in extended supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials
are also known. Burial direction is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to
site. Patterson et al. (1993) report that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary
tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area
by about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the
Conroe-Livingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears
to have progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995).
Southeastern Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where
Aten (1983) established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
129 km (80 mi) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal exception of a
few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found on the Gulf
coast west of the Sabine Lake area.

HJN 110121 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods
(Aten 1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility
ware throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown
Plain for about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods
before once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety,
Goose Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor
pottery types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway
(Aten 1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte
types are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste
(like Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined
by the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the
latter part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in
Southeast Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the
Late Prehistoric period (Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995;
Wheat 1953). In fact, Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in
Southeast Texas as early as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points
that consisted of marginally retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a
generalized date of adoption of the bow-and-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca.
A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas. In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to
be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba,
Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial sequence for these point types has not been
established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn points appear to predate Perdiz points
throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto
Plain and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek
pottery remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt
Coated pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

14

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue.
Aten (1983) has
reconstructed the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century,
including the Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (possibly Karankawa), and Tonkawa. The
presence of the Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central
Texas in the 17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought
to have occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the
corresponding mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east
of the San Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe
may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic
Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and
Cuney points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified
by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. A.D. 1700 TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas occurred in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez
Cabeza de Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near
Galveston Bay; however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until
after 1700. The first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission
system, as well as the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native
culture and social systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where
the burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as
increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the
time heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous
Indian population was greatly diminished. The Alabama/Coushatta Indians who currently reside
in Southeast Texas are migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early
19th centuries (Newcomb 1961).
Orange County was carved from Jefferson County on January 5, 1852, and its county
seat was located at Madison 1. Confusion with Madisonville prompted the name change to
Orange in 1858 at the time of the town’s incorporation. Orange had been known by a variety of
names—Strong’s Bluff, Huntley, Green’s Bluff, Jefferson, and Madison. Most sources cite the

1

The following historical summary of Orange County has been compiled from Johnson (1966) and TSHA (2011).

HJN 110121 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

orange grove planted by early settlers at the mouth of the Sabine River for explanation of the
town’s name. County growth centered on Orange. Because of its proximity to the Gulf and
serving as gateway to Texas and the West, the city quickly developed as both a maritime and
cultural center. Although only a small percentage of land was devoted to cotton farming, by
1861 over 20,000 bales of cotton were shipped from this growing port city. In 1857, the
population was 1,277, including 282 slaves and 26 freed blacks. True to its predominantly
southern majority, Orange County voters supported the Democratic party in the elections just
prior to the Civil War.
Orange mustered several military units during the Civil War, including the Orange Greys
and the Orange Light Guard. A nearby naval encounter in 1863, the battle of Sabine Pass,
successfully halted the Union army’s advance into Texas. Orange survived the war intact but
was decimated only 5 months after the armistice, when a major hurricane hit the town on
September 13, 1865. The county population in 1870 dropped to 1,255. The Texas and New
Orleans Railroad, which had arrived in Orange in 1861 and then closed during the war, began
operating again in 1876. Also that year, Henry Jacob Lutcher and G. Bedell Moore visited
Orange from Pennsylvania and decided to open a sawmill and lumber plant. Lutcher moved to
Orange the following year and began operations. The opening of the Lutcher-Moore Lumber
Company began the slow but steady rebirth of the area. County population grew to 2,938 by
1880 as jobs became available in lumber and related areas, including building construction and
ship-building. In 1881, C.P. Huntington brought the Southern Pacific to Orange, forming a direct
route from San Francisco to New Orleans. Orange became a major rail and port center. The
Opelousas or Old Spanish Trail crossed the Sabine only 10 miles north of the city. Cattle drives
frequently ended at the Orange terminals. Manufacturing became a major contributor to the
local economy as establishments increased from 8 in 1880 to 27 in 1890, the largest percentage
increase on record. The Orange Rice Mill was formed in 1901. The Yell Mill (Equitable Bag),
the only mill in the world that used yellow pine shavings as a raw product, followed in 1904.
That year, county population was 5,905, and expectations for the future remained high, despite
the knowledge that the once abundant surrounding forests were becoming depleted. By 1900,
most religious groups were represented in the county. Catholics were there during the Spanish
colonial period, and Mexico required a pledge of Catholicism to obtain land grants, although
most of the early American arrivals to the area were at least nominally Protestant. According to
a state census of 1887, Baptist, Episcopal, Methodist, Presbyterian, and Catholic were all
represented.
The discovery of oil at the Bland Well in 1913 and the Oscar Chesson Well in 1922
ushered in a new era and a new economy. The county grew to a record population high of
15,379 in 1920. That year, 32 manufacturers processed and refined oil in the county for a
product total of $17,154,779, compared with the 1900 value of $1,762,161. The number of
employees at local plants increased during this period from 894 in 1900 to 4,130. The LutcherMoore Lumber Company donated land to the city of Orange in 1916 for port expansion. Both
public and private wharf space was improved and expanded. That year, the Sabine-Neches
Waterway was dredged through Sabine Lake past Sabine Pass to the Gulf of Mexico, and the
Port of Orange attained deep-water operations and invited the further expansion of oil
operations and chemical industries.

16

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

The Great Depression marked a very difficult period for Orange County. The population
remained relatively stable (15,149 in 1930 to 17,382 in 1940), but industrial establishments
declined to 25 by 1930 and employed only 938 workers. By 1940, the figure had fallen further
to 16 manufacturers and 527 employees. World War II and its defense needs led Orange
County to a recovery. Shipbuilding, long a local staple but moribund since 1918, reached new
heights. The population more than doubled to a record 40,567 in 1950, and manufacturing
activity grew to 33 establishments employing 3,835 by 1947. DuPont moved to Orange in 1944
followed by Allied, Spencer, Firestone, and Goodrich-Gulf, among other chemical and
petrochemical manufacturers. Farming and ranching played a diminishing role in the county’s
economy. Farms produced oranges and fruits, rice, Indian corn, oats, grass, cotton wool, peas
and beans, potatoes, sweet potatoes, soy beans, nursery stock, vegetables, and cattle.
Crayfish, also raised commercially, were featured during the annual Gumbo Cookoff held each
May. Unlike many of its neighbors in Texas and Louisiana, Orange County remained a bastion
of Democratic strength throughout its history. Presidential returns from 1968 to 1992 indicated
a strong Democratic plurality, with only the 1972 Nixon-McGovern election showing a GOP
selection. The population of the county grew from 40,567 in 1950 to 71,170 in 1970 and 83,838
in 1980 before declining slightly to 80,509 in 1990. County population centers with 1980
population figures include Orange (23,628), Vidor (12,117), Bridge City (7,667), West Orange
(4,610), and Pinehurst (3,055). Recreational facilities include boating and fishing on Lake
Sabine and the museums and historic homes of the city of Orange.

HJN 110121 AR

17

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and for
designation as Texas State Archeological Landmarks (SALs)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
on the THC’s online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the National Park Service’s (NPS’s) online
National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas State Historical Association’s and the
General Libraries at The University of Texas at Austin’s Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a
program of intensive and reconnaissance survey of the project area. No cultural resources
were documented as a result of this survey, so the second and third of these goals were not
pursued. The rest of this chapter presents the methodological background for the current
investigations and the specific survey methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey corridor. Archival research conducted on the THC’s
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas on October 27, 2011, indicated that no previous cultural
investigations have been conducted and no previous archeological sites have been recorded
within a 1.6-km (1.0-mi) radius of any of the 3 individual segments of the project area. One
historic-age cemetery, the Bland Cemetery, and 1 modern cemetery, the Autumn Oaks
Memorial Park Cemetery, are located in immediate proximity to the project area.

HJN 110121 AR

19

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

On October 13 to 14, 2011, Horizon archeologist Michael Mudd, under the overall
supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resource survey of
the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed construction project.
Field conditions were favorable at the time of the survey—the sky was clear and the
weather was excellent. Ground surface visibility ranged from poor to good depending on the
density of vegetation cover, though visibility was fair across most of the 3 segments of the APE.
All 3 segments of the APE are located within the ROWs of existing roads and highways; as
such, prior construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of the roads, bridges, and various
surface and subsurface utilities have resulted in extensive existing impacts within the project
area. Field methods consisted of conducting an intensive cultural resource survey of 1 of the
3 segments of the APE where IH 10 crosses over Cole Creek. The goal of investigations
conducted in the other 2 segments of the APE, where IH 10 and Old US 90 pass in front of the
Bland and Autumn Oaks Memorial Park cemeteries, respectively, focused on evaluating the
potential of the existing highway ROWs, in which the proposed pipelines would be installed, to
contain unmarked graves associated with the cemeteries.
In the IH 10 at Cole Creek segment of the project area, the proposed pipeline would be
installed within the existing ROW of the eastbound IH 10 frontage road south of the pavement
(Figures 3 and 4). The channel of Cole Creek is deeply incised into the adjacent Pleistoceneage clayey terraces, and no evidence of Holocene-age sediments was observed, though it is
mapped on geological maps of the area. Existing disturbances from road and bridge
construction and the excavation of drainage features within the existing ROW were extensive.
In general, intensive cultural resource survey activities entail a pedestrian walkover with
surface inspection as well as subsurface shovel testing. The IH 10 at Cole Creek segment of
the APE was traversed on foot by Horizon’s archeologist in parallel transects spaced no more
than 15 m (50 ft) apart and the modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for aboriginal
and historic-age cultural resources. The TSMASS for cultural resource surveys state that, for
linear projects, a minimum of 16 subsurface probes (e.g., shovel tests, auger tests, backhoe
trenches) per mile of 30-m- (100-ft-) wide ROW are required unless field conditions warrant
excavation of more probes (e.g., due to the presence of culturally sensitive areas) or less
probes (e.g., due to extensive prior disturbances or cultural low-probability areas). In the event
that a shovel test yields evidence of subsurface cultural deposits, additional shovel tests may be
necessary to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of the subsurface deposits associated
with the cultural resource. Thus, a minimum of 2 subsurface probes would be required within
the 122-m- (400-ft-) long by 15-m- (50-ft-) wide segment of the APE south of the eastbound
frontage road of IH 10 where it crosses Cole Creek. Horizon excavated 4 shovel tests in this
segment of the project area, including 2 on either side of the stream channel, thereby exceeding
the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size (Figure 5). Shovel testing revealed
shallow, clayey sediments composed of dense dark gray clay with common to abundant road
gravels.

20

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

Figure 3. View of IH 10 at Cole Creek Crossing (Facing W)

Figure 4. View of West Bank of IH 10 at Cole Creek Crossing (Facing E)

HJN 110121 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 5. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated in Project Area

22

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

In general, shovel tests measured approximately 30 centimeters (cm) (12 inches [in]) in
diameter and were excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the top
of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable, and all sediments are screened
through 6.35-millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth. In practice, shovel tests were terminated
at depths of 30 cm below surface (cmbs) due to the presence of dense Beaumont clay
sediments that possess minimal potential to contain intact archeological deposits at depth.
Specific shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching in stream terraces and other areas with
the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are
capable of reaching (approximately 80 to 100 cm below surface [cmbs] or more in sandy
sediments or 40 to 60 cmbs in clayey sediments). Due to the presence of dense Holocene and
Late Pleistocene clayey sediments on the modern ground surface with minimal potential to
contain intact, buried archeological deposits at depth, no backhoe trenches were excavated
during the survey. Pedestrian survey and shovel testing constituted an effective and adequate
technique for penetrating to the bottom of sediments with the potential to contain cultural
resources, and backhoe trenching was not considered to be necessary.
Field methods used to assess the potential for unmarked graves within the existing
ROWs of IH 10 and Old US 90 in the vicinity of the Bland and Autumn Oaks Memorial Park
cemeteries, respectively, consisted of inspecting of the physical characteristics of the existing
highway ROWs and conducting informant interviews with individuals knowledgeable about the
history and layout of the cemeteries. Specific results of the investigations of each cemetery are
presented in the following chapter.
This survey employed a non-collection policy for archeological materials. Diagnostic
artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and nondiagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were to be
described, sketched, and/or photodocumented in the field and replaced in the same location in
which they were found. As no cultural materials were encountered during the survey, the
collections policy was not brought into play.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 Code
of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3.

HJN 110121 AR

23

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The County is proposing to install approximately 2.9 km (1.8 mi) of subsurface sewer
and natural gas pipeline for the Orange County Infrastructure Improvements Project in Orange
County, Texas. The proposed project would involve excavation of approximately 1.0 km
(0.6 mi) of drainage ditches and approximately 1.9 km (1.2 mi) of subsurface sewer force main
and natural gas pipelines. These improvements would be constructed within the existing ROW
of FM 1422, IH 10, and Old US 90. Due to the extent of prior impacts within these existing road
and highway ROWs resulting from prior construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of roadway
and bridge facilities, initial consultation conducted with the THC resulted in the determination
that the project area did not need to be surveyed for cultural resources in its entirety. However,
the THC required that 3 short segments of the project area should be surveyed for cultural
resources. Specifically, these 3 segments consist of (1) an approximately 122-m- (400-ft-) long
segment of the eastbound frontage road of IH 10 where it crosses Cole Creek; (2) an
approximately 137-m- (450-ft-) long segment of the eastbound frontage road of IH 10 that
passes in front of the Bland Cemetery; and (3) an approximately 137-m- (450-ft-) long segment
of Old US 90 where it passes in front of the Autumn Oaks Memorial Park Cemetery. The
proposed subsurface utilities would be installed along the south sides of their respective
highways within ROWs measuring approximately 15 m (50 ft) in width. Thus, the APE of the
proposed undertaking consists of 3 separate segments of proposed pipeline ROW measuring a
total of 396 m (1,300 ft) and covering a total area of about 0.6 ha (1.5 ac).
On October 13 to 14, 2011, Horizon archeologist Michael Mudd, under the overall
supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resource survey of
the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed construction project. The survey was performed under Texas Antiquities Permit
No. 6064.

5.1

IH 10 AT COLE CREEK

In the IH 10 at Cole Creek segment of the project area, the proposed pipeline would be
installed within the existing ROW of the eastbound IH 10 frontage road south of the pavement
(see Figures 3 and 4). The channel of Cole Creek is deeply incised into the adjacent
Pleistocene-age clayey terraces, and no evidence of Holocene-age sediments was observed,
though it is mapped on geological maps of the area. Existing disturbances from road and bridge
construction and the excavation of drainage features within the existing ROW were extensive.

HJN 110121 AR

25

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

Horizon excavated 4 shovel tests in this segment of the project area, including 2 on either side
of the stream channel, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this
size (see Figure 5). Shovel testing revealed shallow, clayey sediments composed of dense
dark gray clay with common to abundant road gravels.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within this segment of the
APE as a result of the survey.

5.2

IH 10 AT BLAND CEMETERY

The historic-age Bland Cemetery is located near the western end of the project area off
the south side of the eastbound frontage road of IH 10. Investigations in this segment of the
APE focused on assessing the potential for unmarked graves to be present within the existing
ROW of the IH 10 frontage road within which the proposed pipeline would be installed. The
existing IH 10 frontage road ROW south of the pavement consists of a slightly elevated roadbed
constructed on a gently sloping section of artificial fill; a linear drainage ditch; and a gravel
driveway that provides entrance to the cemetery (Figure 6). The northern boundary of the
cemetery is marked by a chain-link fence. Based on the physical characteristics of the existing
ROW where it passes in front of the Bland Cemetery, there does not appear to be any potential
for unmarked graves to be present within the road ROW.

Figure 6. View of IH 10 Frontage Road ROW in Front of Bland Cemetery (Facing E)

26

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

According to a state historical marker erected on the site, the Bland Cemetery was
named after Peyton Bland, a veteran of the Texas Revolution and Civil War who later served as
Orange County Commissioner (Figure 7). Bland died in 1873 of pneumonia and was buried in a
now-unknown location near the San Bernard River in Wharton County. Headstones marking
the earliest interments in the cemetery, located along the back (southern) end of the cemetery,
indicate the cemetery was first used around 1875. The headstones closest to the northern
(highway) end of the cemetery indicate the cemetery is still in active use.

Figure 7. Bland Cemetery Historical Marker

HJN 110121 AR

27

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

In order to obtain more information about the potential for unmarked graves beyond the
marked cemetery boundaries, Horizon’s Principal Investigator contacted Mr. Pete Frederick, the
manager of the Bland Cemetery. Mr. Frederick, a 78-year resident of the area, reports that his
parents, grandparents, and great grandparents are buried in the cemetery. Mr. Frederick states
that the eastbound frontage road of IH 10 that currently passes in front of the cemetery was
constructed within the former ROW of Old US 90 and that the existing ROW and the northern
cemetery boundary have not been moved in his memory. While the earliest interments in the
cemetery occurred in the latter quarter of the 19th century and would therefore be beyond Mr.
Frederick’s living memory, Mr. Frederick confirmed that the earliest interments are all along the
southern side of the cemetery opposite the highway. The portion of the cemetery located near
the highway contains only the most recent interments, and Mr. Frederick does not believe there
is any potential for unmarked graves to occur beyond the cemetery boundaries on the highway
side of the cemetery.

5.3

OLD US 90 AT AUTUMN OAKS MEMORIAL PARK CEMETERY

The Autumn Oaks Memorial Park Cemetery is a modern cemetery located near the
eastern end of the project area off the south side of Old US 90. Investigations in this segment
of the APE focused on assessing the potential for unmarked graves to be present within the
existing ROW of Old US 90 within which the proposed pipeline would be installed. The existing
highway ROW south of the pavement consists of a slightly elevated roadbed constructed on a
gently sloping section of artificial fill; a linear drainage ditch; and a gravel driveway that provides
entrance to the cemetery (Figures 8 and 9). The northern boundary of the cemetery is not
marked by a fence; however, there is a prominent drainage ditch within the existing ROW that
provides a sharp demarcation near the edge of the existing highway ROW. Based on the
physical characteristics of the existing ROW where it passes in front of the Autumn Oaks
Memorial Park Cemetery, there does not appear to be any potential for unmarked graves to be
present within the road ROW. While there are several headstones marking graves immediately
adjacent to the northern cemetery boundary, all of the headstones in the cemetery date after the
early 1970s.
In order to obtain more information about the potential for unmarked graves beyond the
marked cemetery boundaries, Horizon’s Principal Investigator contacted Mr. Woody Dorman, Jr,
the Funeral Director and co-owner of the Dorman Funeral Home. The Autumn Oaks Memorial
Park Cemetery is owned and operated by the Dorman Funeral Home in Orange, Texas. The
Dorman family, the owners and operators of the Dorman Funeral Home, purchased the Autumn
Oaks Memorial Park Cemetery in 1986. Mr. Woody Dorman, Jr., reports that he is in
possession of a complete plot map and records extending back to the founding of the cemetery
in the early 1970s. Mr. Dorman reports that no unmarked graves are located within the highway
ROW beyond the cemetery boundaries.

28

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

Figure 8. View of Old US 90 ROW in Front of Autumn Oaks Cemetery (Facing E)

Figure 9. Close-up of Unmarked Boundary of Autumn Oaks Cemetery (Facing E)

HJN 110121 AR

29

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with
important historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of
Texas, archeological resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the
significance of archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs,
respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory
process.

HJN 110121 AR

31

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.1

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually eligible for inclusion in the NRHP only under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

32

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ARCHEOLOGICAL LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are
located in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any
county, city, or political subdivision of the state are state archeological landmarks and are
eligible for designation.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under
Section 26.8 of Part 2 of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may
designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

6.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologists, the modern ground surface was
thoroughly inspected for cultural resources, and a total of 4 shovel tests were excavated within
the IH 10 at Cole Creek segment of the APE, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for
a project area of this size. No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within
the APE as a result of the survey.
Shovel tests were not excavated within the 2 segments of proposed ROW that pass in
front of the Bland and Autumn Oaks Memorial Park cemeteries; rather, investigations in these
areas focused on assessing the potential for unmarked graves to be present within the
proposed ROW. Both of these segments of the project area consist of narrow existing highway
ROWs that are characterized by grassy embankments and drainage ditches. Based on the
physical characteristics of the existing ROWs where they pass in front of the cemeteries, there

HJN 110121 AR

33

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

does not appear to be any potential for unmarked graves to be present within the road ROWs.
In order to obtain more information about the potential for unmarked graves beyond the marked
cemetery boundaries, Horizon’s Principal Investigator contacted local informants with specific
knowledge of the cemeteries.
The Autumn Oaks Memorial Park Cemetery, located off the south side of Old US 90
near the eastern end of the project area, was established in the early 1970s. The Autumn Oaks
Memorial Park Cemetery is owned and operated by the Dorman Funeral Home in Orange,
Texas. The Dorman family, the owners and operators of the Dorman Funeral Home, purchased
the Autumn Oaks Memorial Park Cemetery in 1986. Mr. Woody Dorman, Jr., the Funeral
Director and co-owner of the Dorman Funeral Home, reports that he is in possession of a
complete plot map and records extending back to the founding of the cemetery in the early
1970s. Mr. Dorman reports that no unmarked graves are located within the highway ROW
beyond the cemetery boundaries.
The Bland Cemetery is a historic-age cemetery located off the south side of the
eastbound frontage road of IH 10 near the western end of the project area. Horizon contacted
Mr. Pete Frederick, the manager of the Bland Cemetery. Mr. Frederick, a 78-year resident of
the area, reports that his parents, grandparents, and great grandparents are buried in the
cemetery. Mr. Frederick states that the eastbound frontage road of IH 10 that currently passes
in front of the cemetery was constructed within the former ROW of Old US 90 and that the
existing road ROW and the northern cemetery boundary have not moved in his memory. While
the earliest interments in the cemetery occurred in the latter quarter of the 19th century and
would therefore be beyond Mr. Frederick’s living memory, Mr. Frederick indicated that the
earliest interments are all along the southern side of the cemetery opposite the highway. The
portion of the cemetery located near the highway contains only the most recent interments, and
Mr. Frederick does not believe there is any potential for unmarked graves to occur beyond the
cemetery boundaries on the highway side of the cemetery.

6.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the negative results of the survey-level investigations documented in this
report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed
undertaking. No new cultural resources were identified as a result of intensive survey activities
at the crossing of IH 10 over Cole Creek, and no previously documented cultural resources are
present in the vicinity of the project area that would be adversely affected by the proposed
undertaking. Furthermore, based on the physical characteristics of existing highway ROWs that
pass in front of the Bland and Autumn Oaks Memorial Park cemeteries and the results of
informant interviews, no unmarked graves are believed to exist with the existing road ROWs
beyond the marked cemetery boundaries that would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Thus, no mechanical scraping operations to prospect for unmarked graves appear to be
warranted in connection with the proposed undertaking, and no further investigations are
recommended.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. As no cultural resources were identified that meet

34

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

the criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as State
Archeological Landmarks (SALs) according to 13 TAC 26, no further archeological work is
recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the
proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains
or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 110121 AR

35

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Alford, J.J., and J.C. Holmes
1985
Meander Scars as Evidence of Major Climate Changes in Southeast Louisiana.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 75:395-403.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory,
pp. 72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The
Florida State Museum, Gainesville.

Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Blum, M.D., and D.M. Price
1994
Glacio-Eustatic and Climatic Controls on Quaternary Alluvial Plain Deposition, Texas
Coastal Plain. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies
44:85-92.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V. M. Bryant, Jr., and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.

HJN 110121 AR

37

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Crout, J.D., D.G. Symmank, and G.A. Peterson
1965
Soil Survey of Jefferson County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
DuBar, J.R., T.E. Ewing, E.L. Lundelius, E.G. Otvos, and C.D. Winkler
1991
Quaternary Geology of the Gulf of Mexico Coastal Plain. In The Geology of North
America, Volume K2: Quaternary Non-Glacial Geomophology, Conterminous United
States, edited by R. B. Morrison, pp. 583-610. Geological Society of America,
Boulder, Colorado.
Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas.
Reports of Investigations, No. 8,
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Fisher, W.L.
1982
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Houston Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Fisk, H.N.
1938
Geology of Grant and LaSalle Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 10.
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.
1940

Louisiana

Geology of Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 18. Louisiana
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.

Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.

38

110121_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Johnson, J.E.
1966
An Economic History of Orange County, Texas, Prior to 1940. Unpublished M.A.
thesis, Lamar State College of Technology.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
McMahan, C.A., R.G. Frye, and K.L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:163.

Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.

HJN 110121 AR

39

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C.Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc.,
Corpus Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330

Shelby, C.A., M.K. McGowen, S. Aranow, W.L. Fisher, L.F. Brown, Jr., J.H. McGowen, C.G.
Groat, and V.E. Barnes
1968
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Beaumont Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin (Revised 1992).
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C.
Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2011
Orange County. The Handbook of Texas Online, <http://www.tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/hco03.html>. October 27, 2011.
Van Siclen, D.C.
1985
Pleistocene Meander-Belt Ridge Patterns in the Vicinity of Houston, Texas.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 35:525-532.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

40

110121_arch_survey_report

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Summary Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Orange County
Sewer and Natural Gas Infrastructure Improvements Project, Orange County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates

1

ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

1

416843

3333643

0-30

Dark gray clay with abundant road
gravels

None

2

416872

3333637

0-30

Dark gray clay with abundant road
gravels

None

3

416748

3333653

0-30

Dark gray clay with abundant road
gravels

None

4

416787

3333652

0-30

Dark gray clay with abundant road
gravels

None

Soils

Artifacts

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 110121 AR

A-1

