Intensive Archeological Survey of
3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the Intersection of
FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard,
Williamson County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

HJN 060194 AR
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4273

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

HNTB Corporation
Austin, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

March 2006

Intensive Archeological Survey of
3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the Intersection of
FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard,
Williamson County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

HNTB Corporation
1701 Director’s Boulevard, Suite 770
Austin, Texas 78744

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
2600 Dellana Lane, Suite 200
Austin, Texas 78746

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 060194

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4273

March 2006

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The municipality of Williamson County, Texas, proposes to expand Farm-to-Market
Road (FM) 3405 along an approximately 457-meter (m) (1,500-foot [ft]) segment of the existing
road on either side of the intersection with the future Ronald Reagan Boulevard in western
Williamson County, Texas. West of the Ronald Reagan Boulevard intersection, the proposed
undertaking would expand the existing 30-m- (100-ft-) wide right-of-way (ROW) of FM 3405 by
12 m (40 ft) on both sides of the road, for a total width of 24 m (80 ft) of new ROW measuring
about 282 m (925 ft) in length. East of the Ronald Reagan Boulevard intersection, the proposed
undertaking would expand a 91-m- (300-ft-) long segment of the existing FM 3405 ROW on the
south side of the road as well as a 15-m (50-ft) segment on the north side of the road by an
average of about 8 m (25 ft). In addition, the County proposes to construct an interchange with
County Road (CR) 258 about 213 m (700 ft) east of its existing intersection with FM 3405. This
new interchange measures approximately 76 m (250 ft) in length by 18 m (60 ft) in width and
would be constructed in the angle formed by FM 3405 and CR 258. All construction would
occur within proposed new ROW. The area of potential effect (APE) would cover an area of
approximately 1.6 hectares (ha) (3.9 acres [ac]).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the municipality of Williamson County,
a political subdivision of the State of Texas, and will be reviewed by the Texas Department of
Transportation (TxDOT); as such, the project would fall under the dual jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas via the involvement of Williamson County and TxDOT as well as the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) via the indirect involvement of the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA). As the project represents a public undertaking with the potential to
impact significant cultural resources, Williamson County was required to provide for a cultural
resource evaluation of the proposed impact area to meet its legal responsibilities under existing
federal and state guidelines, including Sections 106 and 110 of the National Historic
Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966 (P.L. 89-665; 80 Stat. 915; 16 USC §470 et seq.) and the
Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977 [revised 1987], Title 9,
Chapter 191, VACS, Art. 6145-9).
To meet its responsibilities under these statutes, Williamson County tasked Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), through its engineering contractor HNTB Corporation
(HNTB), to conduct an archeological survey of the APE associated with the proposed project.
The existing ROW of FM 3405 as well as the proposed future alignment of Ronald Reagan

HJN 060194 AR

iii

Management Summary

Boulevard have already been surveyed and cleared for archeological resources; therefore, only
the proposed new ROW was surveyed. On 2 October 2006, Horizon archeologists Marie J.
Archambeault and Abigail Peyton, under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal
Investigator, conducted an intensive survey of the APE to locate any cultural resource
properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project. This survey
was conducted by Horizon under subcontract to HNTB and under Texas Antiquities Permit
No. 4273.
Horizon’s archeologists traversed the project area and thoroughly examined the modern
ground surface for historic and prehistoric artifacts, cultural features, or other evidence of past
cultural activity. Portions of the project area were covered in isolated stands of deciduous
hardwood trees and a light cover of short grasses; however, relatively little topsoil was present
in the project area and the underlying fractured, indurated limestone bedrock was exposed in
many areas. Ground surface visibility was near 100% in most areas. In addition, Horizon’s
archeologists exceeded the minimum survey standards for a project area of this size by
excavating 21 shovel tests in the APE. Shovel tests measured 30 cm in diameter and were
excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below surface, to the top of pre-Holocene deposits,
or to the maximum depth practicable. In practice, shovel tests were terminated prematurely due
to the presence of near-surface deposits of fractured, indurated limestone bedrock at depths of
0 to 5 cm below surface (cmbs). All sediments were screened through 6.35-millimeter (mm
[0.25-in]) hardware cloth and subsequently replaced in the shovel test hole from which they
were excavated.
No archeological resources, historic or prehistoric, were documented as a result of the
intensive cultural resource survey of the project area. No cultural resources were encountered
on the modern ground surface or in any of the shovel tests excavated during the survey. While
several archeological sites have been recorded in the general vicinity of the project area, most
of them along the banks of the North Fork of the San Gabriel River to the south of the project
area, no previously recorded archeological sites are present within or in the immediate vicinity of
the project area. Furthermore, no listed National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) historic
properties or State Archeological Landmarks (SALs) are located in the vicinity of the project
area.
Based on the results of the intensive cultural resource survey of the proposed project
area, no potentially significant archeological resources would be affected by the proposed
undertaking. No new archeological sites were identified in the project area as a result of the
survey, and no previously recorded archeological sites are present in the immediate vicinity. No
further investigations are recommended within the proposed new right-of-way surrounding the
future intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, and archeological clearance is
recommended for this project. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial
furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and TxDOT should be notified of the discovery.

iv

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ..................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING....................................................................................5
2.1.1 Geology and Geomorphology .............................................................6
2.1.2 Climate ...............................................................................................7
2.1.3 Biota ...................................................................................................8

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND .....................................................................................9
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 12,000 to 8500 B.P.).................................................9
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 8500 to 1200 B.P.) ........................................................10
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1200 to 350 B.P.)..............................................10
3.4
Historic Period (ca. 350 B.P. to Present) ......................................................10

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................15
4.1
Archival Research ........................................................................................15
4.2
Survey Methods ...........................................................................................16

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................21

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................23
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................23
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....24
6.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Archeological Landmark...................25
6.4
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................26
6.5
Management Recommendations..................................................................26

7.0

REFERENCES CITED.............................................................................................27

HJN 060194 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.

vi

Location of Project Area.............................................................................................2
View of Existing and New Right-of-Way along FM 3405 in Northwest Quadrant ......17
Typical View of New Right-of-Way along CR 258 Interchange .................................17
Locations of Shovel Tests in the Project Area ..........................................................19

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The municipality of Williamson County, Texas, proposes to expand Farm-to-Market
Road (FM) 3405 along an approximately 457-meter (m) (1,500-foot [ft]) segment of the existing
road on either side of the intersection with the future Ronald Reagan Boulevard in western
Williamson County, Texas (Figure 1). West of the Ronald Reagan Boulevard intersection, the
proposed undertaking would expand the existing 30-m- (100-ft-) wide right-of-way (ROW) of
FM 3405 by 12 m (40 ft) on both sides of the road, for a total width of 24 m (80 ft) of new ROW
measuring about 282 m (925 ft) in length. East of the Ronald Reagan Boulevard intersection,
the proposed undertaking would expand a 91-m- (300-ft-) long segment of the existing FM 3405
ROW on the south side of the road as well as a 15-m (50-ft) segment on the north side of the
road by an average of about 8 m (25 ft). In addition, the County proposes to construct an
interchange with County Road (CR) 258 about 213 m (700 ft) east of its existing intersection
with FM 3405. This new interchange measures approximately 76 m (250 ft) in length by 18 m
(60 ft) in width and would be constructed in the angle formed by FM 3405 and CR 258. All
construction would occur within proposed new ROW. The area of potential effect (APE) would
cover an area of approximately 1.6 hectares (ha) (3.9 acres [ac]).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the municipality of Williamson County,
a political subdivision of the State of Texas, and will be reviewed by the Texas Department of
Transportation (TxDOT); as such, the project would fall under the dual jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas via the involvement of Williamson County and TxDOT as well as the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) via the indirect involvement of the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA). As the project represents a public undertaking with the potential to
impact significant cultural resources, Williamson County was required to provide for a cultural
resource evaluation of the proposed impact area to meet its legal responsibilities under existing
federal and state guidelines, including Sections 106 and 110 of the National Historic
Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966 (P.L. 89-665; 80 Stat. 915; 16 USC §470 et seq.) and the
Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977 [revised 1987], Title 9,
Chapter 191, VACS, Art. 6145-9).
To meet its responsibilities under these statutes, Williamson County tasked Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), through its engineering contractor HNTB Corporation
(HNTB), to conduct an archeological survey of the APE associated with the proposed project.
The existing ROW of FM 3405 as well as the proposed future alignment of Ronald Reagan

HJN 060194 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area

2

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

Boulevard have already been surveyed and cleared for archeological resources; therefore, only
the proposed new ROW was surveyed. On 2 October 2006, Horizon archeologists Marie J.
Archambeault and Abigail Peyton, under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal
Investigator, conducted an intensive survey of the APE to locate any cultural resource
properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project. This survey
was conducted by Horizon under subcontract to HNTB and under Texas Antiquities Permit
No. 4273.

HJN 060194 AR

3

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

The intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard is located in western
Williamson County, Texas. Williamson County is situated near the southern end of the
Lampasas Cut Plain (Hill 1901; Hill and Vaughn 1900; Johnson 1931:125), near the center of
Texas and close to the common junction of 3 significant physiographic provinces—the
Blackland Prairie, the Edwards Plateau, and the Lampasas Cut Plain. The Blackland Prairie,
the narrow physiographic zone situated between the Edwards Plateau to the west and the Gulf
Coastal Plain to the east, is a low, rolling land that extends in a narrow band along the eastern
edge of the Balcones fault zone from the Red River Valley in northeastern Texas to the
southern edge of the Edwards Plateau. This is an area of low topographic relief and poor
drainage in which water often ponds after rainstorms and streams flow at very gentle gradients.
The Edwards Plateau and Balcones Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that
arcs across Texas to form a distinct boundary between uplands composed primarily of
limestone bedrock and lower plains composed mostly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary
is marked by an abrupt scarp (the Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational
ramp, but the entire length of this transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography,
bedrock, hydrology, soil, vegetation, and animal life.
Specifically, the project area is located within the Lampasas Cut Plain, a roughly
triangular area of rolling hill country in Central and North-Central Texas situated between the
Brazos and Colorado rivers. The Lampasas Cut Plain forms a limestone upland that has been
dissected by the Brazos River and its tributaries, resulting in landforms characterized by
moderately broad, shallow valleys. Soil is thin to absent on the bedrock and supports a mixed
savanna flora, whereas soil is moderately deep in valley floors, where it supports mixed riparian
woodlands and forests. Karst features include sinks, caves, and rockshelters, but such are
neither common nor extensive. Edwards chert is locally abundant but not widespread across
the Lampasas Cut Plain and is of high quality in some places.
Hydrologically, the study area is situated within the Brazos River basin. The North Fork
of the San Gabriel River flows west to east about 0.6 mi (0.9 km) south of the project area, and
the project is located atop an upland divide between Anderson Branch to the west and an
unnamed intermittent stream to the east, both of which flow southward into the North Fork of the
San Gabriel River, which in turn flows eastward to its confluence with the South Fork of the San
Gabriel River. From this point, the San Gabriel River flows roughly 56 km (35 mi) east-

HJN 060194 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

northeast, discharging into the Brazos River near Hearne, Texas. The Brazos River, in turn,
flows southeastward across the Blackland Prairie and Gulf Coastal Plain, ultimately discharging
into the Gulf of Mexico a short distance northeast of East Matagorda Bay.
The project area is situated on the uplands just north of the North Fork of the San
Gabriel River in western Williamson County, Texas. Elevations across the project area range
from about 262 to 271 m (860 to 890 ft) above mean sea level (amsl).
2.1.1

Geology and Geomorphology

Multiple geological formations are associated with the physiographic province in which
the project area is located. In general, the bedrock throughout Central Texas is composed of
Upper Cretaceous formations that dip slightly to the east and are predominantly composed of
calcareous clay, shale, limestone, and marl, with a small portion of sandstone (Sellards et al.
1932). These geologic units are overlain in some areas by unconsolidated Quaternary alluvial
floodplain and fluviatile terrace deposits. On the surface, these formations weather into a
rounded, gently rolling topography with a few bluff faces exposed in stream valleys where more
resistant strata are present.
Specifically, the project area is situated on the upper bed of the Cretaceous Glen Rose
Formation (Proctor et al. 1974), which typically consists of even-bedded strata of argillaceous,
arenaceous, chalky limestones that alternate with thin strata of marly, arenaceous clay. Overall,
the Glen Rose Formation is about 122 m (400 ft) thick—individual beds vary in thickness,
though the thickness of each individual bed is relatively uniform. The upper part of the
formation is mainly thin-bedded and forms a stairstep-like topography created by alternating
resistant and recessive beds. In the thick-bedded lower part, the stairstep topography is less
well developed, and in places is absent. The Glen Rose Formation is calcareous and includes
clay and sand as accessory material, and siliceous grains are so finely triturated that they form
an almost impalpable powder. This siliceous material gradually diminishes upward in the beds,
and the lime increases proportionately in both the indurated beds and the marls.
Soil in Williamson County, Texas, formed in several types of parent material (Werchan
and Coker 1983). In the western part of the county, where the project area is located, the
parent material consists primarily of limestone, dolomite, and interbedded limestone and marl.
The project area is underlain by the Denton-Eckrant-Doss soil association, the dominant surface
soil overlying the Glen Rose Formation (Werchan and Coker 1983). The Denton-Eckrant-Doss
association is composed of moderately deep, shallow and very shallow, calcareous, clayey,
cobbly and stony soils formed in indurated, fractured limestone or limy sediments on uplands.
The Eckrant soils are generally found on steeper hills and ridges, Doss soils are typically on
broad ridges and side slopes, and Denton soils are mainly in valleys. This map unit comprises
about 21% of Williamson County.
Specifically, the project area is situated on the Eckrant cobbly clay, 1 to 8% slopes
(EaD), soil series (Werchan and Coker 1983), which is found predominantly on undulating
uplands. Typically, the surface layer is about 33 centimeters (cm) (13 inches [in]) thick—the
upper part consists of dark grayish-brown, cobbly clay, and the lower part is dark brown cobbly

6

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

clay. The sediment is calcareous and moderately alkaline, and approximately 50% of the
modern ground surface is covered with fragments of limestone measuring 10 to 20 cm (4 to
8 in) across. The underlying material is coarsely fractured, indurated limestone.
2.1.2

Climate

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
Bryant and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central
Texas from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial
period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands
were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985).
During the Post-Glacial period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more
stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas.
The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic
conditions lasting from roughly 6,000 to 5,000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway
(1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably
achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Williamson County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern
climate is typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate
is influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified
by polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer,
and fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.
On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature manifest regional
clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east to west and mean
annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast (Larkin and Bomar
1983:18, 50). Climate has fluctuated from subtropical humid to subtropical subhumid in western
Williamson County. Average annual precipitation totals 81 cm (32 in) and temperature
averages 19°C (67°F) annually, ranging from 36°C (96°F) in August (the warmest month) to
15°C (59°F) in January (the coldest month). During this time, however, drier periods lasting
from 3 to 7 years occurred, when total annual rainfall ranged from 30 to 64 cm (12 to 25 in)
followed by abnormally wet years with 114 to 127 cm (45 to 50 in) of rainfall.
Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are
associated with frontal storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with
warm, moist air masses moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The
topographic discontinuity along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf

HJN 060194 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

storm trace and increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall
(Baker 1975). Two extreme examples are the excess of 91 cm (36 in) of rain that fell within an
18-hour period in the vicinity of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 56-cm (22-in) deluge
that fell in less than 3 hours near O’Harris, Texas, in May 1935 (Baker 1975). Lower rainfall
amounts are characteristic of winter and late summer. In winter, frontal storms pass so
frequently that there is little time for moisture to increase, and prevailing upper-level winds from
west to east often dominate over meridional flow, meaning that much of the available moisture
is derived from the Pacific rather than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer, cool fronts rarely
penetrate into the region, and rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal convective storms.
2.1.3

Biota

The project area is in the southwestern portion of the Texan biotic province (Blair 1950),
an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces and the
grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some species reach the
limits of their ecological range within the Texan province. The boundary, characterized as
“approximate,” between Blair’s (1950) Texan and Balconian provinces passes through western
Williamson County in the vicinity of the project area.
The fauna associated with this region are represented by a mixture of species from the
Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, Kansan, Balconian, and Texan biotic provinces.
Common mammalian species include white-tailed deer, opossum, eastern cottontail rabbit,
raccoon, striped skunk, hispid cotton rat, white-footed mouse, nine-banded armadillo, and fox
squirrel. Common bird species include northern bobwhite, eastern meadowlark, mourning dove,
killdeer, field sparrow, red-tailed hawk, turkey vulture, belted kingfisher, and mockingbird.
Reptile and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include six-lined racerunner, rat
snake, eastern hognose snake, Gulf Coast toad, Texas spiny lizard, rough green snake,
copperhead, western diamondback rattlesnake, green tree frog, Blanchard’s cricket frog,
diamondback water snake, Houston toad, and green anole. Although small herds of bison and
antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early historic periods, these species are
no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

8

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) Central Texas Archeological
Region. The indigenous human inhabitants of Central Texas practiced a generally nomadic
hunting and gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory, and, in contrast to much of the rest of
North America, mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly
through time in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 12,000 TO 8500 B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (cf. Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (12,000 to 8500 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various
periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted,
lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers,
gravers, and bone foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized
into egalitarian bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic
subsistence and settlement pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence
patterns in Central Texas are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence
focused on the exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the
PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as
has been documented elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern
appears to have been practiced throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the
PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point
styles. These include the Early PaleoIndian period, which is recognized based on large, fluted
projectile points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late

HJN 060194 AR

9

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

PaleoIndian period, which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 8500 TO 1200 B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(8500 to 1200 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Central Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture
shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of
groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these
3 subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as well. Perhaps most
markedly, burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod, continuing into the
Late Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic subperiod. In
addition, the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered to constitute
evidence of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least partially
accounts for the lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1200 TO 350 B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 350 B.P.) (Collins 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas,
unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The
Late Prehistoric period is generally divided into 2 phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin
phase sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to
suggest that the Austin-phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north, and
lack the ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 B.P. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay.
However, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The

10

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as increased
participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time that
heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian
population was greatly diminished.
The earliest known historical occupants of Williamson County were the Tonkawa
Indians.1 The Tonkawa traditionally followed buffalo herds on foot and periodically set fire to the
prairie to aid them in their hunts. During the 18th century, however, they made the transition to
a horse-based culture and used firearms to a limited extent. Decimated by European diseases
and by warfare with the Cherokee and Comanche, the Tonkawa were generally friendly towards
the early settlers of Williamson County but were nevertheless removed from Central Texas by
the 1850s. Lipan Apaches and Comanches were also associated with the area that would
become Williamson County. Before the arrival of Europeans in the area, the Lipan Apaches
ranged through the western part of present Williamson County, and after Spanish missions were
established on the San Gabriel River in the 18th century, the Indians frequently raided the
missions for horses. Their enemies, the Comanches, arrived in the area in the 18th century and
lived in parts of the territory of Williamson County until as late as 1838. After they were crowded
out by Anglo settlers, the Comanches continued to raid settlements in the county until the
1860s. There also appear to have been small numbers of Kiowa, Yojuane, Tawakoni, and
Mayeye Indians living in the county at the time of the earliest Anglo settlements.
While Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca may have traveled through the area in the
16th century, it was probably first explored by Europeans in the late 17th century, when Capt.
Alonso De León sought a route between San Antonio and the Spanish missions in East Texas
that would serve as a drier alternative to the more southerly Camino Real. The new route
passed through the area of Williamson County along Brushy Creek and the San Gabriel River
and was called Camino de Arriba. In 1716, 2 explorers in the Spanish service, Louis Juchereau
de St. Denis and Domingo Ramón, led an expedition that passed through the area and camped
on Brushy Creek and the San Gabriel River, naming them respectively Arroyo de las Bendítas
Ánimas and Rio de San Xavier. The San Xavier missions, which were founded in the mid18th century and occupied a series of sites along the San Gabriel River, were just over the
eastern border of Williamson County in present-day Milam County, and the area was
extensively explored by the Spanish. During the Mexican period, parts of the county were
awarded as land grants, first to several Mexican families, then as part of Robertson’s colony, but
no settlement resulted from these grants.
Anglo settlement began during the Texas Revolution and the early days of the Republic
of Texas, when the area was part of Milam County. In 1835, in an attempt to strengthen the
frontier against Indian attack, a military post was built near the headwaters of Brushy Creek in
1

Much of the following discussion of Williamson County history derives from Makemson (1904),
Scarbrough (1973), and Texas State Historical Association (2004).

HJN 060194 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

what would become southwestern Williamson County and was named for Capt. John J.
Tumlinson, Jr., the commander of the company of Texas Rangers who garrisoned the post.
The post was abandoned in February of 1836, when its garrison was withdrawn to deal with the
Mexican invasion. In 1838, the first civilian settlement was established by Dr. Thomas Kenney
and a party of settlers who built a fort, named Kenney’s Fort, on Brushy Creek near the site of
the present-day crossing of the Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad. Several other sites on Brushy
Creek were settled soon after, but Indian raids kept Anglo settlement in check, and a number of
the early pioneers, including Kenney, were killed by Indians over the next few years.
In 1842, many of the early farms were abandoned when Governor Sam Houston advised
settlers to pull back from the frontier. The Indian threat eased after 1846, and part of the influx
of settlers who came to Texas after its annexation traveled to the frontier along Brushy Creek
and the San Gabriel River. By 1848, there were at least 250 settlers in what was then western
Milam County, and in the early months of that year 107 of them signed a petition to organize a
new county. Recognizing that the petitioners needed a seat of local government that was
considerably closer to them than Milam County, the Texas legislature established Williamson
County on 13 March 1848, naming it for prominent judge and soldier Robert M. Williamson.
Georgetown, the county seat, was laid out during the summer of that year, and the district court
was in session by October. According to the census of 1850, Williamson County had a
population of 1,379 Anglos and 155 slaves living in agricultural communities on Brushy Creek
and the San Gabriel. As was common in other frontier counties, most of the improved acreage
was used to grow corn. Three families owned 15 or more slaves in 1850, but family farms and
subsistence agriculture remained the norm prior to the Civil War. While most of the settlers had
moved to Texas from other southern states, particularly Tennessee, a substantial contingent
came from Vermilion County, Illinois, and this latter group remained pro-Union and Republican
in its political orientation during the secession crisis.
On the eve of the Civil War, Williamson County had moved beyond the frontier stage
and was a populous, agriculturally diverse county. The Anglo population tripled between 1850
and 1860 to 3,638, while the slave population grew even more dramatically to 891, six times the
number of slaves in 1850. Agricultural pursuits were quite varied and reflected the county’s
geographical diversity. Farmers used the rich blackland soils in the eastern half of the county to
grow wheat and corn. Cotton was introduced in the 1850s, but only 271 bales were grown in
1860, and it was not an important cash crop for most farmers. The early settlers had found
large herds of wild cattle in the 1840s, and cattle ranching for both home consumption and the
market was widespread throughout the county by 1860. The number of cattle on county
ranches had more than tripled from 11,973 head in 1850 to 38,114 head in 1860. Similarly, the
number of sheep grew from 2,937 producing 3,499 pounds of wool in 1850 to 16,952 sheep and
32,994 pounds of wool in 1860.
Williamson County was marked by political divisions during the secession crisis,
divisions that were carried over into the Civil War and Reconstruction. Unionist sentiment was
strong in the county, and a resolution denouncing secession was adopted by a Texas
Constitutional Union party meeting in Round Rock in 1860. One of the county’s delegates to the
secession convention, Thomas Proctor Hughes, was among the 8 who voted against the

12

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

ordinance of secession. When the ordinance was referred to a statewide election, Williamson
County was one of 19 counties to oppose it, rejecting secession by 480 to 349 votes. When the
war came, most of the citizens of Williamson County supported the Confederate cause, and at
least 5 companies were raised in the county; an independent “spy” company under James O.
Rice, a company of Texas Rangers for border defense under William C. Dalrymple, and
companies in the Fourth, Seventh, and Sixteenth Texas Cavalry regiments. While some of
those who had opposed secession became active Confederate supporters, others remained
loyal to the Union and fled to Mexico or the North, and a number enlisted in the Union army. In
July 1863, 8 Williamson County men were caught by Confederate troops while traveling to
Mexico and were hung near Bandera, Texas, and other Unionists were persecuted during the
war. The pattern of violence within the community continued into the summer following the end
of the war, when several men were arrested for “flagrant crimes” and “illegal persecution of
Union men.” In September 1865, a mass meeting of the citizens of Williamson County was held
on the San Gabriel River near Georgetown, and the gathering set a general tone of
reconciliation, which seems to have characterized the Reconstruction period in Williamson
County, a period which ended with the return of county government to conservative Democratic
control in 1869. Freed slaves formed several new communities, and the county seems to have
been free of much of the political and racial strife that occurred in other Texas counties during
Reconstruction. On the other hand, there was a great deal of crime, much of it violent, in the
later 19th century. Horse and cattle thieves and some of the more famous outlaws of the day,
such as Sam Bass and John Wesley Hardin, preyed on the property of citizens, and long-term
family feuds and drunken brawls at the various saloons in the towns added to the toll of
homicides.
Though the Civil War had caused little material damage in the area, the county was a
much poorer place in 1870 than it had been in 1860. The total value of farms had fallen from
$833,418 to $389,239 and the value of livestock from $823,653 to $341,794. The economic
recovery in the 1870s was aided by the growth of the cattle and sheep industries and a dramatic
expansion of cotton farming. Various feeder routes to the Chisholm Trail passed through
Williamson County, and many cattle drives passed through or originated in the county from the
1860s through the early 1880s. With the coming of the railroads to the county in the 1870s,
Taylor, in the eastern part of the county, became an important rail center for the cattle trade.
Cattle-raising, after declining somewhat in importance in the early 20th century, was again a
major part of the agricultural economy by 1950, and in 1969 ranchers owned a record
65,093 cattle. Sheep- and goat-raising followed a similar pattern. Sheep ranching recovered its
pre-war level by 1880 and peaked at 39,961 sheep and 171,752 pounds of wool in 1890, then
declined in the late 19th and early 20th centuries to 13,397 sheep and 39,458 pounds in 1920.
The industry revived in the 1930s and reached a new high of 59,919 sheep and 336,494 pounds
of wool in 1959. Mohair became a significant agricultural product by 1930 and reached a peak
in 1959, when 44,668 goats produced 209,098 pounds of mohair. Cotton, the second boom
industry in Williamson County, developed at about the same time as the cattle industry. As
early as 1869, the editor of the Georgetown Watchman was advising farmers to “make cotton,
but do not, by any means, neglect the grain crop-diversity.” Cotton production, which had been
insignificant before the war, rose to successive heights of 4,217 bales in 1880, 33,945 bales in

HJN 060194 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

1890, and 80,514 bales in 1900. In 1900 to 1901, Williamson County ginned more cotton than
any county in Texas except Ellis County. The number of improved acres increased almost
tenfold from 1870 to 1880 and doubled again to 306,881 acres by 1890. The proportion of
cropland used for cotton production moved from about one-third of the total in 1880 to a high of
77% in 1910, and cotton was grown on 73% of the cropland as late as 1930. Dramatic changes
in land tenure attended the shift to cotton production. As late as 1880, 1,183 of the 1,538 farms,
or 77%, were still worked by owners. By 1890, only 43% of the farms were operated by owners,
and the percentage of owner-operators remained at 40% until the 1920s, when it dropped still
further to 29% in 1930. Farm tenancy rates began to decline during the Great Depression with
the shift away from cotton and other staple crops and by 1959 had dropped to 36% of the
county’s farmers.
Both the cattle and the cotton booms were aided by the improved communications
available in the county in the later 19th century. The International-Great Northern Railroad,
which later was consolidated with the Missouri Pacific, was built across the eastern part of the
county in 1876 and led to the founding of Taylor (now Williamson County’s third largest city) and
Hutto and to the relocation of Round Rock. It also opened up large areas in eastern Williamson
County to commercial farming. The Taylor, Bastrop, and Houston Railway, which was
eventually consolidated with the Missouri, Kansas, and Texas Railway, was built in the 1880s
and aided in the development of Taylor, Granger, and Bartlett. Roads were generally poor
throughout the county in the early 20th century. There were 11,882 automobiles in the county
by 1930, and extensive improvements, including blacktopping, of all major roads took place in
the 1930s.
The combined effects of soil depletion, overproduction, and the influx of the boll weevil
had already injured the profitability of the industry by the late 1920s, and the situation of cotton
growers was further worsened by the depression. The black population seems to have been
particularly hard hit by the depression. Of the 944 county families on relief in 1933, 442, almost
half were black, though blacks constituted only 16% of the population. Various federal relief
programs benefited farmers with farm loans and subsidies, and in 1936 a total of $204,000 in
subsidy checks was issued. The Depression encouraged diversification among farmers and a
shift away from staple crops to livestock. Between 1930 and 1940, the number of acres used
for cotton-growing fell by almost half, and cotton production went from 68,266 bales to 36,890.
Cropland acreage used for corn production increased over the same period by about half, and
wool and mohair production more than doubled to 342,983 pounds and 102,517 pounds,
respectively. While cotton continued to be an important crop in eastern Williamson County,
farmers increasingly turned to other crops like sorghum and wheat and to livestock-raising in the
later 20th century. Along with such traditional livestock as sheep and cattle, poultry farming
played a significant role in the economy by 1950, when the county was fifth in the state in the
production of eggs and chickens. In 1980, it was 10th in the state in the production of turkeys.

14

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The archeological survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record archeological resources occurring within the designated project
area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and for
designation as Texas State Archeological Landmarks (SALs)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
on the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC’s) online Texas Historic Sites Atlas, the National
Park Service’s (NPS’s) online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), and the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas
State Historical Association’s and the General Libraries at The University of Texas at Austin’s
Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a program of intensive pedestrian survey of the project
area. As no archeological resources were documented during the survey, the second and third
goals were not brought into play. The rest of this chapter presents the methodological
background for the current investigations and the specific survey methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey corridor. Existing site files indicated that at least
3 previous cultural resource surveys had been conducted within a 1.6-km (1.0-mi) radius of the
project area. The existing ROW of FM 3405 was previously surveyed for cultural resources,
though none were recorded as a result of the earlier project. The remaining previous surveys in
the area covered the floodplain and banks of the North Fork of the San Gabriel River in its
entirety. While numerous aboriginal archeological sites have been recorded along both the

HJN 060194 AR

15

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

north and south sides of the North Fork of the San Gabriel River, no previously recorded cultural
resources are present within or in the immediate vicinity of the current project area.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

The scope of work for archeological investigations for the proposed expansion of
FM 3405 at its intersection with Ronald Reagan Boulevard called for performing an intensive
archeological survey of the APE. The municipality of Williamson County, Texas, proposes to
expand FM 3405 along an approximately 457-m (1,500-ft) segment of the existing road on
either side of the intersection with the future Ronald Reagan Boulevard in western Williamson
County, Texas. West of the Ronald Reagan Boulevard intersection, the proposed undertaking
would expand the existing 30-m- (100-ft-) wide ROW of FM 3405 by 12 m (40 ft) on both sides
of the road, for a total width of 24 m (80 ft) of new ROW measuring about 282 m (925 ft) in
length. East of the Ronald Reagan Boulevard intersection, the proposed undertaking would
expand a 91-m- (300-ft-) long segment of the existing FM 3405 ROW on the south side of the
road as well as a 15-m (50-ft) segment on the north side of the road by an average of about 8 m
(25 ft). In addition, the County proposes to construct an interchange with CR 258 about 213 m
(700 ft) east of its existing intersection with FM 3405. This new interchange measures
approximately 76 m (250 ft) in length by 18 m (60 ft) in width and would be constructed in the
angle formed by FM 3405 and CR 258. All construction would occur within proposed new
ROW. The APE would cover an area of approximately 1.6 ha (3.9 ac).
On 2 October 2006, Horizon archeologists Marie J. Archambeault and Abigail Peyton,
under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, conducted an intensive
survey of the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted
by the proposed construction project. The existing ROWs of FM 3405 as well as the proposed
ROW of the future Ronald Reagan Boulevard had been surveyed in connection with previous
cultural resource investigations; consequently, only the proposed new ROW surrounding the
intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard and the proposed new interchange
between FM 3405 and CR 258 were surveyed.
Horizon’s archeologists traversed the project area and thoroughly examined the modern
ground surface for historic and prehistoric artifacts, cultural features, or other evidence of past
cultural activity. At the time of the survey, the sky was clear and the weather amicable.
Portions of the project area were covered in isolated stands of deciduous hardwood trees and a
light cover of short grasses; however, relatively little topsoil was present in the project area and
the underlying fractured, indurated limestone bedrock was exposed in many areas. Ground
surface visibility was near 100% in most areas (Figure 2). The southeastern, northeastern, and
southwestern quadrants surrounding the intersection of FM 3405 and the future Ronald Reagan
Boulevard were largely intact, though evidence of a well and possibly a sewer line or other
underground utility was observed in the segment of new ROW in the northwestern quadrant
(see Figure 2). The area proposed for the interchange between FM 3405 and CR 258 had been
partially devegetated (Figure 3), and a line of telephone poles had been installed within part of
this alignment. Thus, previous impacts had resulted in disturbance to near-surface sediments in
2 of the 5 separate segments of new ROW that comprise the project area.

16

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

Figure 2. View of Existing and New Right-of-Way along FM 3405 in Northwest Quadrant

Figure 3. Typical View of New Right-of-Way along CR 258 Interchange

HJN 060194 AR

17

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

For linear survey projects, the TSMASS call for excavation of 10 shovel tests per km
(16 per mi) per 30 m (100 ft) of ROW width. For the current project, the TSMASS would require
a minimum of about 5 shovel tests in the project area. In practice, shovel testing densities may
be increased in areas with higher probabilities to contain cultural resources, such as stream
terraces, and decreased in areas with low probabilities for cultural resources, such as heavily
disturbed areas or upland settings with minimal soil cover. Horizon exceeded the minimum
survey standards for the current project and excavated 21 shovel tests in the APE (Figure 4).
Shovel tests measured 30 cm in diameter and were excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft)
below surface, to the top of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable. In
practice, shovel tests were terminated prematurely due to the presence of near-surface deposits
of fractured, indurated limestone bedrock at depths of 0 to 5 cm below surface (cmbs). All
sediments were screened through 6.35-mm (0.25-in) hardware cloth and subsequently replaced
in the shovel test hole from which they were excavated. None of the shovel tests contained any
subsurface cultural resources, so no archeological site delineation shovel tests were excavated.
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching in stream terraces and other areas with
the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are
capable of reaching (approximately 1.0 m [3.3 ft] below surface). Fractured, indurated
limestone bedrock was present at or near the modern ground surface across the entire project
area, and no waterways or alluvial sediment packages are present within the project area with
the potential to contain archeological resources at depth. Shovel testing therefore constituted
an adequate survey technique for identifying cultural resources buried in Holocene-age
sediments, and backhoe trenching was not conducted during the survey.
This survey set out to employ a non-collection policy for cultural materials. Nondiagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were to be
described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location in
which they were found. In the event that any diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points,
ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) were identified in the field, they were to be
collected and placed in resealable plastic bags labeled with relevant provenience information.
No cultural resources were encountered during the survey, so the proposed collection policy
was not brought into play.

18

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

Figure 4. Locations of Shovel Tests in the Project Area

HJN 060194 AR

19

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The municipality of Williamson County, Texas, proposes to expand FM 3405 along an
approximately 457-m (1,500-ft) segment of the existing road on either side of the intersection
with the future Ronald Reagan Boulevard in western Williamson County, Texas. West of the
Ronald Reagan Boulevard intersection, the proposed undertaking would expand the existing 30m- (100-ft-) wide ROW of FM 3405 by 12 m (40 ft) on both sides of the road, for a total width of
24 m (80 ft) of new ROW measuring about 282 m (925 ft) in length. East of the Ronald Reagan
Boulevard intersection, the proposed undertaking would expand a 91-m- (300-ft-) long segment
of the existing FM 3405 ROW on the south side of the road as well as a 15-m (50-ft) segment
on the north side of the road by an average of about 8 m (25 ft). In addition, the County
proposes to construct an interchange with CR 258 about 213 m (700 ft) east of its existing
intersection with FM 3405. This new interchange measures approximately 76 m (250 ft) in
length by 18 m (60 ft) in width and would be constructed in the angle formed by FM 3405 and
CR 258. All construction would occur within proposed new ROW. The APE would cover an
area of approximately 1.6 ha (3.9 ac).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the municipality of Williamson County,
a political subdivision of the State of Texas, and will be reviewed by TxDOT; as such, the project
would fall under the dual jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas via the involvement of
Williamson County and TxDOT as well as the NHPA via the indirect involvement of the FHWA.
As the project represents a public undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural
resources, Williamson County was required to provide for a cultural resource evaluation of the
proposed impact area to meet its legal responsibilities under existing federal and state
guidelines.
To meet its responsibilities under applicable statutes, Williamson County tasked Horizon,
through its engineering contractor HNTB, to conduct an archeological survey of the APE
associated with the proposed project. The existing ROW of FM 3405 as well as the proposed
future alignment of Ronald Reagan Boulevard have already been surveyed and cleared for
archeological resources; therefore, only the proposed new ROW was surveyed. On 2 October
2006, Horizon archeologists Marie J. Archambeault and Abigail Peyton, under the overall
direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, conducted an intensive survey of the APE
to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
construction project.

HJN 060194 AR

21

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

Horizon’s archeologists traversed the project area and thoroughly examined the modern
ground surface for historic and prehistoric artifacts, cultural features, or other evidence of past
cultural activity. Portions of the project area were covered in isolated stands of deciduous
hardwood trees and a light cover of short grasses; however, relatively little topsoil was present
in the project area and the underlying fractured, indurated limestone bedrock was exposed in
many areas. Ground surface visibility was near 100% in most areas. The southeastern,
northeastern, and southwestern quadrants surrounding the intersection of FM 3405 and the
future Ronald Reagan Boulevard were largely intact, though evidence of a well and possibly a
sewer line or other underground utility was observed in the segment of new ROW in the
northwestern quadrant. The area proposed for the interchange between FM 3405 and CR 258
had been partially devegetated, and a line of telephone poles had been installed within part of
the alignment. Thus, previous impacts had resulted in disturbance to near-surface sediments in
2 of the 5 separate segments of new ROW that comprise the project area.
For linear survey projects, the TSMASS call for excavation of 10 shovel tests per km
(16 per mi) per 30 m (100 ft) of ROW width. For the current project, the TSMASS would require
a minimum of about 5 shovel tests in the project area. In practice, shovel testing densities may
be increased in areas with higher probabilities to contain cultural resources, such as stream
terraces, and decreased in areas with low probabilities for cultural resources, such as heavily
disturbed areas or upland settings with minimal soil cover. Horizon exceeded the minimum
survey standards for the current project and excavated 21 shovel tests in the APE. Shovel tests
measured 30 cm in diameter and were excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below
surface, to the top of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable. In practice,
shovel tests were terminated prematurely due to the presence of near-surface deposits of
fractured, indurated limestone bedrock at depths of 0 to 5 cm below surface (cmbs). All
sediments were screened through 6.35-mm (0.25-in) hardware cloth and subsequently replaced
in the shovel test hole from which they were excavated. None of the shovel tests contained any
subsurface cultural resources, so no archeological site delineation shovel tests were excavated.
No cultural resources of any kind, including prehistoric or historic archeological sites,
isolated occurrences of artifacts, or historic structures or objects, were identified as a result of
the intensive archeological survey of the APE. In addition, no previously documented cultural
resources are present in the immediate vicinity of the project area.

22

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is the determination
of whether or not an archeological site possesses the potential to make a contribution to 1 or
more previously defined research questions. Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey
level are rarely sufficient to contribute in a meaningful manner to such research issues. The
objective is rather to determine which archeological sites could be most profitably investigated
further in pursuance of regional, methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore,
adequate information on site function, context, and chronological placement from archeological
and, if appropriate, historical perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because
research questions vary as a function of geography and temporal period, determination of the
site context and chronological placement of cultural properties is a particularly important
objective during the inventory process.
Ultimately, management decisions regarding archeological properties are a function of
the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs. Archeological
resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of
archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for determination as SALs.

HJN 060194 AR

23

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

24

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

6.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ARCHEOLOGICAL LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are
located in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any
county, city, or political subdivision of the state are state archeological landmarks and are
eligible for designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
structure as an SAL if it (1) is publicly or privately owned and listed on the NRHP and (2) meets
one of the following 6 eligibility criteria:
A. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad
patterns of our history;
B. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. Is important to a particular cultural or ethnic group;
D. Is the work of a significant architect, master builder, or craftsman;
E. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction,
possesses high aesthetic value, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinctions; or
F. Has yielded or may be likely to yield information important to the understanding of
Texas culture or history.

HJN 060194 AR

25

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

No archeological resources, historic or prehistoric, were documented as a result of the
intensive cultural resource survey of the project area. No cultural resources were encountered
on the modern ground surface or in any of the shovel tests excavated during the survey of the
5 separate segments of proposed new right-of-way along FM 3405 at its future intersection with
Ronald Reagan Boulevard. While several archeological sites have been recorded in the
general vicinity of the project area, most of them along the banks of the North Fork of the San
Gabriel River to the south of the project area, no previously recorded archeological sites are
present within or in the immediate vicinity of the project area. Furthermore, no NRHP-listed
historic properties or SALs are located in the vicinity of the project area.

6.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the intensive cultural resource survey of the proposed project
area, no potentially significant archeological resources would be affected by the proposed
undertaking. No new archeological sites were identified in the project area as a result of the
survey, and no previously recorded archeological sites are present in the immediate vicinity. No
further investigations are recommended within the proposed new right-of-way surrounding the
future intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, and archeological clearance is
recommended for this project. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial
furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and TxDOT should be notified of the discovery.

26

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J. M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Baker, V. R.
1975
Flood Hazards Along the Balcones Escarpment in Central Texas—Alternative
Approaches to the Recognition, Mapping, and Management. Geological Circular
No. 75-5. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G. W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V. M. Bryant, Jr., and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Butzer, K. W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Carr, J. T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas.
No. 53, Austin.

Texas Water Development Board, Report

Collins, M. B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dillehay, T. D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

HJN 060194 AR

27

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D. F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Haynes, C. V., Jr., D. J. Donahue, A. J. T. Hull, and T. H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hill, R. T.
1901
Geography and Geology of the Black and Grand Prairies, Texas. Twenty-First
Annual Report of the United States Geological Survey 1899-1900. US Geological
Survey, Washington, D.C.
Hill, R. T., and T. W. Vaughn
1900
Physical Geography of the Texas Region. Topographic Atlas, Austin, Folio 76. US
Geological Survey, Washington, D.C.
Johnson, E. H.
1931
The Natural Regions of Texas. University of Texas Bulletin 3113. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Jurney, D. H., F. Winchell, and R. W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas. US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R. L., and L. C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T. J., and G. W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T. F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Makemson, W. K
1904
Historical Sketch of First Settlement and Organization of Williamson County.
Georgetown, Texas.
Meltzer, D. J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.

28

060194_arch_survey_report.doc

Intensive Archeological Survey of 3.9 Acres of New Right-of-Way at the
Intersection of FM 3405 and Ronald Reagan Boulevard, Williamson County, Texas

Meltzer, D. J., D. K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A. W. Barker, D. F. Dincauze, C. V. Haynes, F. Mena,
L. Nuñez, and D. J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Patterson, L. W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.

Proctor, C.V., Jr., T.E. Brown, J.H. McGowen, and N.B. Waechter
1974
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Austin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Ricklis, R. A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology
in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and M. B.
Collins, pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Scarbrough, C. S.
1973
Land of Good Water: A Williamson County History.
Publishers, Georgetown, Texas.

Williamson County Sun

Sellards, E.H., W.S. Adkins, and F.B. Plummer
1932
Stratigraphy. The Geology of Texas, Vol. 1. Bulletin No. 3232. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Texas State Historical Association
2004
Williamson County. The Handbook of Texas Online: A Digital Gateway to Texas
History. http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/view/WW/hcw11.html.
Werchan, L. E., and J. L. Coker
1983
Soil Survey of Williamson County, Texas.
Conservation Service. Washington, D.C.

US Department of Agriculture, Soil

Wheat, J. B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

HJN 060194 AR

29

