An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the
7-Mile Eagle Rock Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW,
Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas
By:
Abigail Peyton
With contributions by Jeffrey D. Owens

HJN 070186 AR
Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Eagle Rock Energy Partners
Houston, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas
February 2008

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the
7-Mile Eagle Rock Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW,
Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas
By:
Abigail Peyton
With contributions by Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Eagle Rock Energy Partners
16701 Greenspoint Park Drive, Suite 200
Houston, Texas 77060

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Abigail Peyton, MA, RPA, Principal Investigator
HJN 070186 AR

February 2008

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Eagle Rock Energy Partners (Eagle Rock) is proposing to install an east-west running
pipeline that will be approximately 7.0 miles (mi) (11.2 kilometers [km]) long and located north of
Lake Meredith in Hutchinson and Moore counties, Texas. Although the proposed pipeline rightof-way (ROW) is located on private property and is privately funded, the crossing of areas under
the jurisdiction of the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) will require a Section 404 permit
issued by the USACE. As such, the areas within the purview of the USACE along the proposed
ROW fall under the regulations of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA)
of 1966, as amended.
Mustang Engineering L.P. (Mustang), on behalf of Eagle Rock, contracted with Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) to conduct an intensive cultural resources survey of the
USACE jurisdictional areas in compliance with the regulations of Section 106 of the NHPA. The
purpose of the survey was to determine if any cultural resources were located within the USACE
jurisdictional areas, and, if so, to determine their eligibility for inclusion in the National Register
of Historic Places (NRHP). Based on the pre-field literature review and field investigation,
Horizon determined that the proposed ROW will intersect 9 areas that would be considered
“waters of the US” and subject to regulation by the USACE: 2 unnamed tributaries, Turkey
Creek, 1 unnamed tributary of Turkey Creek, Bugbee Creek, 2 unnamed tributaries of Bugbee
Creek, and 2 unnamed tributaries of Spring Canyon. For clarification purposes, the
investigated USACE jurisdictional areas along the proposed ROW consist of the portions of the
ROW located within 30.0 to 60.0 meters (m) (100.0 to 200.0 feet [ft]) of each of the 9 USACE
jurisdictional crossings present along the proposed ROW.
Upon the completion of the initial survey of the proposed pipeline, much of the pipeline
was rerouted by Mustang for logistical purposes. USACE jurisdictional crossings 1 through 4
coincided with the previously surveyed pipeline ROW and as such additional survey efforts were
not necessary within these areas. The eastern half of the proposed pipeline, which includes
USACE jurisdictional crossings 5 through 9, continues along the same general trajectory as the
original pipeline route with only minor shifts to the north or south. However, as the reroute
traverses previously un-surveyed areas, it was necessary to reassess USACE jurisdictional
crossings 5 through 9 for cultural resources. In all, the surveyed areas totaled approximately
1.3 acres (ac) (0.5 hectares [ha]).

HJN 070186 AR

iii

Management Summary

Horizon conducted the intensive survey of the USACE jurisdictional areas on 27 to 29
November 2007, 2 January 2008, and again on 17 January 2008 in an effort to locate any
cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction
project. The intensive surface inspection and shovel testing regimen resulted in entirely
negative findings. The Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW traverses predominately open
rangeland consisting of rolling topography covered with scrub vegetation. The majority of the
jurisdictional drainages were ephemeral in nature, with the exception of Bugbee Creek, which
was found to consist of a fairly wide waterway.
Areas adjacent to USACE jurisdictional
crossings 1 through 7 were found to lack significant alluvial features and were generally
underlain by shallow gravelly sands. It was apparent that these terraces possessed very little
potential for containing intact, buried cultural resources. Additionally, wind and water erosion
facilitated by overgrazing has likely stripped much of the area of its topsoil, resulting in heavily
compacted deposits topped by quartzite-rich gravels. These types of soil conditions would
typically confine cultural materials to surface contexts, thereby allowing for their discovery if they
were present. Unfortunately, considerable opposition by the landowner prevented Horizon from
accessing USACE jurisdictional crossings 8 and 9. However, given the nature of the 2
tributaries and the lack of cultural materials within the previous 7 USACE jurisdictional areas, it
is Horizon’s opinion that there is a low probability for cultural resources within crossings 8 and 9.
Based on the survey-level investigation, it is Horizon’s opinion that development within
the USACE jurisdictional areas within the Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW will have no
adverse effect on any significant resources located within the investigated USACE jurisdictional
areas. Horizon recommends that cultural resources clearance be granted for USACE
jurisdictional areas within the Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW. However, in the unlikely event
that any cultural materials (including human remains or burial features) are inadvertently
discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance of the ROW, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the Texas Historical
Commission (THC) should be notified of the discovery.

iv

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ..................................................................................... 7
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology ........................................................................... 7
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.......................................................................... 7
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 12
2.4
Flora and Fauna ............................................................................................ 12

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND..................................................................................... 15
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (12,000 to 7,500 B.P.) .................................................... 15
3.2
Archaic Period (7,500 to 1,700 B.P.) ............................................................. 16
3.3
Formative Period (1,700 to 150 B.P.) ............................................................ 17
3.4
Historic Period (150 B.P. to Present) ............................................................. 19

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ........................................................................................... 23

5.0

METHODOLOGY ...................................................................................................... 25

6.0

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................... 29
6.1
Results........................................................................................................... 29
6.2
Recommendations......................................................................................... 29

7.0

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................. 31
APPENDIX A: SHOVEL TEST DATA

HJN 070186 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1. Location of the pipeline ROW ....................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Aerial photograph of the pipeline ROW ........................................................................ 3
Figure 3. View of USACE jurisdictional crossing 1, facing north .................................................. 8
Figure 4. View of USACE jurisdictional crossing 2, facing south ................................................. 8
Figure 5. View of USACE jurisdictional crossing 3, facing south ................................................. 9
Figure 6. View of USACE jurisdictional crossing 4, facing north .................................................. 9
Figure 7. View of Bugbee Creek, USACE jurisdictional crossing 5, facing north ....................... 10
Figure 8. View of USACE jurisdictional crossing 6, facing southeast ........................................ 10
Figure 9. View of USACE jurisdictional crossing 7, facing west................................................. 11
Figure 10. Shovel test locations ................................................................................................. 27

vi

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Eagle Rock Energy Partners (Eagle Rock) is proposing to install an east-west running
pipeline that will be approximately 7.0 miles (mi) (11.2 kilometers [km]) long and located north of
Lake Meredith in Hutchinson and Moore counties, Texas (Figures 1 and 2). Although the
proposed pipeline right-of-way (ROW) is located on private property and is privately funded, the
crossing of areas under the jurisdiction of the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) will require
a Section 404 permit issued by the USACE. As such, the areas within the purview of the
USACE along the proposed ROW fall under the regulations of Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended.
Mustang Engineering L.P. (Mustang), on behalf of Eagle Rock, contracted with Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc (Horizon) to conduct an intensive cultural resources survey of the
USACE jurisdictional areas in compliance with the regulations of Section 106 of the NHPA. The
purpose of the survey was to determine if any cultural resources were located within the USACE
jurisdictional areas, and, if so, to determine their eligibility for inclusion in the National Register
of Historic Places (NRHP). Based on the pre-field literature review and field investigation,
Horizon determined that the proposed ROW will intersect 9 areas that would be considered
“waters of the US” and subject to regulation by the USACE. These include 2 unnamed
tributaries, Turkey Creek, 1 unnamed tributary of Turkey Creek, Bugbee Creek, 2 unnamed
tributaries of Bugbee Creek, and 2 unnamed tributaries of Spring Canyon. The investigated
USACE jurisdictional areas along the 7.0-mi- (11.2-km-) long by 18.2-meter- (m) (60.0-foot- [ft])
wide ROW consist of the portions of the ROW located within 30.0 to 60.0 m (100.0 to 200.0 ft)
of either side of the 9 USACE jurisdictional crossings. Unfortunately, considerable opposition by
the landowner prevented Horizon from accessing the 2 easternmost jurisdictional crossings
(USACE jurisdictional crossings 8 and 9). Of the 7 jurisdictional crossings investigated, 6 were
found to be rather ephemeral in nature, and, as such, only a 30.0-m- (100.0-ft-) wide boundary
was investigated on either side of these waterways. Bugbee Creek was found to be more
substantial in capacity, and a 60.0-m- (200.0-ft-) wide jurisdictional boundary was adopted in
order to adequately assess the alluvial deposits adjacent to the stream course.
Upon the completion of the initial survey of the proposed pipeline, much of the pipeline
was rerouted by Mustang for logistical purposes. USACE jurisdictional crossings 1 through 4
coincided with the previously surveyed pipeline ROW and as such additional survey efforts were
not necessary within these areas. The eastern half of the proposed pipeline, which includes

HJN 070186 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of the pipeline ROW

2

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

Figure 2. Aerial photograph of the pipeline ROW

HJN 070186 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

USACE jurisdictional crossings 5 through 9, continues along the same general trajectory as the
original pipeline route with only minor shifts to the north or south. However, as the reroute
traverses previously un-surveyed areas, it was necessary to reassess USACE jurisdictional
crossings 5 through 9 for cultural resources.
The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive
pedestrian survey of the USACE areas within the Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, and the
production of a report suitable for review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in
accordance with the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure,
Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural
Resources Management Reports. Abigail Peyton served as Principal Investigator for the
project, and Reign Clark (Horizon project archeologist) and Jared Wiersema (Horizon field
technician) conducted the field investigation on 27 to 29 November 2008, 2 January 2008, and
again on 17 January 2008.
The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) require a
minimum of 3 shovel tests per acre on projects of this size. As such, a total of 4 shovel tests
were necessary to comply with the TSMASS. Horizon archeologists exceeded the TSMASS by
excavating a total of 27 shovel tests within USACE jurisdictional crossings 1 through 7. As
mentioned previously, no shovel tests were excavated within USACE jurisdictional areas 8 or 9
due to restricted access. In all, the surveyed areas totaled approximately 1.3 acres (ac) (0.5
hectares [ha]).
The intensive surface inspection and shovel testing regimen resulted in entirely negative
findings. The Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW traverses predominately open rangeland
consisting of rolling topography covered with scrub vegetation. The majority of the jurisdictional
drainages were ephemeral in nature, with the exception of Bugbee Creek, which was found to
consist of a fairly wide waterway. Areas adjacent to USACE jurisdictional crossings 1 through 7
were found to lack significant alluvial features and were generally underlain by shallow gravelly
sands. It was apparent that these terraces possessed very little potential for containing intact,
buried cultural resources. Additionally, wind and water erosion facilitated by overgrazing has
likely stripped much of the area of its topsoil, resulting in heavily compacted deposits topped by
quartzite-rich gravels. These types of soil conditions would typically confine cultural materials to
surface contexts, thereby allowing for their discovery if they were present. Judging by the aerial
photography and topographic maps, both USACE jurisdictional areas 8 and 9 are located near
the headwaters of 2 fairly small unnamed tributaries of Spring Canyon. These tributaries, in this
area, meander through farming and grazing land of relatively low topographic relief. Alluvial
features appear to be minimal in nature indicating that there is likely a low probability that buried
intact cultural resources are present within these areas. With this in mind, USACE jurisdictional
areas 8 and 9 possess physical characteristics that are very similar to other areas surveyed
along the pipeline ROW, particularly USACE jurisdictional crossings 1, 2, and 7.
Based on the survey-level investigation, it is Horizon’s opinion that development within
the USACE jurisdictional areas 1 though 7 within the Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW will have
no adverse effect on any significant resources located within the investigated USACE
jurisdictional areas. While USACE jurisdictional areas 8 and 9 were not formally assessed due
4

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

to access restrictions, it is Horizon’s opinion that these areas possess a low probability for
harboring significant cultural resources. As such, Horizon recommends that cultural resources
clearance be granted for all of the USACE jurisdictional areas within the Stinnett to Cargray
Pipeline ROW. However, in the unlikely event that any cultural materials (including human
remains or burial features) are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or
ongoing maintenance of the ROW, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and the Texas Historical Commission (THC) should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 070186 AR

5

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline is located in Hutchinson and Moore counties, Texas, in
the central portion of the Texas Panhandle, which forms part of the Southern Plains section of
the Great Plains physiographic province. The geology of the Great Plains region as a whole
has been widely discussed, and many localized studies have been published (cf. Hofman et al.
1989; Johnson 1900; Webb 1931; Wedel 1961). In general, the Great Plains region as it is now
recognized was built up as a broad, relatively flat outwash apron or series of alluvial fans at the
base of the Rocky Mountains. The surface geology of the Southern Great Plains is dominated
by sedimentary materials of Pliocene, Pleistocene, and Holocene age, but extensive exposures
of Permian, Triassic, and Cretaceous deposits also occur.
The topography of the Southern Plains is largely a reflection of the regional geology and
drainage systems. In general, topographic relief is limited throughout the Southern Plains.
Permanent stream drainage does not exist in this part of the Texas Panhandle. Major
topographic features are largely limited to shallow draws and occasional depressions that
temporarily fill with water after rainstorms or heavy snows.
The proposed pipeline traverses rolling grasslands that are cross-cut by intermittent
streams that generally flow southward draining into Lake Meredith. The primary drainage
systems in the northern part of the Texas Panhandle are the Canadian and North Canadian
rivers. Overview photographs of each of the 7 USACE jurisdictional crossings are provided in
Figures 3 to 9. No photographs were taken of USACE jurisdictional areas 8 and 9, as Horizon
was not permitted to access these areas.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The surface soils of Hutchinson and Moore counties are underlain by the Ogallala
Formation (Ford and Fox 1975). The Ogallala Formation consists of gravels that are derived
from outwash that was deposited during the development of the Plains (Frye and Leonard 1957;
Walker 1978). The Rocky Mountain orogeny occurred during the Miocene on the order of 10
million years ago, and the Ogallala Formation was deposited during and after that event.
Ogallala Formation gravels are generally considered to be of Pliocene age and occur in braided

HJN 070186 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Figure 3. View of USACE jurisdictional crossing 1, facing north

Figure 4. View of USACE jurisdictional crossing 2, facing south

8

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

Figure 5. View of USACE jurisdictional crossing 3, facing south

Figure 6. View of USACE jurisdictional crossing 4, facing north

HJN 070186 AR

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Figure 7. View of Bugbee Creek, USACE jurisdictional crossing 5, facing north

Figure 8. View of USACE jurisdictional crossing 6, facing southeast

10

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

Figure 9. View of USACE jurisdictional crossing 7, facing west
concentrations underlying Pleistocene deposits throughout much of the High Plains. The most
widespread lithic materials used for manufacture of stone artifacts by prehistoric people in the
Southern Plains consist of gravels from the Ogallala Formation (Hofman et al. 1989).
Five soil types exist within the USACE jurisdictional areas: Berda loam, 3 to 5% slopes
(BeC); Lincoln loamy fine sand (Ln); Mobeetie fine sandy loam, 3 to 5% slopes (MbC); Springer
and Likes soils, undulating (SsB); and Tivoli fine sand, hummocky (TvC) (NRCS 2007).
Berda loam, 3 to 5% slopes (BeC), is a calcareous soil found on uplands. A
representative profile consists of a grayish-brown loam to a depth of 25.4 centimeters (cm) (10.0
inches [in]) followed by a pale brown loam to a depth of 56.0 cm (22.0 in).
Lincoln loamy fine sand (Ln) is characterized by rapidly permeable soils found primarily
on floodplains. A representative profile consists of a brown loamy fine sand underlain by fine
sand stratified with thin layers of clay loam.
Mobeetie fine sandy loam, 3 to 5% slopes (McC), consists of deep, well-drained
calcareous soils found on uplands. A typical profile consists of a grayish-brown fine sandy loam
to a depth of 25.4 cm (10.0 in) underlain by a fine sandy loam that extends to a depth of 107.0
cm (42.0 in).
Springer and Likes soils, undulating (SsB), is characterized by well-drained nearly level
to undulating soils found on uplands. A representative profile consists of a light brown sandy
loam to a depth of 41.0 cm (16.0 in) followed by a reddish-brown sandy loam to a depth of 51.0

HJN 070186 AR

11

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

cm (20.0 in) followed by yellowish-red fine sandy loam to a depth of 81.2 cm (32.0 in). A
reddish-yellow loamy sand then extends to a depth of 183.0 cm (72.0 cm).
Tivoli fine sand, hummocky (TvC), is characterized by rapidly permeable soils composed
of hummocky dunes found on undulating uplands. A representative profile consists of a pale
brown fine sand underlain by a yellow fine sand.

2.3

CLIMATE

In general, the climate of the Southern Great Plains region can be considered as a
semiarid to subhumid continental one (Borchert 1950). The weather is strongly influenced by 3
major upper air systems that converge in the region with distinctive seasonal configurations.
The warm, dry, Cordilleran air mass enters the region from the west over the Rocky Mountains;
a cold and usually dry arctic air mass enters the region from the north; and warm, moist, tropical
maritime air from the Gulf of Mexico to the southeast introduces the majority of the precipitation
into the region. The movements and collisions of these 3 dominant upper air masses produce
the characteristically dynamic weather patterns for which the region is famous. Rapid and
extreme drops or increases in temperature within a few hours are common, as are occurrences
of torrential rains, thunderstorms, hailstorms, and tornadoes.
Average monthly temperatures range from 13.8 to 38.3°C (56.9 to 101.0°F) in July, the
warmest month, to -18.7 to 22.2°C (-1.6 to 71.9°F) in January, the coldest month. Winds are
south to southwesterly throughout most of the year, though northerly winds predominate in
winter. In winter, Hutchinson and Moore counties are subject to sharp drops in temperature
when cold, polar air masses sweep southward across the level plains. However, in spite of
occasional low temperatures, winters are commonly mild and short, and cold spells rarely last
longer than 48 hours. Spring offers the greatest variety in weather, with warm and cool spells
alternating in rapid succession throughout March and April. Summer tends to be the mildest
season, with occasional hot daytime temperatures but with cool nights. Temperatures are
moderate in the fall, with a greater variety of weather than in the summer.
Modern climatic data show that the average annual precipitation is 41.3 cm (16.25 in).
Approximately 85% of the annual precipitation falls during the warm season from April through
October. Warm-season rainfall occurs most frequently as the result of thunderstorms. Winter is
a dry season, as frequent cold air masses from the north cut off the supply of moisture from the
Gulf of Mexico. Winter precipitation often occurs in the form of light snow that piles up in drifts
so that the snowmelt is unevenly distributed. The average relative humidity at noon is estimated
at 45% in January, 35% in April, 42% in July, and 37% in October (Fox and Ford 1975).

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

The portion of the Southern High Plains in which the proposed pipeline ROW is situated
is often termed the short-grass plains to distinguish it from the tall-grass prairie that lies farther
to the east in a prevailingly moister climate. The natural vegetation of the upland plains of the
Texas Panhandle and surrounding regions to the north in the Oklahoma Panhandle,
southeastern Colorado, and northeastern New Mexico is of the “Mixed Prairie” type (Wheat

12

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

1972). The dominant plants are blue grama (Bouteloua gracilis), buffalo grass (Bulbilis
dactyloides), and hairy grama (Bouteloua hirsuta), all of which are extremely drought-resistant.
The dominance of each species depends largely upon the moisture, consistency, and depth of
local soils. Yucca, sand sagebrush, shrubs, and prickly pear cactus are also present in the
study area, particularly in disturbed areas. Trees native to the area are limited mainly to
western cottonwoods, which grow along drainages and springs that contain perennial water.
The current project area consists primarily of mixed grasses communities; here, tall grasses,
such as little bluestem (Andropogan scoparius) grow in little bunches, with short grasses filling
in the spaces between.
Prior to its large-scale replacement by domesticated animals of European origin, the
High Plains area supported a remarkably abundant population of native animals. Ramaley and
Robbins (1926) recorded bison (Bison bison) and longhorn antelope (Antilocapra americana) as
well as a number of small mammals, including the black-tailed prairie dog (Cynomys
ludovicianus), yellow pocket gopher (Geomys lutescens), Richardson kangaroo rat (Dipodomys
ordii richardsoni), white-tailed jackrabbit (Lepus townsendii campanius), plains cottontail
(Sylvilagus auduboni baileyi), and plains coyote (Canic nebracensis). In the 1840s, Gregg’s
(1958) record of prairie fauna also included the large gray wolf (Canis lupus nubilus).
In addition to mammalian fauna, the Southern High Plains also historically supported a
wide variety of avian species (Cooke [1897] reported 100 native breeding species and 200
species that occurred irregularly during specific seasons).
Reptiles were abundantly
represented in the regional fauna, including rattlesnakes (Crotalus confluentus), bullsnakes
(Pituophus sayi), blue racers (Buscanion constrictor), and hog-nosed snakes (Heterodon
nasicus). The horned toad or horned lizard (Phrynosoma ornatissimum) was frequently noted
by early travelers. Several turtles are also found in this part of the Great Plains, including the
yellow mud turtle (Kinosternon flavescens), the spiny soft-shelled turtle (Trionyx spiniferus), and
the dry-land ornate box turtle (Terrapene ornata).

HJN 070186 AR

13

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The cultural sequence and adaptive strategies on the Southern High Plains are still
somewhat poorly understood. Considerable research emphasis has been placed on the
PaleoIndian Period and on the sedentary villages of the middle Formative Periods (i.e., Plains
Village), but few major excavations have focused on the Archaic Period and the early and late
portions of the Formative Period. The following overview briefly summarizes the regional
syntheses previously developed for the region (Collins 1971; Hofman et al. 1989; Hughes
1979b; Hughes and Willey 1978; Lintz 1986; Lintz and Anderson 1989; Wedel 1961),
supplemented by more specific studies at Palo Duro Reservoir (Hughes 1979a; Hughes and
Hughes-Jones 1987; Mitchell 1975; Quigg et al. 1993).

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (12,000 TO 7,500 B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Evidence for these early settlers, in the form of diagnostic fluted projectile points, is
widespread throughout North and South America. Claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period are presently discounted by most archeologists (but see
Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities on the Southern High Plains is
represented by the PaleoIndian Period (12,000 to 7,500 B.P.). This period coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various
periods within this period are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted,
lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers,
gravers, bone foreshafts, and extinct forms of large game. PaleoIndian groups are often
inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that
practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement pattern. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of small plants and animals and occasionally on communally organized large game
hunts. The PaleoIndian period is divided into 3 periods based on recognizable differences in

HJN 070186 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

projectile point styles and associated extinct animals. These include the Clovis period (12,000
to 11,000 B.P.), the Folsom period (11,000 to 10,200 B.P.), and the Plano period (10,200 to
7,500 B.P.), which includes the Agate Basin, Hell Gap, Plainview, Milnesand, Firstview, Cody,
and Frederick complexes.

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (7,500 TO 1,700 B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(7,500 to 1,700 B.P.), during which a significant reorientation of lifestyle occurred. The
changing climatic conditions and corresponding decrease in the big game populations forced
people to rely more heavily upon a diversified resource base composed of smaller game and
wild plants. The appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded
groundstone assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks
of this cultural period. Although the Archaic period in the Southern Plains lasted for some 6,000
years, it is still somewhat poorly understood. Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into
Early, Middle, and Late periods. Climatically, the environment continued to experience a slow,
gradual trend toward increasing aridity from about 8,000 to 5,500 B.P. Known as the
Hypsithermal (Antevs 1955), conditions during the middle Holocene were not conducive to
archeological site formation and preservation. As a result, few stratified Early and Middle
Archaic sites are known in the Southern Plains. Following 5,500 B.P., the environment became
gradually more mesic throughout the Late Archaic Period, eventually stabilizing into an
approximation of the modern climate.
Considerable debate exists regarding the duration of Early Archaic Period (7,500 to
5,000 B.P.) occupations on the High Plains during the onset and height of the Hypsithermal.
Early Archaic sites are rare, and little is known about whether or not the region was depopulated
in favor of more ecologically diverse regions adjacent to the Plains or cooler environments at
higher elevations in the mountainous foothills to the west. Alternatively, the scarcity of sites
may relate to erosional scouring of the Plains landscape during this period. Cultural materials
considered diagnostic of the Early Archaic include large, concave-based projectile points and
some shallow, side-notched points (e.g., Uvalde), gouges, choppers, hammers, and quartzite
boiling stones. Early Archaic materials have been collected from the surfaces of dune blowout
sites in the Texas Panhandle at the Johnson-Cline Site (Lintz 1976). Possible Early Archaic
materials were excavated by Works Progress Administration crews from the Kenton Caves in
the Oklahoma Panhandle during the 1930s, but aside from the Rex Rodgers sites in Tule
Canyon, no Early Archaic sites have been excavated in the upper Texas Panhandle (Quigg et
al. 1993).
The Middle Archaic Period (5,000 to 3,000 B.P.) is characterized by a continued scarcity
of sites; however, local collections document the recovery of diagnostic points of this period
from surface contexts. Climatically, this period is marked by slightly more mesic conditions than
the previous period, though archeologists remain uncertain as to whether the paucity of sites is
the result of an actual scarcity of prehistoric human activity or to poor preservation of
landscapes containing Middle Archaic sites. Diagnostic artifacts associated with this period
include large dart points with weak to barbed shoulders and concave- to indented-base forms,

16

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

bifaces, scrapers, gouges, drills, spokeshaves, awls, hammerstones, one-handed manos, and
metates. Features include arrangements of quartzite boiling stones and formal hearths.
Subsistence activities and seasonal movements during this period remain poorly understood,
but are presumed to have involved nomadic collectors and foragers. Middle Archaic materials
are represented in surface collections from the Nall and Johnson-Cline sites (Baker et al. 1957;
Lintz 1976), though no Middle Archaic sites have been excavated in the North Canadian or
Canadian river valleys of the High Plains.
The Late Archaic Period (3,000 to 1,700 B.P.) is characterized by a continuation of the
collecting and foraging strategies by small, nomadic groups. Diagnostic materials include a
series of corner-notched dart points (e.g., Ellis, Marcos, Shumla) and small side-notched dart
points (e.g., Ensor, Edgewood), found in association with gouges, scrapers, bifaces, drills, and
one-handed manos and grinding stones. Known features are dominated by basin hearths,
some of which are lined with caliche and quartzite boiling stones. On the High Plains of
extreme southeastern Colorado, a single house structure was found at the McEndree Ranch
Site that yielded a radiocarbon date between 2,170 and 2,350 years ago (Shields 1980). No
similar structures have yet been identified in either the Texas or Oklahoma Panhandles, but little
effort has been expended in the search for such features. A broad-spectrum subsistence
economy is suspected to characterize the Late Archaic Period. Excavated Late Archaic sites
from the Texas Panhandle include Little Sunday (Hughes 1955), Chalk Hollow (Wedel 1975),
and Bitter Creek (Hughes and Hood 1976; Quigg et al. 1993).

3.3

FORMATIVE PERIOD (1,700 TO 150 B.P.)

The Formative period (1,700 to 150 B.P.) is marked by the appearance of ceramics,
small arrow points, and, in some areas, permanent villages and horticulture. The date at which
ceramics and the bow and arrow were introduced onto the Plains is still somewhat uncertain,
though they are believed to have been introduced from groups occupying the tall-grass prairies
and mixed-grass prairies to the east (Brosowske and Bement 1998). Three periods are defined
on the basis of differences in ceramics, point forms, cultural features, and subsistence
strategies. These include the Woodland, Late Prehistoric, and Protohistoric periods.
The Woodland Period (1,700 to 800 B.P.) is marked by the appearance of small, cornernotched arrow points and brownware pottery. The date at which ceramics and corner-notched
arrow points were introduced onto the Plains remains somewhat uncertain, but a date of
approximately 1,700 B.P. has been suggested by Quigg et al. (1993:26). This period coincides
with relatively moist climatic conditions on the High Plains. Two distinct but contemporaneous
cultural manifestations have been defined within the Texas Panhandle during this period.
The Palo Duro Complex has been defined on the basis of a distinctive, deeply basally
notched arrow point (i.e., Deadman) and plain brownware pottery found at Deadman’s Shelter in
the Tule Canyon, extending north into the Canadian River Valley (Boyd 1995; Etchieson 1979;
Hughes and Willey 1978). The pottery temper indicates that the vessels were manufactured in
the Sierra Blanca region of New Mexico. Radiocarbon dates from Deadman’s Shelter place the
Palo Duro Complex between A.D. 120 and 710. The Lake Creek Complex was named after the
type site of Lake Creek in the Canadian River Valley (Hughes 1962). Cultural materials

HJN 070186 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

considered diagnostic of Lake Creek include the small, corner-notched Scallorn arrow point and
thick, conoidal, cordmarked pottery. The cordmarked pottery manufacturing style is indicative of
contacts with other Plains Woodland manifestations in southeastern Colorado, Kansas, and/or
western Oklahoma. Other diagnostic materials include Late Archaic dart point styles, scrapers,
knives, thin bifaces, anvil stones, and manos and metates. Lake Creek components have been
identified at the Swift Horse Site in western Oklahoma (Briscoe 1987); the Middle Cheyenne,
Farley’s Boy Ranch, and Maintenance Barn sites (Couzzourt 1982), and sites 41MO5 and
41PT29 at Lake Meredith (Green 1967). Radiocarbon dates from the Swift Horse Site range
between 1,820 and 1,533 B.P.; comparable thermoluminescence dates have been obtained
from the Maintenance Barn Site (Quigg et al. 1993).
The recovery of maize pollen from the Palo Duro Creek area may represent some of the
earliest evidence of corn horticulture on the Plains, but the recovery of macrobotanical remains
from well-dated contexts is needed to confirm this discovery. The Woodland period in the
eastern part of Oklahoma indicates that horticulture began to supplement hunting and gathering
at this time; currently, no evidence of horticultural tools have been found on Plains Woodland
sites (Brosowske and Bement 1998). Overall, Woodland adaptations on the Plains appear to be
nearly identical to the Late Archaic, the only differences being the introduction of pottery and the
bow and arrow.
During the Late Prehistoric Period (800 to 450 B.P.), cultural manifestations on the
Southern High Plains clearly reflect sedentary and semisedentary hunter-gathererhorticulturalists who were adapting to more xeric conditions. The earliest manifestations thus
far recorded are represented by the Antelope Creek Phase, the Buried City Complex along Wolf
Creek (Hughes and Hughes-Jones 1987), the Zimms Complex of west-central Oklahoma (Flynn
1984, 1986), and the Wilmore Complex. Late Prehistoric period, or Plains Village, sites include
small hamlets or villages as well as hunting or special-activity camps. All of the various cultural
manifestations that have been defined are essentially Plains Village adaptations involving
isolated or contiguous masonry structures. Subsistence economies incorporated horticulture
within an already well-developed hunting-and-gathering subsistence base. The densest
occupations appear to be along the Canadian and North Canadian rivers and along Wolf Creek.
Diagnostic materials include bison scapula hoes, tibia digging stick tips, small side-notched and
unnotched points (e.g., Fresno, Washita, Harrell, Reed), end scrapers, drills, and globular
cordmarked pottery. The Antelope Creek people generally quarried and traded Alibates chert to
adjacent groups and maintained trade relationships with the Pueblos to the southwest. In fact,
raw material from the Alibates quarries along the Canadian River accounts for 60 to 80% of the
tools manufactured during this period (Lintz 1976). Lintz (1986) has suggested that variations in
architecture, community size, layout, settlement patterns, burial practices, occurrence of
intersocietal warfare, and trade within the Antelope Creek Phase in the Texas Panhandle
served as buffering mechanisms that offset growing problems with acquisition of resources that
were dwindling due to the lowering of the Ogallala Aquifer reserves. With the exception of the
Antelope Creek Phase, little long-term research has been directed toward Plains Village sites in
the Texas Panhandle, and the remaining complexes are poorly known as a result.

18

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

The Protohistoric Period (450 to 150 B.P.) extends from the abandonment of the Plains
Village pattern to the intensive settlement of the region by Euroamericans. During this period,
the adaptive strategy involved small, nomadic bands of foragers and collectors who seem to
have regularly focused on bison hunting to obtain hides and meat products to trade with the
Southwestern pueblos. Typical structures include tipis or conical huts, and tool assemblages
are characteristically meager. Three spatially distinct complexes have been defined based on
slight differences in ceramics and feature types. These are the Tierra Blanca Complex of the
upper Texas Panhandle, the Garza Complex of the lower Texas Panhandle, and the Wheeler
Complex of western Oklahoma (Baugh 1986; Habicht-Mauche 1988; Spielmann 1982).
Diagnostic artifacts include small side-notched and unnotched arrow points (e.g., Washita,
Fresno, Talco, Garza), end scrapers, and plain or punctated micaceous pottery. Southwestern
and Caddoan tradeware, obsidian, and shell jewelry are also common on Protohistoric sites
(Spielmann 1982). Wheeler Complex sites are distinguished by the presence of circular,
fortified embankments up to 50 m in diameter.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (150 B.P. TO PRESENT)

The Historic period (150 B.P. to present) arguably began with the exploration of the
region by Coronado in 1541 (cf. Quigg et al. 1993; Rathjen 1973). Although the first
Euroamericans may have entered the Southern High Plains as early as the mid-16th century,
most expeditions before the mid-1800s involved only brief excursions through the area. The
ethnographically documented Native American groups who utilized the Texas Panhandle at the
time of Coronado’s visit include the Teyas (a possible Caddoan-speaking group) and the
Querecho (a possible Apachean group). Both of these groups were nomadic when they were
first encountered and recorded in Coronado’s journals. The Teyas may have been the
remnants of people who lived in the Panhandle during the Late Prehistoric period or bands of
hunters from horticultural villages residing along the Great Bend of the Arkansas River. The
Apachean groups may have entered southeastern Colorado during the 13th century and moved
into the Panhandle during the late 15th century.
By the early 18th century, the Plains were dominated by the Comanche, who moved
down the front range of the Rockies to control access to the horse trade in the Southwest.
Various American expeditions through the Panhandle encountered the Kiowa Apaches,
Apaches, and Comanches in the Canadian River drainage. The Indians permitted visits by
explorers, as well as by New Mexican comancheros (traders) and ciboleros (hunters), because
of the benefits of short-term interactions with these groups. However, hostilities between the
Apache and Comanche were so severe that few Euroamericans traversed the Panhandle until
the latter half of the 19th century.
The earliest systematic exploitation of resources in the Texas Panhandle and the first
major competition with the Indians occurred during the 1870s when hide hunters depleted the
bison herds around the rail heads at Dodge City, Kansas, and began to shift southward into
Texas. The Panhandle area was commonly believed to have been allocated to Indian hunting
interests by the Treaty of Medicine Lodge; however, by the fall of 1873, bison hunters had set
up camps along Palo Duro Creek and made successful forays into surrounding territories. The

HJN 070186 AR

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

establishment of the Adobe Walls community in 1874 provoked an Indian attack aimed at
expelling the bison hunters from the region; however, this incident initiated numerous
engagements between the Comanches and the US Army in what has come to be called the Red
River War of 1874-1875. The conclusion of these activities opened the region to Euroamerican
settlement, which was initiated in 1876.
According to the Handbook of Texas Online for Hutchinson County (Anderson 2007),
Free-range cattlemen were the first settlers in the newly formed Hutchinson County. In November
1876 Thomas Sherman Bugbee started the Quarter Circle T Ranch; his daughter Ruby was the
first white child born in Hutchinson County. For the next four decades ranching dominated the
county's economy. In 1890 the county had nine ranches and fifty-eight residents. Aside from
about forty acres planted in corn, virtually no crops were grown in the county at that time, and
most of the land was unfenced. By 1900, sixty-three ranches and farms had been established in
Hutchinson County, and the population had increased to 303. The county's first school was
begun in a dugout on the Turkey Track Ranch that year. Though farmers were beginning to move
into the area, the economy continued to be almost completely dominated by cattle ranching; corn
production occupied nineteen acres, and cotton was planted on twenty-nine, but the agricultural
census counted almost 29,600 cattle in Hutchinson County in 1900.
After its boundaries were established, Hutchinson County was attached for administrative
purposes to Wheeler County and then to Carson County. In the spring of 1901 a movement was
begun for its organization. Elections were held on April 25, and on May 13 the county was
officially organized with the riverside town of Plemons as its seat of government. By 1910 the
population had reached 892, and the county was divided into sixteen school districts.
Crop cultivation slowly expanded in Hutchinson County during the first three decades of the
twentieth century. Hutchinson County slumbered as a sparsely populated ranching and
agricultural center until the discovery of the vast Panhandle oilfield in the early 1920s. Such
ranchers as James M. Sanford, J. A. Whittenburg, and John F. Weatherly cashed in on the
resultant boom; many townsites and oil camps such as Isom, Sanford, Fritch, Phillips, Stinnett,
Signal Hill, Electric City, and Dial sprang up almost overnight as petroleum-related industries
moved in and independent oil producers struck it rich. The largest and rowdiest of these boom
towns was laid out west of Dixon Creek in 1926 and named for its founder, A. P. (Ace) Borger.
With the boom, railroads finally came to the county. In 1924 the Chicago, Rock Island and Gulf
Railway built northeast from Amarillo across the western part of the county, and in 1926 the
Panhandle and Santa Fe extended a spur line from Panhandle in Carson County to Borger and
Phillips. After a special election on September 18, 1926, Stinnett took over as county seat, thus
causing the demise of Plemons.
The onslaught of the Great Depression, with the accompanying black dusters of the Dust Bowl,
ended the boom, devastated farms, and caused petroleum prices to drop. Nevertheless,
Hutchinson County as a whole experienced a mixture of prosperity and recession as many "Okie"
migrants found jobs in the oilfields and plants.
World War II saw a resurgence in the carbon black industry and the establishment at Bunavista,
west of Borger, of a carbon black plant that in 1943 produced 361,000,000 pounds. Tourism and
recreation were enhanced in 1965 with the completion of Sanford Dam, which impounded Lake
Meredith on the Canadian River.

20

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

Despite declining prices in beef and oil, the county remained largely dependent on the petroleum
and cattle industries. In the late 1980s thirty-three plants continued to manufacture petroleumrelated products. During the 1980s controversy raged over the future of the town of Phillips, when
company cutbacks and inadequate sewage-treatment facilities led to the threat of eviction of
much of that town's populace from leased land owned by Phillips Petroleum and the Whittenburg
family's MM Cattle Company.
Borger (2000 population, 14,302) remains the county's largest town and chief commercial and
cultural center, and Stinnett (1,936) is the county seat. Other communities include Fritch (2,235 in
Hutchinson County, partly in Moore County), Sanford (203), Phillips, Dial, and Pringle. Several
lakeside resorts dot the shores of Lake Meredith. In the late 1980s the county had a library, a
hospital, a modern airport, and six public school districts. The Hutchinson County Museum was
opened at Borger in November 1977.

According to the Handbook of Texas Online for Moore County (Abbe 2007),
In 1876 the Texas legislature formed Moore County from lands formerly assigned to Bexar
County, and soon ranchers began moving into the area. Ranching dominated the local economy
from the 1870s to the 1920s, when farming began to develop significantly. During the 1880s the
local ranching economy stabilized, and the few stock raisers and farmers who lived in the
county saw the need for a local government. The founding of the town of Dumas by Louis
Dumas and the Panhandle Townsite Company in 1890 encouraged county organization. As
a result, Moore County was organized with Dumas as the county seat following an election
held on July 5, 1892.
As early as the 1890s local stock raisers and a few farmers began to plant small amounts of corn,
wheat, and grain sorghums. Farming continued on a limited scale until the years during and just
after World War I, when worldwide demand led to a boom in farming. As grain prices fell during
the 1920s, cotton was introduced as a supplementary crop. By the end of the 1920s the local
economy was based on a mix of cattle ranching and wheat and grain farming.
In the mid-1920s discovery of the Panhandle field changed the complexion of Moore County
entirely. Gas reserves were located in Moore County as early as 1921, and large-scale
commercial oil and gas production began in 1927. The town of Cactus came into existence during
World War II, when the United States government constructed a nitrogen-producing plant near
Etter. This plant brought a large influx of people into surrounding towns such as Dumas and
Sunray. The discovery and exploitation of oil and gas greatly influenced Moore County. Since the
1930s the production of oil and, more importantly, of natural gas has dominated the local
economy. Refining, generation of electricity, and even smelting operations developed during the
1930s and 1940s to take advantage of cheap and abundant fuels. Likewise, large pipeline
systems originate in the county and carry gas products throughout the region.
Communities in the county include Dumas (2000 population, 13,747), the county seat; Cactus
(2,538); and Sunray (1,950). Dumas is the home of the Moore County Historical Museum and
hosts Dogie Days in June and the county fair in September.

HJN 070186 AR

21

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Archival research conducted on the THC’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas database
web site (Atlas) indicated that no archeological sites have been recorded within a 1.2-mi (2.0km) perimeter of the Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW (THC 2007). Based on the Atlas maps,
no formal cultural resources surveys have been conducted within or adjacent to the boundaries
of the pipeline ROW.

HJN 070186 AR

23

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

5.0 METHODOLOGY

A Horizon archeologist conducted an intensive pedestrian survey of the USACE
jurisdictional areas within the proposed Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW on 27 to 29
November 2007, 2 January 2008, and again on 17 January 2008. This included intensive
surface inspection as well as subsurface shovel testing. For purposes of this project, the
USACE jurisdictional areas investigated within the proposed pipeline ROW were originally given
a variable width of 30.0 m to 60.0 m (100 to 200 ft) on either side of the jurisdictional drainages.
The variable nature of the USACE jurisdictional boundary was specifically employed in order to
incorporate potential culture-bearing alluvial landforms such as terraces that might skirt the
edges of the drainages. Upon the completion of the initial survey of the proposed pipeline,
much of the pipeline was rerouted by Mustang for logistical purposes. USACE jurisdictional
crossings 1 through 4 coincided with the previously surveyed pipeline ROW, and as such
additional survey efforts were not necessary within these areas. The eastern half of the
proposed pipeline, which includes USACE jurisdictional crossings 5 through 9, continues along
the same general trajectory as the original pipeline route with only minor shifts to the north or
south. However, as the reroute traverses previously un-surveyed areas it was necessary to reassess USACE jurisdictional crossing 5 through 9 for cultural resources. Unfortunately,
considerable opposition by the landowner prevented the Horizon from accessing USACE
jurisdictional crossings 8 and 9. However, given the nature of the landscape and the lack of
cultural materials within the previous 7 USACE jurisdictional areas, it is Horizon’s opinion that
there is a low probability for cultural resources within crossings 8 and 9.
Of the 7 jurisdictional crossings investigated, 6 were found to be rather ephemeral in
nature, and, as such, only a 30.0-m- (100.0-ft-) wide boundary was investigated on either side of
these waterways. Bugbee Creek was found to be more substantial in capacity, and a 60.0-m(200.0-ft-) wide jurisdictional boundary was adopted in order to adequately assess the alluvial
deposits adjacent to the stream course. In all, the surveyed areas totaled approximately 1.3
acres (ac) (0.5 hectares [ha]). The TSMASS require a minimum of 3 shovel tests per acre on
projects of this size. As such, a total of 4 shovel tests were necessary to comply with the
TSMASS. Horizon archeologists exceeded the TSMASS by excavating a total of 27 shovel
tests within the USACE jurisdictional areas.
Shovel tests measured 30 cm in diameter and were excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m
(3.3 ft) below surface, to the top of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable.
In practice, shovel tests were often terminated prematurely due to the presence of compact

HJN 070186 AR

25

Chapter 5.0: Methodology

gravelly sands.
All sediments were screened through 0.25-inch hardware cloth and
subsequently replaced in the shovel test hole from which they were excavated. Shovel test
location data were acquired via a handheld Global Positioning System (GPS) unit using the
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinate system and map datum NAD 27. Shovel test
locations are presented in Figure 10, and shovel test data are provided in Appendix A.

26

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

Figure 10. Shovel test locations

HJN 070186 AR

27

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

6.0 RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

RESULTS

The intensive surface inspection and shovel testing regimen resulted in entirely negative
findings. The Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW traverses predominately open rangeland
consisting of rolling topography covered with scrub vegetation. The majority of the jurisdictional
drainages were ephemeral in nature, with the exception of Bugbee Creek, which was found to
consist of a fairly wide waterway. Areas adjacent to USACE jurisdictional crossings 1 through 7
were found to lack significant alluvial features and were generally underlain by shallow gravelly
sands. It was apparent that these terraces possessed very little potential for containing intact,
buried cultural resources. Additionally, wind and water erosion facilitated by overgrazing has
likely stripped much of the area of its topsoil, resulting in heavily compacted deposits topped by
quartzite-rich gravels. These types of soil conditions would typically confine cultural materials to
surface contexts, thereby allowing for their discovery if they were present. Judging by the aerial
photography and topographic maps, both USACE jurisdictional areas 8 and 9 are located near
the headwaters of 2 fairly small unnamed tributaries of Spring Canyon. These tributaries, in this
area, meander through farming and grazing land of relatively low topographic relief. Alluvial
features appear to be minimal in nature, indicating that there is likely a low probability that
buried intact cultural resources are present within these areas. With this in mind, USACE
jurisdictional areas 8 and 9 possess physical characteristics that are very similar to other areas
surveyed along the pipeline ROW, particularly USACE jurisdictional crossings 1, 2, and 7.

6.2

RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the survey-level investigation, it is Horizon’s opinion that development within
the USACE jurisdictional areas 1 though 7 within the Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW will have
no adverse effect on any significant resources located within the investigated USACE
jurisdictional areas. While USACE jurisdictional areas 8 and 9 were not formally assessed due
to access restrictions, it is Horizon’s opinion that these areas possess a low probability for
harboring significant cultural resources. As such, Horizon recommends that cultural resources
clearance be granted for all of the USACE jurisdictional areas within the Stinnett to Cargray
Pipeline ROW. However, in the unlikely event that any cultural materials (including human
remains or burial features) are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or

HJN 070186 AR

29

Chapter 6.0: Results and Recommendations

ongoing maintenance of the ROW, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and the Texas Historical Commission (THC) should be notified of the discovery.

30

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbe, Donald
2007
Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Moore County,” <http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/
handbook/online/articles/MM/hcw11.html>. Accessed 5 December 2007.
Adovasio, J. M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Anderson, H. Allen
2007
Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Hutchinson County,” <http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/
handbook/online/articles/CC/hcc6.html>. Accessed 5 December 2007.
Antevs, E.
1955
Geologic-Climatic Dating in the West. American Antiquity 20:317-335.
Baker, W. E., T. N. Campbell, and G. L. Evans
1957
The Nall Site: Evidence of Early Man in the Oklahoma Panhandle. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society 5:1-20.
Baugh, T. G.
1986
Culture History and Protohistoric Societies in the Southern Plains. In Current Trends
in Southern Plains Archaeology, edited by T. Baugh. Plains Anthropologist Memoir
No. 21:167-187.
Borchert, J. R.
1950
The Climate of the Central North American Grassland. Annals of the Association of
American Geographers 40:1-39.
Boyd, D. K.
1995
The Palo Duro Complex: Redefining the Early Ceramic Period in the Caprock
Canyonlands. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:461-518.
Briscoe, J. D.
1987
Radiocarbon Dates from the Swift Horse Site, 34RM501, Roger Mills County.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Newsletter 35(5):8-9.

HJN 070186 AR

31

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Brosowske, S. D., and L. C. Bement
1998
Pedestrian Survey of Playa Lake Environments in Beaver and Texas Counties,
Oklahoma, Project 40-97-12040.021. Archeological Resource Survey Report No. 39,
The University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman, Oklahoma.
Butzer, K. W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Collins, M. B.
1971
A Review of Llano Estacado Archaeology and Ethnohistory. Plains Anthropologist
16(52):85-104.
Cooke, W. W.
1897
The Birds of Colorado. State Agricultural College, Bulletin No. 37, Technical Series
No. 2, Fort Collins, Colorado.
Couzzourt, J.
1982
Archaeological Testing at Cal Farley’s Boys Ranch, Oldham County, Texas—Part
One: The Maintenance Barn Site (A1543), pp. 57-134. Transactions of the 17th
Regional Archaeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western
Texas.
Dillehay, T. D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.

Dincauze, D. F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Etchieson, G. M.
1979
Archeological Investigations in the Crowell Reservoir Area, Cottle, Foard, King, and
Knox Counties, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research
Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.
(ESRI) Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc.
2004
GIS data layers: US cities. Redlands, California.
Ford, A. R., and R. W. Fox
1975
Soil Survey of Dallam County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Commission (formerly Soil Conservation Service),
Washington, D.C.

32

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

Frye, J. C., and A. B. Leonard
1957
Studies of Cenozoic Geology Along Eastern Margin of Texas High Plains, Armstrong
to Howard Counties. University of Texas Bureau of Economic Geology, Report of
Investigations 32:1-62. Austin.
Flynn, P.
1984
An Analysis of the 1973 Test Excavations at the Zimms Site (34RM72). In
Archaeology of the Mixed Grass Prairie Phase I: Quartermaster Creek, edited by T.
G. Baugh. Oklahoma Archaeological Survey, Archaeological Resource Survey
Report 20:215-290, Norman.
1986

Analysis of Test Excavations at the Zimms Site (34RM72), Western Oklahoma. In
Current Trends in Southern Plains Archaeology, edited by T. G. Baugh. Plains
Anthropologist Memoir 21:129-140.

Gregg, J.
1958
Commerce of the Prairies. Norma, Oklahoma.
Green, F. E.
1967
Archeological Salvage in the Sanford Reservoir Area. National Park Service Report
No. 14-10-0333-1126. Alibates National Monument, Texas.
Habricht-Mauche, J.A.
1988
An Analysis of Southwestern-Style Utility Ware Ceramics from the Southern Plains in
the Context of Protohistoric Plains-Pueblo Interaction.
Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachussetts.
Haynes, C. V., Jr., D. J. Donahue, A. J. T. Hull, and T. H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hofman, J. L., R. L. Brooks, J. S. Hays, D. W. Owsley, R. L. Jantz, M. K. Marks, and M. H.
Manheim
1989
From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great Plains.
Oklahoma Archeological Survey, University of Oklahoma and Louisiana State
University, and the Arkansas Archeological Survey, Arkansas Archeological Survey
Research Series No. 35. Fayetteville, Arkansas.
Hughes, J. T.
1979a Cultural Resources. In An Environmental Profile of the Palo Duro Creek Basin.
West Texas State University, Killgore Research Center, Canyon, Texas.
1979b

Archaeology of Palo Duro Canyon. The Story of Palo Duro Canyon, edited by D.
Guy, pp. 35-58. West Texas State University, Killgore Research Center, Canyon,
Texas.

1962

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle.
Archeological and Paleontological Society 32:65-84.

HJN 070186 AR

Bulletin of the Texas

33

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

1955

Little Sunday: An Archaic Site in the Texas Panhandle.
Archeological Society 32:65-84.

Bulletin of the Texas

Hughes, J. T., and H. C. Hood
1976
An Archeological Survey in the Lakeview Watershed. Report submitted to the Soil
Conservation Service by West Texas State University, Canyon.
Hughes, J. T., and A. A. Hughes-Jones
1987
The Courson Archeological Projects: Final 1985 and Preliminary 1986.
Courson Archeological Projects, Perryton, Texas.

The

Hughes, J. T., and P. Willey
1978
Archeology at MacKenzie Reservoir. Archaeological Survey Report No. 24, Texas
Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist, Austin.
Johnson, W. D.
1900
The High Plains and Their Utilization. U.S. Geological Survey, 21st Annual Report,
Part 4:601-741.
Kelly, R. L., and L. C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.
Lintz, C.
1976
1986

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

The McGrath Site of the Panhandle Aspect.
Anthropological Society 25:1-110.

American

Bulletin of the Oklahoma

Architecture and Community Variability within the Antelope Creek Phase of the
Texas Panhandle. Studies in Oklahoma’s Past, No. 14, Oklahoma Archaeological
Survey, Norman, Oklahoma.

Lintz, C., and J. L. Anderson (eds.)
1989
Temporal Assessment of Diagnostic Materials from the Piñon Canyon Maneuver
Site: Towards the Development of a Cultural Chronology for Southeastern Colorado.
Colorado Archaeological Society, Memoir No. 4.
Lynch, T. F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D. J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D. J., D. K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A. W. Barker, D. F. Dincauze, C. V. Haynes, F. Mena,
L. Nuñez, and D. J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4:659-663.

34

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock
Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

Mitchell, J. L.
1975
Notes on Some Archeological Materials from the Palo Duro Creek Area of Hansford
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 46:217-230.
(NRCS) US Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service
2007
Web Soil Survey, <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed 5 December 2007.
Quigg, J. M., C. Lintz, F. M. Oglesby, A. C. Earls, C. D. Frederick, W. N. Trierweiler, D. Owsley,
and K. W. Kibler
1993
Historic and Prehistoric Data Recovery at Palo Duro Reservoir, Hansford County,
Texas. Technical Report No. 485, Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Ramaley, F., and W. W. Robbins
1926
Colorado. In Naturalist’s Guide to the Americas, edited by V. Shelford. Ecological
Society of America.
Rathjen, F.
1973
The Texas Panhandle Frontier.
University of Texas Press.

The M.K. Brown Range Life Series, No. 12.

Shields, W. L.
1980
Preliminary Investigations at the McEndree Ranch Site, 5BS30. Southwestern Lore
46:1-17.
Spielmann, K.
1982
Inter-Societal Food Acquisition Among Equalitarian Societies: An Ecological Study of
Plains/Pueblo Interaction in the American Southwest.
Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
(THC) Texas Historical Commission
2007
Texas
Archeological
Sites
Atlas
restricted
database.
www.pedernales.thc.state.tx.us/>. Accessed 3 December 2007.

<http://

(USGS) US Geological Survey
1970
7.5-minute Series Topographic Quadrangle Map, Evans Canyon, Texas.
(USGS) US Geological Survey
1970
7.5-minute Series Topographic Quadrangle Map, Sanford, Texas.
Walker, D. N.
1978
Geomorphic Evolution of the Southern High Plains.
Bulletin No. 35, Waco.

Baylor Geological Studies,

Webb, W. R.
1931
The Great Plains. Grosset and Dunlap, New York.

HJN 070186 AR

35

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Wedel, W. R.
1961
Prehistoric Man on the Great Plains (1970 edition). University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.
1975

Chalk Hollow: Culture Sequence and Chronology in the Texas Panhandle. Actas del
XLI Congreso Internacional de Americanistas 1:271-278, Mexico, D.F.

Wheat, J. B.
1972
The Olsen-Chubbuck Site: A Paleo-Indian Bison Kill. Memoirs of the Society for
American Archaeology, No. 26. Washington D.C.

36

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the USACE Jurisdictional Areas within the 7-Mile Eagle Rock Stinnett to Cargray Pipeline ROW, Moore
and Hutchinson Counties, Texas

SHOVEL TEST DATA
Waypoint
#

Shovel
Test#

Easting

Northing

Depth

1

1

258386

3959251

0‐10 cm

2

2

258279

3959259

0‐10 cm

3

3

258341

3959260

0‐10 cm

4

4

261509

3959140

0‐10 cm

5

5

261548

3959142

0‐20 cm

6

6

261898

3959135

0‐10 cm

7
8
9
10

7
8
9
10

261965
261973
264263
264202

3959129
3959144
3959144
3959133

0‐70 cm
0‐60 cm
0‐10 cm
0‐10 cm

11

11

264395

3959085

0‐10 cm

12

12

264446

3959078

0‐5 cm

13

13

264438

3958921

0‐20 cm

14

14

264425

3958941

0‐20 cm

HJN 070186 AR

Soils

Pale brown sandy silt with dense
quartzite cobbles and gravels
Pale brown sandy silt with dense
quartzite cobbles and gravels
Pale brown sandy silt with dense
quartzite cobbles and gravels
Pale brown sandy silt with dense
quartzite cobbles and gravels,
massive cobble exposures
Deeper pale brown sand over gravels
Pale brown sandy silt with dense
quartzite cobbles and gravels,
massive cobble exposures
Deeper pale brown sand over gravels
Deeper pale brown sand over gravels
Massive cobble exposures
Massive cobble exposures
Silt and caliche with heavy gravel
exposures
Massive cobble exposures
Dark brown silty clay, dense clay at
base
Dark brown silty clay, dense clay at
base

Comments

East bank of Trib 1
West bank of Trib 2
Between Tribs 1 and 2
West bank of Trib 3
East bank of Trib 3
West bank of Trib 4
East bank of Trib 4
East bank of Trib 4
West bank of BugBee Creek
West bank of BugBee Creek
East bank of BugBee Creek
East bank of BugBee Creek
West bank of Trib 5
West bank of Trib 5

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data
Waypoint
#

Shovel
Test#

Easting

Northing

Depth

15

15

264423

3958917

0‐20 cm

16

16

264458

3958942

0‐20 cm

A-2

Soils

Comments

Dark brown silty clay, dense clay at
base
Dark brown silty clay, dense clay at
base

West bank of Trib 5
East bank of Trib 5

070186_arch_survey_report.doc

