Cultural Resources Investigations
Conducted for the City of Anahuac’s
Proposed Water System Improvements,
Anahuac, Chambers County, Texas
By:
Russell K. Brownlow

HJN 080043 AR
TAC Permit No. 3856
Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Schaumburg & Polk, Inc.
Beaumont, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

September 2008

Cultural Resources Investigations
Conducted for the City of Anahuac’s
Proposed Water System Improvements,
Anahuac, Chambers County, Texas
By:
Russell K. Brownlow

Prepared for:

Schaumburg & Polk, Inc.
8865 College Street
Beaumont, Texas 77707

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Russell K. Brownlow, MA, RPA, Principal Investigator
HJN 080043 AR

TAC Permit No. 3856

September 2008

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The City of Anahuac is proposing a series of water system improvements that include: 1)
the construction of a 20-acre raw water reservoir; 2) the construction of an associated 3000linear-foot (915-meter) transfer line that will connect the proposed reservoir to an existing water
treatment plant; 3) the construction of a new ground storage tank adjacent to the City’s existing
ground storage tank; and 4) the replacement of 12 segments of ductile iron water lines within
existing road rights-of-way (ROWs) within the City limits. Because the reservoir, water storage
tank, and water lines will be owned and maintained by the City of Anahuac, the water system
improvements fall under the regulations of the Antiquities Code of Texas (ACT). Additionally,
because the projects are being funded through the Texas Water Development Board’s (TWDB)
Drinking Water State Revolving Fund (DWSRF), a portion of which is funded through annual US
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) capitalization grants, the improvements also trigger
Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended.
On behalf of the City of Anahuac, Schaumburg & Polk, Inc. has contracted, Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) to conduct cultural resources investigations within the
Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed improvements. These investigations consisted
of: 1) an intensive cultural resources survey of the proposed raw water reservoir and associated
transfer line, both of which are located in relatively undisturbed areas; and 2) a general
reconnaissance survey of the generally disturbed locations where the water line replacements
and ground storage tank are proposed. The purpose of the intensive survey investigations was
to identify any cultural resources within the APE of the proposed reservoir and associated
transfer line, and, if any existed, to assess their eligibility for formal designation as State
Archeological Landmarks (SALs) and for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP). The purpose of the general reconnaissance survey was to determine the degree of
impacts to the proposed water line and storage tank locations, and to determine whether an
intensive survey or archeological monitoring is warranted at these locations.
The intensive pedestrian survey entailed intensive surface inspection and subsurface
shovel testing within the APE of the proposed reservoir and associated transfer line. During the
survey, the Horizon field crew exceeded the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards by excavating a total of 22 shovel tests within the APE. The intensive survey
resulted in the documentation of no archeological sites or historic structures at any location
within the proposed reservoir or along the associated transfer line. Additionally, the dense clay

HJN 080043

iii

Management Summary

soils in the area had little potential to contain buried, intact cultural deposits. As such, it is
Horizon’s opinion that no significant cultural resources will be impacted by the construction of
the proposed 20-acre raw water reservoir and associated transfer line. Horizon recommends
that cultural resources clearance be granted for the construction of the proposed reservoir and
transfer line.
The general reconnaissance survey consisted of a visual inspection and photodocumentation of the locations of the proposed water line replacements and ground storage
tank.
Since the proposed water line construction activities consist of the replacement of
existing iron water lines that have outlived their useful life expectancy, the locations of all the
proposed water lines have been previously disturbed during the original installation of the
existing water lines. Moreover, with the exception of only a few segments, all proposed water
line replacements are located within existing easements that have been heavily disturbed by
road construction, drainage ditch excavation, and utility installation. The proposed ground
storage tank is located within an existing surface water treatment plant that has also been
heavily disturbed by previous construction activities within the plant. Based on the existing,
heavily disturbed condition of the locations of the proposed water line replacements and ground
storage tank, it is Horizon’s opinion that the potential for impacting intact subsurface cultural
deposits is minimal. As such, Horizon recommends that cultural resources clearance be
granted for the proposed water line replacements and the construction of the proposed ground
storage tank.

iv

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1

2.0

PROJECT AREA DESCRIPTION ............................................................................... 5
2.1
20-Acre Raw Water Reservoir ......................................................................... 5
2.2
3000-Linear-Foot Transfer Line ....................................................................... 5
2.3
Water Line Segment Replacements ................................................................ 8
2.4
Ground Storage Tank ...................................................................................... 8

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND..................................................................................... 15
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 BC) ....................................................... 16
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 BC to AD 100) ............................................................. 16
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (AD 100 to 600) .......................................................... 17
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (AD 600 to 1500) ...................................................... 18
3.5
Protohistoric Period (AD 1500 to 1700) ......................................................... 19
3.6
Historic Period (AD 1700 to Present) ............................................................ 19

4.0

ARCHIVAL REVIEW ................................................................................................. 21

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY ...................................................................................... 25
5.1
Intensive Pedestrian Survey .......................................................................... 25
5.2
General Reconnaissance Survey .................................................................. 26

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................. 27
6.1
Intensive Pedestrian Survey .......................................................................... 27
6.2
General Reconnaissance Survey .................................................................. 27

7.0

RECOMMENDATIONS ............................................................................................. 29
7.1
20-Acre Raw Water Reservoir ....................................................................... 29
7.2
3000-Linear-Foot Transfer Line ..................................................................... 29
7.3
Water Line Segment Replacements .............................................................. 29
7.4
Ground Storage Tank .................................................................................... 30

8.0

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................. 31
APPENDIX A: SHOVEL TEST DATA
ADDENDUM: ARCHEOLOGICAL MONITORING

HJN 080043

v

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1. Location of the City of Anahuac’s proposed water system improvements ................... 2
Figure 2. View of proposed raw water reservoir location ............................................................. 6
Figure 3. Example of argillic clay surface within proposed reservoir ........................................... 6
Figure 4. View of cow ruts in reservoir surface ............................................................................ 7
Figure 5. View along transfer line easement ................................................................................ 7
Figure 6. View along water line replacement Segment No. 1 ...................................................... 8
Figure 7. View along water line replacement Segment No. 2 ...................................................... 9
Figure 8. View along water line replacement Segment No. 3 ...................................................... 9
Figure 9. View along water line replacement Segment No. 4 .................................................... 10
Figure 10. View along water line replacement Segment No. 5 .................................................. 10
Figure 11. View along water line replacement Segment No. 6 .................................................. 11
Figure 12. View along water line replacement Segment No. 7 .................................................. 11
Figure 13. View along water line replacement Segment No. 8 .................................................. 12
Figure 14. View along water line replacement Segment No. 9 .................................................. 12
Figure 15. View along water line replacement Segment No. 10 ................................................ 13
Figure 16. View along water line replacement Segment No. 11 ................................................ 13
Figure 17. View along water line replacement Segment No. 12 ................................................ 14
Figure 18. View of proposed ground storage tank location within existing plant ....................... 14

HJN 080043

vii

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

1.0 INTRODUCTION

This document reports the results of cultural resources investigations conducted for a
series of water system improvements proposed by the City of Anahuac in Chambers County,
Texas. These proposed water system improvements include: 1) the construction of a 20-acre
raw water reservoir; 2) the construction of an associated 3000-linear-foot (915-meter) transfer
line that will connect the proposed reservoir to an existing water treatment plant; 3) the
construction of a new ground storage tank adjacent to the City’s existing ground storage tank;
and 4) the replacement of 12 segments of ductile iron water lines within existing road rights-ofway (ROWs) within the City limits (Figure 1). Because the reservoir, water storage tank, and
water lines will be owned and maintained by the City of Anahuac, the water system
improvements fall under the regulations of the Antiquities Code of Texas (ACT). Additionally,
because the projects are being funded through the Texas Water Development Board’s (TWDB)
Drinking Water State Revolving Fund (DWSRF), a portion of which is funded through annual US
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) capitalization grants, the improvements also trigger
Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended.
On behalf of the City of Anahuac, Schaumburg & Polk, Inc. has contracted with Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) to conduct cultural resources investigations within the
Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed improvements. These investigations consist of:
1) an intensive cultural resources survey of the proposed raw water reservoir and associated
transfer line, both of which are located in relatively undisturbed areas; and 2) a general
reconnaissance survey of the generally disturbed locations where the water line replacements
and ground storage tank are proposed. The purpose of the intensive survey investigations was
to identify any cultural resources within the APE of the proposed reservoir and associated
transfer line, and, if any existed, to assess their eligibility for formal designation as State
Archeological Landmarks (SALs). The purpose of the general reconnaissance survey was to
determine the degree of impacts to the proposed water line and storage tank locations, and to
determine whether an intensive survey or archeological monitoring is warranted at these
locations.
The cultural resources investigations consisted of an archival review, an intensive
pedestrian survey, a general reconnaissance survey, and the production of a report suitable for
review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas
Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and

HJN 080043

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of the City of Anahuac’s proposed water system improvements

2

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

the Council of Texas Archeologists’ (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management
Reports. Russell Brownlow (Horizon’s cultural resources director) served as the project’s
Principal Investigator. Jared Wiersema and Reign Clark (Horizon field technicians) served as
the field crew. Horizon conducted the field investigations on 20 and 21 July 2005.
The intensive pedestrian survey entailed intensive surface inspection and subsurface
shovel testing within the APE of the proposed reservoir and associated transfer line. During the
survey, the Horizon field crew exceeded the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards by excavating a total of 22 shovel tests within the APE. The intensive survey
resulted in the documentation of no archeological sites or historic structures at any location
within the proposed reservoir or along the associated transfer line. Additionally, the dense clay
soils in the area had little potential to contain buried, intact cultural deposits. As such, it is
Horizon’s opinion that no significant cultural resources will be impacted by the construction of
the proposed 20-acre raw water reservoir and associated transfer line. Horizon recommends
that cultural resources clearance be granted for the construction of the proposed reservoir and
transfer line.
The general reconnaissance survey consisted of a visual inspection and photodocumentation of the locations of the proposed water line replacements and ground storage
tank.
Since the proposed water line construction activities consist of the replacement of
existing iron water lines that have outlived their useful life expectancy, the locations of all the
proposed water lines have been previously disturbed during the original installation of the
existing water lines. Moreover, with the exception of only a few segments, all proposed water
line replacements are located within existing easements that have been heavily disturbed by
road construction, drainage ditch excavation, and utility installation. The proposed ground
storage tank is located within an existing surface water treatment plant that has also been
heavily disturbed by previous construction activities within the plant. Based on the existing,
heavily disturbed condition of the locations of the proposed water line replacements and ground
storage tank, it is Horizon’s opinion that the potential for impacting intact subsurface cultural
deposits is minimal. As such, Horizon recommends that cultural resources clearance be
granted for the proposed water line replacements and the construction of the proposed ground
storage tank.

HJN 080043

3

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

2.0 PROJECT AREA DESCRIPTION

The proposed improvements to the City of Anahuac’s water distribution system and
production facilities are discussed separately below.

2.1

20-ACRE RAW WATER RESERVOIR

To provide sufficient freshwater reserve during periods of saltwater intrusion into Lake
Anahuac, the City proposes to construct a 30-million-gallon raw water reservoir on a 20-acre
parcel located east of the City of Anahuac and south of the Chambers County Airport (see
Figure 1). This 20-acre parcel consists of a fallow hay field that is bordered by Belton Street to
the north, an artificial drainage canal to the west, and extant hay fields to the south and east.
The parcel is a generally flat and featureless area that appears to pool water during wet periods
due to the clayey nature of the soils (Figures 2 and 3). The presence of deeply rutted hoof
prints over the property also indicates that the parcel is used at times for cattle grazing (Figure
4). It is located in an area that is a considerable distance from any natural water sources. This
fact, coupled with the dense clay nature of the soils on the parcel, suggests a generally low
potential for subsurface, prehistoric cultural deposits.

2.2

3000-LINEAR-FOOT TRANSFER LINE

As part of the solution to provide sufficient freshwater reserve during periods of saltwater
intrusion into Lake Anahuac, a 3000-linear-foot (915-meter [m]) water transfer line is also
proposed in order to transport the raw water from the proposed reservoir to the City’s existing
surface water treatment plant. This transfer line will extend from the northwest corner of the
proposed reservoir, and will be placed within a 30-foot (10-m) easement along the west side of
an artificial drainage canal that extends northward to the existing water treatment plant (Figure
5). The easement may have experienced some impacts in the past during the construction of
the artificial canal. At the time of the survey, the easement was covered with dense stands of
tallow trees. Like the reservoir, the soils along the length of the transfer line easement consist
of shallow clay soils.

HJN 080043

5

Chapter 2.0: Project Area Description

Figure 2. View of proposed raw water reservoir location

Figure 3. Example of argillic clay surface within proposed reservoir

6

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

Figure 4. View of cow ruts in reservoir surface

Figure 5. View along transfer line easement

HJN 080043

7

Chapter 2.0: Project Area Description

2.3

WATER LINE SEGMENT REPLACEMENTS

Many of the ductile iron water lines throughout the City’s distribution system have
reached their useful life expectancy. As such, 12 segments (totaling roughly 16,000 linear feet
[4,880 m]) of these outdated water lines will be removed and replaced with new PVC water lines
(see Figure 1). Because the activities consist of the replacement of existing water lines, all
proposed locations have been previously impacted during the construction of the existing water
lines. Moreover, with the exception of segments No. 10 and No. 12, all proposed water line
replacements are located within existing easements that have been heavily disturbed by road
construction, drainage ditch excavation, and utility installation (Figures 6 through 17). Based on
these previous disturbances, there exists essentially no potential for intact, subsurface deposits
within the APE of the proposed water line replacement.

2.4

GROUND STORAGE TANK

In order to meet changing drinking water standards, portions of the existing surface
water treatment plant will be upgraded. These upgrades include filter piping, process control
equipment, converting the existing on-site raw water reservoir into the backwash basin and
decommissioning the existing backwash basin, telemetry equipment, replacement of a filter
splitter box, and the construction of a second ground storage tank adjacent to the City’s existing
ground storage tank (Figure 18). All these activities are proposed within the confines of the
existing surface water treatment plant. Because this is an existing facility, there exists
essentially no potential for intact, subsurface deposits within its confines.

Figure 6. View along water line replacement Segment No. 1

8

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

Figure 7. View along water line replacement Segment No. 2

Figure 8. View along water line replacement Segment No. 3

HJN 080043

9

Chapter 2.0: Project Area Description

Figure 9. View along water line replacement Segment No. 4

Figure 10. View along water line replacement Segment No. 5

10

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

Figure 11. View along water line replacement Segment No. 6

Figure 12. View along water line replacement Segment No. 7

HJN 080043

11

Chapter 2.0: Project Area Description

Figure 13. View along water line replacement Segment No. 8

Figure 14. View along water line replacement Segment No. 9

12

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

Figure 15. View along water line replacement Segment No. 10

Figure 16. View along water line replacement Segment No. 11

HJN 080043

13

Chapter 2.0: Project Area Description

Figure 17. View along water line replacement Segment No. 12

Figure 18. View of proposed ground storage tank location within existing plant

14

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The Project Area is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21county area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 200 km (124 miles) inland from the Texas gulf coastline. In broad terms, much
of the archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern
Great Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990).
Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin sub-regions of
Southeast Texas. These 2 sub-regions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25 kilometer (km) (16 miles) inland from the coast that covers the area
influenced by gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable
ecological variability characterizes this sub-region, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes,
wetlands, marine coastline, and barrier islands. The inland sub-region also encompasses
considerable ecological diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney
woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to
denote Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural
characteristics of Southeast Texas cultural periods are often different than in neighboring
regions. For instance, the Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and
Southeast Texas, and Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for
Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time
in Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit
evidence of reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be
associated with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of
subsistence-related activities. Inland sites tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired
clay balls (at some sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites
tend to consist of multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain oyster shell tools, large
quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), numerous bone tools, and few lithic
materials.

HJN 080043

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 BC)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 BC (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (but see Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is
represented by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 BC)(Patterson 1995). This stage
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end
scrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas
are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is
little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 BC), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian
period (8000 to 5000 BC), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).
3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 BC TO AD 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 BC to AD 100)(Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Southeast Texas.
Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and
corresponding decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a
diversified resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas,
however, this hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The

16

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone
assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural
stage. Material culture shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in
the application of groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
In Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 BC) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains.
Many of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 BC) and
several new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and
probably the Gary-Kent series. The Late Archaic period (1500 BC to AD 100) is characterized
by Gary, Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition
developed in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981;
Patterson 1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period
but reached full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as
boatstones and bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang
knives, stingray spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial
practices included the systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre,
and use of locally made grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most
burials are found in extended supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials
are also known. Burial direction is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to
site. Patterson et al. (1993) report that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary
tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (AD 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 BC, in the Galveston Bay area by
about AD 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about AD 300, and in the ConroeLivingston inland area by about AD 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears to have
progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995).
Southeastern Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where
Aten (1983) established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area

HJN 080043

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

129 km (80 miles) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal exception of
a few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found on the Gulf
coast west of the Sabine Lake area.
Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods
(Aten 1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility
ware throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown
Plain for about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods
before once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety,
Goose Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor
pottery types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway
(Aten 1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte
types are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste
(like Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (AD 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (AD 600 to 1500)(Patterson 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the
latter part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in
Southeast Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland sub-region along with the bow and arrow through the
Late Prehistoric period (Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995;
Wheat 1953). In fact, Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in
Southeast Texas as early as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points
that consisted of marginally retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a
generalized date of adoption of the bow-and-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca.
AD 600) in Central and Southeast Texas. In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to
be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba,
Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial sequence for these point types has not been
established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn points appear to predate Perdiz points
throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto
Plain and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek

18

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

pottery remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt
Coated pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (AD 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue.
Aten (1983) has
reconstructed the territories of native groups present in this region in the early eighteenth
century, including the Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco/Karankawa, and Tonkawa. The presence
of the Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central Texas in
the 17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought to have
occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the
corresponding mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east
of the San Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe
may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson et al 1993; Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in
identifying Historic Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and
possibly Fresno and Cuney points after AD 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites
are usually identified by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types
of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (AD 1700 TO PRESENT)

The Handbook of Texas Online (Handbook 2005a) describes the history of Anahuac as
follows:
Anahuac, the county seat of Chambers County, is on the northeast bank of Trinity Bay on
the Texas Gulf Coast. The earliest inhabitants of the Anahuac area were Atakapan
Indians. In 1721 French explorer Jean Baptiste de La Harpe visited a village of some 200
Atakapans located between the future site of Anahuac and Round Point. The site was
originally known by Anglos as Perry's point, a name attributed to Col. Henry Perry, a
noted filibuster, who established a camp there in 1816. Col. John Davis Bradburn, the
newly appointed Mexican commander, arrived there in October 1830 with three officers
and forty men to begin construction of a fort. Gen. Manuel de Mier y Terán, commanding
officer of the Mexican states of Coahuila and Texas, officially named the town Anahuac in
January 1831, after the ancient capital of the Aztecs.
Fort Anahuac was the scene of incidents in 1832 and 1835 that preceded the Texas
Revolution. Although the town flourished briefly prior to the 1832 battle, the population
declined dramatically afterward. A long-running civil dispute between Gen. Thomas
Jefferson Chambers and Charles Willcox over ownership of the townsite began in 1838

HJN 080043

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

and was not fully resolved until after the assassination of Chambers in 1865. This dispute
obviously hindered the development of the town. General Chambers briefly called the
town Chambersea in his own honor, but the town did not follow suit. A small Confederate
outpost was established here in 1862 and was called Fort Chambers.
The first significant commercial development came with the establishment of a large
sawmill in 1894 by Jesse and Charles R. Cummings. The mill was moved to Wallisville in
1898. The construction of the Lone Star Canal Company began in 1902 under the
direction of Berriman Richard Garland and A. L. Williams. The Anahuac Townsite
Company, under the direction of William Duncan Willcox, George R. Fahring, and Francis
M. Hamilton, began real estate development of the town in the early 1900s. Business
leaders were successful in an April 11, 1907, election to make Anahuac the county seat
instead of Wallisville. Legal efforts to reverse the election failed, and the First Court of
Civil Appeals ordered county records transferred to Anahuac in 1908 (Handbook 2005a).

20

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

4.0 ARCHIVAL REVIEW

Archival research conducted online via the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas indicated 3 archeological/historical sites recorded within 1.2 miles (2
km) of the proposed water system improvements. These include the Original Anahuac
Cemetery (41CH280), Fort Anahuac (41CH226), and the General Thomas Jefferson Chambers
House. Each of these sites is described below.
Original Anahuac Cemetery (41CH280)
This site is described as probably the earliest cemetery in Anahuac. It consists of
historic Mexican materials (ceramics and coins) as well as the grave of Benjamin Freeman. A
metal detector was utilized to find Freeman’s grave under a layer of shell. His headstone was
found down slope from the grave. Other metal detector finds include ten 8 real silver Mexican
coins dating between 1813 and 1819. Several aboriginal shell middens are located at the foot
of the bluff where these historic materials were found.
Fort Anahuac (41CH226)
Fort Anahuac is a Mexican fort and customs house located at the mouth of Trinity River
in what is now Fort Anahuac Park. The fort, which is listed on the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP), is described in the Handbook of Texas Online (Handbook 2005b) as:
[T]he site of the first armed confrontation between Anglo-Texans and Mexican troops, on
June 10-12, 1832. In November 1830 Col. Juan Davis Bradburn chose the site for the fort
and its town on a bluff, called Perry's Point since 1816, overlooking the entrance to the
Trinity River. The garrison was one of six new outposts located at strategic entrances to
Texas and designed to enforce the Law of April 6, 1830.
The garrison lived temporarily in a fortified wooden barracks a half mile north of the bluff
in the center of the site of modern Anahuac. The barracks was later used as the jail that
held William B. Travis and others. Bricks for the walls and buildings of the permanent fort
were made by convict soldiers on-site, beginning in March 1831. A Masonic and military
ceremony marked completion of the foundation on May 14, 1831. The exterior walls were
100 by seventy feet and enclosed two redoubts diagonally opposite on the southwest and
northeast corners. Inside the perimeter was a reinforced-brick building about fifty by
thirty-five feet. The southwest redoubt, overlooking Trinity Bay, was named Fort Davis
(for Bradburn); it was manned by a maximum of fifty men and defended by a six-pound

HJN 080043

21

Chapter 4.0: Archival Review

cannon, while its twin on the northeast guarded the land approach. The cavalry tethered
its horses between the two redoubts. An excavated passage connected the enclosure
with the powder magazine on the east side, where two bulwarks named Hidalgo and
Morelos (for martyrs of the Mexican independence movement) near the sites of the brick
kilns, each with a sixteen-pound cannon, guarded the compound.
The garrison grew from forty men and four officers in November 1830 to a maximum of
285 men and ten officers in May 1832. After March 1832 about 100 of the men were
stationed at Velasco, at the mouth of the Brazos, under Col. Domingo de Ugartechea.
The troops were from the Eleventh and Twelfth battalions; the boatmen came from the
battalion of Pueblo Viejo de Tampico; La Bahía supplied twenty-five cavalrymen and one
officer.
Texan insurgents under Col. Francis White Johnson attacked the fort on June 10-12,
1832, to rescue Travis. The troops dismantled the fort when they left in July 1832, and a
fire in November gutted the wooden parts. The wooden calaboose was burned in
December 1832, and practical residents removed bricks for fireplaces and foundations.
In January 1835 Capt. Antonio Tenorio arrived with about forty troops to reopen the fort,
but it was in such disrepair that he asked his superiors for wood to make repairs. The
wood arrived in May but was burned by irate Texans. Tenorio had no artillery when
Travis and his volunteers attacked on June 29, so his troops fled into the woods. He
capitulated the next day, and the small garrison sailed to Harrisburg and retreated to
Bexar.
The fort was never used again; the land became private property. In 1938 the county
surveyor made field notes of the existing foundations. Erosion caused by rechanneling
the Trinity River sometime after the 1930s caused the remains of the southwestern
redoubt to fall into the water. Chambers County acquired the site for a park in 1946, and
officials ordered it cleared and the rubble buried for safety reasons and to prevent
vandalism. An amateur excavation was made in 1968 before preservation laws went into
effect, but no in-depth archeological study has been made of the site.

General Thomas Jefferson Chambers House
The General Thomas Jefferson Chambers House is a historic home listed in the NRHP.
Its NRHP description is as follows:
Chambersea, once the homestead of General Thomas Jefferson Chambers and his
family, was constructed in 1845, an early wood frame house fashioned after Greek
Revival principles of symmetry, and decorated with architectural elements often found in
Louisiana Greek Revival forms. The homestead, while in operation as such from 18401865, was a self-sustaining plantation including the growth of fine livestock and cotton for
clothing. Design and construction was authored by General Chambers who intended to
manifest in the physical appearance of the house features which were significant of his
"beloved Texas." This attitude is most notable in the circular window of the west eave
bearing five- pointed star (the Texas emblem) and by the sitting of the house where
several waterways meet a bay off of the Gulf of Mexico. The owner and his family, who
originally occupied the house, are of great significance for active participation in
establishing early legal land rights for colonists settling in Texas.

22

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

General Chambers, son of Thomas and Mary Gore Chambers, was born in Virginia on
April 3, 1802. Sometime after his father's death in 1815, Chambers moved to Kentucky
with his family where he attended an academy taught by his brother for one year. He had
additional schooling by Joshua Wordly. He taught school until he was admitted to the bar
in Kentucky and Alabama. Early in 1826 he went to Mexico where he studied the Spanish
language and Mexican law. He was appointed Surveyor General of the State of Coahuila
and Texas to accompany Juan Antonio Padilla in the establishment of a colonization
system. On February 12, 1830 Chambers and Padilla received an empresario contract to
introduce eight hundred families into Texas; however, the land granted to them lay in
present Oklahoma and Kansas, so the contract was never fulfilled.
In February of 1834, Chambers was made State Attorney General of Coahuila and Texas
and helped frame a judiciary code for the site. In June of 1834 he was appointed Judge
of the Court (Superior Judicial Court) but because of side orders precipitated by the
removal of the capitol from Saltillo to Monclova, it was impossible for him to organize the
court and he was never able to assume the duties of the office. He received five leagues
of land for service as a judge; other land granted to him totaled thirty leagues or
approximately 137, 268 acres and were surveyed in present Milam, Travis, Hays,
Navarro, Ellis, Galveston, Liberty, Chambers, San Jacinto and Trinity Counties.
He took an active part in the events leading up to the Texas Revolution. He proposed to
the government that he use his land as security to raise men and arms for the Texas
cause and on January 7, 1836, the General Council commissioned him a "Major General
of Reserves" and sent him to procure volunteers and munitions. He was given Bounty
Certificate No. 41 for 1280 acres as compensation for army service from January 9, 1836
to January 7, 1837. His diary, written during this time, is a complete record of his travels
in connection with this commission.
In his report to Congress on June 3, 1837, Chambers stated that he had dispatched 1915
volunteers to Texas, and had spent $23,621 and had sold bonds amounting to $9035.
Congress directed the auditor to settle the account and adopted resolution of thanks to
Chambers. He later claimed rank as Commanding Major General of the Texas Army and
engaged in a bitter newspaper dispute with David G. Burnet over that claim.
In 1839 he established himself at Round Point in Liberty County, now Chambers County.
There were several controversies over his claims to properties in that area, namely by
Charles Wilcox and William M. Logan (1838). Both men publicly warned anyone from
buying land in this area from General Chambers stating their beliefs that the league was
wrongfully owned by Chambers. Another man, John O'Brian, stated in 1842 his
acquisition of the league purchased in public auction to specifically include the residence
of General Chambers and the entire city of Anahuac.
It is thought that these land disputes led to the assassination of Chambers at his home in
Anahuac (Chambersea) on March 15, 1865. He was first buried in a small cemetery near
the home and later moved to Galveston by his widow.
General Chambers' destiny was hopelessly studded with legal entanglements when he
died. His claims to land where the Capitol now stands had not been settled. It was 1925
before this claim was finally settled. To date, Chambers vs. State of Texas is the longest
standing land dispute case in the state's history.

HJN 080043

23

Chapter 4.0: Archival Review

The house was purchased by Chambers County as park project in 1943. It was used as
temporary offices for County Treasurer, and a temporary home for the county library
collection. Occasional use of the house provided a meeting place for various civic groups.
Presently it is used as a place for sorting archival records.

In addition to the sites listed above, the Chambers County State Bank (constructed in
1912) and the Anahuac Hardware Building (constructed in 1905) are also documented
Neighborhood Survey structures within the archival review radius.
In general, none of the sites/structures listed above are located immediately adjacent to
any of the proposed water systems improvements with 2 exceptions. The 2 Neighborhood
Survey structures mentioned above are recorded on Bolivar Avenue between Miller and Wilcox
Streets at the northern end of the proposed water line segment No. 6. Both structures are
located on the eastern side of Bolivar Avenue, while the proposed water line replacement
activities are located on the western side of Bolivar Avenue. The entire city block on the eastern
side of the northern end of proposed water line segment No. 6 (containing the 2 Neighborhood
Survey Structures mentioned above) was monitored for cultural deposits in 1994 during a
Chambers County construction project. A review of the available records was unable to
produce a report of these monitoring investigations.
A second monitoring investigation was conducted 1 block to the south and also on the
east side of Bolivar Avenue by Moore Archeological Consulting at the location of the Chambers
County Jail Expansion. Moore et al.’s (1997) monitoring investigations identified no significant
cultural resources within the jail expansion footprint. Although some historic materials were
observed, they were located within fill material placed on the property. No historic materials
were observed below this fill layer.
Both of the monitoring investigations discussed above occurred on the east side of
Bolivar Avenue. Proposed water system improvements in the area of the previous monitoring
investigations are located on the west side of Bolivar Avenue within existing road/utility
easements. Based on the Atlas data, it would appear that none of the locations of the proposed
water system improvements have been previously assessed for cultural resources.
During the application for the TAC permit for the current investigations, concern was
voiced by the THC that the some of the proposed water line segments were within or adjacent
to Fort Anahuac. The closest water line segment to Fort Anahuac is segment No. 10. This
segment is located several hundred meters to the north-northeast of Fort Anahuac Park in an
area that is currently a developed neighborhood.

24

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

The project’s APE consisted of 2 types of areas: those that were considered to be
relatively intact and free of substantial disturbances, and those that had been heavily disturbed
by past construction activities. The proposed reservoir and transfer line were located in areas
that appeared to be relatively intact based on the general lack of observed disturbances, and,
as such, were the areas where an intensive pedestrian survey was believed to be warranted.
On the other hand, the locations of the proposed water line replacements and ground storage
tank were areas that have experienced considerable impacts in the past due to the original
installation of the water lines, adjacent utility installation, and the grading of the roadway
drainage ditches in which they are located. The ground storage tank and other plant
modification are also all proposed within existing facilities that have been heavily disturbed. In
these areas, only a general reconnaissance survey was proposed. The methodology for each
type of survey is presented below.

5.1

INTENSIVE PEDESTRIAN SURVEY

A 2-person Horizon field crew conducted an intensive pedestrian survey of the proposed
20-acre raw water reservoir and the associated 3000-linear-foot transfer line. This included
intensive surface inspection as well as subsurface shovel testing. The Texas Minimum
Archeological Survey Standards require a minimum of 10 shovel tests (1 per 2 acres) within the
proposed 20-acre raw water reservoir boundaries. Horizon exceeded this minimum and
conducted a total of 13 shovel tests within the proposed reservoir boundaries. Additionally, a
total of 9 shovel tests were conducted along the 3000-foot transfer line ROW, meeting the
minimum survey standards for linear projects.
All excavated shovel test matrix was passed through 1/4-inch hardware mesh or trowelsorted. Only temporally diagnostic artifacts (such as projectile points, ceramics, historic
materials with maker’s marks, etc.) were to be collected, if present. All other artifacts (such as
debitage, burned rock, historic glass, scrap metal, etc.) were to be tabulated and assessed in
the field and left where they were found. Collected artifacts were to be bagged and labeled
appropriately. Field notes were maintained on location, disturbances, soils, shovel tests, etc.
Digital photos will be taken when appropriate and recorded on a photograph log. Handheld
GPS units, utilizing the UTM coordinate system and the NAD 27 map datum, will be used to
mark the location of all shovel tests as well as any newly recorded sites (if documented).
Shovel test data are presented in Appendix A.

HJN 080043

25

Section 5.0: Survey Methodology

5.2

GENERAL RECONNAISSANCE SURVEY

The field crew also conducted a general reconnaissance level survey of the proposed
water line segments that are to be located within existing road and utility easements, as well as
the location of the proposed ground storage tank within the existing plant facility. This
reconnaissance served to determine the degree of impacts to the proposed ROWs and whether
an intensive survey or archeological monitoring is warranted of these areas. As this type of
location is general highly disturbed by previous road and utility construction, it was anticipated
that there would be minimal probability for intact cultural deposits. However, in the event that
intact areas were observed, the field crew was to implement shovel testing procedures at these
locations to determine the presence/absence of subsurface cultural material if time allowed or
recommend a subsequent intensive survey or monitoring during construction. Otherwise, each
location was described and photo-documented to provide evidence of their lack of integrity.
During this general reconnaissance survey, special attention was paid to the areas located at
the northern end of water line segment No. 6 where certain historic structures are located and
along water line segment No. 10 since it is in general proximity to Fort Anahuac Park.

26

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The results of the intensive pedestrian survey and the general reconnaissance surveys
are presented separately below.

6.1

INTENSIVE PEDESTRIAN SURVEY

The intensive pedestrian survey within the proposed raw water reservoir and along the
proposed transfer line ROW produced entirely negative findings. No cultural materials were
observed on the surface at any location within the reservoir or along the transfer line.
Additionally, no subsurface cultural materials were recovered from any of the 13 shovel tests
conducted within the proposed reservoir boundaries or from any of the 9 shovel tests conducted
along the proposed transfer line ROW.
In general, the location of the proposed raw water reservoir possessed an extremely low
potential for buried, intact cultural deposits. Its low-lying and featureless terrain made the area
extremely wet and marshy after episodes of rain, suggesting that it would not have been
targeted by the aboriginal occupants of the region for intensive occupation. Its distance from a
natural water source also adds to this suggestion. In addition, the dense clay soils within the
proposed reservoir boundaries significantly decreased the chances for buried and stratified
cultural deposits.
As the proposed transfer line is also located in an area similar to and adjacent to the
proposed reservoir, it too possessed a decreased potential for cultural deposits. This potential
was further decreased by the dredging of an adjacent drainage canal.

6.2

GENERAL RECONNAISSANCE SURVEY

As indicated in the preceding sections of this document, portions of the water system
improvement project consist of the replacement of outdated segments of existing water lines
and upgrades to existing water treatment plant facilities. As the proposed water line activities
consist of replacing old line within previously impacted water line ROWs, there exists essentially
no chance for intact, subsurface deposits within these disturbed ROWs. This is compounded by
the fact that the majority of the proposed replacement sections are located within existing,
heavily disturbed road/utility easements. The only exception to this was within the proposed
water line segment No. 10, which is located within private yards. While this section is within
maintained yards, it has also been heavily disturbed by the original installation of the existing

HJN 080043

27

Chapter 6.0: Results of Investigations

line. Regarding the areas of concern at the north end of water line segment No. 6, the APE for
this segment is also within a heavily disturbed road/utility easement. Of more importance, the
location of segment No. 6 in the vicinity of the previously recorded historic structures at the
north end of the line appeared to consist entirely of an elevated fill area. This suggests no
chance for intact cultural deposits within the fill material, just as Moore et al. (1997) documented
during their nearby monitoring of the Chambers County Jail Expansion Project.
The proposed ground storage tank and water treatment plant upgrades are all planned
within the existing water treatment plant facility. As such, there is little potential for intact
cultural deposits within these heavily impacted areas.

28

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

7.0 RECOMMENDATIONS

Horizon’s recommendations for each portion of the City of Anahuac’s proposed water
system improvements are presented separately below.

7.1

20-ACRE RAW WATER RESERVOIR

No cultural resources were documented within the boundaries of the proposed raw water
reservoir during the intensive pedestrian survey. Moreover, the argillic clay soils within the
reservoir boundaries possessed no potential to contain buried, stratified cultural deposits. As
such, it is Horizon’s opinion that the construction of the proposed 20-acre raw water reservoir
will have no impact on significant cultural resources. Horizon recommends that cultural
resources clearance be granted for the undertaking.

7.2

3000-LINEAR-FOOT TRANSFER LINE

As with the proposed reservoir, no cultural resources were documented within the
proposed ROW of the transfer line between the proposed reservoir and an existing water
treatment plant during the intensive pedestrian survey. Again, the argillic clay soils within the
proposed ROW possessed no potential to contain buried, stratified cultural deposits. As such, it
is Horizon’s opinion that the construction of the proposed 3000-linear-foot transfer line will have
no impact on significant cultural resources. Horizon recommends that cultural resources
clearance be granted for the undertaking.

7.3

WATER LINE SEGMENT REPLACEMENTS

Because this portion of the water system improvements consists of the replacement of
existing, outdated water lines rather than new construction, there exists essentially no potential
for intact cultural deposits within the water line ROWs since the ROWs have already been
heavily disturbed during the initial installation of the water lines. For the majority, these impacts
have been further compounded by the additional installation of adjacent utilities, drainage ditch
excavation, and roadway construction. Due to the lack of potential for intact cultural deposits
within the areas of pipe replacement, it is Horizon’s opinion that no significant cultural deposits
will be impacted by replacement of the 12 water line segments. Horizon recommends that
cultural resources clearance be granted for the undertaking.

HJN 080043

29

Chapter 7.0: Recommendations

7.4

GROUND STORAGE TANK

The proposed ground storage tank will be constructed within an existing, heavily
disturbed water treatment plant facility. Due to the lack of potential for intact cultural deposits
within the existing treatment plant, it is Horizon’s opinion that no significant cultural deposits will
be impacted by the construction of the ground storage tank. Horizon recommends that cultural
resources clearance be granted for the undertaking.

30

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives in Gulf Coast Prehistory,
edited by D.D. Davis, pp. 44-76, Ripley P. Bulletin Monograph in Anthropology and
History No. 5. Florida State University, Gainesville.

Butzer, K.W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas.
Reports of Investigations, No. 8,
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A study of the cultural prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No. 61.

HJN 080043

31

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Handbook of Texas Online (Handbook)
2005a "ANAHUAC, TX," http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/AA/hja8.html.
(accessed 1 August 2005).
2005b "FORT ANAHUAC," http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/FF/qbf1.html
(accessed August 1, 2005).
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R.L., and L. C.Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

American

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Moore, R.G., T.Q. Booth, R.C. Booth, and M.J. Donachie
1997
Archeological Monitoring at the Chambers County Jail Expansion Project, Anahuac,
Texas. Report of Investigations Number 113. Moore Archeological Consulting.
Houston, Texas.
Newcomb, W.W.
1993
Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:163.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
32

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R. L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C.Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1995
Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330.
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J. C.
Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, U. S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

HJN 080043

33

APPENDIX A:

SHOVEL TEST DATA

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

Anahuac Reservoir Survey 080043 AR
Waypoint
#

Shovel
Test #

Easting

Northing

Depth

Soil Description

Cultural
Material

Comments

24

1

338953

3293780

0-20 cm

Black mottled
clay

None

First shovel test within
proposed retention pond

Black mottled
clay

None

North end of proposed
transfer line, soil
composed of
approximately 10% sand

25

2

338734

3294714

0-10 cm

26

3

338761

3294624

0-10 cm

27

4

338768

3294512

0-10 cm

28

5

338788

3294425

0-10 cm

29

6

338805

3294330

0-10 cm

30

7

338821

3294231

0-10 cm

31

8

338839

3294140

0-10 cm

32

9

338867

3294001

33

10

338887

34

11

35

0-10 cm

Black mottled
clay
Black mottled
clay
Black mottled
clay
Black mottled
clay
Black mottled
clay
Black mottled
clay
Brown clay

None

3293892

0-10 cm

Brown clay

None

338991

3293717

0-5 cm

Sticky brown
clay

None

Shovel test from
proposed retention pond,
all argillic clays

12

339025

3293657

0-10 cm

Sticky brown
clay

None

Shovel test from
proposed retention pond,
all argillic clays

36

13

339046

3293606

0-10 cm

Sticky brown
clay

None

Shovel test from
proposed retention pond,
all argillic clays

37

14

339075

3293552

0-5 cm

Sticky brown
clay

None

Shovel test from
proposed retention pond,
all argillic clays

38

15

339095

3293510

0-10 cm

Sticky brown
clay

None

Shovel test from
proposed retention pond,
all argillic clays

39

16

339110

3293555

0-10 cm

Sticky brown
clay

None

Shovel test from
proposed retention pond,
all argillic clays

40

17

339129

3293611

0-10 cm

Sticky brown
clay

None

Shovel test from
proposed retention pond,
all argillic clays

HJN 080043

None
None
None
None
None
None

Soil composed of
approximately 10% sand
Soil composed of
approximately 10% sand
Soil composed of
approximately 10% sand
Soil composed of
approximately 10% sand
Soil composed of
approximately 10% sand
Soil composed of
approximately 10% sand
Argillic clays
South end of proposed
transfer line

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Anahuac Reservoir Survey 080043 AR
Waypoint
#

Shovel
Test #

Easting

Northing

Depth

Soil Description

Cultural
Material

Comments

41

18

339147

3293670

0-10 cm

Sticky brown
clay

None

Shovel test from
proposed retention pond,
all argillic clays

42

19

339160

3293707

0-10 cm

Sticky brown
clay

None

Shovel test from
proposed retention pond,
all argillic clays

43

20

339177

3293763

0-10 cm

Sticky brown
clay

None

Shovel test from
proposed retention pond,
all argillic clays

44

21

339123

3293691

0-10 cm

Sticky brown
clay

None

Shovel test from
proposed retention pond,
all argillic clays

45

22

339062

3293771

0-10 cm

Sticky brown
clay

None

Shovel test from
proposed retention pond,
all argillic clays

A-2

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

ADDENDUM
ARCHEOLOGICAL MONITORING
REQUIRED BY THE TEXAS HISTORICAL COMMISSION

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

INTRODUCTION
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) originally conducted the cultural
resources investigations contained in the main body of this report in July 2005. Subsequent to
the completion of the field efforts, the report of the investigations was prepared and submitted to
the Texas Historical Commission (THC) for review. In a letter dated 12 September 2005, the
THC concurred with the majority of the presented findings and recommendations, granting
clearance to the proposed reservoir, transfer pipeline, and all proposed water line segment
replacements with the exception of line segments No. 6 and No. 10. For these 2 water line
segments, the THC recommended archeological monitoring when the trenches were re-opened
for pipeline replacement and the documentation of any cultural features, if any, that might be
exposed.
Almost 3 years after the initial field assessments and agency review, Horizon was
informed that water line segment No. 10 had been deleted from the overall project design and
that the replacement of water line segment No. 6 was to commence in March 2008. As such, a
Horizon archeologist was on-site monitoring the excavation of the trench for line segment No. 6
during the 24 days that it took to complete the water line replacement between 3 March 2008
and 10 April 2008. This addendum presents the results of the archeological monitoring efforts
conducted for line segment No. 6. Like the original survey efforts, the monitoring efforts were
conducted under Texas Antiquities Committee permit No. 3856.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
Water line segment No. 6 measures approximately 3500 feet in length and is located on
the west side of Bolivar Avenue on the west side of the City of Anahuac (Figures A-1 through A5). The replacement of the segment required the mechanical excavation of an approximately 2foot-wide trench immediately between the existing 2-inch diameter metal water line and an
existing underground telephone cable, and then the installation of the new 6-inch diameter PVC
water line between these 2 existing utilities at a depth of approximately 3 feet (Figures A-6 and
A-7).
As the location of water line segment No. 6 is situated immediately west of Bolivar
Avenue, the majority of the upper extent of the excavated trenches consisted of fill material
placed at the location to facilitate the construction of the street (see Figures A-6 and A-7).
Below the fill material, soils consisted of dense Vamont clay, which is described as sticky or
very plastic clay sediments derived from the Beaumont Formation of late Pleistocene age
(NRCS 2008). The entire length of the water segment replacement consisted of fill or clay soils
that have been previously impacted by road construction, drainage ditch excavation, and the
installation of the various utilities that extend along the west side of Bolivar Avenue.
REVISED ARCHIVAL RESEARCH
The primary justification for the THC’s requirement of archeological monitoring along line
segment No. 6 was the location of sites 41CH227 and 41CH314 in proximity to this segment.
The THC’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas erroneously depicts the locations of these 2 sites

HJN 080043

B-1

Addendum: Archeological Monitoring

Figure A-1. Location of water line segment No. 6

B-2

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

Figure A-2. View looking south along Bolivar Avenue

Figure A-3. View looking north along west side of Bolivar Avenue

HJN 080043

B-3

Addendum: Archeological Monitoring

Figure A-4. View of water line replacement after completion

Figure A-5. Another view of water line replacement after completion

B-4

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

Figure A-6. View of 6-inch diameter PVC replacement pipe

Figure A-7. View of typical soil profile with existing utilities exposed

HJN 080043

B-5

Addendum: Archeological Monitoring

west of the mainland on the Trinity River Delta. An accurate plotting of the sites based on their
UTM coordinates places them on the mainland closer to segment No. 6 (see Figure A-1).
Site 41CH227 is listed as the Chambers House, a historic home erected in 1840. This
site, registered as a Texas Historic Landmark Homesite, is located approximately 300 feet east
of Bolivar Avenue. It is described as a historic home, barn, and stable with numerous historic
artifacts around the house where soil is exposed. Although this site is located roughly 300 feet
away from the water line replacement project, the recorder of the site listed its area as unknown
but apparently extensive. This suggests that cultural materials associated with this house could
be scattered into the current project area.
Site 41CH314 is recorded as a Civil War fort situated on a bluff near the mouth of the
Trinity River. Visible remnants of this site consist of a parapet or breastwork above the bay in
the backyard of one of the modern houses along Bolivar Avenue. According to the site form,
this feature was guarded by a rather fierce old lady with a shotgun in 1990 when the site was
originally recorded. The site form also indicates that the fort was utilized between 1862 and
1880, but that there may have been an earlier fort at this location built by Juan Bradburn before
he built the brick fort (Fort Anahuac) 1 mile to the south. The site is located approximately 160
feet west of line segment No. 6. Although no evidence of it was seen within the current project
area, the current tenant allowed the Horizon archeologist to photograph the location (Figures A8 and A-9).
METHODOLOGY
A Horizon archeologist was on-site during the entire time that it took to complete the
replacement of water line segment No. 6. The construction crews worked 10-hour days, 4 days
each week, and installed an average of 150 feet of water line per day. The THC was primarily
concerned about historic fortifications and foundation associated with the nearby sites that may
have been constructed within deeply excavated trenches. As such, the archeologist closely
monitored all ground-disturbing activities, visually assessing the excavated matrices and
examining the resulting trench profiles. If any cultural features were observed, the archeologist
was to document the location and sketch and photograph the feature extents.
RESULTS
The archeological monitoring efforts failed to document any fortifications or foundations
associated with the early military usage of the area. The modern construction of Bolivar
Avenue, the excavation of the adjacent drainage ditch that borders the street, and the
installation of numerous utilities within the road easement have effectively served to obliterate
any obvious features that may have once been present.
Although no intact features were observed, the remnants of a possible historic trash pit
feature were encountered at one location along the excavated trench (Figure A-10). During the
excavation of the trench at this location, several hand-made brick fragments, several fragments
of bottle glass, a metal button back, and several ceramic plate fragments were observed within
the excavated matrices (Figure A-11 through A-14). These materials were lying near the
boundary of the upper fill materials and lower Vamont clays and appear to have been scattered

B-6

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

Parapet or
breastwork remnant

Figure A-8. View of site 41CH314 behind house on Bolivar Avenue

Figure A-9. Close up view of parapet or breastwork remnant on site 41CH314

HJN 080043

B-7

Addendum: Archeological Monitoring

Scatter of historic materials

Small trash pit with early 20th
century bottles

Figure A-10. Location of historic materials observed within excavated trench

B-8

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

Figure A-11. View of scatter of brick and other historic materials in trench profile

Figure A-12. Photograph of ceramic plate fragments from trench

HJN 080043

B-9

Addendum: Archeological Monitoring

Figure A-13. Photograph of bottle glass fragments from trench

Figure A-14. Photograph of metal button back from trench

B-10

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

on the surface of this location prior to modern construction or possibly contained within a small
trash pit. The monitor indicated that the modern construction has obliterated any evidence of
such a pit, but that it may continue to the west. The monitor also noted that previous
construction activities appear to have scattered the materials over an approximately 30-foot
length along the trench. As no obvious feature or concentration of materials was observed,
these materials were not formally recorded as a site. The scatter was located about 260 feet
southwest of site 41CH314 and does not appear to be immediately associated. Rather, it
appears to represent a refuse dump associated with the historic occupation of Anahuac. All
materials were photographed in the field and left within their disturbed contexts.
In addition to the historic scatter, the remnants of a small early 20th century trash pit
were also encountered near the southern end of line segment No. 6. This trash pit measured
roughly 30 inches in diameter and 20 inches thick. It was discovered when the backhoe
unearthed 5 intact bottles, several small pieces of whiteware, a porcelain Mason jar seal, and
fragments of a small metal bowl or pot (Figure A-15). The largest of the bottles was a machinemade Fels Whiskey bottle with the seam extending to the top of the bottle lip. This production
method suggests a post-1910 date (BLM/SHA 2008). The second bottle is a ketchup bottle with
an improved tooled finish screw-top neck. The production method indicates a production period
of 1900 to 1920 (BLM/SHA 2008). The third bottle is a rectangular specimen embossed with
“California Figure Syrup Co.”
This specimen also dates between 1900 and 1920
(GoAntiques.com 2008). The fourth bottle is a small half-pint whiskey bottle with an improved
tooled finish neck that again indicates a 1900 to 1920 age range (BLM/SHA 2008). The fifth
bottle was taken by a member of the construction crew and was not available for
documentation. However, as 4 of the 5 bottles all date to the first part of the 20th century, the
last specimen likely did as well.

Figure A-15. Early 20th century materials from trash pit near south end of segment No. 6

HJN 080043

B-11

Addendum: Archeological Monitoring

The impacting of this feature by the backhoe essentially removed all of the feature
contexts. A thin area of feature fill was noted in the west wall of the trench profile, but slight
scraping of the profile immediately removed the few surviving remnants, indicating that it did not
continue any further to the west. Based on the observed bottles, this feature represented a
small, early 20th century trash pit likely associated with domestic occupation on the west side of
Anahuac. As stated above, this feature was completely destroyed during the excavation of the
water line trench. No other associated features were noted and the location was not formally
recorded as an archeological site.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The primary goal of the monitoring efforts was to determine if any Civil War-era
fortification or foundation remnants were located within the confines of the trench excavated for
the installation of water line segment No. 6. While it was understood that the length of the
trench had already been heavily impacted by road construction, drainage ditch excavation, and
utility installation, the THC indicated that historic fortifications and foundations could conceivably
be located within the lower extent of the excavated trench in previously unimpacted areas. As
discussed above, no evidence of any fortifications or foundations associated with the early
military presence in Anahuac was observed during the monitoring efforts. In fact, no cultural
materials were noted in the immediate proximity of the 2 previously recorded sites (41CH227
and 41CH314) located near the water line segment. Rather, the remnants of 2 historic trash
pits were observed near the southern extent of the water line. The first was essentially the
scatter of a historic trash pit that had been previously impacted by utility construction, while the
second was a small 20th century trash pit that was destroyed by the current construction. Since
neither feature remains intact within the water line easement, neither was formally recorded as
an archeological site. This is not to say that additional features/deposits associated with each
are not present beyond the limits of the current water line easement. However, the prospecting
for and recording of any such associated features (on private property) was beyond the limits of
the current investigations.
At this time, no intact cultural deposits are documented within the extent of the trench for
water line segment No. 6. Based on this absence of intact deposits, it is Horizon’s opinion that
the City of Anahuac has fulfilled its obligations in compliance with the requirements of the THC
and the Antiquities Code of Texas and that no additional field investigations are warranted for
the water line replacement project. Horizon recommends that archeological clearance be
granted for the installation of line segment No. 6.

B-12

080043_arch_survey_report.doc

Cultural Resources Investigations Conducted for Anahuac’s Proposed Water System Improvements

REFERENCES
BLM/SHA
2008

NRCS
2008

Bureau of Land Management and Society for Historical Archeology. Historic Glass
Bottle Identification & Information Website. Available URL: <http://www.sha.org/
bottle/index.htm>. Accessed 10 February 2004.
Soil Survey Staff, Natural Resources Conservation Service, United States
Department of Agriculture. Official Soil Series Descriptions [Online WWW]. Available
URL: <http://soils.usda.gov/technical/classification/osd/index.html>. Accessed 10
February 2004. USDA-NRCS, Lincoln, NE.

GoAntiques.com
2008
Vintage California Fig Syrup Bottle – Colorless.
Available URL: <http://
www.goantiques.com/detail,vintage-california-fig,1203873.html>.
Accessed
10
February 2004.

HJN 080043

B-13

