Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles
of the US Highway 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens
With Contributions by Abigail Weinstein

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 3880
HJN 050093 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Schaumburg & Polk, Inc.
Schaumburg & Polk, Inc.
Tyler, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

August 2007

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles
of the US Highway 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens
With Contributions by Abigail Weinstein

Prepared for:

Schaumburg & Polk, Inc.
Schaumburg & Polk, Inc.
117 North Spring Avenue
Tyler, Texas 75702

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 050093 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 3880

August 2007

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The City of Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas, is proposing to build a reliever route
for the existing US Highway 69 (US 69) that would loop around the west side of the city. US 69
currently passes north to south through the City of Jacksonville. The proposed reliever route
would diverge from the existing US 69 alignment just south of Ranch Roach (RR) 456 south of
town, loop around the west side of town between the existing edge of urban development and
Lakes Jacksonville and Acker, and rejoin the existing route of US 69 north of town. The right-ofway (ROW) of the proposed reliever route would consist of a 16.4-kilometer- (km-) (10.2-mile[mi-]) long corridor. Most of the proposed reliever route consists of new ROW that traverses a
largely undeveloped, rural landscape, though existing ROW occurs within the project area
where the route crosses existing roads and highways, including the existing route of US 69
north and south of Jacksonville, US Highway 79 (US 79) west of town, and several smaller state
and county roads. The proposed ROW averages approximately 168 meters (m) (550 feet [ft]) in
width, though the ROW measures up to 427 m (1,400 ft) in width to provide extra space for turn
lanes and interchanges at its northern and southern articulations with US 69 and at the US 79
intersection. The area of potential effect (APE) of the proposed undertaking consists of the
entire 16.4-km- (10.2-mi-) long corridor of the proposed reliever route, which measures an
average of 168 m (550 ft) in width along most of its route and up to 427 m (1,400 ft) at
3 intersections with existing major highways. The APE covers a total area of approximately
306 hectares (ha) (755 acres [ac]), inclusive of the typical 168-m- (550-ft-) wide ROW plus the
extra acreage at the 3 major intersections.
The US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route project is being sponsored by the City of
Jacksonville, an agency of the State of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of
the Antiquities Code of Texas. Following construction, the City of Jacksonville intends to cede
the right-of-way of the US 69 reliever route to the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT);
as such, the project also falls under the jurisdiction of the National Historic Preservation Act
(NHPA) via the involvement of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). Since the
proposed undertaking represents a publicly sponsored project with the potential for damaging or
destroying cultural resources, the City of Jacksonville was required to provide for a cultural
resource inventory survey of the proposed impact area to meet its legal responsibilities under
existing federal and state guidelines to evaluate the potential effects of the undertaking on
significant cultural resources.

HJN 050093 AR

iii

Management Summary

To meet its responsibilities under existing state and federal statutes, the City of
Jacksonville, through its design contractor, Schaumburg & Polk, Inc. (SPI), contracted with
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to secure all applicable clearances for cultural
resources. On 24 to 28 April 2006, Horizon personnel—including Abigail Weinstein, Project
Archeologist; and Marie Archambeault, Michael Mudd, and Jared Wiersema, Archeological Field
Technicians; under the direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator—conducted an
intensive cultural resource survey of accessible portions of the APE to locate any cultural
resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project.
Unfortunately, SPI was able to obtain access permission from local landowners only for
6 separate segments of the project area that cover a cumulative 5.0 km (3.1 mi) of the total
16.4-km- (10.2-mi-) long corridor, or about 88 ha (218 ac) of the total 306-ha (755-ac) APE, or
approximately 30% of the total project area. The landowners who own the remaining 70% of
the APE either failed to respond or refused SPI’s request for permission to access their
properties; therefore, 11.4 km (7.1 mi) of the route, totaling roughly 217 ha (537 ac), could not
be accessed during the cultural resource inventory. At SPI’s request, Horizon conducted a
cultural resource survey of the available 30% of the overall APE despite the partial access to the
entire project area. Six separate segments of the proposed US 69 reliever route, designated as
Segments A to F, which collectively cover 5.0 km (3.1 mi), or about 88 ha (218 ac) (ca. 30%) of
the overall APE, were surveyed for cultural resources. This survey was conducted by Horizon
under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 3880.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of 6 segments of the US 69
Expressway and Reliever Route, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected
by the proposed undertaking. Three isolated occurrences of artifacts, all of which consisted of
1 to 2 pieces of lithic debitage, were encountered in shovel tests excavated in 3 separate survey
segments, but none of these locales yielded artifacts in sufficient densities or varieties to
warrant recording the artifact occurrences as archeological sites. While the 3 isolated
occurrences of artifacts generally indicate the presence of aboriginal cultural activity in the area,
they do not appear to have any potential to contribute meaningful information regarding the
aboriginal past. Consequently, the isolated artifact occurrences are recommended as ineligible
for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and for designation as Texas
State Archeological Landmarks (SALs), and no further archeological investigations are
recommended in connection with these finds.
No previously documented cultural resources are present within any of the 6 surveyed
segments of the project area. Historic map research yielded evidence of possible historic-age
cultural resources that may have manifestations in the overall project’s APE, including the
historic Nacogdoches-Neches Saline Road, a Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) camp, and
possible historic-age structures. The portions of the APE with the potential to contain remains
associated with these historic period resources, however, are located on parcels of land to
which landowners refused to provide access; therefore, these areas remain uninvestigated and
unassessed.
No significant cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were documented as a result of
the cultural resource survey in the investigated portions of the APE, and the likelihood that any

iv

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

undiscovered resources exist in these areas is considered to be exceedingly low. Cultural
resource clearance is recommended for the 30% of the project area that was surveyed (ca.
5.0 km [3.1 mi]).
The remaining 70% of the project area has not yet been surveyed for cultural resources,
so no recommendations may be offered at this time concerning the potential for these areas to
contain significant cultural resources. Intensive archeological survey is recommended for the
unsurveyed portions of the APE.
Since the survey of 30% of the APE described in this report was conducted, the US 69
Expressway and Reliever Route project has been placed on indefinite hold by the City of
Jacksonville pending additional environmental investigations. An initial draft of this technical
report was submitted to the Texas Historical Commission (THC) for review on 2 May 2007. In
correspondence dated 22 May 2007, the THC responded that it was unable to comment on the
findings, conclusions, or recommendations of the original draft report due to the fact that only
30% of the overall project area was ever available for survey. The THC concluded that it could
not grant clearance for any construction activities related to those areas that had been
surveyed. In the event that the survey could be completed at some future date, however, the
THC expressed that it would not require areas that have already been surveyed to be
resurveyed. Future investigations to complete the cultural resource survey would need to be
accomplished under a new Antiquities Permit, but the findings of the current report could be
referenced along with new documentation for other areas that have not yet been surveyed.
Thus, at the present time, the THC has not granted cultural resource clearance for the
30% of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route project that has been surveyed for cultural
resources. This revised report reflects the THC’s review conditions and is being prepared in the
interest of closing Antiquities Permit No. 3880 under which the 30% survey of the project area
has been completed. Any future investigations conducted to complete the survey of the US 69
Expressway and Reliever Route APE as described in this report may reference the current
report to document the findings, conclusions, and recommendations presented herein regarding
areas that have already been surveyed for cultural resources, and clearance for surveyed areas
may be sought at that time.

HJN 050093 AR

v

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ..................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology ........................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.......................................................................... 7
2.3
Climate ............................................................................................................ 8

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND..................................................................................... 11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 9500 to 7000 B.C.) .................................................. 11
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 7000 to 200 B.C.) ........................................................... 12
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (ca. 200 B.C. to A.D. 800) .......................................... 14
3.4
Formative, Early, and Middle Caddoan Periods (ca. A.D. 800 to 1400) ........ 16
3.5
Late Caddoan Period (ca. A.D. 1400 to 1680) .............................................. 19
3.6
Historic Caddoan Period (ca. A.D. 1519 to Present) ..................................... 21
3.7
Historic EuroAmerican Period (ca. 1519 to Present) ..................................... 24

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................. 29
4.1
Archival Research ......................................................................................... 29
4.2
Historic Map Research .................................................................................. 30
4.3
Survey Methods............................................................................................. 32

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................. 35

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................. 39
6.1
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .... 39
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Archeological Landmark ................... 41
6.3
Summary of Inventory Results ...................................................................... 41
6.4
Management Recommendations ................................................................... 42

7.0

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................. 45
APPENDIX A:

HJN 050093 AR

Locations of Shovel Tests within the Six Surveyed Segments of
the Project Area

vii

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1. Location of Project Area ............................................................................................... 2

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1. Chronological Framework for Northeast Texas Archeological Region ........................ 11
Table 2. Shovel Test Densities in Surveyed Segments of Project Area .................................... 33

HJN 050093 AR

ix

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The City of Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas, is proposing to build a reliever route
for the existing US Highway 69 (US 69) that would loop around the west side of the city
(Figure 1). US 69 currently passes north to south through the City of Jacksonville. The
proposed reliever route would diverge from the existing US 69 alignment just south of Ranch
Roach (RR) 456 south of town, loop around the west side of town between the existing edge of
urban development and Lakes Jacksonville and Acker, and rejoin the existing route of US 69
north of town. The right-of-way (ROW) of the proposed reliever route would consist of a 16.4kilometer- (km-) (10.2-mile- [mi-]) long corridor. Most of the proposed reliever route consists of
new ROW that traverses a largely undeveloped, rural landscape, though existing ROW occurs
within the project area where the route crosses existing roads and highways, including the
existing route of US 69 north and south of Jacksonville, US Highway 79 (US 79) west of town,
and several smaller state and county roads. The proposed ROW averages approximately
168 meters (m) (550 feet [ft]) in width, though the ROW measures up to 427 m (1,400 ft) in
width to provide extra space for turn lanes and interchanges at its northern and southern
articulations with US 69 and at the US 79 intersection. The area of potential effect (APE) of the
proposed undertaking consists of the entire 16.4-km- (10.2-mi-) long corridor of the proposed
reliever route, which measures an average of 168 m (550 ft) in width along most of its route and
up to 427 m (1,400 ft) at 3 intersections with existing major highways. The APE covers a total
area of approximately 306 hectares (ha) (755 acres [ac]), inclusive of the typical 168-m- (550-ft-)
wide ROW plus the extra acreage at the 3 major intersections.
The US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route project is being sponsored by the City of
Jacksonville, an agency of the State of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of
the Antiquities Code of Texas. Following construction, the City of Jacksonville intends to cede
the right-of-way of the US 69 reliever route to the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT);
as such, the project also falls under the jurisdiction of the National Historic Preservation Act
(NHPA) via the involvement of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). Since the
proposed undertaking represents a publicly sponsored project with the potential for damaging or
destroying cultural resources, the City of Jacksonville was required to provide for a cultural
resource inventory survey of the proposed impact area to meet its legal responsibilities under
existing federal and state guidelines to evaluate the potential effects of the undertaking on
significant cultural resources.

HJN 050093 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area

2

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

The proposed US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route Project falls under dual federal
and state jurisdiction, including Sections 106 and 110 of the NHPA of 1966 (P.L. 89-665; 80
Stat. 915; 16 USC §470 et seq.); Executive Order Number 11593 of 1971, “Protection and
Enhancement of the Cultural Environment”; the Archaeological and Historic Preservation Act
(AHPA) of 1974 (P.L. 93-291; 88 Stat. 174; 16 USC §469 et seq.); the American Indian
Religious Freedom Act (AIRFA) of 1978 (P.L. 95-341; 92 Stat. 469; 42 USC §12996); the Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) of 1990 (P.L. 101-601; 104 Stat.
3048; 25 USC §3001 et seq.); and the Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resource
Code of 1977 [revised 1987], Title 9, Chapter 191, VACS, Art. 6145-9). To meet its
responsibilities under these statutes, the City of Jacksonville, through its design contractor,
Schaumburg & Polk, Inc. (SPI), contracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon),
to secure all applicable clearances for cultural resources.
On 24 to 28 April 2006, Horizon personnel—including Abigail Weinstein, Project
Archeologist; and Marie Archambeault, Michael Mudd, and Jared Wiersema, Archeological Field
Technicians; under the direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator—conducted an
intensive cultural resource survey of accessible portions of the APE to locate any cultural
resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project.
Unfortunately, SPI was able to obtain access permission from local landowners only for
6 separate segments of the project area that cover a cumulative 5.0 km (3.1 mi) of the total
16.4-km- (10.2-mi-) long corridor, or about 88 ha (218 ac) of the total 306-ha (755-ac) APE, or
approximately 30% of the total project area. The landowners who own the remaining 70% of
the APE either failed to respond or refused SPI’s request for permission to access their
properties; therefore, 11.4 km (7.1 mi) of the route, totaling roughly 217 ha (537 ac), could not
be accessed during the cultural resource inventory. At SPI’s request, Horizon conducted a
cultural resource survey of the available 30% of the overall APE despite the partial access to the
entire project area. Six separate segments of the proposed US 69 reliever route, designated as
Segments A to F (see Figure 1), which collectively cover 5.0 km (3.1 mi), or about 88 ha
(218 ac) (ca. 30%) of the overall APE, were surveyed for cultural resources. This survey was
conducted by Horizon under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 3880.

HJN 050093 AR

3

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route project is located in Jacksonville, Cherokee
County, in Northeast Texas within the Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic region (Fenneman
1938:605-630). Environmentally, the Gulf Coastal Plain is characterized as:
an area where the temperate southeastern woodlands gradually give way to the
grasslands of the plains. It is a land of mixed forests, pine barrens, open savannas, tall
grass prairies, and littoral marshes. Much of the terrain is gently rolling but mountains
(the Ouachitas) and costal flats are to be found in the northern and southern margins of
the region, respectively. A number of perennial rivers and streams cross the area,
ending in the deltas and bays along the…Gulf of Mexico (Story and Guy 1990:2).

Northeast Texas supports 3 major physiographic communities—the Blackland Prairie,
the Post Oak Savanna (or Oak Woodlands), and the Pineywoods (Diamond et al. 1987). The
Blackland Prairie is a narrow physiographic zone situated between the Edwards Plateau to the
west and the Gulf Coastal Plain to the east. This area consists of low, rolling land that extends
in a narrow band along the eastern edge of the Balcones fault zone from the Red River Valley in
Northeast Texas to the southern edge of the Edwards Plateau. This is an area of low
topographic relief and poor drainage in which water often ponds after rainstorms and streams
flow at very gentle gradients. The Blackland Prairie supports a tall-grass community that
commonly includes such species as little bluestem, yellow Indian grass, big bluestem,
switchgrass, and various forbs (Diamond et al. 1987:209, 211). The distribution of the tall-grass
prairie is closely related to patterns of rainfall and soil character, as the prairie tends to occur in
areas that receive less than 102 centimeters (cm) (40 inches [in]) of rain annually and that have
clayey, calcareous soils (Collins and Bousman 1990:29).
The Post Oak Savanna and Pineywoods support medium-tall to tall broadleaf deciduous
forests, and shortleaf loblolly pines are common in the Pineywoods on upland fine sandy loam
soils with adequate moisture. Small areas of tall-grass prairie may occur in both communities
(cf. Jordan 1981). The Post Oak Savanna is a narrow, southwest-to-northeast-trending
woodland belt that marks a natural transition zone, or ecotone, between the more xeric
Blackland Prairie to the west and the more mesic Pineywoods to the east (Kuchler 1964). The

HJN 050093 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Post Oak Savanna is composed primarily of post oak, blackjack oak, hickory, pecan, and ash
(Kuchler 1964).
Specifically, the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route project area is situated within
the Pineywoods, the dominant vegetation region of Northeast Texas. The Pineywoods region is
composed of 2 distinct forest communities—mixed pine-hardwood forest and longleaf pine
forest. The mixed pine-hardwood forest is characterized by medium-tall to tall broadleaf
deciduous hardwoods, including a wide variety of oak, elm, hickory, maple, sweetgum, and
other mesic species. In some cases, the presence of pine represents a subclimax vegetation
association. The longleaf pine forest is most common in the southern part of Northeast Texas,
extending south to the coastal prairies of Southeast Texas. Longleaf, shortleaf, and loblolly
pines, as well as a variety of hardwoods such as oak, hickory, beech, birch, gum, and magnolia,
as well as tupelo and bald cypress in swampy floodplain areas, are constituents of this
vegetation region. Within both Pineywoods vegetation communities, bottomland forests and
wetlands are common. These communities are dominated by hardwood and swamp forests,
marsh and bog vegetation, herbs, shrubs, and other plants that tolerate extended periods of
stream overflow. Common trees in these habitats are sweetgum, black tupelo, elm, green ash,
bald cypress, water oak, overcup oak, cottonwood, black willow, and American hornbeam
(Diamond et al. 1987:212). Herbs, shrubs, ferns, cane, wax myrtle, sassafras, holly, yaupon,
cane, and buttonbush occur along the margins of marshes, bogs, and channel lakes and
sloughs.
As a result of moderately high rainfall and extensive aquifers, perennial rivers and
streams are common across most of the Gulf Coastal Plain (Story 1990:8-9). Not including
some small coastal streams, 6 major river basins occur in this region—the Brazos, Neches,
Red, Sabine, San Jacinto, and Trinity—all of which flow in a more or less southeasterly direction
and discharge into the Gulf of Mexico. Under current climatic conditions, all of the larger rivers
are reliable sources of surface water, though smaller streams are more variable. The most
dependable are those that receive groundwater discharge and delayed runoff (Thurmond
1981:29-36). The least reliable are those fed solely by direct runoff. Two other sources of
surface water, lakes and springs, also occur in the area. With the exception of Caddo Lake (a
natural, albeit artificially enlarged, impoundment) on the Cypress River and lakes on the Red
and lower Brazos floodplains, most lakes in the region occur on smaller streams, are dry at least
part of the year, and have minimal subsistence value. Springs are fairly numerous in the region,
and even high-order streams in the region often have sustained water flow because they are fed
by groundwater discharge and aquifers (Story 1990:8-9). Changing land use practices, farming,
and erosion have caused many springs to dry up over the last 150 years or to have a much
reduced flow (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:38).
Cherokee County is extensively dissected by creeks and rivers. The 3 main drainages—
the Neches River on the west, the Angelina River on the southeast, and Mud Creek in the
eastern part of the county—have broad, poorly drained floodplains. The proposed ROW of the
US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route traverses an extensive upland divide between the
Angelina and Neches rivers. On the west side of the City of Jacksonville, various minor
tributaries discharge into Gum Creek, which flows southward, paralleling the proposed US 69

6

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

Expressway and Reliever Route, to discharge into One Arm Creek, which in turn discharges into
the Neches River south of Jacksonville. On the east side of town, numerous tributary streams
discharge into the Mud Creek drainage. Mud Creek flows generally south-southeasterly to its
confluence with the Angelina River. The Angelina River, in turn, flows southeastward to its
confluence with the Neches River, which in turn flows generally southward and discharges into
Sabine Lake, an inlet of the Gulf of Mexico, in the vicinity of Beaumont and Port Arthur near the
Texas-Louisiana state line.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route is situated within the West Gulf Coastal
Plain physiographic province (Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). In this physiographic province,
sedimentary bedrock formations of limestone and sandstone laid down during the Cretaceous
Period parallel the margins of the ancient, receding coastline of the Gulf of Mexico and crop out
as cuestas or escarpments across the generally southwardly dip of the modern land surface
(Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). Little internal relief of more than 50 m (164 ft) occurs except
along the eroded fronts of the cuestas and in the ironstone hills (Fisher 1965; Godfrey et al.
1973).
Soils in Northeast Texas are divided into 2 broad groups—alluvial valley soils and
upland soils (Godfrey et al. 1973). The project area traverses an extensive upland formation on
which alluvial valley soils are rare to absent. Upland soils, which characterize the vast majority
of the project area, support tall grasses and hardwoods and tend to form directly on bedrock,
except where colluvial deposition has occurred during the Quaternary Period. These soils vary
from moist, acidic soils with a sandy to loamy surface horizon and clayey subsoil to soils whose
basic loamy surface strata overlie clay-enriched B-horizons. Bone and shell preservation is
common in archeological deposits in the latter soils (Story 1990:9). Mixed hardwood and pine
forests occur on the acidic upland soils in Northeast Texas. Tall-grass prairie occurs on the
dark, clayey soils of the Blackland Prairie to the west of the project area (Perttula and Kenmotsu
1993).
Specifically, the project area is situated on the Nacogdoches-Magnolia-Bub soil
association, known locally as the “Redlands,” which consists of sandy and clayey soils on
strongly sloping to steep slopes adjacent to streams or between drainages (Mowery 1948). As
discussed in Chapter 1.0, Introduction, the portion of the overall US 69 Expressway and
Reliever Route’s APE that was accessible during the cultural resource survey described in this
report has been subdivided into 6 separate segments (Segments A to F [see Figure 1]), each of
which is characterized by varying combinations of the most common upland soil series found in
the area (Mowery 1948).
Segment A traverses 5 separate soil units—the Bub-Nacogdoches Complex (Bt);
Hannahatchee fine sandy loam (Hb); Nacogdoches clay loam, strongly sloping, eroded (Nd);
Nacogdoches fine sandy loam, sloping, eroded (Ng); and Nacogdoches fine sandy loam,
strongly sloping, eroded (Nk). The northern half of Segment A traverses the Bub-Nacogdoches
Complex (Bt), which consists of very shallow stony soils underlain by ironstone formations. The
southern half of Segment A is dominated by Hannahatchee fine sandy loam (Hb) and

HJN 050093 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Nacogdoches fine sandy loam, strongly sloping, eroded (Nk). These soil types are generally
confined to floodplains. The remaining soil types, Nacogdoches clay loam, strongly sloping,
eroded (Nd), and Nacogdoches fine sandy loam, sloping, eroded (Ng), occupy the outer fringes
of the project area.
Soil series in Segment B include Nacogdoches fine sandy loam, strongly sloping (Nh),
and Nacogdoches fine sandy loam, strongly sloping, eroded (Nk). Both soil types are
composed of reddish-brown fine sandy loam underlain by reddish or yellowish-brown glauconitic
clay and sandy clay parent material.
Segment C traverses 4 different soil units—Bowie fine sandy loam, sloping (Bn); Bowie
loamy fine sand, gently sloping (Bp); Caddo fine sandy loam, level (Ca); and Nacogdoches fine
sandy loam, sloping, eroded (Ng). Bowie series soils occupy the northern portion of Segment C
and are derived from pale-yellow clay loam parent material. The Caddo fine sandy loam, level
(Ca), soil unit has mottled yellow sandy clay loam parent material and occupies the southern
portion of Segment C. Nacogdoches fine sandy loam, sloping, eroded (Ng), dominates an
upland formation within Segment C and is underlain by reddish glauconitic clay.
Soil types in Segment D include Nacogdoches fine sandy loam, sloping, eroded (Ng), in
the southern portion of the segment; Bowie fine sandy loam, sloping (Bn), in the northern half;
and Caddo fine sandy loam, level (Ca), associated with an intermittent stream. These 3 soil
series are fairly evenly distributed within Segment D.
Segment E is bisected by a small, intermittent stream characterized by Caddo fine sandy
loam, level (Ca). Bowie loamy fine sand, gently sloping (Bp), constitutes the remainder of the
segment.
Segment F is situated at the headwaters of an intermittent stream and is dominated by
Nacogdoches fine sandy loam, strongly sloping (Nh).

2.3

CLIMATE

The environment in Northeast Texas has not remained the same throughout the ca.
12,000 years during which humans have lived in the region. Archeological, faunal, geological,
and pollen evidence suggests that significant changes have occurred, and these changes have
major implications for the development and maintenance of human adaptive strategies in the
region (Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). At present, these changes are poorly understood as only
limited evidence of past environments prior to ca. 3,000 years ago has been obtained (Bryant
and Holloway 1985; Collins and Bousman 1990; Story 1990).
Evidence for climatic change from the late Pleistocene to the present is most often
obtained through studies of pollen sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985). Few pollen studies
have been conducted in Northeast Texas—to date, only a few studies from Buck Creek Marsh
and Jewett Mine have provided interpretable pollen data from this portion of the state (Jacobs
1991; Scott-Cummings 1991), but these are poorly dated or have serious gaps in their records.
Nevertheless, an important series of pollen sites occur in areas surrounding Northeast Texas
(cf. Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). The best dated and most informative pollen sequences come

8

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

from Boriack Bog in Lee County and Weakly Bog in Leon County (Bryant 1969, 1977; Holloway
and Bryant 1984; Holloway et al. 1987). The radiocarbon dates from Boriack Bog suggest a
regular accumulation of deposits and indicate that Boriack Bog surface sediments are
approximately 3,000 years old. Bryant (1977) indicates that the bog was drained and the
surface peat was excavated in the 20th century; thus, the surface of the peat was lowered to
sediments of that age. Weakly Bog, by contrast, covers the last 3,000 years or so, and the
bottom samples roughly match the younger portion of Boriack Bog. Thus, Boriack and Weakly
bogs cumulatively provide a general picture of vegetation change throughout most of the late
Pleistocene and Holocene periods for this region of Texas.
Bryant and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for East Texas that
includes 3 separate climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.),
the Late Glacial Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to
present). Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. The limited available evidence suggests
that the region was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods and
that, prior to ca. 10,000 years B.P., it was forested with species that prefer cool, temperate
conditions, including boreal taxa such as spruce (Bryant and Holloway 1985). This late
Pleistocene/early Holocene climate is inferred to have been cooler than today, with increased
precipitation and/or more effective moisture, but with perhaps less seasonal climatic constraints.
The Late Glacial Period was characterized by a slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins 2004)
during which the deciduous woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak
savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985).
During the Post-Glacial Period, the environment appears to have been more stable.
During the early Holocene (ca. 10,000 to 7000 B.P.), warmer temperatures prevailed, with less
moisture and presumably a lower density of forest cover. The deciduous forests were replaced
by prairies and post oak savannas. Collins and Bousman (1990) suggest that significant
expanses of grassland were present along the western edge of the Northeast Texas region.
The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic
conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. In the middle Holocene, the period between
ca. 7000 and 4000 years B.P., much drier and warmer conditions may have characterized the
region’s climate, possibly resulting in even more widespread grasslands and replacement of
forests along its western edge. The forest cover in Northeast Texas is suspected to have been
at its lowest density during this time period (Collins and Bousman 1990:62).
Following the warm and dry interlude of the middle Holocene, environmental data
suggest that a gradual reforestation of the region continued into the late Holocene (ca.
4000 B.P. to present). Collins and Bousman (1990) suggest that prairie areas were replaced
first by oak savanna, then by oak-hickory forest in the western part of the region and by oakhickory-pine forest in the eastern portions of the region. Bryant and Holloway (1985) suggest
that essentially modern environmental conditions in Northeast Texas were probably achieved by
about 1,500 years ago.

HJN 050093 AR

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

The modern climate of the region is characterized as humid subtropical, with warm,
humid weather from the spring to the fall, and cool, humid weather in the fall and winter. The
climate is influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is
modified by polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring,
summer, and fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental
climate characterized by considerable variations in temperature. Summers are long and warm.
Winters are short and mild and are characterized by short periods of clear, cold, or freezing
weather interspersed with cloudy and rainy periods and clear, pleasant days. Extremely hot or
cold temperatures are rare. Sudden temperature changes are not very common during
summer, but may occur frequently in winter. Rapid drops in winter temperature are caused by
cold waves or sudden, strong north winds, though freezing weather is uncommon. Average
winter temperatures range between 2 and 10 degrees Celsius (°C) (35 and 50 degrees
Fahrenheit [°F]), and average summer temperatures range from 29 to 35°C (85 to 95°F).
Valleys and low divides are often covered with frost on winter early mornings, but freezing
temperatures are of short duration. The average frost-free season is 246 days (March 15 to
November 16) (Bomar 1983; Mowery 1948:3-5).
The region is well watered—precipitation falls rather uniformly over the area and is fairly
well distributed throughout the year. Normally, it is heaviest in December, March, April, and
May, and lowest in August. Rainfall varies from year to year, but the average is about 114 (cm)
(45 in). Torrential rains fall occasionally, especially in winter and spring, and light snows fall
occasionally in winter but melt rapidly. Hailstorms are infrequent but do occur in the vicinity of
the project area (Mowery 1948:3-5). Precipitation generally increases from north to south
across the region and decreases from east to west in a clinal pattern. The wettest counties in
the area (Shelby, Sabine, and San Augustine) receive more than 122 cm (48 in) of annual
precipitation, while the driest counties (Fannin, Henderson, and Anderson) receive between
91 and 102 cm (36 and 40 in) of precipitation each year. Droughts are not uncommon, and
periods of lower summer precipitation are often accompanied by extended droughts caused by
warm continental Pacific air masses moving across the area from the west.
Dendrochronological analyses of tree rings suggest that numerous wet and dry spells
occurred over the last 1,000 years (Stahle and Cleaveland 1994, 1995). Dry conditions and the
worst droughts occurred in the late A.D. 1200s, in the mid-1400s and 1600s, and then again in
the mid-1700s (Stahle and Cleaveland 1995). Stahle et al. (1985) suggest that the worst June
drought to occur in the past 450 years occurred during the period between A.D. 1549 and 1577.
More favorable conditions probably occurred during the intervening years, especially between
ca. A.D. 1390 and 1440, then in the late part of the 16th and early 17th centuries (Perttula
2004:371). Such climatic perturbations presumably affected the predictability and success of
maize harvests during the Caddoan occupation of the Pineywoods and neighboring Post Oak
Savanna (Perttula 2004:371). Similar fluctuations throughout the Holocene would also have
affected the range, distribution, and abundance of naturally occurring plants and animals upon
which non-agricultural human populations relied.

10

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route project area is situated within the Northeast
Texas Archeological Region, a subdivision of the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) Eastern
Planning Region (Kenmotsu and Pertulla 1993). The Northeast Texas Archeological Region
encompasses a 31-county area bounded on the north by the Red River, on the east by the
Louisiana-Texas state line, partially by the Neches River on the south, and by the Trinity River
on the west. This region incorporates segments or all of several prehistorically important river
systems, including the Angelina, Cypress, Neches, Red, Sabine, Sulphur, and Trinity drainages.
The Northeast Texas Archeological Region shares numerous similarities with adjacent portions
of Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana, and Arkansas at various points in prehistory and history,
especially during the Late Prehistoric segment of the cultural sequence during which Caddoan
peoples occupied the area.
The cultural history of Northeast Texas can be subdivided into 9 broad temporal periods,
although the historic period has been differentiated into overlapping Historic Caddoan and
Historic EuroAmerican periods to distinguish between the highly divergent historical experiences
of the indigenous Native Americans and EuroAmerican settlers during the settlement of Texas
(Table 1).

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 9500 TO 7000 B.C.)

The initial human occupation of the New World can be confidently extended back before
10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990; Meltzer
1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans were
present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
Table 1. Chronological Framework for Northeast Texas Archeological Region
Cultural Period

Approximate Dates

Cultural Period

Approximate Dates

PaleoIndian
Archaic
Early Ceramic
Formative Caddoan
Early Caddoan

9500 to 7500 B.C.
7000 to 200 B.C.
200 B.C. to A.D. 800
A.D. 800 to 1000
A.D. 1000 to 1200

Middle Caddoan
Late Caddoan
Historic Caddoan
Historic EuroAmerican

A.D. 1200 to 1400
A.D. 1400 to 1680
A.D. 1690 to 1860
A.D. 1519 to Present

Source: Perttula and Kenmotsu (1993:44, Tab. 2.1.2)

HJN 050093 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation in
North America during the Pleistocene glacial period.
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Northeast Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (ca. 9500 to 7000 B.C.) (Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). This period
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred endscrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals who practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns are known primarily
through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the exploitation of small animals,
fish, and shellfish during the PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in Northeast Texas for
hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented elsewhere in North America; rather, a
broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been practiced until the Late Prehistoric
period.
Undoubtedly, discrete PaleoIndian components are present in Northeast Texas, but they
have proved to be quite difficult to recognize and define (Perttula 2004:373). The Northeast
Texas archeological record for the PaleoIndian period consists largely of surficial, mixed, or
isolated finds of diagnostic projectile points (cf. Johnson 1989; Meltzer and Bever 1995; Story
1990). Early PaleoIndian materials found on sites in the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of
Northeast Texas include Clovis and Folsom fluted projectile points and scraping tools commonly
manufactured on high-quality, non-local raw materials (Story 1990:179, Tab. 44). Unfluted
lanceolate points were more common during the Late PaleoIndian period in the region, including
Dalton (Johnson 1989; Wyckoff and Bartlett 1995), San Patrice, and Scottsbluff points
(Saunders and Allen 1997), as well as early side-notched points and Albany beveled bifaces or
knives (Johnson 1989; Webb et al. 1971), Quince-style scrapers, end and side scrapers,
denticulates, burins, and bifacial adzes. San Patrice points and associated tools were typically
manufactured from local raw materials (Saunders and Allen 1997; Webb et al. 1971), although
one unrecorded PaleoIndian site in Gregg County, Texas, contains an abundance of large, early
side-notched points crafted from novaculate along with a Dalton point of Ouachita Mountains
chert and a San Patrice lanceolate point made from local raw material (Perttula 2004:373).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 7000 TO 200 B.C.)

Throughout most of North America, the onset of the hypothesized Hypsithermal drying
trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period (ca. 7000 to 200 B.P.) (Perttula and Kenmotsu
1993). In many regions, this climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant reorientation of
lifestyle—the changing climatic conditions and corresponding decrease in the big game
populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified resource base composed of

12

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

smaller game and wild plants. In Northeast Texas, however, a generalized hunting and
gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory prior to the advent of large-scale
agricultural systems during the Late Prehistoric.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these
3 subperiods, though other changes in material culture have been noted as well. Johnson
(1962) employs archeological data from the Yarbrough site (41VN6) on the upper Sabine River
to bring chronological order to the diverse Archaic archeological record in Northeast Texas.
Johnson’s (1962) temporal divisions are based on projectile point sequences and on the
introduction of plain ceramics at the end of the Archaic period. More recent refinements of the
projectile point sequence (Story 1990; Thurmond 1990) document straight and expanding-stem
forms characteristic of the Early and Middle Archaic subperiods and contracting-stem darts
during the Late Archaic and subsequent Early Ceramic periods (Schambach 1982, 1998).
Paleoenvironmental research suggests that much of the Archaic period in Northeast
Texas, particularly the middle portion of the period, was drier than today, with apparent
reductions in biomass and local expansions of prairie habitats along the western margins of the
region (Ferring 1995). While archeological data are still rather limited, it appears that group
mobility remained high for hunting-and-gathering populations during the Early Archaic
subperiod, and the subsistence base included hardwood nuts, deer, shellfish, turtles, and small
mammals. Anderson (1996a, 1996b) suggests that Archaic groups had highly mobile foraging
adaptations along the Red River, the central Sabine River, and in interior uplands away from
major drainages, and employed expedient lithic tool technologies. Thurmond (1990) suggests
that group territories were probably large and poorly defined and that sites were occupied
repeatedly and recurrently by small groups at this time.
By the Middle Archaic subperiod, fairly substantial and extensive occupations occurred
within the major basins in the region, with limited use of smaller tributaries and headwater areas
(Thurmond 1990). Middle Archaic components consist largely of open campsites dominated by
hunting tools, including the distinctive blade-notched Evans Point, and generalized cutting and
scraping tools, lithic manufacturing debris and cores, and groundstone tools (Perttula
2004:375). Burned rock features, such as hearths, ovens, and roasting pits, and burned rock
concentrations have been documented at a few sites in the Sulphur River drainage (Cliff et al.
1996; Gadus et al. 1992), though the large burned rock midden features that begin appearing in
Central Texas around this time appear to be absent in Northeast Texas. Lithic raw material
data from a possible Middle Archaic assemblage at Lake Fork Reservoir in the upper Sabine
River basin suggest that exchange of non-local raw materials, especially finished tools, was
commonplace (Perttula 1984), but raw material procurement and utilization patterns were not
uniform across Northeast Texas (Fields and Tomka 1993:92). Mound complexes dating to the
Middle Archaic subperiod have been documented in northern Louisiana, which suggests the
development of more complex hunter-gatherer societies in the Lower Mississippi Valley area at
this time (Saunders and Allen 1997).
Late Archaic sites are common in the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna, occurring
along major streams, near springs, on spring-fed branches, on upland ridges, and on tributary

HJN 050093 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

drainages (Cliff and Hunt 1995; Cliff et al. 1996; Dixon et al. 1997; Thurmond 1990). In fact, the
distribution of Late Archaic sites suggests that these groups ranged extensively across almost
every part of the region (Perttula 2004:375). In particular, Anderson (1996a) notes major
concentrations of Late Archaic sites along the Red and Little rivers in southwestern Arkansas
and northwestern Louisiana as well as in the Ouachita Mountains. A generalized foraging
adaptation appears to have remained the predominant subsistence pattern, and population
growth has been inferred based on the substantially larger numbers of sites (in Northeast
Texas, however, only 4 well-dated Late Archaic components have been documented). Some
Late Archaic components in riverine settings in the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna (e.g.,
the Yarbrough site on the Sabine River) contain earthen middens, but sites of this age generally
contain only small burned rock features (Cliff et al. 1996). Projectile points, bifacial and flake
tools, and lithic debris are common in Late Archaic artifact assemblages. Characteristic
projectile points include expanding-stem (e.g., Ellis, Ensor, Palmillas, Yarbrough) and
contracting-stem (e.g., Gary, Kent) styles. There is no paleobotanical evidence to indicate that
Late Archaic populations in Northeast Texas cultivated native plant species (such as
sumpweed, sunflower, and chenopod), as was the case in many parts of North America in the
first millennium B.C. (cf. Ford 1985; Fritz 1994). Extensive use of local lithic raw materials
during the Late Archaic in the Sulphur, Sabine, Cypress, and Angelina-Neches basins speaks to
a more limited interregional interaction at this time (Fields and Tomka 1993; Perttula and
Bruseth 1995). In contrast, Late Archaic sites in the Mississippi River basin of northern
Louisiana are marked by large quantities of non-local lithic raw materials, particularly novaculite
and Boone and Pitkin cherts (Saunders and Allen 1997).
While there is no evidence of prolonged sedentism in Northeast Texas in the Late
Archaic, the occurrence of relatively more substantial archeological components and an
increased number of sites have lead some researchers to infer a higher degree of sedentism in
this area than in surrounding regions of Texas (Perttula et al. 1993). Northeast Texas exhibits
some similarities in artifact styles with the Prairie-Savanna Archeological region to the west,
possibly suggesting increased contact or affiliation with people in that region (Story 1990:220).
The large Late Archaic cemeteries that form such a prominent part of the archeological record
of the Southeast Texas Archeological Region extend only to the western margins of Northeast
Texas in the Trinity River basin. Burial mounds occur in the subsequent Early Ceramic period,
but these appear to “reflect the emergence of more complexly organized local groups” (Story
1985:53) rather than an extension of the Late Archaic mortuary pattern of the Gulf Coast.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (CA. 200 B.C. TO A.D. 800)

The Early Ceramic period (ca. 200 B.C. to A.D. 800), also known as the Woodland
period, is characterized in much of Northeast Texas, especially from the Sabine to the Red
rivers, primarily by plain, relatively thick ceramic bowls and flowerpot-shaped jars, double-bitted
axe heads, smaller and thinner versions of Gary dart points, and later in the period by cornernotched arrow points (Thurmond 1990). Early Ceramic sites along the Red River in
southwestern Arkansas and in Northeast Texas have abundant ceramics, though many sites of
this age, especially between the Sulphur and Sabine rivers, do not evince such prevalent use of
ceramics (Perttula 2004:376). This situation suggests regional differences in food processing

14

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

technologies and/or dietary habits, and may further highlight differences in the degree of
sedentism among populations across the area (Skibo and Blinman 1999). Lower Mississippi
Valley ceramic styles (e.g., Tchefuncte Stamped, Churupa Punctated, Marksville Incised,
Troyville Stamped, and Marksville Stamped) occur with some regularity at sites in the Sabine,
Sulphur, and Big Cypress basins (Story 1990). These ceramics may provide evidence of
contact and interaction between Trans-Mississippi South and Lower Mississippi Valley
populations, or they may represent the adoption of Lower Mississippi Valley stylistic and
decorative attributes by local potters (Perttula and Bruseth 1995; Schambach 1982, 1998).
The presence of grinding stones, projectile points, ceramics, and/or refuse pits at the
Viper Marsh and Mahaffey sites in Oklahoma (Story 1990:298-299), the Fish Lake Site in
Arkansas (Jeter and Mintz 1990), and the Sanders (41LR2), Hurricane Hill (41HP106), and
other sites in Texas indicates that both plant and animal resources were important during the
Early Ceramic period. The Early Ceramic inhabitants of Northeast Texas were still primarily
hunter-gatherers, though they may have lived in increasingly large groups and/or resided for
longer periods of time at certain sites (Perttula 2004:377). Larger villages and multiple mound
centers were first constructed during this period, mainly on the major streams (e.g., the Red and
Sabine rivers). In the Angelina and Attoyac basins, Early Ceramic period sites contain plain,
sandy-paste ceramics of the Mossy Grove tradition (Story 1990) as well as decorated ceramics
of Lower Mississippi Valley affiliation. Changes in the density and location of Early Ceramic
sites, particularly in favor of sandy interfluves, has led some researchers (e.g., Corbin 1998) to
suggest that horticulture may have been introduced into the Angelina-Neches basin at this time,
though such measures may also have been tied to “moving closer to a significant plant food
resource (i.e., plants that were restricted to valley margins and/or the floodplain) whose use was
facilitated by processing via cooking in ceramic vessels” (Corbin 1998:115). Settlement data
from the McGee Bend area at the confluence of the Angelina River and Attoyac Bayou indicates
that middens and occupational components range from 0.2 to 3.2 ha (0.5 to 8.0 ac) in size
(Duffield 1963; Jelks 1965). Some sites have relatively substantial midden deposits, particularly
along the Red River and in the upper Sulphur River basin (Fields et al. 1997; Schambach 1982),
and some evidence for structures (probably daubed pole and thatch structures), but the degree
of settlement permanence is still less than that seen in the subsequent, long-term, Caddoan
settlements of Northeast Texas (Perttula et al. 1993:99).
On the basis of available paleobotanical information, Early Ceramic groups may have
cultivated squash (McGregor 1996) and used native seeds, tubers, and roots in addition to a
variety of woodland and aquatic animal resources (Webb et al. 1969). The presence of chipped
stone axes and hoe-shaped tools in Early Ceramic occupations suggests that some level of
horticultural activity was occurring, though intensive use of colonizing weedy annuals may
similarly account for the presence of these implements. Bruseth (1998) has suggested that
maize was being cultivated during the latter portions of this period, but stable isotope analyses
of some 25 or more Late Archaic, Fourche Maline, and Formative to Early Caddoan human
remains indicate that maize was not a major part of the diet at this time (Rose et al. 1998).
Early Ceramic period burial mounds have been documented in bluff top and alluvial valley
settings on the Red River in northwestern Louisiana and southwestern Arkansas (Schambach
1982, 1997; Webb 1984) and on the Angelina, Neches, and Sabine rivers in Northeast Texas

HJN 050093 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

(Story 1990). Mortuary ceremonialism included the interment of costly, non-local raw materials
and artifacts, including chert, copper, and Lower Mississippi Valley ceramic vessels, in the burial
mounds. Evidence of mortuary or ritual practices also occurs in non-mound contexts such as
the Hurricane Hill Site, which contained a small cemetery on a prominent hill, and the Mahaffey
Site on the Kiamichi River in southeastern Oklahoma, which had a large cemetery with flexed
and semiflexed burials without grave goods (Perino and Bennett 1978). In the broadest sense,
the establishment of bounded cemeteries is often interpreted as a correlate of increasing
sedentism in the western Gulf Coastal Plain of Northeast Texas (Pertulla 2004:378).

3.4

FORMATIVE, EARLY, AND MIDDLE CADDOAN PERIODS (CA. A.D. 800 TO 1400)

The Caddoan archeological record represents the fluorescence of aboriginal complex
societies in northeastern Texas, northwestern Louisiana, southwestern Arkansas, and
southeastern Oklahoma. In the Northeast Texas Archeological Region, the timeframe referred
to in many surrounding regions as the Late Prehistoric period is usually subdivided into the
Formative Caddoan (ca. A.D. 800 to 1000), the Early Caddoan (ca. A.D. 1000 to 1200), the
Middle Caddoan (ca. A.D. 1200 to 1400), and the Late Caddoan (ca. A.D. 1400 to 1680) periods
(Perttula 1993a). European contact with Caddoan groups in Northeast Texas began around ca.
A.D. 1540, but it was sporadic until after ca. A.D. 1680 (Perttula 1992), and the Historic
Caddoan period (ca. A.D. 1680 to 1860) therefore covers the period of regular interaction with
Spanish, French, and other EuroAmerican settlers up to the expulsion of the Caddo peoples
from their homelands and removal to Indian Territory in 1859.
In general terms, the Caddo were characterized by:
a large population represented by many small settlements scattered within particular
resource areas; a reliance upon horticulture as one of the primary means of subsistence;
differentiated and undifferentiated mound/habitation sites with structurally differentiated
mound classes (producing an apparently hierarchic division of places on the landscape);
differential treatment of the dead reflective of a system of ranking; [and] indications of
long-term cooperation in disposal of the dead by groups represented by some of the
archeological units (Prewitt 1974:76).

Broadly, these basic characteristics of settlement, subsistence, sociopolitical organization, and
mortuary practices are representative of the Caddoan archeological area from ca. A.D. 750 to
1750 and are similar, if not identical, to what constitutes the Mississippian period cultural
traditions of the Mississippi River Valley and Eastern Woodlands of North America (Griffin 1967,
1985; Muller 1978; Smith 1986, 1990; Steponaitis 1986). Despite these similarities, Caddoan
archeologists maintain that the prehistoric and early historic Caddoan tradition developed
largely independently of Mississippian-period chiefdoms elsewhere (Smith 1990).
The overall Caddoan archeological area has been divided into 3 subareas (Perttula
1992:7-9), including (1) the Arkansas, or Northern Caddoan, subarea of northeast Oklahoma,
northwest Arkansas, and southwest Missouri, including the Arkansas Valley lowlands, the South
Canadian basin, and the western Ozark Highlands (Brown et al. 1978); (2) the Western
Caddoan subarea of East Texas and south-central Oklahoma, including the western Gulf
Coastal Plain outside the Red River Valley and the Ouachita Mountains (Story 1981, 1990;

16

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

Wyckoff and Baugh 1980); and (3) the Central Caddoan subarea in the Red and Ouachita river
valleys in southwestern Arkansas, northwestern Louisiana, and southeastern Oklahoma
(Schambach 1983; Williams and Early 1990). Archeological developments within each of these
subareas seem to represent the in situ formation of separate and complex Caddoan cultural
traditions (Schambach 1983).
Throughout prehistoric times, Caddoan peoples lived in dispersed communities of grassand cane-covered structures that were frequently associated with grass-covered arbors and
armadas (Perttula 1992:13). The communities were composed of isolated homesteads or
farmsteads, small hamlets, a few larger villages or towns, and large civic-ceremonial centers.
Such centers were marked by the construction of earthen mounds that were used as temples,
burial mounds, and ceremonial fire mounds (Jeter et al. 1989:2001). The civic-ceremonial
centers appear to have “served a local population which [was] dispersed in small social and
economic groups around the center” (Schambach and Early 1983:SW107).
Post Oak Savanna and Pineywoods Caddoan groups in Northeast Texas constructed
temple and burial mounds, and the larger sites were important civic-ceremonial centers
containing multiple mounds and associated villages, generally dating after ca. A.D. 900. The
multiple mound sites are evenly spaced along the Red River, Sabine River, and Cypress Bayou,
and those that are contemporaneous may represent the nodes of hierarchical systems of an
“integrated…regional network of interaction and redistribution” (Thurmond 1990:234). Perttula
(1994:12) identified the Jamestown, Boxed Springs, and Hudnall-Pirtle multiple-mound centers
as the nodes of such a network during the Early to Middle Caddoan periods in the Sabine River
basin. The Hale (41TT12) and Keith (41TT11) multiple-mound sites may have served civicceremonial functions in the Big Cypress Creek basin (Perttula 2004:384), and the Roitsch
(41RR16), Wright Plantation (41RR7), Fasken (41RR14), and Sanders (41LR2) sites may have
served similar roles in the Red River basin (Bruseth 1998; Hamilton 1997). The premier mound
centers in the Angelina-Neches river basins are the George C. Davis and Washington Square
sites (Corbin and Hart 1998; Story 1997). Calibrated radiocarbon dates from village contexts at
the George C. Davis site establish that the site was occupied beginning in the 9th century and
was then continuously settled through the end of the 13th century (Story 2000). Radiocarbon
dating of the Washington Square site suggests that it began to flourish after ca. A.D. 1250,
when the George C. Davis site may have begun to lose power and social authority (Perttula
2004:386). The proximity of the Washington Square Mound complex to the north-to-south and
east-to-west aboriginal trails that later became known as the Caddo trace and the Camino Real,
respectively, may suggest reasons why the seat of power shifted away from the George C.
Davis site, the preeminent polity on the Neches River, which was abandoned by the early
14th century.
Formative to Middle Caddoan period groups seem to have been horticulturalists,
cultivating maize and squash along with several kinds of native seeds (Perttula and Bruseth
1983). They also gathered nuts, tubers, and roots and were proficient hunters of deer, fish,
rabbits, raccoon, turkey, squirrel, and turtles. Available paleobotanical and bioarcheological
evidence from Northeast Texas and elsewhere within the Caddoan area, including stable
carbon isotope analyses of human remains (Rose et al. 1998), suggests that Caddoan groups

HJN 050093 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

became dependent primarily upon maize and other domesticated crops only after about
A.D. 1300. By ca. A.D. 1450, maize composed more than 50% of the diet (Burnett 1990;
Perttula 1996; Rose et al. 1998), though local variation in dependence upon cultivated plants
has been noted (Cliff 1997; Largent et al. 1997; Perttula 1999).
The most distinctive material culture item of the Caddo populations living in Northeast
Texas was the ceramics they made for cooking, storage, and serving needs (Perttula et al.
1995b). The variety of styles and forms of ceramics recovered from the region hint at the range,
temporal span, and geographic extent of prehistoric Caddoan groups across the landscape
(Thurmond 1990). Story (1990:246-247, 277-319) suggests that the earliest ceramics in the
region date between ca. 500 and 100 B.C. and are closely related to the ceramics being
produced in the Lower Mississippi Valley. Between the introduction of ceramics in the region
and the emergence of distinctive Caddoan vessel forms and decorative motifs around A.D. 800,
the local plainware traditions seem to have continued relatively unchanged. As Story notes:
Sometime probably between A.D. 700 and A.D. 900 (there is a lot of room for arguing the
age), Caddoan ceramics came to dominate the northeastern part of [Texas]. These
ceramics are distinguished by certain vessel forms (especially a long-necked bottle with a
globular body and a carinated bowl), engraved decorations, and other attributes.
Although the bottle form and engraving may have an exotic origin, most of the Caddoan
ceramics can be recognized as local developments with strong influences from the
[Lower Mississippi Valley] (1990:247).

The diversity in decoration and shape in Caddoan ceramics is substantial, ranging from utility
jars and bowls to fineware bottles, carinated bowls, and compound vessels, and precludes any
succinct summary in the present context (cf. Perttula 2004; Story 1990).
Aside from ceramics, Formative to Middle Caddoan period populations in the
Pineywoods possessed a sophisticated technology based on the use of stone, bone, wood,
shell, and other media for the manufacture of tools, clothing, basketry, ornaments, and other
items (Perttula 1992:15). Well-made corner-notched and rectangular-stemmed arrow points
were common, along with siltstone and greenstone celts, perforators and borers, large Gahagan
bifaces, and a variety of more expedient stone tools, such as unifacial flake scraping and cutting
implements (Perttula 2004:386). Long-stemmed Red River (Hoffman 1967) and cigar-shaped
ceramic pipes, as well as ceramic earspools and figurines, were also manufactured by the
Caddo at this time (Newell and Krieger 1949).
Locally available lithic materials were usually employed for the manufacture of stone
tools, but non-local raw materials and finished goods made from these raw materials were also
obtained through trade (Brown 1983; Perttula 1990). The development and maintenance of
long-distance east-to-west and north-to-south trade networks were notable features of
prehistoric Caddoan tradition. Trade items included bison hides and salt; raw materials such as
copper, stone, and marine shell; and finished objects such as pottery vessels and large
ceremonial bifaces (Brown 1983; Creel 1991; Early 1990; Vehik 1988, 1990). Many of the more
exotic trade items, especially marine shell and copper artifacts, were obtained from areas more
than 300 miles away from the Caddoan area (Perttula 1992).

18

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

3.5

LATE CADDOAN PERIOD (CA. A.D. 1400 TO 1680)

As currently defined, the Late Caddoan period extends from ca. A.D. 1400 to 1680
(Story 1990). Late Caddoan occupation in Northeast Texas was arguably centered on the
Great Bend area of the Red River, where Late Caddoan archeological sites are included in the
contemporaneous Belcher and Texarkana phases (Schambach 1983). Texarkana phase sites
occur on the Red River northwest of Texarkana to the Arkansas-Oklahoma state line, as well on
the lower Sulphur River (Jelks 1961), while Belcher phase sites are distributed from about
Fulton, Arkansas, to below Shreveport, Louisiana (Kelley 1997; Schambach 1983; Webb 1959).
The McCurtain phase represents another Late Caddoan archeological complex upstream from
the Texarkana phase (Bruseth 1998). Texarkana and Belcher phase sites include large,
permanent settlements with mounds and cemeteries, hamlets, and farmsteads (Perttula
2004:393). The mound centers were marked by the construction of earthen mounds used as
temples, burial mounds, and/or ceremonial fire mounds, as during earlier Caddoan periods
(Kelley 1998; Webb 1959). These settlements were inhabited by sedentary Caddo agricultural
communities with complex societies led by individuals with high status (Story 1990). Sites such
as Belcher (16CD13), Battle Mound (3LA1), Hatchel (41BW3), Moore/Higginbotham (3MI3/30),
and Cabe Mounds (41BW14) represent the larger villages or towns (Creel 1996; Kelley and
Coxe 1998; Kelley and Guccione 1997; Perttula et al. 1995a; Sierzchula et al. 1995), while
smaller hamlets or farmsteads have been investigated at the Shewin, Atlanta State Park (Harris
et al. 1980), and 41MX5 (Brewington et al. 1995) for the Texarkana phase, and Cedar Grove
(3LA97), Spirit Lake (3LA83), and Cox for the Belcher phase.
In the Angelina-Neches river basin, the Late Caddoan period is represented by the
Frankston phase, which dates from ca. A.D. 1400 to 1650 (Perttula 2004:395), and the Angelina
focus or phase in the vicinity of Lake Sam Rayburn (formerly the McGee Bend Reservoir) (Jelks
1965). Only one Frankston phase mound site is known, the A.C. Saunders site (41AN19)
(Jackson 1936; Kleinschmidt 1982). Other Frankston phase sites include small, residential
settlements in dispersed agricultural communities, with small family and/or community
cemeteries that appear to have been used over relatively short periods of time (Anderson et al.
1974; Johnson 1961; Shafer 1981). One of the larger known Frankston phase cemeteries is the
Omer and Otis Hood cemetery (Kleinschmidt 1982; Suhm et al. 1954), which contains
20 burials, while other, smaller cemeteries contain fewer than 10 individuals generally laid out
individually in extended supine position with accompanying grave goods (Kleinschmidt
1982:214). In at least one Frankston phase cemetery in the upper Neches River basin in Smith
County, the burial of socially elite individuals occurs in a family and/or village cemetery context
rather than in a mound.
The other major Late Caddoan manifestation in Northeast Texas is the Titus phase (ca.
A.D. 1430 to 1680), which represents the remains of a number of Caddoan groups who lived
between the Sabine and Sulphur rivers in the northeastern Texas Pineywoods. Like the
Frankston phase groups in the upper Neches and Angelina river basins (Kleinschmidt 1982;
Story and Creel 1982) and in the Angelina River and Attoyac Bayou basins (Middlebrook 1994),
Titus phase groups lived in dispersed year-round settlements, buried their dead in planned
cemeteries, and manufactured culturally distinctive ceramics of considerable stylistic and

HJN 050093 AR

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

functional diversity (Perttula 2004:396). Sociopolitically, these Pineywoods Caddo were
somewhat akin to the early historic Kadohadacho groups on the Red River that had elitecontrolled and hierarchically ranked societies (Barker and Pauketat 1992). Several hundred
Titus phase components have been identified, the largest concentration of which is found in the
Cypress Bayou (or Big Cypress Creek) valley (Perttula 2004; Thurmond 1990), with a scatter of
sites throughout the Little Cypress Creek valley, the middle portions of the Sulphur River, the
middle and upper portions of White Oak Creek, and the upper and middle reaches of the Sabine
River drainage (Perttula 2004:396). Thurmond (1985, 1990) has proposed that the Titus phase
is composed of 4 contemporaneous spatial subclusters—Three Basins, Tankersley Creek,
Swauano Creek, and Big Cypress Creek—within the larger Cypress cluster. By contrast, Turner
(1978) proposes early and late chronological subdivisions within the Titus phase based on motif
variations on Ripley Engraved carinated bowls and on changes in vessel form. It is likely that
both spatial and temporal factors contribute to the archeological character of the Titus phase
(Perttula 1992). Despite the prominence of Titus phase groups in the archeological record,
Europeans in historic times described these Pineywoods Caddo groups in the Sabine and
Cypress basins in only a cursory fashion, unlike the Kadohadacho and Hasinai groups to the
north, east, and south (Smith 1995).
Late Caddoan material culture is at least as distinctive and diverse as early Caddoan
assemblages. The wide variety of ceramic vessel shapes and decorative motifs, as well as their
frequency in domestic contexts, demonstrates the importance of ceramics for cooking and
serving food, as personal possessions, and as social identifiers. Both finewares and utility
wares were manufactured during the Late Caddoan period. Finewares were tempered with
finely crushed grog and bone and were well polished. Shell-tempered vessels are quite rare
and, when found, are typically trade wares from the Red River Caddo area (Perttula 2004:404).
Utility vessels were tempered with grog and grit and utilized a coarser paste and a thicker body.
Ceramic earspools and biconical and elbow pipes were made (Jackson 1933), and other types
of earspools were manufactured from siltstone, sandstone, and wood (Turner 1992:84). Lithic
tools and debris are uncommon on Late Caddoan period sites in the Pineywoods, which
presumably reflects the development of a strong wood and bone tool industry, few examples of
which are preserved in the archeological record (Perttula 2004:404). Tool diversity was low,
consisting primarily of triangular and corner-notched arrow points, flake tools (e.g., drills,
scrapers, and retouched flakes), lithic debris and cores, and a variety of groundstone
implements, including petaloid and tabular celts, manos and metates, battered and polished
cobbles and pebbles, hematite and limonite pigment stones, and abrading slabs (Thurmond
1990; Turner 1992). Bone is not usually well preserved on Late Caddoan sites, though
occasional deer mandibles, deer beamers, ulna punches, antler tines, deer and bird bone pins,
and turtle shell rattles have been noted (Perttula 2004:405).
Faunal subsistence remains are known from a few sites in Northeast Texas dating to this
time period but have so far received relatively little attention (Perttula 1993a; Thurmond 1990).
Vertebrate species represented in trash middens include deer, turkey, cottontail rabbit,
jackrabbit, squirrel, beaver, turtle, and fish, though deer and turkey appear to have been the
dominant economic species (Perttula et al. 1982; 1993). In general, subsistence evidence
suggests that Pineywoods Caddo practiced a strongly maize-based economy at this time (Fritz

20

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

1990:421, 425). Floral evidence from trash midden deposits suggests that maize (Zea mays)
provided a dietary staple, and beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) were also an important food source
(Perttula 2004:4005). Nuts and seeds were gathered but appear to have been of lesser
importance than during earlier time periods (Crane 1982; Perttula and Bruseth 1983; Perttula et
al. 1982).
By early historic times, the Caddoan nation comprised at least 25 separate groups,
bands, or tribes organized into loosely affiliated kin-based groups referred to by European
observers as the Hasinai, Kadohadacho, and Natchitoches confederacies (Perttula 1992). The
Hasinai groups lived in the Angelina and Neches river valleys in East Texas, the Kadohadacho
groups on the Red River in the Great Bend area, and the Natchitoches groups on the Red River
in the vicinity of the French trading post of Natchitoches established in A.D. 1714. In the
Angelina-Neches area, protohistoric Caddoan development in the upper Neches River basin
shares certain aspects of the sociopolitical and ceremonial change observed for the
contemporaneous Titus phase (Perttula 1992:117). Frankston phase mound centers, such as
the A.C. Saunders and Pace McDonald sites, both of which were apparently structural mounds
without accompanying mortuary events (Story 1981:149), were not used after A.D. 1600.
Kleinschmidt (1982:240) places the A.C. Saunders site in the Frankston Phase 2 subdivision,
probably just prior to the historic contacts of the early 17th century. Cultural change appears to
have been toward a more regionally localized sociopolitical system generally compatible with
the A.D. 1680 to 1720 ethnohistorical records from the East Texas Hasinai tribes (Wyckoff and
Baugh 1980:246-249), in which ritual and ceremony were conducted in non-mound structures or
plazas and cemeteries were strictly for extended family use (Perttula 1992:117).

3.6

HISTORIC CADDOAN PERIOD (CA. A.D. 1519 TO PRESENT)

The earliest explorations by Europeans in the overall Caddo area began shortly after
Spain’s Indies commerce was formally organized in 1503 by the creation of the Casa de
Contratación (Arnold and Weddle 1978:63; Milanich and Milbreath 1989a, 1989b). Explorations
of the Gulf Coast were carried out from Florida to Tampico throughout the early 16th century as
part of the regulation and encouragement of New World trade. The first European incursion into
what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern
shores of the Gulf of Mexico (Weddle 1985). While no documentary evidence exists for direct
contact with Caddoan peoples during these initial forays, Europeans were already conducting
slave raiding and native resettlement projects along the Texas coast by 1550 (Bolton 1912).
From 1528 to 1534, Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca and other survivors of the Narváez Florida
expedition crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas coast near Galveston
Bay (Bandelier 1904). Swanton (1942:29) does not believe that Cabeza de Vaca actually
encountered any Caddoan people during his wanderings, though his dealings in Native
American trade goods between coastal and inland groups suggest that he might have traveled
in the region (Pertula 1992:19). While direct contact between Cabeza de Vaca and Caddoan
peoples cannot be established by historical documentation, Perttula (1992) argues that
diseases such as typhoid and measles carried by the Narváez party could have been
transmitted to Native American groups living elsewhere along the Texas Coast and then inland

HJN 050093 AR

21

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

to Caddoan groups through aboriginal trade and other contact. Thus, the Narváez and Cabeza
de Vaca exploration may have been an important benchmark for the initiation of contact
between Europeans and Native Americans in the Spanish Borderlands West (Hester 1989:199;
Perttula 1992:19, 1993b), and may have introduced epidemic diseases that resulted in
substantial population declines prior to the inception of more regular contact later in the
16th century.
In the early 1540s, the Hernando de Soto entrada, led by Luis de Moscoso following the
death of de Soto along the Mississippi River near present-day Memphis, passed into the
Caddoan area, spending several months among the Caddoan groups who lived between the
Ouachita and Trinity rivers (Swanton 1939; Perttula 1992:19). The death of de Soto on the
Mississippi River at the province of Guachoya in the spring of 1542:
freed the survivors from continuing upon the original objectives of the expedition. There
was only one thought shared by all: to escape from the whole dreadful adventure. Under
the leadership of Luis de Moscoso, they officially decided it was hopeless to seek the
sea…in fact, the cavaliers were clearly reluctant to take to boats…and instead
determined to march west in the direction of New Spain (Brain 1985:xlv).

Within what is now recognized as the Caddoan archeological area, Moscoso described
the provinces of Naguatex, Nondacao, and Guasco, for example, as groups that had dense
populations in scattered settlements and abundant reserves of maize (Swanton 1939:258-280).
Perttula’s (1992) examination of Moscoso’s travels suggests that his route passed through
settlements of aboriginal Caddoan groups known archeologically as the Late Mid-Ouachita (or
Social Hill), Belcher, Texarkana, Titus, and Frankston phases. Different versions of Moscoso’s
route have been proposed by various researchers (e.g., Hudson 1986; Perttula 1992; Swanton
1939); interestingly, all of the proposed routes pass through the Angelina-Neches river basin
area in the vicinity of the proposed Lake Columbia Water Supply Project. The basic import of
the de Soto-Moscoso expedition in 1542 is that these explorers documented and described
aspects of Caddoan settlement, subsistence strategies, aboriginal routes of travel and trade,
and social organization that are broadly consistent with inferences that have made based on the
archeological record. In the province of Guasco in the Angelina-Neches basin, the Spanish
noted that there was plenty of corn as well as turquoise and shawls of cotton that had been
brought from the southwest (Bourne 1904:181).
The second major phase of European contact in the Caddoan historic period began with
the renewed exploration of the Mississippi Valley following the establishment of the Illinois
colony by the French in the 1670s. The Mississippi River, initially explored by Marquette and
Joliet in 1673 to the mouth of the Arkansas River (Delangez 1946), was fully explored to its
mouth by La Salle. Three years later, another expedition directed by La Salle intended to
colonize the area and link the Gulf Coast with the growing French colonies of Illinois and
Canada. For unknown reasons, this expedition missed the mouth of the Mississippi River and
came ashore on the Texas Gulf Coast at Matagorda Bay (Cox 1922; Gilmore 1986). La Salle
made several trips from Fort St. Louis to explore the region and try to find the Mississippi River,

22

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

visiting the Hasinai (or Cenis, in the French transcription) in 1686 before turning back with
several horses purchased from the Hasinai. Another effort was made in 1687 by the survivors
of Fort St. Louis; however, La Salle was murdered by several of the men partway through this
trip, and the remaining party decided to stay on with the Hasinai.
The years between 1685 and 1714 were a time of continual French and Spanish
exploration of the Caddoan area. The threat of French settlement in an area the Spanish
considered to be officially under their hegemony spurred serious Spanish efforts to settle and
missionize the country east of New Mexico and the Rio Grande known to them as the “Kingdom
of the Tejas” (Bolton 1912; Perttula 1992:30). At the same time, the French were determined to
take advantage of the La Salle explorations to extend their claims in the region. Shortly
thereafter, English colonies were established along the South Atlantic Coast that wished to
extend trade routes west to Native American groups living on the Mississippi River and the
Texas Gulf Coast (Coker and Watson 1986; Crane 1929; Usner 1989; Woods 1980). European
political relationship, trade and religious objectives, and the larger spheres of influence under
the control of the Spanish, French, and British in the developing world economy all played
important parts in the fate of the Caddo between ca. 1685 and 1800 (Braudel 1984:21-85, 387429; Wallerstein 1974; Wolf 1982:129-231). Trade contacts, rumors of settlement, and
exploration by one government were responded to in kind by others as part of the unstable
process of colonization. The nature and character of sustained European contact has been
comprehensively discussed by many researchers (Bolton 1915, 1987; Giraud 1957, 1963,
1974a, 1974b; Cox 1909; Fieldhouse 1966; Galloway 1982; Gibson 1989; John 1975, 1985;
Surrey 1916; Swagerty 1984; Usner 1987; Wade 1989).
From the 1790s, containment of the expanding US east of the Mississippi River
dominated Spain’s concerns in its Texas and Louisiana colonies, and the allegiance of the
various Indian nations of the Provincias Internas, such as the Caddo, Wichita, and Comanche,
was perceived by the Spanish government as a critical factor in controlling the frontier. The
1790s were a period of growth in the American fur trade, and another major growth period in the
industry occurred from 1800 to 1808 (Clayton 1967). Beaver was the primary fur resource in
the trade from 1790 to 1820. The Kadohadacho and Hasinai participated in the trade from the
outset, and their contributions to the fur trade were considered important parts of the Spanish
and Louisiana economies (Ewers 1969:47-48; Flores 1984; Peake 1954:17-18). Following the
purchase of the Louisiana Territory in 1803, the US moved rapidly to explore the boundaries
and character of its new territory, and the federal government emphasized the establishment of
commercial and political relationships with resident aboriginal groups, including Caddoan tribes.
The Freeman and Custis expedition of 1806 on the Red River followed specific guidelines
regarding interaction with the Indians. This expedition was ultimately abandoned due to
interference with the Spanish related to questions about the boundary between Spanish Texas
and the Louisiana Territory. The US initiated a border war with Spain that resulted in the 1806
Neutral Ground Agreement. Possession of the Red River, as well as the territorial allegiance of
the Kadohadacho, remained unresolved (Flores 1984:287).

HJN 050093 AR

23

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

As Spanish and American trading ventures evolved through the first 2 decades of the
19th century, the actual settlement of the Red River, its tributaries, and the neutral ground
between Louisiana and Texas began in earnest (Strickland 1937; Haggard 1945). By 1818,
nearly 3,000 settlers from the Midwest and upper South had squatted illegally in Caddo country
along the south side of the Red River from the Great Bend to the Kiamichi River (Lottinville
1980:170-172). Anglo-American settlements increased up to and beyond the time of the Texas
Revolution in 1836 (Strickland 1937:64-238). This settlement expansion was also accompanied
by an influx of aboriginal groups from east of the Mississippi River and from the Arkansas River,
including Choctaw, Cherokee, Delaware, Kickapoo, Quapaw, Shawnee, and Koasati groups
(Anderson 1990; Everett 1990; Ewers 1969; Kniffen et al. 1987; Williams 1964). These groups
exchanged hides, corn, pumpkins, and beans at the trading house in Nacogdoches (Swanton
1942:88) as well as with American government traders at the new agency house at the mouth of
the Sulphur River. As the frontier moved west, Caddoan Indians in Louisiana became more
isolated in the Anglo-American community and were under continual pressure from these
settlers and from the immigrant Indians (Swanton 1942:88; Williams 1964). In Texas,
settlement pressures did not impinge on Caddoan lands until after 1830 (Strickland 1937:318355), though Stephen F. Austin viewed the aboriginal populations of Texas as a hindrance to
the security of settlement (Barker 1925).
Following the death of the Caddo chief Dehahuit in 1833, American pressure in
Louisiana on the new Caddo chiefs led to the ceding of Caddo homelands within the limits of the
US on 1 July 1835 (Swanton 1942:89-92). The Caddo relinquished their lands for $80,000,
agreed to move at their own expense within 1 year of the treaty date, and moved to Texas just
prior to the establishment of the Republic of Texas in 1836. The term Caddo Nation came to be
associated with the Cherokee as well as with the Hasinai, Anadarko, and other related tribes of
East Texas, and the Indians became subject to the repressive measures of successive Republic
of Texas administrations (Neighbors 1973, 1975). By the early 1840s, the Caddo Nation was
composed of remnants of the Kadohadacho, Hasinai, and other once-independent Caddoan
tribes, and it had been essentially pushed out of East Texas along with the other groups who
had signed the Treaty of Peace and Friendship with the Republic of Texas in 1843 (Strickland
1937:355; Swanton 1942:97). In 1846, the Kadohadacho, Hasinai, and Anadarko lived together
in a village of about 150 houses on the Brazos River near the present City of Waco, Texas;
shortly thereafter, they moved near the Clear Fork of the Brazos to maintain their distance from
Anglo-American frontier communities. From 1846 to 1854, the US government and the Texas
legislature founded the Texas Indian Reservation on the Brazos River (Neighbors 1957, 1973),
but this reservation lasted only until 1859 due to frictions among white settlers, Indian agents,
and the agglomeration of tribal members. Accordingly, in August 1859, the Caddo Nation, then
about 1,050 people in number, was removed to the Indian Territory and the Wichita agency in
western Oklahoma. Since that time, the history of the Caddo peoples is largely similar to the
overall history of the US.

3.7

HISTORIC EUROAMERICAN PERIOD (CA. 1519 TO PRESENT)

The first documented entry of Europeans in Cherokee county occurred on 6 November
1691, when the expedition of Domingo Terán de los Ríos and Father Damián Massenet entered

24

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

the county en route from San Francisco de los Tejas to the Red River 1 . The mission was
abandoned in 1693, and Europeans ignored the area until 1705, when French traders led by
Louis Juchereau de St. Denis began to do business among the Hasinai Caddo. To counter the
resultant growing French influence, Spanish authorities sent Capt. Domingo Ramón to establish
a series of missions and a presidio in East Texas. On 3 July 1716, Ramón founded the Nuestro
Padre San Francisco de los Tejas Mission among the Neches Indians. In June 1719, French
pressure led to the temporary abandonment of the mission, but the Marqués de Aguayo
reoccupied the site on 5 August 1721, at which time it was renamed San Francisco de los
Neches. The Spanish permanently abandoned the mission in 1730. Thereafter, a mission at
Nacogdoches maintained the Spanish presence in the area.
The first land grant in the county went to Nacogdoches merchants William Barr and
Peter Samuel Davenport in 1798, but they did not settle there. The Indians for whom the county
was named—the Cherokees—joined by Delawares, Shawnees, and Kickapoos, began settling
north of the Camino Real (the Old San Antonio Road) ca. 1820. Cherokee chiefs Bowl, Richard
Fields, and John Dunn Hunter tried unsuccessfully to obtain title to their land from the Mexican
government, and Anglo-American settlers began moving onto land claimed by Cherokees near
Linwood in the late 1820s. In 1826, Indian hopes suffered another blow when David G. Burnet
obtained an empresario grant to lands north of the Camino Real, and the area south of the road
fell to empresario Joseph Vehlein.
Rapid settlement began in 1834. The Houston-Forbes treaty of 23 February 1836
seemingly assured Cherokee neutrality, but the rejection of the treaty by the Texas Senate and
the increased encroachment of settlers on Indian land led to violence. On 5 October 1838,
Indians massacred members of the Isaac Killough family at their farm northwest of the site of
present-day Jacksonville. This led directly to the Cherokee War of 1839 and the expulsion of all
Indians from the county. White settlers quickly occupied the abandoned Indian farms and the
communities of Pine Town, Lockranzie, Linwood, and Cook’s Fort developed. Cherokee County
was marked off from Nacogdoches County on 11 April 1846 and was organized on July 13 of
the same year. The town of Rusk was established as the county seat, though only 1 family lived
in Rusk at that time.
The county’s settlers hailed mostly from the South and brought with them the economic
and social traditions of that region. The 1850 population of 6,673 was the third largest in the
state. By 1860, the population had grown to 12,098, of whom 3,250 were slaves, 2 were free
blacks, and 14 bore Spanish surnames. Of the white families, 29% owned slaves, although only
32 plantations had 20 or more slaves; 7 slaveholders in the county owned more than 40 slaves.
Cotton was important to the local economy, and, in 1860, local farmers produced 6,251 bales of
the fiber. The area’s principal crops, however, were corn and wheat. County farmers produced
more than 496,000 bushels of corn and about 21,000 bushels of wheat in 1860.

1

The following historical summary has been compiled from Ford and Browne (1951), Moore (1967,
1971), and Roach (1934, 1976), as summarized in the online Handbook of Texas History.

HJN 050093 AR

25

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Cherokee County voters strongly supported secession, and 24 companies from the
county entered Confederate service. The Confederate Army maintained 2 training camps, a
prisoner of war camp, a large commissary depot, and conscription and field-transportation
offices in the county. War demands allowed the development of 2 iron foundries and a gun
factory.
In addition to Rusk, several new towns appeared shortly after the organization of the
county. Larissa, founded in 1846 in the northwest part of the county, became the largest town.
Gum Creek, later renamed Jacksonville, was founded in 1847. Alto was established on the Old
San Antonio Road in 1851. Lone Star (originally Skin Tight), Knoxville, and Griffin were other
pioneer communities.
Railroad construction and agricultural development, especially the expansion of cotton
cultivation, helped the county to grow and mature between 1870 and 1900. In 1870, there were
1,216 farms and ranches in Cherokee County, and the county had a population of 11,079; by
1900, 3,683 farms and ranches had been established in the county, and the population had
increased to 25,154. During this period, total farm acreage rose from 133,014 to almost
341,000, and the number of improved acres more than tripled from 43,000 to almost 149,000.
The arrival of the railroads drastically altered the settlement pattern. Most of the old
towns, with the exceptions of Jacksonville, Rusk, and Alto, disappeared, unable to compete with
the new railroad centers. The International-Great Northern (later the Missouri Pacific), built in
1872, gave rise to Troup and a relocated and revitalized Jacksonville. Between 1882 and 1885,
the Kansas and Gulf Short Line built north-to-south through the county, producing new towns—
Bullard, Mount Selman, Craft, Dialville, Forest, and Wells—and bringing rail service to Rusk and
Alto. In 1905, the Texas and New Orleans produced Cuney, Reese, Turney, Gallatin, Ponta,
and Reklaw. Maydelle appeared on the Texas State Railroad in 1910. The only new town not
associated with a railroad was New Summerfield, which was founded as a market center in the
late 1890s. The automobile and school consolidations led to the growth of the 4 central towns—
Jacksonville, Rusk, Alto, and Wells—at the expense of the others.
The decline of farming, which began in the 1930s, and increased industrial job
opportunities in the years during and after World War II led to another major population shift.
County population reached a peak of 43,970 in 1940, then declined to 38,694 in 1950 and to
33,120 in 1960, before dropping to its lowest point of 32,008 in 1970. During these same years,
however, the population of the larger towns increased as the result of both emigration from the
county to outside urban areas and migration within the county from the countryside to the towns.
Although no longer preeminent, agriculture remains important in the local economy.
Cotton replaced wheat as the major crop immediately after the Civil War and continued to grow
in importance into the 20th century. In 1928, the county’s cotton production reached its
maximum (36,951 bales), and, in 1929, 113,689 acres of Cherokee County farmland was
devoted to its cultivation. In the 1930s, production fell sharply because of low prices and New
Deal allotment programs; by 1940, cotton production utilized only about 45,000 acres in the
county. Peaches became important after the introduction of refrigerator cars in 1893, and
Cherokee County orchards produced a record of 1,204 carloads in 1912 before the San José

26

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

scale and marketing troubles brought a decline. In the late 1930s, however, peach production
revived somewhat. From its beginnings at Craft in 1897, tomato culture grew until, by 1917,
Cherokee County produced 90% of the tomatoes shipped from Texas. Tomatoes remained a
major product in the county until increased competition and marketing problems caused a
sudden collapse in the 1950s. Since then, Cherokee County agriculture has centered on cattle
and timber. The nursery industry dates from the 1880s and is of increasing importance in the
New Summerfield-Reklaw area. Some truck farming still exists, dairies remain significant, and
some poultry production remains from the boom of the late 1950s. Sharecropping, which had
been prevalent since Reconstruction, largely disappeared with farming. The typical modern
Cherokee County farm is a beef-and-timber operation run as a sideline by a landowner with a
job in town.
The 20th century brought numerous improvements in transportation.
The first
automobile arrived in 1905; by the 1920s, automobile ownership was commonplace. During the
1930s and 1940s, the basic highway system was paved. Four federal and 4 state highways
now cross the county, while hundreds of miles of smaller paved roads network the rural areas.
Rail transportation, however, has been sharply curtailed. The last passenger train ran in the
late 1960s, and, in the early 1980s, the Southern Pacific stopped all service, as did the Cotton
Belt, south of Rusk. The first airport in the county was established at Jacksonville in 1934. The
present county airport, built in 1961, has no scheduled airline service.
Sawmills provided the first industry in the county, beginning with John Durst’s mill at the
lower San Antonio Road crossing of the Angelina River in 1832. The rich iron ore deposits have
produced important industries 3 times—blast furnaces operated during the Civil War, in the
1884 to 1909 period, and during World War II. The industry led to the founding of New
Birmingham in 1888, which grew to be a city of 2,000 inhabitants before collapsing completely
as a result of the panic of 1893. Since World War II, industry has led the private sector of the
economy, employing around 30% of the private-sector work force. Jacksonville, in which more
than 60 firms make wood, metal, and plastic products, has become the industrial and
commercial hub of the county. Altogether, some 114 manufacturing firms operated in the
county in 1977. Oil was discovered in 1933, but technical and financial difficulties prevented
development until 1934. Continuing discoveries produced an oil value of $51,379,910 by 1982.
Currently, 26% of the labor force works in professional and related services (a relatively high
figure reflecting employment at the Rusk State Hospital), 22% work in manufacturing, and 18%
are in wholesale and retail trade. Tourism is of growing importance, spurred by the
establishment in 1971 of the Texas State Railroad State Historical Park.

HJN 050093 AR

27

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and for
designation as a State Archeological Landmark (SAL)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
at the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) online Texas Historic Sites Atlas, the National Park
Service’s (NPS) online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL), and the Texas State Historical Association’s and the General
Libraries at The University of Texas at Austin’s The Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a
program of intensive pedestrian survey of accessible portions of the project area. The
assessment of significance, evaluation of NRHP and SAL eligibility, and recommendations
concerning the treatment options for the cultural resources recorded during this project are
presented in Chapter 5.0, Results of Investigations, and Chapter 6.0, Summary and
Recommendations. The rest of this chapter presents the results of archival research, the
methodological background for the current investigations, and the specific survey methods used
in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing information on the
THC’s online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas for information on previously recorded cultural
resource sites and previous archeological investigations conducted within a 1.6-km (1.0-mi)
radius of the project area. Based on this archival research, at least 1 previous cultural resource
survey has been conducted in the vicinity of the project area. This survey was a linear corridor
survey conducted in the bottoms of an unnamed tributary that flows southwest from the City of
Jacksonville into Lake Jacksonville, crossing the APE of the current project area. While this

HJN 050093 AR

29

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

previous survey crossed over the current project area, the APE associated with the City of
Jacksonville’s proposed undertaking has not been previously surveyed for cultural resources; in
fact, relatively few systematic previous cultural resource investigations have been conducted in
the vicinity of Jacksonville, Texas.
One previously documented cultural resource site, 41CE323, is present about 1.4 km
(0.9 mi) west of the southern terminus of the project area, where the proposed US 69
Expressway and Reliever Route articulates with the existing US 69 alignment south of
Jacksonville. The THC’s site files do not contain any information about this site, and it is located
well beyond the boundaries of the project area.
Horizon personnel also reviewed the NPS’s NRIS to identify any historic properties listed
on the NRHP in the vicinity of the proposed project area. The City of Jacksonville contains
4 NRHP-listed historic properties, including the Aber and Haberle houses, the Jacksonville Post
Office, and the William Walter Newton House, though none of these historic properties is
located anywhere near the proposed project area.

4.2

HISTORIC MAP RESEARCH

Horizon personnel examined the 1936 General Highway Map of Cherokee County,
Texas for information on historic-age structures that were standing within the project area in
1936. Numerous historic structures, presumably houses, are visible on this map, predominantly
adjacent to existing roads and highways. As discussed in Chapter 1.0, Introduction, only about
30% of the entire project’s APE was accessible during the survey, and many of the surveyed
segments of the project area are located well away from existing roads (see Figure 1;
Appendix A). In fact, only 3 of the 6 surveyed segments of the project area—Segments C, D,
and F—articulate with existing roads.
The southern end of Segment C terminates at the northern edge of the existing ROW of
US 79 (see Figure 1; Appendix A). While it is difficult to rectify the scales of the 1936 highway
map with modern cartographic sources, it is possible that the 1936 map shows 1 standing
structure, likely a house, in the general area where Segment C contacts US 79. The 1973 US
Geological Survey (USGS) Jacksonville West, Texas, 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle,
however, does not show any structures standing within the area covered by Segment C, and no
structures are currently standing on the north side of US 79 within the area covered by
Segment C.
The southern end of Segment D terminates at the northern edge of the existing ROW of
South Pineda Street, a curved road that extends southward from US 79 and bends to the west
about 0.8 km (0.5 mi) south of US 79 (see Figure 1; Appendix A). South Pineda Street is clearly
discernable on the 1936 highway map, and no structures are evident at the location where the
current project area crosses South Pineda Street. One structure shown on the 1973 USGS
map is currently standing on the north side of South Pineda Street near the eastern boundary of
Segment D, but this structure is clearly of modern (ca. 1970s) construction.

30

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

The diminutive Segment F is located near the southernmost terminus of the project area,
along the existing ROW of US 69 south of Jacksonville (see Figure 1; Appendix A). No historic
structures are evident on the 1936 highway map or the 1973 USGS map within the area
covered by this segment, and no structures were observed during the survey.
During initial consultation conducted prior to the fieldwork, Mr. Stephen “Waldo” Troell,
the archeological reviewer for this portion of Northeast Texas at TxDOT’s Environmental Affairs
Division, pointed out that the historic Nacogdoches-Neches Saline Road crosses the proposed
ROW of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route. According to The Handbook of Texas
Online, this historic road led from the Caddo Indian villages near the site of present-day
Nacogdoches, crossed the Angelina River east of the site of present-day Alto, and traveled the
length of Cherokee County northwest to the Brooks Saline on the Neches River, 11.2 km
(7.0 mi) west of present-day Bullard in Smith County. Stephen F. Austin indicated the location
of the salt springs on his 1840 map of Texas, and 2 segments of this historic road are depicted
as early as 1851 on a survey map of Cherokee County prepared for the Texas Land
Commission. The Nacogdoches-Neches Saline Road greatly facilitated the settlement of East
Texas between the Neches and Angelina rivers.
This route was also utilized by the survivors of the Killough Massacre, which The
Handbook of Texas Online describes as the largest single massacre of EuroAmerican settlers
by Native Americans in East Texas history, who used the road to flee to Lacy’s Fort 64 km
(40 mi) to the south. This incident occurred on 5 October, 1838, near the site of present-day
Old Larissa in northwestern Cherokee County. The 18 victims included Isaac Killough, Sr., and
members of his extended family, who had established a settlement southeast of the Neches
Saline in the winter of 1837.
According to the route of the Nacogdoches-Neches Saline Road drawn on Mr. Troell’s
copy of the 1936 highway map, the alignment of this historic road ran along numerous
Cherokee County roadways—in the vicinity of the project area, the historic road ran along Farmto-Market Road (FM) 3301. As seen on the 1973 USGS map, FM 3301 extends west from the
northwestern quarter of Jacksonville, running roughly parallel to and about 0.40 km (0.25 mi)
north of the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks. The point at which FM 3301 crosses the
proposed ROW of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route is located approximately midway
between Segments B and C (see Figure 1; Appendix A). The 1936 highway map shows that
2 to 3 structures were present on the north and south sides of FM 3301 in 1936, and the 1973
USGS map also shows 2 to 3 structures standing in this vicinity. This area was not surveyed
during the current cultural resource survey effort as it falls within one of the many portions of the
proposed project corridor to which access was refused by local landowners.
Finally, the 1936 highway map depicts a Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) camp off
the west side of FM 3301. The CCC was a public works program that put over 3 million people
to work during the Great Depression of the 1930s and 1940s in the US. The mapped location of
the CCC camp places this facility a short distance west of the proposed alignment of the US 69
Expressway and Reliever Route. Examination of the 1973 USGS map suggests that this camp
may have been located atop a prominent hill located across the street from the “Filtration Plant”
facility noted on the north side of FM 3301 south of Lake Aker. The mapped location of the
CCC camp falls outside the boundaries of the current project area.

HJN 050093 AR

31

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

4.3

SURVEY METHODS

On 24 to 28 April 2006, Horizon personnel—including Abigail Weinstein, Project
Archeologist; and Marie Archambeault, Michael Mudd, and Jared Wiersema, Archeological Field
Technicians; under the direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator—conducted an
intensive cultural resource survey of accessible portions of the APE to locate any cultural
resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project.
Unfortunately, SPI was able to obtain access permission from local landowners only for
6 separate segments of the project area that cover a cumulative 5.0 km (3.1 mi) of the total
16.4-km- (10.2-mi-) long corridor, or about 88 ha (218 ac) of the total 306-ha (755-ac) APE, or
approximately 30% of the total project area. The landowners who own the remaining 70% of
the APE either failed to respond or refused SPI’s request for permission to access their
properties; therefore, 11.4 km (7.1 mi) of the route, totaling roughly 217 ha (537 ac), could not
be accessed during the cultural resource inventory. At SPI’s request, Horizon conducted the
cultural resource survey of the available 30% of the overall APE despite the partial access to the
entire project area. Thus, 6 separate segments of the proposed US 69 Expressway and
Reliever Route, designated as Segments A to F), were surveyed for cultural resources.
For linear projects, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards
(TSMASS) for cultural resource surveys established by the THC and the Council of Texas
Archeologists (CTA) require a minimum of 10 shovel tests per kilometer (16 shovel tests per
mile) for each 30-m- (100-ft-) wide expanse of ROW. The shovel testing density may be
increased in areas with higher probabilities to contain cultural resources, such as stream
terraces, and decreased in areas with low probabilities for cultural resources, such as heavily
disturbed areas or upland settings with minimal soil cover. The majority of the proposed US 69
Expressway and Reliever Route ROW measured 168 m (550 ft) in width, with wider areas
measuring up to 427 m (1,400 ft) in width occurring at 3 major highway intersections to
accommodate construction of turn lanes and interchanges.
As the majority of the project corridor measured 168 m (550 ft) in width, 5.5 parallel
transects spaced at 30-m (100-ft) intervals were traversed by the 4-person survey crew within
the APE. Additional transects were traversed at similar intervals in Segment C, the only
segment of the APE available for survey that flared out wider than the standard 168-m (550-ft)
width. The modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for historic and prehistoric cultural
resources, and cutbanks associated with stream courses and erosional gullies were carefully
examined to obtain information on local stratigraphy and to identify any exposed subsurface
cultural resources.
Shovel tests were excavated at average intervals of approximately 100 m (328 ft) along
each transect, though shovel tests were clustered more tightly in many areas. Shovel tests
measured 30 cm in diameter and were excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below
surface, to the top of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable. In practice,
shovel tests were often terminated prematurely due to the presence of near-surface deposits of
compact, nearly impenetrable clay sediments. All sediments were screened through 6.35millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth.

32

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

Table 2 summarizes the dimensions and approximate acreage of the 6 segments of the
APE that were available for survey as well as the number of shovel tests and shovel test
densities within each segment. Shovel test densities are presented both in linear and blockarea formats because, while the overall project corridor is linear in shape, many of the smaller
accessible segments of the project area are of irregular shapes that lend themselves to
consideration based on block-area shovel test density calculations. Based on the TSMASS’s
linear shovel testing density requirements (i.e., 10 shovel tests per kilometer [16 shovel tests
per mile]), the shovel testing density achieved during the cultural resource survey of the
6 accessible segments of the APE met or exceeded the TSMASS in all segments but
Segment C, often by a substantial margin. Shovel tests were more sparse in Segment C due to
the extent of modern development within the wider (ca. 427-m- [1,400-ft-] wide) area adjacent to
the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks and US 79. Within the narrower (ca. 168-m- [550-ft-] wide)
portion of Segment C, shovel testing requirements were met or exceeded, and Horizon believes
that shovel testing was more than adequate to characterize the potential for cultural resources
in all areas investigated.
Segments A and B cross undisturbed upland environments that are dominated by thick
vegetation, which resulted in poor to moderate (ca. 10 to 40%) ground surface visibility. Soils in
these segments are fairly rocky, with red clay often present on the surface that resulted in
relatively shallow shovel tests. Conversely, Segments C to F traverse mostly open pastures
that support somewhat deeper sandy soils with better (ca. 40 to 70%) ground surface visibility.
As a result of vegetation clearing associated with agricultural and commercial development,
these segments have undergone considerably more modern development than Segments A
and B. Detailed descriptions of each segment are provided in the following chapter.
Observations about local terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms, cultural materials
observed, and disturbances were maintained by each member of the field crew. Standardized
shovel test forms were completed for each excavated shovel test. The project area was
thoroughly photodocumented, and a photo log was completed. Universal Transverse Mercatur
Table 2. Shovel Test Densities in Surveyed Segments of Project Area
Segment

Length
(ft)

Width
(ft)

Approx.
Acres

No. STs

No.
STs/Acre

No.
STs/Mile 1

A

10,000

550

126

165

1.3

15.9

B

650

550

8

19

2.4

27.1

C

2,640

550 to 1,400

43

40

0.9

11.1

D

1,800

550

23

31

1.3

16.3

E

1,000

550

13

28

2.2

28.0

F

400

550

5

7

1.4

17.5

Total

16,490

–

218

290

–

–

ST = Shovel Test
1
Based on 500- to 1,400-ft-wide right-of-way and 100-ft-wide survey transects (i.e., 5.5 to 14 transects/mile)

HJN 050093 AR

33

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

(UTM) coordinates were acquired for each shovel test location via handheld Global Positioning
System (GPS) units based on the North American Datum of 1927 (NAD 27). Shovel test
location maps were subsequently generated for each of the 6 survey segments showing the
locations of all shovel tests (Appendix A).
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching in stream terraces and other areas with
the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are
capable of reaching (approximately 1.0 m [3.3 ft] below surface). The project area is located in
an upland setting with shallow soils. While the project corridor traverses numerous minor
tributaries of larger streams, the streams present within the APE are mainly erosional channels
being cut into the surrounding upland clays, and no alluvial packages were observed in the field
that may have the potential to contain cultural resources at depth. Shovel testing therefore
constituted an adequate survey technique for identifying cultural resources within the project
area. No settings conducive to preservation of deeply buried cultural deposits are present in the
investigated portions of the project area, and mechanical trenching was consequently not
employed as a site-prospecting technique.
This cultural resource survey employed a non-collection policy for cultural materials.
Non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
described, sketched, and/or photodocumented in the field and replaced in the same location in
which they were found. In the event that any diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points,
ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) were identified in the field, they were to be
collected and placed in resealable plastic bags labeled with relevant provenience information;
however, no diagnostic artifacts were encountered during the survey.

34

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The City of Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas, is proposing to build a reliever route
for the existing US 69 that would loop around the west side of the city. US 69 currently passes
north to south through the City of Jacksonville. The proposed reliever route would diverge from
the existing US 69 alignment just south of RR 456 south of town, loop around the west side of
town between the existing edge of urban development and Lakes Jacksonville and Acker, and
rejoin the existing route of US 69 north of town. The ROW of the proposed reliever route would
consist of a 16.4-km- (10.2-mi-) long corridor. Most of the proposed reliever route consists of
new ROW that traverses a largely undeveloped, rural landscape, though existing ROW occurs
within the project area where the route crosses existing roads and highways, including the
existing route of US 69 north and south of Jacksonville, US 79 west of town, and several smaller
state and county roads. The proposed ROW averages approximately 168 m (550 ft) in width,
though the ROW measures up to 427 m (1,400 ft) in width to provide extra space for turn lanes
and interchanges at its northern and southern articulations with US 69 and at the US 79
intersection. The APE of the proposed undertaking consists of the entire 16.4-km- (10.2-mi-)
long corridor of the proposed reliever route, which measures an average of 168 m (550 ft) in
width along most of its route and up to 427 m (1,400 ft) at the 3 major highway intersections.
The APE covers a total area of approximately 306 ha (755 ac), inclusive of the typical 168-m(550-ft-) wide ROW plus the extra acreage at the 3 highway intersections.
On 24 to 28 April 2006, Horizon personnel—including Abigail Weinstein, Project
Archeologist; and Marie Archambeault, Michael Mudd, and Jared Wiersema, Archeological Field
Technicians; under the direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator—conducted an
intensive cultural resource survey of accessible portions of the APE to locate any cultural
resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project.
Unfortunately, SPI was able to obtain access permission from local landowners only for
6 separate segments of the project area that cover a cumulative 5.0 km (3.1 mi) of the total
16.4-km- (10.2-mi-) long corridor, or about 88 ha (218 ac) of the total 306-ha (755-ac) APE, or
approximately 30% of the total project area. The landowners who own the remaining 70% of
the APE either failed to respond or refused SPI’s request for permission to access their
properties; therefore, 11.4 km (7.1 mi) of the route, totaling roughly 217 ha (537 ac), could not
be accessed during the cultural resource inventory. At SPI’s request, Horizon conducted the
cultural resource survey of the available 30% of the overall APE despite the partial access to the

HJN 050093 AR

35

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

entire project area. Six separate segments of the proposed US 69 reliever route, designated as
Segments A to F, were surveyed for cultural resources (Appendix A).
Segment A
Segment A measures 2.9 km (1.8 mi) in length, maintains a uniform width of 168 m
(550 ft), covers an area of about 51 ha (126 ac), and extends from the existing ROW of an oil
pipeline that crosses the project area about 1.8 km (1.1 mi) south of the APE’s northern
terminus southward to a fenceline just south of Dublin Lake (Appendix A, Figure A.1).
Segment A is situated within an upland environment dominated by thick vegetation with no
direct access via existing roads. Aside from occasional fencelines demarcating property
boundaries, and a transmission line that crosses the project area near the southern end,
Segment A was largely undeveloped at the time of the survey. Several intermittent streams with
exposed sandstone or ironstone bedrock beds cross the project corridor. These intermittent
streams are generally 0.6 to 1.8 m (2.0 to 6.0 ft) wide, and most of them contained running
water at the time of the survey.
The eroded upland slopes characteristic of Segment A support almost exclusively
shallow, rocky, red clays, and outcrops of native sandstone bedrock were frequently observed
on the modern ground surface. A total of 165 shovel tests were excavated in Segment A. No
cultural resources were observed on the modern ground surface or in any of the shovel tests
excavated in this area.
Segment B
Segment B is a small, roughly triangular parcel located on the south side of US
Highway 175 (US 175) that measures about 1.7 km (0.1 mi) in length by a maximum of 168 m
(550 ft) in width, covering an area of about 3.2 ha (8.0 ac) (Appendix A, Figure A.2). Vegetation
was extremely thick throughout much of the segment during the survey, and soils were
generally similar to those encountered in Segment A, consisting of red clays with a high
frequency of sandstone gravels exposed on the modern ground surface. A total of 19 shovel
tests were excavated within Segment B, and no cultural resources were observed on the
modern ground surface or in any of the shovel tests excavated in this area.
Segment C
Segment C is located on the north side of US 79 and measures approximately 0.8 km
(0.5 mi) in length (Appendix A, Figure A.3). Most of this survey segment measures the standard
168 m (550 ft) in width, though the area surrounding the future intersection of the US 69
Expressway and Reliever Route with US 79 flares out to a width of 427 m (1,400 ft) to
accommodate necessary turn lanes and highway interchange facilities. Thus, the total area
covered by Segment C is roughly 17 ha (43 ac).
The narrower portion of this segment traverses a fairly prominent upland formation and
terminates at a small, 0.6-m- (2.0-ft-) wide, intermittent creek at its north end. The widened
portion of the project area adjacent to US 79 has been heavily disturbed by prior impacts,
including large dredge piles, the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks, and construction debris.

36

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

A total of 40 shovel tests were excavated in Segment C. Most of the shovel tests were
excavated in the narrower portion of the survey segment, though several shovel tests were
excavated in the disturbed area adjacent to the railroad tracks and US 79. Soils in Segment C
were sandy, extended to depths of 50 to 100 centimeters below surface (cmbs), and were
terminated when red clay was encountered. A single piece of lithic debitage, a tertiary flake
manufactured from chert, was encountered at a depth of 30 cmbs in 1 of the shovel tests
excavated near the base of the southern slope of the hill, near the point at which the APE
expands in width. Four additional shovel tests were excavated in approximate cardinal
directions from the shovel test that yielded the flake, but no additional cultural materials were
encountered. Consequently, the find was recorded as an isolated occurrence (IO 1) instead of
as an archeological site.
A cluster of farm buildings, including a barn and several corrals, are present on top of
the upland formation at the approximate mid-point of this survey segment; however, these
buildings do not appear on the any of the historic maps examined in connection with this project
(including the 1973 USGS topographic quadrangle), and they appear to be of modern
construction. Aside from the single flake found in one of the shovel tests, no other cultural
materials were observed on the modern ground surface or in any of the shovel tests excavated
in Segment C.
Segment D
Segment D is a short segment of the proposed ROW located between South Pineda
Street and US 79 that measures about 0.5 km (0.3 mi) in length by a uniform 168 m (550 ft) in
width (Appendix A, Figure A.4). The southern end of this segment terminates at the northern
edge of the existing ROW of South Pineda Street. This segment is dominated by an open field,
the eastern portion of which appears to be terraced. A small, east-to-west running, intermittent
drainage bisects the segment, and a small stand of young oak trees surrounds this creek.
A total of 23 shovel tests were excavated within Segment D. Soils within this segment
were sandy, and shovel tests were generally terminated when yellowish clay was encountered
at depths ranging from 65 to 100 cmbs. Two adjacent shovel tests near the southwestern
boundary of the APE at the approximate mid-point of the segment yielded artifacts. One shovel
test contained a single tertiary flake at a depth of 50 cmbs, and the other shovel test contained a
single tertiary flake at a depth of 60 to 80 cmbs. These 2 shovel tests were located just west of
a north-to-south-oriented fenceline that bisects the project area approximately midway between
its northern and southern ends, and the shovel tests were located about 25 m (82 ft) from each
other. Four additional shovel tests were excavated north, northwest, and southeast of these
finds (the area to the southwest was located beyond the APE and could not be accessed), but
no additional cultural resources were encountered. Due to the fact that only 2 artifacts were
observed across such a large area despite the excavation of numerous shovel tests, the
2 flakes were recorded as an isolated occurrence (IO 2) rather than as an archeological site.
Several residences are located on the north side of South Pineda Street just beyond the
northern boundary of the APE (all of which appear to be of modern construction), but no
structures are currently standing within the project area. Aside from the 2 flakes recovered from

HJN 050093 AR

37

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

shovel tests near the southwestern boundary of the APE, no other cultural materials were
observed on the modern ground surface or in any of the shovel tests excavated in Segment D.
Segment E
Segment E is a small, roughly triangular segment, measuring about 0.3 km (0.2 mi) in
length by a uniform 168 m (550 ft) in width that covers approximately 5 ha (13 ac), located
roughly halfway between South Pineda Street and Byrd Road (Appendix A, Figure A.5). The
segment is surrounded by an electric fence and appears to be a single parcel of land. A large
proportion of this segment was covered in an actively cultivated agricultural field, though the
eastern and northern edges were forested.
A total of 13 shovel tests were excavated in Segment E. The plowed field contained
loose brown sandy soils, and shovel tests excavated in the field were terminated at a stratum of
yellowish clay that was encountered at depths ranging from 40 to 60 cmbs. Sediments in the
forested area were similar, though they lacked a definable plowzone, as was observed in the
agricultural area. A single chert tertiary flake was encountered in a shovel test located near the
southwestern boundary of the APE at a depth of 70 to 75 cmbs. Four additional shovel tests
were excavated in close proximity to the shovel test that yielded the flake, but no additional
cultural resources were encountered. Consequently, the single piece of lithic debitage was
recorded as an isolated occurrence (IO 3) rather than as an archeological site. Aside from the
single chert flake, no other cultural materials were observed on the modern ground surface or in
any of the shovel tests excavated in Segment E.
Segment F
Segment F is a small segment, measuring only about 122 m (400 ft) in length by 168 m
(550 ft) in width, located on the existing alignment of US 69 at the southern terminus of the
project area (Appendix A, Figure A.6). Most of the area within this survey segment has been
previously disturbed by the construction and ongoing maintenance of US 69, and existing
impacts observed in the field included the roadway itself as well as associated drainage ditches,
utility lines, and commercial and private facilities adjacent to the existing ROW. This survey
segment is centered on a 2.1-m- (7.0-ft-) wide intermittent stream that flows underneath the
highway at this location, and vegetation consisted predominantly of a stand of deciduous
hardwood trees bordering the stream’s banks.
A total of 7 shovel tests were excavated on either side of the intermittent stream,
including 5 shovel tests on the east side and 2 shovel tests on the west side of the highway.
Shovel tests were uniformly shallow, with red clay observed at 20 to 30 cmbs. No cultural
materials were observed on the modern ground surface or in any of the shovel tests excavated
in Segment F.

38

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The cultural resource investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric cultural resources that occur within the designated
survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
at the THC’s online Texas Historic Sites Atlas, the NPS’s NRIS, TARL, and the Texas State
Historical Association’s and the General Libraries at The University of Texas at Austin’s The
Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a program of cultural resource survey of accessible
portions of the project area.
At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is the determination
of whether or not an archeological site possesses the potential to make a contribution to 1 or
more previously defined research questions. Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey
level are rarely sufficient to contribute in a meaningful manner to such research issues. The
objective is rather to determine which cultural resource sites could be most profitably
investigated further in pursuance of regional, methodological, or theoretical research questions.
Therefore, adequate information on site function, context, and chronological placement from
archeological and, if appropriate, historical perspectives is essential for cultural resource
evaluations. Because research questions vary as a function of geography and temporal period,
determination of site context and chronological placement of cultural properties is a particularly
important objective during the inventory process.

6.1

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Ultimately, management decisions regarding cultural resource properties are a function
of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs. Cultural

HJN 050093 AR

39

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

resources are usually evaluated according to criteria established to determine their eligibility for
inclusion in the NRHP. Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the
criteria presented in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The
4 criteria of eligibility are applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and
related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history (US Department of the Interior, National Park Service) (36 CFR
§60.4).

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For a cultural resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

40

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ARCHEOLOGICAL LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural resource for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092, of the
Antiquities Code of Texas. These criteria are similar to the criteria used in assessing the
eligibility of a property for inclusion in the NRHP:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are
located in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any
county, city, or political subdivision of the state are state archeological landmarks and are
eligible for designation (Section 191.092(a)).

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society (Section 191.092(b)).

6.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

As discussed in Chapter 1.0, Introduction, of this report, access was available to
6 separate segments of the overall project area, covering a cumulative 5.0 km (3.1 mi) of the
total 16.4-km- (10.2-mi-) long corridor, or about 88 ha (218 ac) of the total 306-ha (755-ac) APE,
or approximately 30% of the total project area. The landowners who own the remaining 70% of
the APE either failed to respond or refused to provide permission to access their properties;
therefore, 11.4 km (7.1 mi) of the route, totaling roughly 217 ha (537 ac), could not be accessed
during the cultural resource inventory. At SPI’s request, Horizon conducted the cultural
resource survey of the available 30% of the overall APE despite the partial access to the entire
project area and presents this report in the interest of proceeding with the cultural resource
consultation process for the cumulative 5.0 km (3.1 mi) of the APE that could be surveyed.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of 6 segments of the US 69
Expressway and Reliever Route, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected
by the proposed undertaking. Three isolated occurrences of artifacts, all of which consisted of
1 to 2 pieces of lithic debitage, were encountered in shovel tests excavated in 3 separate survey

HJN 050093 AR

41

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

segments, but none of these locales yielded artifacts in sufficient densities or varieties to
warrant recording the artifact occurrences as archeological sites. While the 3 isolated
occurrences of artifacts generally indicate the presence of aboriginal cultural activity in the area,
they do not appear to have any potential to contribute meaningful information regarding the
aboriginal past. Consequently, the isolated artifact occurrences are recommended as ineligible
for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs, and no further archeological
investigations are recommended in connection with these finds.
No previously documented cultural resources are present within any of the 6 surveyed
segments of the project area. Historic map research yielded evidence of possible historic-age
cultural resources that may have manifestations in the overall project’s APE, including the
historic Nacogdoches-Neches Saline Road, a CCC camp, and possible historic-age structures.
The portions of the APE with the potential to contain remains associated with these historic
period resources, however, are located on parcels of land to which landowners refused to
provide access; therefore, these areas remain uninvestigated and unassessed.
At this time, approximately 30% of the APE associated with the US 69 Expressway and
Reliever Route project has been intensively surveyed for cultural resources. Three isolated
occurrences of artifacts were recorded during the survey, but none of these isolated finds
appear to warrant any further investigation. Access to the remaining 70% of the project area
was not available during the field efforts described in this report due to the refusal of permission
by landowners to survey their properties.

6.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

No significant cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were documented as a result of
the cultural resource survey in the investigated portions of the APE, and the likelihood that any
undiscovered resources exist in these areas is considered to be exceedingly low. Cultural
resource clearance is recommended for the 30% of the project area that was surveyed (ca.
5.0 km [3.1 mi]).
The remaining 70% of the project area has not yet been surveyed for cultural resources,
so no recommendations may be offered at this time concerning the potential of these areas to
contain significant cultural resources. Intensive archeological survey is recommended for the
unsurveyed portions of the APE.
Since the survey of 30% of the APE described in this report was conducted, the US 69
Expressway and Reliever Route project has been placed on indefinite hold by the City of
Jacksonville pending additional environmental investigations. An initial draft of this technical
report was submitted to the THC for review on 2 May 2007. In correspondence dated 22 May
2007, the THC responded that it was unable to comment on the findings, conclusions, or
recommendations of the original draft report due to the fact that only 30% of the overall project
area was ever available for survey. The THC concluded that it could not grant clearance for any
construction activities related to those areas that had been surveyed. In the event that the
survey could be completed at some future date, however, the THC expressed that it would not
require areas that have already been surveyed to be resurveyed. Future investigations to

42

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

complete the cultural resource survey would need to be accomplished under a new Antiquities
Permit, but the findings of the current report could be referenced along with new documentation
for other areas that have not yet been surveyed.
Thus, at the present time, the THC has not granted cultural resource clearance for the
30% of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route project that has been surveyed for cultural
resources. This revised report reflects the THC’s review conditions and is being prepared in the
interest of closing Antiquities Permit No. 3880 under which the 30% survey of the project area
has been completed. Any future investigations conducted to complete the survey of the US 69
Expressway and Reliever Route APE as described in this report may reference the current
report to document the findings, conclusions, and recommendations presented herein regarding
areas that have already been surveyed for cultural resources, and clearance for surveyed areas
may be sought at that time.

HJN 050093 AR

43

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Anderson, D.B.
1996a Approaches to Modeling Regional Settlement in the Archaic Period Southeast. In
Archaeology of the Mid-Holocene Southeast, edited by K.E. Sassaman and D.G.
Anderson, pp. 157-176. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.
1996b

Models of Paleo-Indian and Early Archaic Settlement in the Lower Southeast. In The
Paleoindian and Early Archaic Southeast, edited by D.G. Anderson and K.E.
Sassaman, pp. 29-57. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.

Anderson, H.A.
1990
The Delaware and Shawnee Indians and the Republic of Texas, 1820-1845.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly 94(2):231-260.
Anderson, K.M., K. Gilmore, O.F. McCormick, III, and R.R. Morenon
1974
Archaeological Investigations at Lake Palestine, Texas.
Contributions in
Anthropology No. 11, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.
Arnold, J.B., and R. Weddle
1978
The Nautical Archeology of Padre Island: The Spanish Shipwrecks of 1554. New
York: Academic Press.
Bandelier, F. (translator)
1964
[1904] The Journey of Alvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca and his Companions from
Florida to the Pacific, 1528-1536. New York: Allerton Press.
Barker, A.W., and T.R. Pauketat
1992
Introduction: Social Inequality and the Native Elites of Southeastern North America.
In Lords of the Southeast: Social Inequality and the Native Elites of Southeastern
North America, edited by A.W. Barker and T.R. Pauketat, pp. 1-10. Archeological
Papers of the American Anthropological Association No. 3. Washington, D.C.:
American Anthropological Association.

HJN 050093 AR

45

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Barker, E.C.
1925
The Life of Stephen F. Austin, Founder of Texas, 1793-1836: A Chapter in the
Westward Movement of the Anglo-American People. Austin: The University of
Texas Press.
Bolton, H.E.
1912
The Spanish Occupation of Texas, 1519-1690. Southwestern Historical Quarterly
11:249-276.
1915

Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies in Spanish Colonial History and
Administration. Berkeley: University of California Press.

1987

The Hasinais: Southern Caddoans as Seen by the Earliest Europeans. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press.

Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Bourne, E.G. (translator)
1904
Narratives of the Career of Hernando de Soto. New York: Allerton Book Company.
Brain, J.P.
1985
Introduction: Update of De Soto Studies since the United States De Soto Expedition
Commission Report. In Final Report of the United States De Soto Expedition
Commission, by J.R. Swanton, xi-lxxii.
Classics in Anthropology Series.
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Braudel, F.
1984
Civilization and Capitalism: Fifteenth to Eighteenth Century, Vol. 3, The Perspective
of the World. New York: Harper & Row.
Brewington, R.L., J.E. Dockall, and H.J. Shafer
1995
Archaeology at 41MX5: A Late Prehistoric Caddoan Hamlet in Morris County, Texas.
Reports of Investigations No. 1. College Station: Center for Environmental
Archaeology, Texas A&M University.
Brown, I.W.
1983
Historic Aboriginal Pottery from the Yazoo Bluffs Region, Mississippi. Southeastern
Archaeological Conference Bulletin 21:1-17.
Brown, J.A., R.E. Bell, and D.G. Wyckoff
1978
Caddoan Settlement Patterns in the Arkansas River Drainage. In Mississippian
Settlement Patterns, edited by B.D. Smith, pp. 169-200. New York: Academic
Press.
Bruseth, J.E.
1998
The Development of Caddoan Polities along the Middle Red River Valley of Eastern
Texas and Oklahoma. In The Native History of the Caddo: Their Place in
Southeastern Archaeology and Ethnohistory, edited by T.K. Perttula and J.E.

46

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

Bruseth, pp. 47-68. Studies in Archeology No. 30. Austin: Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.
Bryant, V.M., Jr.
1969
Late Full-glacial and Post-glacial Pollen Analysis of Texas Sediments. Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Botany, The University of Texas at Austin.
1977

A 16,000 Year Pollen Record of Vegetational Change in Central Texas. Palynology
1:143-155.

Bryant, V.M., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late Quaternary North America Sediments, edited by
V.M. Bryant and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-67. Dallas: The American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation.
Burnett, B.A.
1990
The Bioarcheological Synthesis of the Eastern Portion of the Gulf Coastal Plain. In
The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy,
B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard,
pp. 385-418. Research Series No. 38. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.
Clayton, J.L.
1967
The Growth and Economic Significance of the American Fur Trade, 1790-1890. In
Aspects of the Fur Trade: Selected Papers of the 1965 North American Fur Trade
Conference, edited by R.W. Fridley and J.D. Holmquist, pp. 62-72. St. Paul:
Minnesota Historical Society.
Cliff, M.B.
1997
The Middle Caddoan Period in the Lower Sulphur River Area. Journal of Northeast
Texas Archaeology 9:9-16.
Cliff, M.B., and S.M Hunt
1995
Cultural Resources Testing of Three Sites within the Moist Soils Management Area
(MSMA) of the White Oak Creek Mitigation Area (WOCMA), Cass County, Texas.
White Oak Creek Mitigation Area Archaeological Technical Series, Report of
Investigations No. 3. Plano, Texas: Geo-Marine, Inc.
Cliff, M.B., W. White, Jr., S.M. Hunt, D. Pleasant, and G. Shaw
1996
Cultural Resources Survey of 5,000 Acres within the White Oak Creek Mitigation
Area (WOCMA), Bowie, Morris, and Titus Counties, Texas: 1993-1994. White Oak
Creek Mitigation Area Archaeological Technical Series, Report of Investigations
No. 5. Plano, Texas: Geo-Marine, Inc.
Coker, W.S., and T.D. Watson
1986
Indian Traders and the Southeast Spanish Borderlands: Panton, Leslie and Co. and
John Forbes and Co. Gainesville: University Presses of Florida.

HJN 050093 AR

47

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Collins, M.B.
2004
Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T.K. Perttula, pp.
101-126. College Station: Texas A&M University Press.
Collins, M.B., and C.B. Bousman, with contributions by T.K. Perttula
1990
Historic Context: Quaternary Environments and Archeology in Northeastern Texas.
In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited
by N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 49-67. Cultural Resource Management
Report No. 3, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission.
Austin.
Corbin, J.E.
1998
Reflections on the Early Ceramic Period and the Terminal Archaic in South Central
East Texas. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology 11:108-116.
Corbin, J.E., and J.P. Hart
1998
The Washington Square Mound Site: A Middle Caddo Mound Complex in Central
East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 69:47-78.
Cox, I.J.
1909
1922

The Significance of the Texas-Louisiana Frontier.
Association Proceedings 3:198-213.

Mississippi Valley Historical

The Journeys of René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle. New York: Allerton Book
Company.

Crane, C.J.
1982
Plant Utilization at Spoonbill, an Early Caddo Site in Northeast Texas.
Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology 7:81-97.
Crane, V.W.
1929
The Southern Frontier, 1670-1732. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Creel, D.G.
1991
Bison Hides in Late Prehistoric Exchange in the Southern Plains. American Antiquity
56(1):40-49.
1996

Hatchel-Mitchell Site. In The New Handbook of Texas, edited by R. Tyler, pp. 504505. Austin: Texas State Historical Association.

Delangez, J.
1946
The “Récit des Voyages et des Découvertes du Père Jacques Marquette.” MidAmerica 28:173-194, 211-258.
Diamond, D.D., D.H. Riskind, and S.L. Orzell
1987
A Framework for Plant Community Classification and Conservation in Texas. The
Texas Journal of Science 39:203-221.

48

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323.
Dixon, B., S. Kotter, and R. Taylor
1997
Data Recovery Excavations at the Mockingbird Site (41TT550): The Archaic and
Early Caddo Components. Document No. 970735. Austin, Texas: Espey, Huston &
Associates, Inc.
Duffield, L.F.
1963
The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic-Neo-American Site in San Augustine County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34:83-141.
Early, A.M.
1990
Hardman and Salt Making. In Hardman (3CL418): A Prehistoric Salt Processing
Site, by I. Williams and A.M. Early, pp. 13-1 to 13-31. Project Report No. 642,
Sponsored Research Program. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.
Everett, D.
1990
The Texas Cherokee: A People Between Two Fires, 1819-1840.
University of Oklahoma Press.
Ewers, J.C. (editor)
1969
The Indians of Texas in 1830 by Jean Louis Berlandier.
Smithsonian Institution Press.

Norman:

Washington, D.C.:

Fenneman, N.M.
1938
Physiography of the Eastern United States. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company,
Inc.
Ferring, C.R.
1995
The Late Quaternary Geology and Archaeology of the Aubrey Clovis Site, Texas: A
Preliminary Report. In Ancient Peoples and Landscapes, edited by E. Johnson, pp.
273-281. Lubbock: Museum of Texas Tech University.
Fieldhouse, D.K.
1966
The Colonial Empires: A Comparative Survey from the Eighteenth Century. London:
G. Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

HJN 050093 AR

49

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Fields, R.C., M.E. Blake, and K.W. Kibler
1997
Synthesis of the Prehistoric and Historic Archeology of Cooper Lake, Delta and
Hopkins Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 104. Austin: Prewitt and
Associates, Inc.
Fields, R.C., and S.A. Tomka, with contributions by T.K. Perttula
1993
Historic Context: Hunter-Gatherer Mobility in Northeast Texas, 10,000 – 200 B.C. In
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by
N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 69-96. Cultural Resource Management Report
No. 3, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Fisher, W.L.
1965
Rock and Mineral Resources of East Texas. Report of Investigations No. 54, Bureau
of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Flores, D.L.
1984
Jefferson and Southwestern Exploration: The Freeman and Custis Accounts of the
Red River Expedition of 1806. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Ford, R.I. (editor)
1985
Prehistoric Food Production in North America. Anthropological Papers No. 75,
Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan. Ann Arbor.
Ford, F.H., and J.L. Browne
1951
Larissa. McFarland: Jacksonville, Texas.
Fritz, G. J.
1990
Multiple Pathways to Farming in Precontact Eastern North America. Journal of World
Prehistory 4:387-435.
1994

The Value of Archaeological Plant Remains for Paleodietary Reconstruction. In
Paleonutrition: The Diet and Health of Prehistoric Americans, edited by K.D. Sobolik,
pp. 21-33. Occasional Paper No. 22. Carbondale: Center for Archaeological
Investigations, Southern Illinois University.

Gadus, E.F., R.C. Fields, C.B. Bousman, S.A. Tomka, and M.A. Howard
1992
Excavations at the Finley Fan Site (41HP159), Cooper Lake Project, Hopkins
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 78. Austin: Prewitt and Associates,
Inc.
Galloway, P.K. (editor)
1982
La Salle and His Legacy: Frenchmen and Indians in the Lower Mississippi Valley.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.
Gibson, C.
1989
Spanish Indian Policies. In Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 4, History of
Indian-White Relations, edited by W.E. Washburn, pp. 96-102. Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution Press.

50

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

Gilmore, K.
1986
La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55:6172.
Giraud, M.
1957
Histoire de la Louisiane Française, Vol. 2, Années de Transition, 1715-1717. Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France.
1963

Histoire de la Louisiane Française, Vol. 3, La Système de Law, 1717-1720. Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France.

1974a

Histoire de la Louisiane Française, Vol. 4, La Louisiane Après le Système de Law,
1721-1723. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

1974b

A History of French Louisiana, Vol. 1, The Reign of Louis XIV, 1698-1715. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.

Godfrey, C.L., G.S. McKee, and H. Oakes
1973
General Soil Map of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M
University, and Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, College
Station, Texas.
Griffin, J.B.
1967
Eastern North American Archaeology: A Summary. Science 156:175-191.
1985

Changing Concepts of the Prehistoric Mississippian Cultures of the Eastern United
States. In Alabama and the Borderlands: From Prehistory to Statehood, edited by
R.R. Badger and L.A. Clayton, pp. 40-63. University: University of Alabama Press.

Haggard, J.V.
1945
The Neutral Ground Between Louisiana and Texas, 1806-1821. Louisiana Historical
Quarterly 28:1001-1128.
Hamilton, D.L.
1997
Observations on Caddoan Burial Practices at the Sanders Site (41LR2). Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 68:115-134.
Harris, R.K., I.M. Harris, and M.P. Miroir
1980
The Atlanta State Park Site in Northeastern Texas. Louisiana Archaeology 6:223230.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J.T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hester, T.R.
1989
Texas and Northeastern Mexico: An Overview. In Columbian Consequences, Vol. 1,
Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West, edited
by D.H. Thomas, pp. 191-211. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.

HJN 050093 AR

51

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Hoffman, M.P.
1967
Ceramic Pipe Style Chronology along the Red River Drainage in Southwestern
Arkansas. Arkansas Archeolgist 8(1):4-14.
Holloway, R.G., and V.M. Bryant, Jr.
1984
Picea Glauca Pollen from Late Glacial Deposits in Central Texas. Palynology 8:2132.
Holloway, R.G., L.M. Raab, and R. Stuckenrath
1987
Pollen Analysis of Late-Holocene Sediments from a Central Texas Bog.
Journal of Science 39:71-79.

Texas

Hudson, C.M.
1986
Hernando De Soto in the Caddo Area. Paper presented at the 28th Annual Caddo
Conference, 13 to 15 March, University of Arkansas, Little Rock.
Jackson, A.T.
1933
Some Pipes of East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 5:69-86.
1936

A Perpetual Fire Site.
Society 8:134-174.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological

Jacobs, B.F.
1991
Palynology Report on Locality 8 at Lambs Creek and Localities 9 and 13 and
Backhoe Trench 6 at Buffalo Creek. In Excavations at the Bottoms, Rena Branch,
and Moccasin Springs Sites, Jewett Mine Project, Freestone and Leon Counties,
Texas, by R.C. Fields, L.W. Klement, C.B. Bousman, S.A. Tomka, E.F. Gadus, and
M.A. Howard, pp. 363-368. Report of Investigations No. 82, Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. Austin.
Jelks, E.B.
1961
Excavations at Texarkana Reservoir, Sulphur River, Northeastern Texas. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin No. 179, River Basin Survey Papers No. 21.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
1965

The Archeology of McGee Bend Reservoir, Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Jeter, M.D., and J.J. Mintz
1990
National Register of Historic Places Eligibility Testing at the Fish Lake Site (3HE287)
on the Red River, Hempstead County, Arkansas.
Fayetteville:
Arkansas
Archeological Survey.
Jeter, M.D., J.C. Rose, G.I. Williams, Jr., and A.M. Harmon
1989
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Trans-Mississippi
South in Arkansas and Louisiana. Research Series No. 37. Fayetteville: Arkansas
Archeological Survey.

52

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

John, E.A.H.
1975
Storms Brewed in Other Men’s Worlds. College Station: Texas A&M University
Press.
1985

La Situación y Visión de los Indios de la Frontera Norte de Nueva España (Siglos
XVI-XVIII). América Indigena 45(3):465-483.

Johnson, L., Jr.
1961
An Archeological Survey of Blackburn Crossing Reservoir on the Upper Neches
River. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 31:213-238.
1962

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a Preliminary Definition
of the LaHarpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 32:141-284.

1989

Great Plains Interlopers in the Eastern Woodlands in Late PaleoIndian Times: The
Evidence from Oklahoma, Texas, and Areas Close By. Report Series No. 36, Office
of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission. Austin.

Jordan, T.G.
1981
Trails to Texas: Southern Roots of Western Cattle Ranching. Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press.
Kelley, D.B.
1997
Two Caddoan Farmsteads in the Red River Valley: The Archeology of the McLelland
and Joe Clark Sites. Research Series No. 51. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological
Survey.
1998

Protohistoric and Historic Caddoan Occupation of the Red River Valley in Northwest
Louisiana. In The Native History of the Caddo: Their Place in Southeastern
Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by T.K. Perttula and J.E. Bruseth, pp. 91-111.
Studies in Archeology No. 30. Austin: Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Kelley, D.B., and C.L. Coxe
1998
Cultural Resources Survey of Levee Rehabilitation/Restoration Areas along the Red
River between Fulton, Arkansas, and the Louisiana State Line: Items 4, 5, and 9.
Baton Rouge, Louisiana: Coastal Environments, Inc..
Kelley, D.B., and M.J. Guccione
1997
Cultural Resources Survey and Evaluation of Portions of theMoore/Higginbotham
Site (3MI3/30), within Item 2 of the Red River below Denison Dam Levee
Rehabilitation/Restoration Project, Miller County, Arkansas. Baton Rouge, Louisiana:
Coastal Environments, Inc.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

HJN 050093 AR

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

American

53

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Kenmotsu, N.A., and T.K. Perttula
1993
Introduction—Section One:
The Eastern Regional Preservation Plan for
Archeological Resources. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A
Planning Document, edited by N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 3-14. Cultural
Resource Management Report No. 3, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas
Historical Commission. Austin.
Kleinschmidt, U.K.W.
1982
Review and Analysis of the A.C. Saunders Site, 41AN19, Anderson County, Texas.
Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Kniffen, F.B., H.F. Gregory, and G.A. Stokes
1987
The Historic Indian Tribes of Louisiana: From 1542 to the Present. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press.
Kuchler, A.W.
1964
Potential Natural Vegetation of the Conterminous United States. Special Publication
No. 36, American Geographical Society. New York.
Largent, F.B., D.L. Beene, M.B. Cliff, and S.M. Hunt
1997
Cultural Resources Testing of Two Sites within the White Oak Creek Wildlife
Management Area (WOCMA), Bowie and Titus Counties, Texas. White Oak Creek
Wildlife Management Area Archaeological Technical Series, Report of Investigations
No. 6. Plano, Texas: Geo-Marine, Inc.
Lottinville, S. (editor)
1980
A Journal of Travels into the Arkansas Territory During the Year 1819, by T. Nuttall.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Martin, W.A., T.K. Perttula, N.A. Kenmotsu, L. Roark, J. Wise, J.E. Bruseth, J. Ippolito, V.
Hubbard, and W. Kingsborough
1995
Cultural Resource Management Planning for the National Forests and Grasslands in
Texas. Cultural Resource Management Report No. 6. Austin: Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission.
McGregor, D.E.
1996
Archaeological Investigations at 41HP137. In Archaeological Investigations at
Cooper Lake, Delivery Order Numbers 2, 3, and 4, 1987: Cultural Resource Studies
for Cooper Lake, Hopkins and Delta Counties, Texas, Vol. 1, by D.E. McGregor,
M.M. Green, D.H. Jurney, W.A. Martin, R.W. Moir, and J.W. Saunders, pp. 341-362.
Dallas: Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man,
Southern Methodist University.

54

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., and M.R. Bever
1995
Paleoindians of Texas: An Update on the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 66:47-81.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stafford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Middlebrook, T.
1994
An Update of Archaeological Investigations at the Tyson Site (41SY92). Journal of
Northeast Texas Archaeology 3:1-36.
Milanich, J.T., and S. Milbrath
1989a Another World. In First Encounters: Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the
United States, 1492-1570, edited by J.T. Milanich and S. Milbrath, pp. 1-26. Ripley
F. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History No. 9. Gainesville: University of
Florida Press.
Milanich, J.T., and S. Milbrath (editors)
1989b First Encounters: Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States,
1492-1570, edited by J.T. Milanich and S. Milbrath. Ripley F. Bullen Monographs in
Anthropology and History No. 9. Gainesville: University of Florida Press.
Moore, J.
1967
Angelina: Little Angel of the Tejas. Progress: Jacksonville, Texas.
1971

The Great Jacksonville Circus Fight and Other Cherokee County Stories.
Jacksonville, Texas.

Mowery, I.C.
1948
Soil Survey of Cherokee County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Washington, D.C.
Muller, J.D.
1978
The Southeast. In Ancient Native Americans, edited by J.D. Jennings, pp. 281-325.
San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.
Neighbours, K.F.
1957
Chapters from the History of the Texas Indian Reservation. West Texas Historical
Association Year Book 33:3-16.
1973

Indian Exodus:
Publications.

HJN 050093 AR

Texas Indian Affairs, 1835-1859.

Quannah:

Nortex Offset

55

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

1975

Robert Simpson Neighbors and the Texas Frontier, 1836-1859.
Press.

Waco:

Texian

Newell, H.P., and A.D. Krieger
1949
The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoir No. 5. Washington,
D.C.: Society for American Archaeology.
Peake, O.B.
1954
A History of the United States Indian Factory System, 1795-1822. Denver: Sage
Books.
Perino, G., and W.J. Bennett
1978
Archaeological Investigations at the Mahaffey Site, Ch-1, Hugo Reservoir, Choctaw
County, Oklahoma. Idabel: Museum of the Red River.
Perttula, T.K.
1984
Patterns of Prehistoric Lithic Raw Material Utilization in the Caddoan Area: The
Western Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric Chert Exploitation: Studies from the
Midcontinent, edited by B.M. Butler and E.E. May, pp. 129-148. Occasional Paper
No. 2, Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois University at
Carbondale.
1990

Part I: The Development of Agricultural Subsistence, Regional and Diachronic
Variability in Caddoan Subsistence, and Implications for the Caddoan Archaeological
Record, and Part II: Faunal and Paleobotanical Data from the Caddoan Area.
Manuscript on file, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission. Austin.

1992

“The Caddo Nation”: Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives.
University of Texas Press.

1993a

Historic Context: The Development of Agriculture in Northeast Texas before A.D.
1600. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document,
edited by N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 121-146. Cultural Resource
Management Report No. 3, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission. Austin.

1993b

Historic Context: Effects of European Contact on Native and Immigrant Indians in
Northeast Texas, A.D. 1540-1859. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region,
Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 147190. Cultural Resource Management Report No. 3, Department of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission. Austin.

1994

Caddoan Mound Sites in the Sabine River Basin of Northeast Texas.
Archeology Newsletter 4(4):4-19.

1996

Caddoan Area Archaeology since 1990.
4(4):295-348.

56

Austin:

Caddoan

Journal of Archaeological Research

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

1999

The Hurricane Hill Site (41HP106): The Archaeology of a Late Archaic/Early
Ceramic and Early-Middle Caddoan Settlement in Northeast Texas, 2 Vols. Special
Publication No. 4. Pittsburg and Austin: Friends of Northeast Texas Archaeology.

2004

The Prehistoric and Caddoan Archeology of Northeastern Texas Pineywoods. In
The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T.K. Perttula, pp. 370-407. College Station:
Texas A&M University Press.

Perttula, T.K., and J.E. Bruseth
1983
Early Caddoan Subsistence Strategies, Sabine River Basin, East Texas.
Anthropologist 28(99):9-21.
1995

Plains

Trade and Exchange in Eastern Texas, 1100 B.C.-A.D. 800. In Exchange in the
Lower Mississippi Valley and Contiguous Areas in 1100 B.C., edited by J.L. Gibson.
Louisiana Archeology 17:93-121.

Perttula, T.K., J.E. Bruseth, N.A. Kenmotsu, and W.A. Martin
1995a Archeological Testing at the Cabe Mounds (41BW14), Bowie County, Texas.
Cultural Resource Management Report No. 8. Austin: Department of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission.
Perttula, T.K., C.J. Crane, and J.E. Bruseth
1982
A Consideration of Caddoan Subsistence. Southeastern Archaeology 1(2):89-102.
Perttula, T.K., R.C. Fields, J.E. Corbin, and N.A. Kenmotsu
1993
Historic Context: The Emergence of Sedentism in the Northeast Texas Archeological
Region, ca. 500 B.C. to A.D. 1000. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region,
Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 97120. Cultural Resource Management Report No. 3, Department of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Perttula, T.K., and N.A. Kenmotsu
1993
Introduction—Section Two: Regional Preservation Plan for Archeological Resources,
Northeast Texas Archeological Region, Eastern Planning Region. In Archeology in
the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N.A.
Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 35-48. Cultural Resource Management Report No.
3, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Perttula, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Rickliss, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995b Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.
Prewitt, T.J.
1974
Regional Interaction Networks and the Caddoan Area.
15(2):73-101.

Bulletin of the Texas

Papers in Anthropology

Roach, H.J.
1934
A History of Cherokee County. Southwest: Dallas, Texas.
1976

The Hills of Cherokee. Fort Worth, Texas.

HJN 050093 AR

57

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Rose, J.C., M.P. Hoffman, B.A. Burnett, A.M. Harmon, and J.C. Barnes
1998
Skeletal Biology of the Prehistoric Caddo. In The Native History of the Caddo: Their
Place in Southeastern Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by T.K. Perttula and J.E.
Bruseth, pp. 113-126. Studies in Archeology No. 30. Austin: Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Saunders, J.W., and T. Allen
1997
The Archaic Period. Louisiana Archaeology 22:1-30.
Schambach, F.F.
1982
An Outline of Fourche Maline Culture in Southwest Arkansas. In Arkansas
Archeology in Review, edited by N.L. Trubowitz and M.D. Jeter, pp. 132-197.
Research Series No 15. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.
1983

The Archeology of the Great Bend Region in Arkansas. In Contributions to the
Archeology of the Great Bend Region, edited by F.F. Schambach and F. Rackerby,
pp. 1-11. Research Series No. 22. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.

1997

The Development of the Burial Mound Tradition in the Caddo Area.
Northeast Texas Archaeology 9:53-72.

1998

Pre-Caddoan Cultures in the Trans-Mississippi South: A Beginning Sequence.
Research Series No. 53. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.

Journal of

Schambach, F.F., and A.M. Early
1983
Southwest Arkansas. In A State Plan for the Conservation of Archeological
Resources in Arkansas, edited by H.A. Davis. Research Series No. 21. Fayetteville:
Arkansas Archeological Survey.
Scott-Cummings, L.
1991
Pollen, Phytolith, Macofloral and Charcoal Analysis in the Jewett Mine Project Area,
Texas. In Excavations at the Bottoms, Rena Branch, and Moccasin Springs Sites,
Jewett Mine Project, Freestone and Leon Counties, Texas, by R.C. Fields, L.W.
Klement, C.B. Bousman, S.A. Tomka, E.F. Gadus, and M.A. Howard, pp. 329-362.
Report of Investigations No. 82, Prewitt and Associates, Inc.. Austin.
1981

Archeological Investigations at the Attaway Site, Henderson County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 52:147-179.

Sierzchula, M.C., M.J. Guccione, R.H. Lafferty, III, and M.T. Oates
1995
Archeological Investigations in the Great Bend Region, Miller County, Arkansas,
Levee Items 2 and 3. Report No. 94-5. Lowell, Arkansas: Mid-Continental
Research Associates, Inc.
Skibo, J.M., and E. Blinman
1999
Exploring the Origins of Pottery on the Colorado Plateau. In Pottery and People: A
Dynamic Interaction, edited by J.M. Skibo and G.M. Feinman, pp. 171-183. Salt
Lake City: University of Utah Press.

58

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

Smith, B.D.
1986
The Archaeology of the Southeastern United States: From Dalton to De Soto,
10,500 B.P.-500 B.P. In Advances in World Archaeology, edited by F. Wendorf and
A. Close, pp. 1-92. New York: Academic Press.
Smith, B.D. (editor)
1990
The Mississippian Emergence. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Smith, F.H.
1995
The Caddo Indians: Tribes at the Convergence of Empires, 1542-1854. College
Station: Texas A&M University Press.
Stahle, D.W., E.R. Cook, and J.W.C. White
1985
Tree-ring Dating of Baldcypress and the Potential for Millenia-Long Chronologies in
the Southeast. American Antiquity 50:796-802.
Stahle, D.W., and M.C. Cleaveland
1994
Tree-Ring Reconstructed Rainfall over the Southeastern U.S.A. during the Medieval
Warm Period and Little Ice Age. Climatic Change 26:194-212.
1995

Texas Paleoclimatic Data from Daily to Millennial Time Scales. In The Changing
Climate of Texas: Predictability and Implications for the Future, edited by J. Norwine,
J.R. Giardino, G.R. North, and J.B. Valdes, pp. 49-69. College Station: GeoBooks,
College of Geosciences and Maritime Studies, Texas A&M University.

Steponaitis, V.P.
1986
Prehistoric Archaeology in the Southeastern United States, 1970-1985.
Reviews in Anthropology 15:363-404.

Annual

Story, D.A.
1981
An Overview of the Archaeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26(92):139156.
1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric
Food Production in North America, edited by R.I. Ford, pp. 19-56. Anthropological
Papers No. 75, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

1990

Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain: Volume 1, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D.
Freeman, J.C. Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey. Fayetteville.

1997

Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:1-113.

2000

Introduction. In The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas, by H.P. Newell
and A.D. Krieger, pp. 1-31. Washington, D.C.: Society for American Archaeology.

HJN 050093 AR

59

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Story, D.A., and D. Creel
1982
Cultural Background. In The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Vol. 1,
edited by D.A. Story, pp. 20-34. Texas Antiquities Permit Series No. 7. Austin:
Texas Antiquities Committee.
Story, D.A., and J.A. Guy
1990
Introduction. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain:
Volume 1, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose, D.G.
Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 1-4. Research Series No. 38, Arkansas
Archeological Survey. Fayetteville.
Strickland, R.W.
1937
Anglo-American Activities in Northeastern Texas, 1803-1845.
dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.

Unpublished Ph.D.

Suhm, D.A., A.D. Krieger, and E.B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 25.
Surrey, N.M.M.
1916
The Commerce of Louisiana During the French Regime, 1699-1763. Columbia
University Studies in History, Economics, and Public Law, Vol. 71. New York:
Columbia University.
Swagerty, W.R.
1984
Spanish-Indian Relations, 1513-1821. In Scholars and the Indian Experience:
Critical Review of Recent Writings in the Social Sciences, edited by W.R. Swagerty,
pp. 36-78. Bloomington: Indiana University Press for the D’Arcy McNicle Center for
the History of the American Indian.
Swanton, J.R.
1939
Final Report of the United States De Soto Expedition Commission. Report prepared
for the US House of Representatives, 76th Congress, 1st Session, Historical
Document No. 71.
1942

Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bulletin
No. 132. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of American Ethnology, US Government
Printing Office.

Thurmond, J.P.
1981
Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin, Northeastern Texas and
Northwestern Louisiana. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
1985

60

Late Caddoan Social Group Identification and Sociopolitical Organization in the
Upper Cypress Basin and Vicinity, Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 54:185-200.

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

1990

Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin, Northeastern Texas and
Northwestern Louisiana. Studies in Archeology 5, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Turner, R.L.
1978
The Tuck Carpenter Site and Its Relation to Other Sites within the Titus Focus.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:1-110.
1992

Prehistoric Mortuary Remains at the Tuck Carpenter Site, Camp County, Texas.
Studies in Archeology No. 10. Austin: Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Usner, D.H.
1987
The Frontier Exchange Economy of the Lower Mississippi Valley in the Eighteenth
Century. William and Mary Quarterly 44:165-192.
1989

Economic Relations in the Southeast until 1783. In Handbook of North American
Indians, Vol. 4, History of Indian-White Relations, edited by W.E. Washburn, pp. 391395. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.

Vehik, S.C.
1988
Late Prehistoric Exchange on the Southern Plains and its Periphery. Midcontinental
Journal of Archaeology 13:41-68.
1990

Late Prehistoric Plains Trade and Economic Specialization. Plains Anthropologist
35(128):125-145.

Wade, M.
1989
French Indian Policies. In Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 4, History of
Indian-White Relations, edited by W.E. Washburn, pp. 20-28. Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Wallerstein, I.
1974
The Modern World-System. New York: Academic Press.
Webb, C.H.
1959
The Belcher Mound, a Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Memoirs
No. 16. Kenosha, Wisconsin: Society for American Archaeology.
1984

The Bellevue Focus: a Marksville-Troyville Manifestation in Northwestern Louisiana.
Louisiana Archaeology 9:251-274.

Webb, C.H., J.L. Shiner, and E.W. Roberts
1971
The John Pearce Site (16CD56): A San Patrice Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:1-49.
Webb, C.H., F.E. Murphey, W.G. Ellis, and H.R. Green
1969
The Resch Site 41HS16, Harrison County, Texas.
Archeological Society 40:3-106.

HJN 050093 AR

Bulletin of the Texas

61

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Weddle, R.S.
1985
Spanish Sea: Discovery on the Gulf of Mexico, 1500-1685. College Station: Texas
A&M University Press.
Williams, I., and A.M. Early
1990
Hardman (3CL418): A Prehistoric Salt Processing Site. Sponsored Research
Program, Final Report No. 642. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.
Williams, S.
1964
The Aboriginal Locations of the Kadohadacho and Related Tribes. In Exploration in
Cultural Anthropology, edited by W. Goodenough, pp. 545-570. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Wolf, E.R.
1982
Europe and the People Without History. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Woods, P.D.
1980
French-Indian Relations on the Southern Frontier, 1699-1762. Studies in American
History and Culture No. 18. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Research Press.
Wyckoff, D.G., and T.G. Baugh
1980
Early Historic Hasinai Elites: A Model for the Material Culture of Governing Elites.
Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology 5:225-283.
Wyckoff, D.G., and R. Bartlett
1995
Living on the Edge: Late Pleistocene-Early Holocene Cultural Interactions along the
Southeastern Woodlands-Plains Border.
In Native American Interactions:
Multiscalar Analyses and Interpretations in the Eastern Woodlands, edited by M.S.
Nassaney and K.E. Sassaman, pp. 27-72. Knoxville: University of Tennessee
Press.

62

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

APPENDIX A:

Locations of Shovel Tests within the Six Surveyed Segments
of the Project Area

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

Figure A.1. Locations of Shovel Tests in Segment A of Project Area

HJN 050093 AR

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Location Maps

Figure A.2. Locations of Shovel Tests in Segment B of Project Area

A-2

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

Figure A.3. Locations of Shovel Tests in Segment C of Project Area

HJN 050093 AR

A-3

Appendix A: Shovel Test Location Maps

Figure A.4. Locations of Shovel Tests in Segment D of Project Area

A-4

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

Cultural Resource Survey of 3.1 Miles of the US 69 Expressway and Reliever Route,
Jacksonville, Cherokee County, Texas

Figure A.5. Locations of Shovel Tests in Segment E of Project Area

HJN 050093 AR

A-5

Appendix A: Shovel Test Location Maps

Figure A.6. Locations of Shovel Tests in Segment F of Project Area

A-6

050093_arch_survey_report.doc ©

