Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development,
The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens and Russell K. Brownlow

HJN 070183 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

The Woodlands Development Company
The Woodlands, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

February 2008

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development,
The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens and Russell K. Brownlow

Prepared for:

The Woodlands Development Company
2201 Timberloch Place
The Woodlands, Texas 77387

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South Interstate Highway 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Russell K. Brownlow, Principal Investigator
HJN 070183 AR

February 2008

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The Woodlands Development Company (WDC) is proposing development on the 10acre (ac) Mitchell Island as part of its East Shore Project along Lake Woodlands in The
Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas. The construction of a bridge from the shore to the
island would require a Section 404 permit issued by the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).
As the Section 404 permit is a federal permit, the bridge construction would fall under the
jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as
amended. Moreover, the development on the island would not be possible but for the USACE
permit for the construction of the bridge to the island. As such, the entire development is
considered to be under the jurisdiction of the USACE and thereby falls under the regulations of
Section 106 of the NHPA. WDC contracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
(Horizon), to conduct a cultural resources survey of the USACE jurisdictional areas associated
with the proposed bridge construction, which includes the entire 10-acre Mitchell Island. The
purpose of the survey was to determine if any archeological/historical sites are located within
the USACE jurisdictional areas, and, if any exist, to determine their eligibility for inclusion in the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP).
The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive
pedestrian survey of the Area of Potential Effect (APE), and the production of a report suitable
for review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas
Historical Commission’s (THC’s) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and
the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management
Reports. Russell K. Brownlow (Horizon’s cultural resources director) served as the Principal
Investigator for the project, while Reign Clark and Michael Mudd (Horizon field technicians)
conducted the field investigations.
Horizon conducted the cultural resources survey on December 5 and 20, 2007. During
the first day of field investigations, a pedestrian survey was conducted of the APE that consisted
of pedestrian walkover and shovel testing. Two shovel tests produced aboriginal artifacts, so a
second day of field investigations was conducted during which backhoe trenches were
excavated within the APE. The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards
(TSMASS) require a minimum of 1 subsurface probe per 2 ac in project areas between 3 and
10 ac in size. As such, a total of 20 subsurface probes would be required within the 10-ac APE.
Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by excavating a total of 21 subsurface probes.

HJN 070183 AR

iii

Management Summary

The intensive survey resulted in the documentation of 1 new prehistoric site, 41MQ218.
The site consists of a sparse subsurface scatter of aboriginal artifacts, including 3 pieces of lithic
debitage and 1 ceramic sherd, observed at depths of 85 to 110 centimeters (cm) below surface
(cmbs) in 2 widely separated shovel tests spaced 250 meters (m) apart. The cultural materials
are situated within a sandy mantle on an upland landform that has been extensively disturbed
via deposition of dredge spoils and lumbering activities. A total of 22 shovel tests and backhoe
trenches were excavated in the vicinity of these finds, but no additional cultural resources were
encountered. The sparse deposits are similar to those on other sites in the area that have been
recorded in connection with other investigations. Due to the overall scarcity of materials on this
sandy site and the extent of existing impacts on the 10-ac Mitchell Island, it is Horizon’s opinion
that site 41MQ218 is ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP and that no additional investigations
are warranted on this site.
Based on the results of the investigations, it is Horizon’s opinion that the proposed
development of the 10-ac Mitchell Island will have no effect on any significant cultural
resources. Horizon recommends that cultural resources clearance be granted for the proposed
undertaking. However, in the unlikely event that human remains or burial features are
inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance of
project-related facilities, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately
in the vicinity of the find and the USACE and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

iv

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ..................................................................................... 7
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology ........................................................................... 7
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.......................................................................... 7
2.3
Climate ............................................................................................................ 8
2.4
Flora and Fauna .............................................................................................. 9

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND..................................................................................... 13
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) ..................................................... 14
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) ......................................................... 14
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) ........................................................ 15
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) .................................................... 16
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ....................................................... 17
3.6
Historic Period (ca. 1700 A.D. to Present) ..................................................... 17

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................. 23
4.1
Archival Research ......................................................................................... 23
4.2
Survey Methods............................................................................................. 24

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................. 31
5.1
Site 41MQ218................................................................................................ 31
5.2
Recommendations......................................................................................... 34

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................. 35
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................. 35
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .... 36
6.3
Summary of Inventory Results ...................................................................... 36
6.4
Management Recommendations ................................................................... 37

7.0

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................. 39
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test and Backhoe Trench Data

HJN 070183 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.

vi

Vicinity Map of Project Area ........................................................................................ 2
Topographic Map of Project Area................................................................................ 3
Aerial Photograph of Project Area ............................................................................... 4
Typical View of Mitchell Island Project Area (Facing North) ...................................... 25
Overview of Proposed Bridge Location on Mainland (Facing Southeast) ................. 25
Overview of Proposed Bridge Location on Mitchell Island (Facing North) ................ 26
Typical View of Shallow, Mottled, Calcareous Sandy Clay Loam Sediments ........... 26
Locations of Shovel Tests and Backhoe Trenches in Project Area ........................... 28
Overview of Site 41MQ218 ....................................................................................... 32
Cultural Materials Observed in ST 10 on Site 41MQ218 .......................................... 32

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The Woodlands Development Company (WDC) is proposing development on the 10acre (ac) Mitchell Island as part of its East Shore Project along Lake Woodlands in The
Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas (Figures 1 to 3). The construction of a bridge from the
shore to the island would require a Section 404 permit issued by the US Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE). As the Section 404 permit is a federal permit, the bridge construction
would fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA)
of 1966, as amended. Moreover, the development on the island would not be possible but for
the USACE permit for the construction of the bridge to the island. As such, the entire
development is considered to be under the jurisdiction of the USACE and thereby falls under the
regulations of Section 106 of the NHPA. WDC contracted with Horizon Environmental Services,
Inc. (Horizon), to conduct a cultural resources survey of the USACE jurisdictional areas
associated with the proposed bridge construction, which includes the entire 10-acre Mitchell
Island. The purpose of the survey was to determine if any archeological/historical sites are
located within the USACE jurisdictional areas, and, if any exist, to determine their eligibility for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP).
The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive
pedestrian survey of the Area of Potential Effect (APE), and the production of a report suitable
for review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas
Historical Commission’s (THC’s) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and
the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management
Reports. Russell K. Brownlow (Horizon’s cultural resources director) served as the Principal
Investigator for the project, while Reign Clark and Michael Mudd (Horizon field technicians)
conducted the field investigations.
Horizon conducted the cultural resources survey on December 5 and 20, 2007. During
the first day of field investigations, a pedestrian survey was conducted of the APE that consisted
of pedestrian walkover and shovel testing. Two shovel tests produced aboriginal artifacts, so a
second day of field investigations was conducted during which backhoe trenches were
excavated within the APE. The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards
(TSMASS) require a minimum of 1 subsurface probe per 2 ac in project areas between 3 and
10 ac in size. As such, a total of 20 subsurface probes would be required within the 10-ac APE.
Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by excavating a total of 21 subsurface probes.

HJN 070183 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Vicinity Map of Project Area

2

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 2. Topographic Map of Project Area

HJN 070183 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 3. Aerial Photograph of Project Area

4

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

The intensive survey resulted in the documentation of 1 new prehistoric site, 41MQ218.
The site consists of a sparse subsurface scatter of aboriginal artifacts, including 3 pieces of lithic
debitage and 1 ceramic sherd, observed at depths of 85 to 110 centimeters (cm) below surface
(cmbs) in 2 widely separated shovel tests spaced 250 meters (m) apart. The cultural materials
are situated within a sandy mantle on an upland landform that has been extensively disturbed
via deposition of dredge spoils and lumbering activities. A total of 22 shovel tests and backhoe
trenches were excavated in the vicinity of these finds, but no additional cultural resources were
encountered. The sparse deposits are similar to those on other sites in the area that have been
recorded in connection with other investigations. Due to the overall scarcity of materials on this
sandy site and the extent of existing impacts on the 10-ac Mitchell Island, it is Horizon’s opinion
that site 41MQ218 is ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP and that no additional investigations
are warranted on this site.
Based on the results of the investigations, it is Horizon’s opinion that the proposed
development of the 10-ac Mitchell Island will have no effect on any significant cultural
resources. Horizon recommends that cultural resources clearance be granted for the proposed
undertaking. However, in the unlikely event that human remains or burial features are
inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance of
project-related facilities, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately
in the vicinity of the find and the USACE and the THC should be notified of the discovery.
This report presents the results of the cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds
of the project area, respectively. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the survey, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report, and Appendix A presents data collected from shovel tests and backhoe trenches
excavated during the survey.

HJN 070183 AR

5

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The proposed project is located in south-central Montgomery County, Texas, north of
Houston within The Woodlands. Montgomery County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in
southeastern Texas, which is a structural basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas
Coastal Plain, which extends as far north as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and
westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock,
most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin, that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from
its margins (Abbott 2001). The general Houston area is underlain by rocks and unconsolidated
sediments that are quite young in a geological sense, ranging from modern to Miocene in age.
These consist predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic bodies arranged in an offlapped
sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine facies making up a
relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities between these
formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that occurred during
periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in this fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As a
result of the geometry of basin filling, successively younger rock units crop out in subparallel
bands from the basin margin toward the modern coastline.
The project area originally was a small hill bounded on its western and northern sides by
Panther Branch. Prior to the construction of Lake Woodlands, surface elevations over the
landform ranged from 37 to 41 m (120 to 135 feet [ft]) above mean sea level (amsl). Now, the
portions of the landform comprising the island are those at the upper extents of the elevation
range. Panther Branch flows in a southerly direction to its confluence with Spring Creek about
6.4 kilometers (km) (4.0 miles [mi]) south of the project area. Spring Creek flows generally
eastward to its confluence with the West Fork of the San Jacinto River. The San Jacinto River,
in turn, flows southeastward and discharges into the Gulf of Mexico.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project is underlain by the Lissie Formation (Shelby et al. 1968). The Lissie
Formation consists of clay, silt, sand, and minor deposits of siliceous gravel of granule to small
pebble size. A total of 3 soils are mapped over the extent of the island. The western half of the
island is mapped as Lilbert loamy fine sand (Fs). The southeastern end of the island is mapped

HJN 070183 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

as Boy fine sand (Bo), while the northeastern portion is mapped as Sorter silt loam (So) (NRCS
2008).
Boy fine sand (Bo) is a deep, somewhat poorly drained, moderately slowly permeable
soil found on interfluves on coastal plains that formed from unconsolidated sandy and loamy
marine deposits. A typical profile consists of fine sand to a depth of 119 cm (47 inches [in])
followed by sandy clay loam to a depth of 178 cm (70 in).
Lilbert loamy fine sand (Fs) is a very deep, well-drained, moderately slowly permeable
soil found on interfluves on coastal plains that formed from loamy marine deposits. A typical
profile consists of loamy fine sand to a depth of 58 cm (23 in) followed by sandy clay loam to a
depth of 203 cm (80 in).
Sorter silt loam (So) is a very deep, poorly drained, slowly permeable soil found on flats
on coastal plains that formed from loamy fluviomarine deposits of Early Pleistocene age. A
typical profile consists of loamy fine sand to a depth of 173 cm (68 in) followed by sandy clay
loam to a depth of 203 cm (80 in).

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
While the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway
(1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes
3 separate climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late
Glacial Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present).
Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas
was considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region
was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and
Holloway 1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a
slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous
woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway
1985). During the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have
been more stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post
oak savannas. The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued
into the mid-Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more
mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and
Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were
probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern US and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects
the influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with
the urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and concrete to give
the Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout

8

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

much of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water,
humidity in the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often
exceeds 50% even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high
humidity characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and
a modest diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly
high temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in
January to a high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to
9°C (38 to 47°F) in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average
low temperatures range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range
from 27 to 29°C (75 to 79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The Houston region experiences 2 precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott
2001). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of infrequent
cold fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs in the late
summer to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical storms and
hurricanes from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter and early
spring are relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional thunderstorms
that are relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual precipitation
varies from a low of approximately 40.0 inches (100.0 cm) to a high of more than 52.0 inches
(132.0 cm). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 2.0 to 3.0 inches (5.0 to 8.0
cm) in March to more than 7.5 inches (19.0 cm) occurring locally on the coast during
September. Almost all of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely rare,
occurring in measurable amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Montgomery County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texas biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahan et al.
(1984) further define 4 broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic
province that lies on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie,
(3) coastal gallery forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are
strongly controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the
seasonal water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically
dominated by little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter
environments are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria,
bulrushes, smooth cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush,
saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal
waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained

HJN 070183 AR

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

environments are characterized by such taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum,
gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass, red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort.
A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon,
nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and
many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish
to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs
and woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the
north and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses
are found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver
bluestem, buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian
sunflower, Engelman daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow
neptunia, snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush,
bluebonnet, ragweed, croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring
in the coastal prairie include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live
oak, elm, hackberry, bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as
the coastal prairie grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland
environment with common stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie
is home to a diverse fauna, including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many
small rodents, amphibians and reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison
and pronghorn were also present at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbriar, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are
grasses such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest
include white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and
rodents, turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various times in the
past, and a number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger
deciduous trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory
vegetation varies from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and
young trees. Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle,
greenbriar, Virginia creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A
variety of fauna is also present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit,

10

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

mink, skunk, various small rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was
also present at times in the past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the
transition zone to the coastal prairie environment.

HJN 070183 AR

11

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The proposed project is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21county area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 200 km (124 mi) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline. Much of the
archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern Great
Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990).
Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These 2 subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25 km (16 mi) inland from the coast that covers the area influenced by
Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological variability
characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands, marine
coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable ecological
diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to
denote Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural
characteristics of Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring
regions. For instance, the Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and
Southeast Texas, and Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for
Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time
in Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit
evidence of reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be
associated with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of
subsistence-related activities. Inland sites tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired
clay balls (at some sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites
tend to consist of multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain few lithic artifacts, oyster
shell tools, large quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), and numerous bone tools.

HJN 070183 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (but see Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is
represented by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred endscrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas
are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is
little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian
period (8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far
less pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and
corresponding decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a
diversified resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas,
however, this hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The
appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone
assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural

14

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

stage. Material culture shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in
the application of groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
In Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains.
Many of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and
several new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and
probably the Gary-Kent series.
The Late Archaic period (1500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is
characterized by Gary, Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos
points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition
developed in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981;
Patterson 1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period
but reached full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as
boatstones and bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang
knives, stingray spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial
practices included the systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre,
and use of locally made grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most
burials are found in extended supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials
are also known. Burial direction is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to
site. Patterson et al. (1993) report that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary
tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area
by about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the
Conroe-Livingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears
to have progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995).
Southeastern Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where
Aten (1983) established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
129 km (80 mi) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal exception of a
few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found on the Gulf
coast west of the Sabine Lake area.

HJN 070183 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods
(Aten 1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility
ware throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown
Plain for about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods
before once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety,
Goose Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor
pottery types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway
(Aten 1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte
types are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste
(like Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined
by the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the
latter part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in
Southeast Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the
Late Prehistoric period (Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995;
Wheat 1953). In fact, Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in
Southeast Texas as early as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points
that consisted of marginally retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a
generalized date of adoption of the bow-and-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca.
A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas. In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to
be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba,
Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial sequence for these point types has not been
established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn points appear to predate Perdiz points
throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto
Plain and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek
pottery remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt
Coated pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

16

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue.
Aten (1983) has
reconstructed the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century,
including the Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (possibly Karankawa), and Tonkawa. The
presence of the Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central
Texas in the 17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought
to have occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the
corresponding mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east
of the San Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe
may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic
Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and
Cuney points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified
by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1700 A.D. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez
Cabeza de Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near
Galveston Bay; however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until
after 1700. The first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission
system, as well as the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native
culture and social systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where
the burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as
increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the
time heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous
Indian population was greatly diminished. The Alabama/Coushatta Indians who currently reside
in Southeast Texas are migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early
19th centuries (Newcomb 1961).
The earliest European explorer of what became Montgomery County was probably the
Frenchman René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, who evidently passed through the area in
1687 1 . When news of French incursions reached Spanish authorities, they sent several
expeditions to the region to reclaim it for Spain. During the mid-19th century the Spanish made

1

The following history of Montgomery County, Texas, derives from Bement (1987), Gandy (1952), Martin (1950), and
Montgomery (1975), as summarized in The Handbook of Texas Online.

HJN 070183 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

several attempts to establish settlements in the area and eventually set up 3 missions on the
banks of Spring Creek within the current boundaries of Montgomery County, but the missions
were abandoned in 1756 and no permanent Spanish settlements were established. The future
Montgomery County area was included in the colonization contracts issued by Spanish and later
Mexican authorities to empresario Stephen F. Austin, and, during the early 1820s, AngloAmerican settlers began moving into the region. Forty-two families of Austin’s colony obtained
land titles from the Mexican government and settled in western Montgomery County. Among
the earliest settlers was Andrew Montgomery, who established a trading post at the crossroads
of the Loma del Toro and lower Coushatta traces. He was soon joined by relatives and others,
and the settlement eventually grew into the town of Montgomery. During the early 1830s, the
population of the region increased rapidly, and, in December 1837, the Republic of Texas
Congress established Montgomery County, which was named for its largest settlement. The
new county was carved from Washington County, and its borders originally extended from the
Brazos River on the west to the Trinity on the east, and from the Old San Antonio Road on the
north to the San Jacinto River on the south, an area that included future Grimes, Walker, San
Jacinto, Madison, and Waller counties. The county’s present boundaries were established after
the establishment of Waller County in 1870.
On the eve of the Civil War, Montgomery County was in most ways typical of the
counties of the region, decidedly Southern in character and outlook, with a rapidly developing
plantation economy. Montgomery remained the largest town, but several other trading centers
had emerged, including Danville, Bay’s Chapel, Cincinnati, and Waverly. Methodist minister
I.L.G. Strickland began preaching in Montgomery in the early 1840s, and, in the early 1850s,
Baptists had organized the first church there. Several private schools also began operating
during the 1850s, including the Montgomery Academy, which earned a reputation as one of the
preeminent schools of the region. The Civil War and its aftermath brought profound changes to
the county. Not surprisingly, given its large number of slaveholders, Montgomery County’s
citizens overwhelmingly supported the Southern cause, and nearly 80% (318 of 416) of those
who went to the polls cast their votes in favor of secession. The county’s men volunteered for
the Confederate army in large numbers, a sizeable number of them serving in the Fourth Texas
Regiment of Hood’s Texas Brigade; others joined Terry’s Texas Rangers (Eighth Texas
Cavalry). Many of the early volunteers saw considerable action during the war, and as many as
three-fourths of them were killed or injured before war’s end. For those who remained at home,
there were other problems to deal with, including lack of markets for goods, shortages, and wild
fluctuations in Confederate currency. The end of the war brought wrenching changes to the
county’s economy. For many of Montgomery County’s white inhabitants, the abolition of slavery
meant devastating economic loss. Prior to the Civil War, slaves had constituted nearly one-half
of all taxable property in the county, and their loss, coupled with a decline in property values,
caused a profound disruption for most planters.
The African-American population of
Montgomery County fared even worse. Most blacks left the farms owned by their former
masters to seek better working and living conditions; however, for the vast majority, the change
brought only marginal improvement. Most ended up working as agricultural laborers or as
sharecroppers, receiving one-third or one-half of the crop for their labors.

18

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

Montgomery County escaped much of the strife that many other Texas counties
experienced during Reconstruction. No permanent federal garrison was stationed in the county,
and there was no Freedmen’s Bureau. Citizens nevertheless chafed under local Republican
rule, and there were isolated acts of violence and intimidation directed at African-American
officials. By the early 1870s, the local white elite had once more gained control of the county’s
affairs, and, through the use of the White Primary, literacy tests, and threats, managed to
effectively disenfranchise the black population until the 1960s. Like most of the counties in the
state, Montgomery County experienced a prolonged post-war agricultural depression. During
the Civil War, prices for cotton had skyrocketed, and landowners had planted ever-increasing
amounts of land in cotton to reap the benefits. After the war, falling prices and the loss of cheap
slave labor combined to severely depress the local economy. To make ends meet, many
landowners opted to grow even more cotton, badly depleting the soil in the process. By the
1880s, the soil in many areas of the county was so poor that cotton yields were as low as onethird to three-quarters of a bale per acre. Some farmers turned to livestock-raising or other
small grains, such as corn and wheat, but cotton nevertheless remained the county’s leading
cash crop until the end of the century.
The county’s economy began to recover in the 1870s and early 1880s with the
construction of several railroads. In 1871, the International-Great Northern Railroad was built
across the county; in 1879, a narrow-gauge line known as the Houston, East, and West Texas
was constructed; and, in 1880, the Houston and Texas Central built a branch line from
Navasota to Montgomery and extended eastward to Conroe. The construction of the railroads
touched off an intense controversy concerning the location of the county seat. The first railroad
missed the town of Montgomery. Willis, a new town on the railroad, was voted county seat in
1874, but the county seat was moved back to Montgomery in 1880, after the Houston and
Texas Central was built. In 1889, however, the county seat was moved to the fledgling
community of Conroe, which was situated at the junction of the International-Great Northern and
the newly built Gulf, Colorado, and Santa Fe Railway. The construction of the railroads also
sparked a major period of expansion in the county. Numerous new towns grew up, and the
population, which had risen only slightly since the Civil War, saw a marked increase. Despite
the loss of considerable territory due to the splitting off of several new counties, the number of
residents grew from 6,483 to 10,154 between 1870 and 1880, and population increased to more
than 17,000 over the next 2 decades.
The construction of the railroads also marked the beginnings of the county’s great
lumbering boom. Commercial lumbering had begun in the county prior to the Civil War, but the
lack of easy access to river or rail transportation severely hampered efforts to exploit the area’s
rich timber resources. With the arrival of the railroads, however, lumbering quickly developed
into a major industry. By 1882, 45 steam sawmills were in operation, and lumbering emerged
as the county’s largest source of income within a short time. The lumber boom gave rise to
numerous new communities, including Bobville, Cowl Spur, Dobbin, Egypt, Fostoria, Honea,
Karen, Keenan, Mostyn, Leonides, and Security, all of which developed as lumber shipping
points or mill sites. The boom also helped to transform the county in other ways. As late as the
early 1870s, 80% of the county was still covered by thick pine forests. Over the next 4 decades,

HJN 070183 AR

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

much of the county was deforested, permanently altering the landscape and opening the way
for a steady increase in livestock-raising and farming.
The agricultural economy, which had been on the wane since the Civil War, began to
recover in the 1880s. Spurring its growth was the introduction of tobacco, which began to be
planted in large quantities in the 1890s. Much of the tobacco was a fine-grade variety known as
Vuelta Abajo, grown from seeds imported each year from Cuba. The center of the industry was
Willis, which had 7 cigar factories by 1895. High railroad shipping costs and the high initial
investment and labor involved in curing and sweating the tobacco, however, discouraged many
farmers; between 1898 and 1901, the amount of land given over to tobacco production fell
dramatically from more than 1,000 acres to only 70. The subsequent lifting of a US tariff on
Cuban tobacco, which had kept prices artificially high, finally ended the experiment, and no
tobacco was being grown in the county within a few years. The agricultural economy stagnated
at the turn of the century; however, by 1910, it began to show slow but steady growth.
The county, however, experienced a dramatic reversal of fortune in 1932, when oil was
discovered southeast of Conroe. Evidence of oil had been found in the county as early as 1901,
when Santa Fe Railroad engineers drilled a water well and noted traces of oil. Natural gas was
found southwest of Conroe in 1924, and several major oil companies acquired leases in the
area. The initial tests, however, were unsuccessful, and the companies lost interest. In August
1931, however, wildcatter George William Strake began drilling a test well southeast of Conroe
and, on 13 December of the same year, hit oil; by June 1932, Strake had brought in a second,
even larger well, which was spewing out more than 900 barrels daily. The discovery
immediately triggered a tremendous oil boom. Within days, thousands of fortune-seekers,
wildcatters, financiers, roughnecks, and hangers-on flooded the area. The population of Conroe,
estimated at 2,500 in December 1931, blossomed to more than 10,000 within a few months. At
the beginning of 1933, more than 100 wells had been drilled, and more that 25,000 barrels per
day were being produced; by the end of the year, the number of producing wells had grown to
679, and the daily output was more than 52,000 barrels. Oil was subsequently discovered in
several other areas of the county, and the combined oilfields of Montgomery County made it
one of the richest oil-producing areas in the nation. Although the vast majority of Montgomery
County residents did not benefit directly from the oil discovery, oil money contributed to a
general prosperity that helped offset the worst effects of the depression. Proceeds from the oil
also helped to remake the face of the county. Roads were graded and paved, new schools
were built, and public buildings and monuments were erected. Conroe experienced a
construction boom as numerous new buildings, including banks, offices, and homes, were
erected with oil money. The population of the county swelled during the boom, growing by
nearly 10,000 between 1930 and 1940, increasing from 14,588 to 23,055. The prosperity
continued during the years of World War II. Oil refineries and a carbon black manufacturing
plant were built, and efforts were intensified to produce as much oil as possible for the war
effort. After the war, oil production declined somewhat, but it has remained one of the county’s
leading sources of income; in 1990 alone, more than 2.7 million barrels of oil were produced.
In recent years, Montgomery County has become a recreation destination for many
Houston residents. The area, with its abundant lakes and forest, offers numerous opportunities

20

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

for hunting, boating, fishing, and hiking. Among the most popular attractions are the Sam
Houston National Forest, W. Goodrich Jones State Forest, Lake Conroe, and Lake Woodlands.
Visitors to the area are also attracted by the shopping opportunities in Conroe, the annual
county fair, and the Conroe Main Street Festival.

HJN 070183 AR

21

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated survey area
2. To provide preliminary assessments of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the NRHP
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
at the THC’s online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (Atlas), the National Park Service’s (NPS’s)
online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL), the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas State Historical Association’s
and the General Libraries at The University of Texas at Austin’s Handbook of Texas Online, as
well as a program of intensive survey of the project area. Assessments of significance,
evaluations of NRHP eligibility, and recommendations concerning treatment options for the
cultural resources recorded during this survey are presented in Chapter 5.0, Results of
Investigations, and Chapter 6.0, Summary and Recommendations. The rest of this chapter
presents the results of archival research, the methodological background for the current
investigations, and the specific survey methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey corridor. Archival research revealed that 4 previously
recorded archeological sites, 41MQ70, 41MQ71, 41MQ73, and 41MQ74, occur within a 1.6-km
(1.0-mi) radius of the project area. All 4 sites were recorded as prehistoric open campsites
along Panther Branch.
Investigations on the northernmost site, 41MQ70, produced 1 projectile point,
11 ceramic sherds, 2 biface fragments, 2 bifacially worked knives, and 45 pieces of lithic

HJN 070183 AR

23

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

debitage. No NRHP or State Archeological Landmark (SAL) eligibility information was provided
for this site on the site form in THC files.
Site 41MQ71 was documented as a small open campsite on which 2 pieces of lithic
debitage and 1 mussel shell fragment were found. No NRHP or SAL eligibility information was
provided for this site on the site form.
Site 41MQ73 was recorded as a large and deeply buried open campsite with cultural
deposits extending to depths of 170 cmbs. Recovered cultural materials consisted of 2 dart
points, 18 ceramic sherds, 4 bifacial knives, 1 chopper/scraper, 1 oval scraper, 2 end scrapers,
1 bone awl, 6 biface fragments, and 94 pieces of lithic debitage. Although no NRHP or SAL
eligibility information was provided for this site on the site form, the amount of recovered cultural
materials and the fact that it is a deeply buried site suggests that it may have been eligible for
inclusion in the NRHP and/or for formal designation as an SAL. It is unclear if this site has ever
been impacted by development.
Finally, site 41MQ74 was recorded as a small prehistoric open campsite on which
7 pieces of lithic debitage were found. Although no NRHP or SAL eligibility information was
provided for this site on the site form, it was described as “destroyed” and therefore likely does
not qualify for inclusion in the NRHP and/or for formal designation as an SAL.
All 4 of these previously recorded prehistoric sites are located on landforms adjacent to
Panther Branch. As Mitchell Island was once a prominent rise adjacent to Panther Branch and
is surrounded by the 4 previously recorded sites, there would appear to be a high probability for
similar prehistoric deposits on this landform. According to the THC’s Atlas, the project area has
never been formally assessed for cultural resources.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

The project area consists of the entire 10-ac Mitchell Island and a small area on the
bank of Lake Woodlands on which a proposed bridge to the island would be constructed. The
project area can be found on the US Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5-minute Tamina, Texas,
topographic quadrangle (see Figure 2). The project area is completely surrounded by
developed areas associated with The Woodlands, located north of Houston and just west of
Interstate Highway (IH) 45. Mitchell Island was originally a small hill bounded on its western
and northern sides by Panther Branch, a tributary of Spring Creek. The location became an
island when Panther Branch was dammed to create Lake Woodlands, and a drainage channel
was dredged along the east side of the landform to allow water to surround the hill top. A
review of the aerial photograph of the island shows that the eastern side of the island is a
moderately dense pine forest, while the western side is less vegetated (see Figure 3). This is
due to the fact that when Lake Woodlands was created, dredge material from the lake channel
was deposited on the western side of the island. As such, the eastern half of the island is more
pristine, while the much western half is covered by a thick layer of dredge deposits. General
photographs of the project area are presented in Figures 4 to 7.

24

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 4. Typical View of Mitchell Island Project Area (Facing North)

Figure 5. Overview of Proposed Bridge Location on Mainland (Facing Southeast)

HJN 070183 AR

25

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 6. Overview of Proposed Bridge Location on Mitchell Island (Facing North)

Figure 7. Typical View of Shallow, Mottled, Calcareous Sandy Clay Loam Sediments

26

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

Horizon conducted the cultural resources survey on December 5 and 20, 2007. In
general, intensive cultural resource survey activities entail a pedestrian walkover with surface
inspection as well as subsurface shovel testing and/or backhoe trenching. The APE was
traversed on foot by Horizon archeologists in parallel transects, and the modern ground surface
was thoroughly inspected for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. During the first day
of field investigations, a pedestrian survey was conducted of the APE that consisted of
pedestrian walkover and shovel testing. Two shovel tests produced aboriginal artifacts, so a
second day of field investigations was conducted during which backhoe trenches were
excavated within the APE. The TSMASS require a minimum of 1 subsurface probe per 2 ac in
project areas between 3 and 10 ac size unless field conditions warrant excavation of more
probes (e.g., due to the presence of culturally sensitive areas) or less probes (e.g., due to
extensive prior disturbances or cultural low-probability areas). In the event that a subsurface
probe yields evidence of buried cultural deposits, additional probes may be necessary to
determine the horizontal and vertical extent of the subsurface deposits associated with the
cultural resource.
The APE of the proposed undertaking consists of the 10-ac Mitchell Island tract; as
such, a total of 20 shovel tests would be required to meet the TSMASS requirements. Horizon
exceeded the TSMASS requirements by excavating a total of 21 subsurface probes, including
11 shovel tests and 10 backhoe trenches (Figure 8).
In general, shovel tests measure approximately 30 cm (12 in) in diameter and are
excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the top of pre-Holocene
deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable, and all sediments are screened through 6.35millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth. All sediments were screened through 6.35-millimeter
(mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth and subsequently replaced in the shovel test hole from which
they were excavated. Specific shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.
Backhoe trenches were excavated using a 0.6-m- (2.0-ft-) wide bucket. Most trenches
were approximately 0.6 m (2.0 ft) wide, 3.0 to 4.0 m (9.8 to 13.1 ft) long, and from 0.3 to 3.7 m
(1.0 to 12.1 ft) deep. The trenches were excavated by removing thin layers measuring
approximately 0.1 m (0.3 ft) in thickness from across the entire trench before proceeding
downward. Horizon personnel monitored all trench excavations. Trench walls and floors were
carefully monitored during excavation; backfill piles were thoroughly examined for archeological
resources during excavation and random samples of backfill were screened through 6.35-mm
(0.25-in) hardware cloth; and trench walls were inspected following excavation for artifacts,
distinctive stratigraphic anomalies, and/or soil discolorations that might be indicative of past
cultural activities. Profile sketch maps and notes were recorded on the stratigraphic character
of soil deposits observed in trench walls, though at no time did any personnel enter into any
trench deeper than 1.2 m (4.0 ft). Specific backhoe trench data are summarized in Appendix A.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken and a photographic
log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and
non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, and metal scrap) were described,

HJN 070183 AR

27

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 8. Locations of Shovel Tests and Backhoe Trenches in Project Area

28

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location in which they
were found. No cultural materials were collected during the survey. The Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all shovel tests and backhoe trenches were determined using
hand-held Garmin ForeTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices based on the North
American Datum of 1927 (NAD 27).
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project areas as defined in
36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3.

HJN 070183 AR

29

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The intensive surface inspection, shovel testing, and backhoe trenching regimen
resulted in the documentation of 1 new prehistoric site, 41MQ218, within the APE.

5.1

SITE 41MQ218
General Description

Site 41MQ218 is somewhat difficult to define due to the scarcity of materials present, but
it appears to be the remnants of a short-term prehistoric open campsite contained within fine
sandy loam sediments. It is located 342 m (1,122 ft) east of the original channel of Panther
Branch on the crest of the hill that forms Mitchell Island (Figure 9). Cultural materials were
observed in only 2 of the 22 shovel tests and backhoe trenches excavated on and in the vicinity
of the site, and the 2 positive shovel tests (STs 5 and 10) were 250 m apart and separated by
and surrounded by a series of negative subsurface probes (see Figure 8). Cultural materials
observed on the site consisted of 3 small pieces of lithic debitage and 1 unclassified plainware
ceramic sherd encased within a sandy loam matrix at depths of 85 to 110 cmbs. No additional
cultural materials were observed in any of the other subsurface probes excavated on the island.
The sparse deposits on this site are similar to those on other prehistoric open campsites (i.e.,
41MQ70, 41MQ71, 41MQ73, and 41MQ74) found in sandy sediments in the same general area.
Observed Cultural Materials
Cultural materials are extremely sparse on site 41MQ218, consisting of only
1 unclassified plainware ceramic sherd and 3 pieces of lithic debitage encountered in 2 of
22 shovel tests and backhoe trenches excavated on and in the vicinity of the site (Figure 10).
The lithic flakes are all very small interior flakes manufactured from gray chert, and the
unclassified sandy-paste ceramic sherd appeared to be a plainware sherd but was so small as
to preclude any specific typological inferences. Cultural materials were encased within a thick
lens of sandy loam sediment that was encountered across Mitchell Island at depths of 85 to
110 cmbs.

HJN 070183 AR

31

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 9. Overview of Site 41MQ218

Figure 10. Cultural Materials Observed in ST 10 on Site 41MQ218

32

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

Cultural Features
No cultural features were documented during the shovel testing and backhoe trenching
of the site. No evidence of subsurface burned rock features or discolored soil suggestive of
features was detected.
Testing investigations conducted by Horizon on 5 similar sites in the general area
(41MQ186, 41HR987, 41HR988, 41HY989, and 41HR990) have resulted in the stripping of
large areas of sandy loam matrix in search of buried features thought to be potentially present
on the sites (Brownlow 2003, 2005). While these large-scale stripping efforts did produce small
quantities of artifacts (i.e., ceramic sherds and lithic debitage), they failed to produce any
evidence of subsurface features. Overall, the sites were found to consist of only sparse
amounts of cultural debris scattered within the sandy matrix. Based on the available data, site
41MQ218 appears to be similar to the sites previously assessed by Horizon in the general area
(Brownlow 2003, 2005).
Horizontal and Vertical Extents of the Cultural Materials
Based on the recovery of cultural materials in 2 shovel tests spaced 250 m apart, the
site boundaries have been delineated as measuring 250 m north to south by roughly 30 m east
to west. Cultural materials were found in an undifferentiated mantle of sandy loam sediments at
depths of 85 to 110 cmbs. A total of 22 shovel tests and backhoe trenches were excavated on
Mitchell Island, but only 2 shovel tests (STs 5 and 10) contained cultural materials.
Summary
Site 41MQ218 is documented as a prehistoric open campsite composed of extremely
sparse deposits within a fine sandy loam mantle on an upland landform that overlooks the
former course of Panther Branch, now inundated by Lake Woodlands. Observed cultural
materials consist of only 1 unclassified ceramic sherd and 3 small interior pieces of lithic
debitage manufactured from gray chert. Cultural materials were recovered from 2 widely
separated shovel tests spaced 250 m apart from depths of 85 to 110 cmbs. A total of 22 shovel
tests and backhoe trenches were excavated on Mitchell Island, including numerous probes
between and surrounding the 2 positive shovel tests, but no additional cultural materials or other
evidence of cultural activity was encountered.
The single, small ceramic sherd found on site 41MQ218 contained sandy paste. The
presence of the sandy-paste sherd on the site suggests that the occupation of the site
potentially occurred during the Early Ceramic period (A.D. 100 to 600) according to Patterson
(1995). Aten (1983) argues that pottery was being manufactured on the coastal margin of the
Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area by about A.D. 100, in the
western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the Conroe-Livingston inland area
by about A.D. 500. Based on Aten’s timeline, site 41MQ218 potentially dates to the latter
portion of the Early Ceramic period circa A.D. 500. However, Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery
was used throughout Southeast Texas during the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early
part of the Historic periods (Aten 1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995), which suggests
that the deposits on site 41MQ218 could date anywhere within a 1,200-year period between

HJN 070183 AR

33

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

roughly A.D. 500 and 1700. The Goose Creek series was the primary utility ware throughout
the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown Plain for about
200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods before once
again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984).
Site 41MQ218 is similar to a number of other sites in the area investigated by Horizon in
recent years (Brownlow 2003 and 2005). Testing investigations on those nearby sites, which
produced similar sparse assemblages, failed to yield any evidence of subsurface features or
stratified deposits. Based on this previous experience, it is believed that any additional
investigations on site 41MQ218 would produce similar results; as such, no further investigations
appear to be warranted.

5.2

RECOMMENDATIONS

Site 41MQ218 appears to represent a typical example of a small, short-term aboriginal
encampment containing sparse cultural deposits, and it is Horizon’s opinion that the site is not
eligible for inclusion in the NRHP. As such, Horizon recommends that no further investigations
are warranted in connection with the proposed development of Mitchell Island. Horizon
recommends that cultural resources clearance be granted for the proposed undertaking.
However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial features are inadvertently
discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance of the facility, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the USACE and the THC
should be notified of the discovery.

34

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is the determination
of whether or not an archeological site possesses the potential to make a contribution to 1 or
more previously defined research questions. Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey
level are rarely sufficient to contribute in a meaningful manner to such research issues. The
objective is rather to determine which archeological sites could be most profitably investigated
further in pursuance of regional, methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore,
adequate information on site function, context, and chronological placement from archeological
and, if appropriate, historical perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because
research questions vary as a function of geography and temporal period, determination of the
site context and chronological placement of cultural properties is a particularly important
objective during the inventory process.
Ultimately, management decisions regarding archeological properties are a function of
the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs. Archeological
resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of
archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP.

HJN 070183 AR

35

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

6.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The intensive surface inspection, shovel testing, and backhoe trenching regimen
resulted in the documentation of 1 new prehistoric site, 41MQ218, within the APE. Site
36

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

41MQ218 is documented as a prehistoric open campsite composed of extremely sparse
deposits within a fine sandy loam mantle on an upland landform that overlooks the former
course of Panther Branch, now inundated by Lake Woodlands. Observed cultural materials
consist of only 1 unclassified ceramic sherd and 3 small interior pieces of lithic debitage
manufactured from gray chert. Cultural materials were recovered from 2 widely separated
shovel tests spaced 250 m apart from depths of 85 to 110 cmbs. A total of 22 shovel tests and
backhoe trenches were excavated on Mitchell Island, including numerous probes between and
surrounding the 2 positive shovel tests, but no additional cultural materials or other evidence of
cultural activity was encountered.
The single, small ceramic sherd found on site 41MQ218 contained sandy paste. The
presence of the sandy-paste sherd on the site suggests that the occupation of the site
potentially occurred during the Early Ceramic period (A.D. 100 to 600) according to Patterson
(1995). Aten (1983) argues that pottery was being manufactured on the coastal margin of the
Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area by about A.D. 100, in the
western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the Conroe-Livingston inland area
by about A.D. 500. Based on Aten’s timeline, site 41MQ218 potentially dates to the latter
portion of the Early Ceramic period circa A.D. 500. However, Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery
was used throughout Southeast Texas during the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early
part of the Historic periods (Aten 1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995), which suggests
that the deposits on site 41MQ218 could date anywhere within a 1,200-year period between
roughly A.D. 500 and 1700. The Goose Creek series was the primary utility ware throughout
the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown Plain for about
200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods before once
again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984).
Site 41MQ218 is similar to a number of other sites in the area investigated by Horizon in
recent years (Brownlow 2003 and 2005). Testing investigations on those nearby sites, which
possessed similar sparse assemblages, failed to produce any evidence of subsurface features
or stratified deposits. Based on this previous experience, it is believed that any additional
investigations on site 41MQ218 would produce similar results; as such, no further investigations
appear to be warranted.

6.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Site 41MQ218 appears to represent a typical example of a small, short-term
encampment aboriginal site containing sparse cultural deposits, and it is Horizon’s opinion that
the site is not eligible for inclusion in the NRHP. As such, Horizon recommends that no further
investigations are warranted in connection with the proposed development of Mitchell Island.
Horizon recommends that cultural resources clearance be granted for the proposed
undertaking. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial features are
inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance of the
facility, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the USACE
and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 070183 AR

37

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory,
pp. 72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The
Florida State Museum, Gainesville.

Bement, L.C.
1987
Buried in the Bottoms: The Archeology of Lake Creek Reservoir, Montgomery
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Brownlow, R.K.
2003

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey and Subsequent Testing of the Proposed
Woodlands Southwest Detention Pond, The Woodlands, Montgomery County,
Texas. HJN 030019. Horizon Environmental Services, Inc., Austin, Texas.

Brownlow, R.K.
2005
An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey and Subsequent SAL/NRHP Eligibility
Testing of 4 Sites (41HR987, 41HR988, 41HR989, and 41HR990) within the
Proposed Woodlands V7 Detention Basin, The Woodlands, Harris County, Texas.
HJN 040235. Horizon Environmental Services, Inc., Austin, Texas.

HJN 070183 AR

39

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Butzer, K.W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
DeLorme
2008
DeLorme Street Atlas USA 2007. DeLorme, Yarmouth, Maine.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas.
Reports of Investigations, No. 8,
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Gandy, W.H.
1952
A History of Montgomery County, Texas. Unpublished Masters thesis, University of
Houston.
Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.

40

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Martin, W.N.
1950
A History of Montgomery, Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Sam Houston State
Teachers College.
McMahon, C.A., R.G. Frye, and K.L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Montgomery, R.N.
1975
The History of Montgomery County. Austin: Jenkins.
(NAIP) National Agriculture Imagery Program
2006
Farm Service Agency, US Department of Agriculture. Digital orthophoto quarterquadrangle, Montgomery, Texas. Aerial Photography Field Office.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:163.

HJN 070183 AR

41

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

(NRCS) Natural Resources Conservation Service
2007
Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed 3 December 2007.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc.,
Corpus Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330

Shelby, C.A., M.K. McGowen, S. Aranow, W.L. Fisher, L.F. Brown, Jr., J.H. McGowen, C.G.
Groat, and V.E. Barnes
1968
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Beaumont Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin (revised 1992).
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C.
Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
(USGS) US Geological Survey
1979
7.5-minute series topographic quadrangle maps. Tamina, Texas.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

42

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test and Backhoe Trench Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test and Backhoe Trench Summary Data
UTM Coordinates 1
Unit No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

Soils

Cultural
Materials

Comments

Shovel Tests
ST 1

261611

3339241

0-35
35-50
50-65

ST 2

ST 3

ST 4

261632

261592

261540

3339430

3339434

261540

ST 6

261548

261694

3339277

3339644

ST 8

ST 9

ST 10

ST 11

261733

261749

261687

261669

261605

3339578

3339528

3339548

3339508

3339339

HJN 070183 AR

Light brown sandy loam w/
reddish-brown clay mottles
Dense yellow sandy clay w/
red clay mottles
Pale gray sandy loam

40-85

Disturbed dredge spoil

85-120

Fine pale brown sand

Native sand

0-30

Light gray sandy loam

35-70

Light brown sand w/ abundant
clay mottles

0-30

Light grayish-brown sandy
loam
Light brown sandy loam w/
reddish-brown and yellow
clay mottles

None

Proposed bridge location –
mainland side
Tiny river gravels @ 0-50
cmbs

Pale brown sandy loam w/
yellow sandy clay mottles

None

Proposed bridge location –
island side

Proposed bridge location –
island side

0-15

Dark gray sandy loam

None

15-70

Light brown sand

None

70-120

Pale brown fine sand
Pale grayish-brown sandy
loam
Very dense compact gray
sandy clay w/ abundant river
gravels

0-35

Pale gray sandy loam

35-70

Very dense pale brown sandy
clay w/ clay mottles

0-20

Pale gray silty sand

20-100

Grayish-white silty sand

0-30

Pale grayish brown silty sand

30-40

Rock-hard gray sandy clay w/
reddish-brown clay striations

0-30

Pale gray sandy loam

30-60

Compact pale brown sand

Disturbed dredge spoil

None

Dense clay

0-40

Disturbed dredge spoil

Disturbed dredge spoil

50-60

40-65
ST 7

None

0-40

30-50

ST 5

Light brown sandy loam

1 flake @
110 cmbs
None

Disturbed dredge spoil
Disturbed dredge spoil

None

None
Saturated with depth –
native?
None

None

Native sands – deep cultural

None

60-120

Fine pale brown sand

2 flakes, 1
sherd (@
85-100
cmbs)

0-35

Pale gray sandy loam

None

35-100

Compact pale brown sand

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test and Backhoe Trench Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test and Backhoe Trench Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates 1
Unit No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

Cultural
Materials

Soils

Comments

Shovel Tests (cont.)
ST 12

261490

3339293

0-10

Gray sandy loam

10-60

Light brown sand w/ reddishbrown clay mottles

None

60-100

Fine pale brown sand

Backhoe Trenches
BT 1

261697

3339651

0-80
80-170

BT 2

BT 3

261717

261640

3339573

3339558

170-230

Olive clay w/ red clay mottles

0-90

Pale brown sand w/ red and
mustard sandy clay mottles

90-240

Pale brown sand

0-120

120-170
BT 4

261661

3339505

0-80

80-230

BT 5

261613

3339428

0-50
50-230

BT 6

261609

3339368

0-110
110-130

BT 7

BT 8

261532

261563

3339298

3339281

A-2

3339360

Medium brown sand w/ red
sandy clay mottles
Mixed pale brown and
medium brown sand, medium
brown sandy clay, and red
and mustard clay mottles
Medium brown sand w/ red
clay mottles
Fine pale brown sand w/ few
reddish-brown clay striations
Fine pale brown sand w/ few
medium brown and mustard
sandy clay mottles
Mottled brown, mustard, and
reddish-brown clay
Clumpy medium brown sand
Clumpy pale brown sand

110-130

Mottled orange, red, and gray
clay

160-230
261479

Pale brown clayey sand w/
reddish-brown sandy clay
striations
Very dense compacted sandy
clay red w/ grey and olive
mottles

0-40

0-90

None

Disturbed dredge spoil
Disturbed dredge spoil
Native soil

None

Disturbed dredge spoil
Native soil

40-110

90-160

BT 9

Pale brown sand w/ reddishbrown sandy clay mottles
Pale brown sand w/ reddishbrown clay striations

Damp pale brown sand

None

Disturbed dredge spoil

Native soil
None

Disturbed dredge spoil

Disturbed dredge spoil

None

Native soil; root bioturbation

None

Native soil

None

Native soil

None

Native soil?

Wet pale brown sand w/ roots
and strong smell of methane
Mottled pale brown and red
clay

Native soil?
Native soil

0-30

Pale brown sand

30-115

Medium brown sand w/ deep
red clay mottles

None

Disturbed dredge spoil
Disturbed dredge spoil

115-130

Mottled brown and red clay

Native soil

070183_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 10-Acre Mitchell Island Development, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test and Backhoe Trench Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates 1
Unit No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

Soils

Cultural
Materials

Comments

Backhoe Trenches (cont.)
BT 10

261551

3339448

0-50
50-130
130-150

1

Medium brown sand w/
abundant red clay mottles
Very compact dark gray and
red clay
Platy dark gray and red
striated clay

None

Disturbed dredge spoil

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1927 (NAD 27)

cmbs = Centimeters below surface
BT = Backhoe Trench
ST = Shovel Test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 070183 AR

A-3

