Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of
the Loop 4 Extension Project,
Buda, Hays County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4506
HJN 070071 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

HNTB Corporation
Austin, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

June 2007

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of
the Loop 4 Extension Project,
Buda, Hays County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

HNTB Corporation
301 Congress Avenue, Suite 600
Austin, Texas 78701

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 070071 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4506

June 2007

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The City of Buda, Texas, is proposing to build an approximately 0.6-kilometer- (km) (0.4mile- [mi]) long extension of Loop 4 in Buda, Hays County, Texas. The proposed undertaking
would construct an approximately 0.6-km- (0.4-mi-) long extension of Loop 4 within a
combination of existing and new right-of-way (ROW) extending from the intersection of Loop 4
(also known as Main Street in downtown Buda) and the northbound Interstate Highway (IH) 35
frontage road eastward to County Road (CR) 118. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) consists
of a linear corridor measuring approximately 0.6 km (0.4 mi) in length by 38 meters (m)
(125 feet [ft]) in width. The western half of the proposed Loop 4 extension would consist of an
expansion of the existing 221 Drive, which ends in a cul-de-sac approximately 299 m (980 ft)
east of its intersection with the northbound IH 35 frontage road, and the eastern half of the APE
traverses a vacant lot and a paved parking lot. The APE encompasses approximately
2.6 hectares (ha) (6.4 acres [ac]).
The proposed Loop 4 extension project is being sponsored by the City of Buda, a
political subdivision of the State of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977 [revised 1987], Title 9,
Chapter 191, VACS, Art. 6145-9). In addition, the City of Buda may consult with the Texas
Department of Transportation (TxDOT) during project design, construction, and/or ongoing
maintenance of the roadway extension, and the project may therefore additionally fall under the
jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966 (P.L. 89665; 80 Stat. 915; 16 USC §470 et seq.) via the indirect involvement of the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA). Since the proposed undertaking represents a publicly sponsored
project with the potential for damaging or destroying cultural resources, the City of Buda was
required to provide for a cultural resource evaluation of the proposed impact area to meet its
legal responsibilities under existing state, and possibly also federal, guidelines.
To meet its responsibilities under these statutes, the City of Buda tasked HNTB
Corporation (HNTB), through its archeological subcontractor Horizon Environmental Services,
Inc. (Horizon), to conduct a cultural resource survey of the APE associated with the proposed
project. On 3 May 2007, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd and Jared Wiersema, under the
direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, conducted an intensive survey of the APE
to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
construction project. At the time of the survey, the sky was overcast and thunderstorms

HJN 070071 AR

iii

Management Summary

threatened, but the ground was dry. The existing 221 Drive is covered in road pavement;
flanking storm water drainage ditches; driveways; utility lines; and mowed, short-grass-covered
areas adjacent to the road. Areas of proposed new ROW consist of a vacant lot covered in
short, mowed grasses as well as the front yards, driveways, and parking lots of developed
commercial parcels. Those portions of the APE not covered in pavement and driveways are
covered in mowed, short grasses, and ground surface visibility was generally less than 30%.
The modern ground surface within the existing and proposed new ROW was thoroughly
inspected for historic and prehistoric cultural resources. Horizon’s archeologists examined
100% of the project area by traversing 2 parallel transects across the length of the APE and
excavated 12 shovel tests, thereby exceeding the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) for a project area of this size. This survey was conducted under Texas
Antiquities Permit No. 4506.
The APE has experienced extensive previous impacts from the commercial and
transportation-related construction, including the existing ROWs of 221 Drive and Pit Stop
Trace, driveways, utility lines, and the front lawns and parking lots of developed commercial
parcels, though 1 vacant lot covered in mowed, short grasses was undeveloped. No cultural
resources, historic or prehistoric, were documented as a result of the cultural resource survey.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of the Loop 4 extension project
area documented in this report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by
the proposed undertaking. No new cultural resources were identified in the remainder of the
project area as a result of intensive survey activities, and previously documented cultural
resources in the vicinity of the project area would not be adversely affected by the proposed
undertaking.
Cultural resource clearance is recommended for the project. However, in the unlikely
event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point
during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously
surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the Texas Historical Commission (THC)
should be notified of the discovery.

iv

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ..................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology ........................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.......................................................................... 6
2.3
Climate ............................................................................................................ 6
2.4
Biota ................................................................................................................ 7

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND..................................................................................... 11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 12,000 to 8500 B.P.) ............................................... 11
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 8500 to 1200 B.P.) ......................................................... 12
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1200 to 350 B.P.) .............................................. 12
3.4
Historic Period (ca. 350 B.P. to Present) ....................................................... 12

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................. 17
4.1
Archival Research ......................................................................................... 17
4.2
Survey Methods............................................................................................. 19

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................. 25

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................. 27
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................. 27
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .... 28
6.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Archeological Landmark ................... 29
6.4
Summary of Inventory Results ...................................................................... 30
6.5
Management Recommendations ................................................................... 30

7.0

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................. 31
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 070071 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.

vi

Location of Loop 4 Extension Project Area ................................................................. 2
Aerial Photograph of Project Area ............................................................................... 3
Overview of Intersection of 221 Drive and Pit Stop Trace (View Northeast) ............. 20
Overview of 221 Drive from Cul-de-Sac at East End (Facing West) ......................... 20
Overview of Vacant Lot (foreground) and CR 221 (background) (Facing West) ....... 21
Overview of Parking Lot at East End of Project Area (Facing Southeast) ................ 21
Locations of Shovel Tests in the Project Area........................................................... 22

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The City of Buda, Texas, is proposing to build an approximately 0.6-kilometer- (km) (0.4mile- [mi]) long extension of Loop 4 in Buda, Hays County, Texas (Figures 1 and 2). The
proposed undertaking would construct an approximately 0.6-km- (0.4-mi-) long extension of
Loop 4 within a combination of existing and new right-of-way (ROW) extending from the
intersection of Loop 4 (also known as Main Street in downtown Buda) and the northbound
Interstate Highway (IH) 35 frontage road eastward to County Road (CR) 118. The Area of
Potential Effect (APE) consists of a linear corridor measuring approximately 0.6 km (0.4 mi) in
length by 38 meters (m) (125 feet [ft]) in width. The western half of the proposed Loop 4
extension would consist of an expansion of the existing 221 Drive, which ends in a cul-de-sac
approximately 299 m (980 ft) east of its intersection with the northbound IH 35 frontage road,
and the eastern half of the APE traverses a vacant lot and a paved parking lot. The APE
encompasses approximately 2.6 hectares (ha) (6.4 acres [ac]).
The proposed Loop 4 extension project is being sponsored by the City of Buda, a
political subdivision of the State of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977 [revised 1987], Title 9,
Chapter 191, VACS, Art. 6145-9). In addition, the City of Buda may consult with the Texas
Department of Transportation (TxDOT) during project design, construction, and/or ongoing
maintenance of the roadway extension, and the project may therefore additionally fall under the
jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966 (P.L. 89665; 80 Stat. 915; 16 USC §470 et seq.) via the indirect involvement of the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA). Since the proposed undertaking represents a publicly sponsored
project with the potential for damaging or destroying cultural resources, the City of Buda was
required to provide for a cultural resource evaluation of the proposed impact area to meet its
legal responsibilities under existing state, and possibly also federal, guidelines.
To meet its responsibilities under these statutes, the City of Buda tasked HNTB
Corporation (HNTB), through its archeological subcontractor Horizon Environmental Services,
Inc. (Horizon), to conduct a cultural resource survey of the APE associated with the proposed
project. On 3 May 2007, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd and Jared Wiersema, under the
direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, conducted an intensive survey of the APE
to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed

HJN 070071 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Loop 4 Extension Project Area

2

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

Source: HNTB Corporation

Figure 2. Aerial Photograph of Project Area
construction project. This survey was conducted by Horizon under subcontract to HNTB and
under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4506.

HJN 070071 AR

3

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The Loop 4 extension project area is located in northeastern Hays County in southern
Central Texas, east of downtown Buda, near the boundary of 2 significant physiographic
provinces—the Edwards Plateau and the Blackland Prairie. The Blackland Prairie, the narrow
physiographic zone situated between the Edwards Plateau to the west and the Gulf Coastal
Plain to the east, is a low, rolling land that extends in a narrow band along the eastern edge of
the Balcones fault zone from the Red River Valley in northeastern Texas to the southern edge
of the Edwards Plateau. This is an area of low topographic relief and poor drainage in which
water often ponds after rainstorms and streams flow at very gentle gradients. The Edwards
Plateau and Balcones Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that arcs across
Texas to form a distinct boundary between uplands composed primarily of limestone bedrock
and lower plains composed mostly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary is marked by an
abrupt scarp (the Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational ramp, but the
entire length of this transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography, bedrock,
hydrology, soil, vegetation, and animal life. The project area is situated on the Blackland Prairie
in upland settings to the south of Onion Creek, a major tributary of the Colorado River. The
average elevation within the relatively small project area is about 212 m (695 ft) above mean
sea level (amsl).
Hydrologically, the project area is situated within the Colorado River basin. Hays
County’s numerous streams generally flow in an easterly direction. The principal waterways are
Bear, Cypress, and Onion creeks as well as the Blanco and San Marcos rivers. The Edwards
Aquifer underlies the eastern portion of the county, and the San Marcos Springs, the second
largest in Texas, deliver over 102 million gallons of water daily. The project area is situated on
a broad, flat upland formation consisting of an ancient stream terrace remnant, and the APE
does not cross any streams. The nearest major waterway to the project area, Onion Creek,
passes approximately 0.8 km (0.5 mi) northwest of the western terminus of the APE. Onion
Creek discharges into the Colorado River in southeastern Austin, Texas, northeast of the project
area. The Colorado River, in turn, flows southeastward across the Blackland Prairie and the
Gulf Coastal Plain, ultimately discharging into the Gulf of Mexico a short distance northeast of
Matagorda Bay.

HJN 070071 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project area is underlain by a thick sequence of Cretaceous-age, sedimentary rock
strata. Major geologic units that crop out in the vicinity of the project area include the Edwards
Limestone Formation, Glen Rose Formation (upper and lower parts), Pecan Gap Chalk, and
Austin Chalk. Specifically, the Loop 4 project area is underlain by Onion Creek Marl, a fluviatile
terrace deposit of late Pleistocene age that forms broad terraces in the vicinity of Buda and
downstream along Onion Creek (Proctor et al. 1974). Onion Creek Marl consists of mixed sand,
clay, and gravel deposits and measures up to 15 m (50 ft) in thickness.
The project area is situated on the Lewisville-Gruene-Krum soil association, which
consists of deep, shallow, and very shallow, nearly level to gently sloping soils over loamy,
clayey, and gravelly sediments on stream terraces and valley fills of the Blackland Prairie and
Edwards Plateau (Batte 1984). Specifically, the project area traverses 2 soil units—Branyon
clay, 0 to 1% slopes (ByA), and Gruene clay, 1 to 5% slopes (GrC) (Batte 1984). Branyon soils,
which consist of deep, moderately well-drained, nearly level to gently sloping clayey soils on
broad, ancient stream terraces that formed in calcareous, clayey sediment, underlie
approximately 75% of the APE. Gruene soils, which consist of very shallow to shallow, welldrained, gently sloping, clayey soils on uplands that formed in clayey sediment over gravel,
comprise about 25% of the APE.
Regional climate has a profound effect on the morphology and formation of soil profiles
in Hays County (Batte 1984). Winter precipitation occurs primarily in the form of persisting fogs,
drizzles, and light showers that contribute to low soil temperature, poor aeration of soils, and
reduction of animal activity and plant growth. Spring rains are generally of short duration and
high intensity, and they tend to retard soil development through erosion. During hot, dry
summers, the clay soils of Hays County crack deeply, and subsequent rains wash the surface
soil into the cracks. Rainfall quantities are sufficient to leach the calcium carbonate from the
upper horizons of some soils, but not enough to leach it out entirely. Most of the soils in the
county have specks, threads, or nodules of calcium carbonate throughout the profile, and
significant calcium carbonate accumulation characterizes B horizons where they are present. In
a few soils, most of the lime and plant nutrients are leached to a depth below the rooting zone,
and clay particles have moved down to form very slowly permeable horizons.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
Bryant and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central
Texas from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial
period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow

6

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands
were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985).
During the Post-Glacial period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more
stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas.
The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic
conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway
(1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably
achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Hays County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern climate is
typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate is
influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified by
polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer, and
fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.
On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature in Texas
manifest regional clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east
to west and mean annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast
(Larkin and Bomar 1983). In Central Texas, climate has fluctuated from subtropical humid to
subtropical subhumid. Average annual precipitation totals 81 cm (32 in) and temperature
averages 19°Celsius (°C) (67°Fahrenheit [°F]) annually, ranging from 36°C (96°F) in August (the
warmest month) to 15°C (59°F) in January (the coldest month). During this time, however, drier
periods lasting from 3 to 7 years, when total annual rainfall ranged from 30 to 64 cm (12 to
25 in), were followed by abnormally wet years with 114 to 127 cm (45 to 50 in) of rainfall.
Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are
associated with frontal storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with
warm, moist air masses moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The
topographic discontinuity along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf
storm trace and increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall.
Two extreme examples are the excess of 91 cm (36 in) of rain that fell within an 18-hour period
in the vicinity of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 56-cm (22-in) deluge that fell in less
than 3 hours near O’Harris, Texas, in May 1935. Lower rainfall amounts are characteristic of
winter and late summer. In winter, frontal storms pass so frequently that there is little time for
moisture to increase, and prevailing upper-level winds from west to east often dominate over
meridional flow, meaning that much of the available moisture is derived from the Pacific rather
than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer, cool fronts rarely penetrate into the region, and
rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal convective storms.

2.4

BIOTA

The project area is situated in the southwestern portion of the Texan biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces (Dice 1943).

HJN 070071 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Some species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texan province. The
boundary, characterized as “approximate,” between Blair’s (1950) Texan and Balconian
provinces passes through western Williamson County, northwest of the project area. Rainfall in
the Texan province is barely in excess of water need, and the region is classified by Thornwaite
(1948) as a C2 (moist subhumid) climate with a moisture surplus index of from 0 to 20%.
Edaphic controls on vegetation types are important in the Texan biotic province, which is
located near the border between moisture surplus and moisture deficiency. Sandy soils support
oak-hickory forests dominated by post oak (Quercus stellata), blackjack oak (Q. marilandica),
and hickory (Carya buckleyi). Clay soils originally supported a tall-grass prairie, but much of this
soil type has been placed under cultivation. Dominant tall-grass prairie species include western
wheatgrass (Agrophyron smithii), silver beardgrass (Andropogon saccharoides), little bluestem
(Andropogon scoparius), and Texas wintergrass (Stipa leucotricha). Major areas of oak-hickory
forest include the Eastern and Western Cross Timbers, and major tall-grass prairie areas
include the Blackland, Grand, and Coastal prairies. Some characteristic associations of the
Austroriparian province occur locally in the Texan province, such as a mixed stand of loblolly
pine (Pinus taeda) and blackjack and post oak in Bastrop County, as well as a series of peat
and bog marshes distributed in a line extending from Leon to Gonzales counties.
The fauna associated with this region are represented by a mixture of species from the
Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, Kansan, Balconian, and Texan biotic provinces. At
least 49 species of mammals occur in the Texan province, including Virginia opossum
(Didelphis virginiana), eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus), fox squirrel (Sciurus niger), desert
pocket gopher (Geomys breviceps), fulvous harvest mouse (Reithrodontomys fulvescens),
white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus), eastern
cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus floridanus), raccoon (Procyon lotor), striped skunk (Mephitis
mephitis), ground squirrel (Citellus tridecemlineatus), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginiana),
hispid pocket mouse (Perognathus hispidus), deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus), blacktailed jackrabbit (Lepus californicus), pygmy mouse (Baiomys taylori), 9-banded armadillo
(Dasypus novemcinctus), and jaguar (Felis onca). Both species of Terrapene known from the
Austroriparian province—eastern box turtle (T. Carolina) and desert box turtle (T. ornata)—
occur in the Texan province. Small herds of bison and antelope were common during the late
prehistoric and early historic periods, but these species are no longer native to this region
(Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).
Sixteen species of lizards, including 7 grassland and 9 forest species, are also found,
including green anole (Anolis carolinensis), eastern fence lizard (Sceloporus undulates),
common ground skink (Leiolopisma laterale), and glass snake (Ophiosaurus ventralis
[grassland species]), as well as collared lizard (Crotaphytus collaris), Texas spiny lizard
(Sceloporus olivaceous), Texas horned lizard (Phrynosoma cornutum), and Great Plains skink
(Eumeces obsoletus [forest species]). Only 5 species of urodele fauna are known from this
area, including small-mouthed salamander (Ambystoma texanum), tiger salamander
(Ambystoma tigrinum), and eastern lesser siren (Siren intermedia), and the Texan province acts
as a barrier to urodele distribution between the endemic Balconian province fauna to the west
and the Austroriparian fauna to the east.

8

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

Anuran fauna is composed primarily of Austroriparian or otherwise widely distributed
species, including eastern spadefoot toad (Scaphiopus holbrookii), Gulf Coast toad (Bufo
valliceps), Woodhouse’s toad (Bufo woodhousii), southern cricket frog (Acris gryllus), southern
chorus frog (Pseudacris nigrita), gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor), green treefrog (Hyla cinerea),
North American bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana), northern leopard frog (Rana pipiens), and narrowmouthed toad (Microhyla carolinensis). Additional anuran species that fail to cross from the
Texan into the Austroriparian province include pacific tree frog (Pseudacris clarkia), Strecker’s
chorus frog (Pseudacris streckeri), and striped whipsnake (Microhyla olivacea). Other reptile
and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include 6-lined racerunner (Aspidoscelis
sexlineata), rat snake (Ptyas mucosus), eastern hognose snake (Heterodon platirhinos), rough
green snake (Opheodrys aestivus), copperhead (Agkistrodon contortrix), western diamondback
rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox), Blanchard’s cricket frog (Acris crepitans), diamondback water
snake (Nerodia rhombifer rhombifer), and Houston toad (Bufo houstonensis).
Common bird species include northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus), eastern
meadowlark (Sturnella magna), mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), killdeer (Charadrius
vociferus), field sparrow (Spizella pusilla), red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis), turkey vulture
(Cathartes aura), belted kingfisher (Ceyrle alcyon), and mockingbird (Mimus polyglottos).

HJN 070071 AR

9

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) Central Texas Archeological
Region. The indigenous human inhabitants of Central Texas practiced a generally nomadic
hunting and gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory, and, in contrast to much of the rest of
North America, mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly
through time in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 12,000 TO 8500 B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period.
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (12,000 to 8500 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various
periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted,
lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers,
gravers, and bone foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized
into egalitarian bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic
subsistence and settlement pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence
patterns in Central Texas are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence
focused on the exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the
PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as
has been documented elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern
appears to have been practiced throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the
PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point
styles. These include the Early PaleoIndian period, which is recognized based on large, fluted
projectile points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late

HJN 070071 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

PaleoIndian period, which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 8500 TO 1200 B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(8500 to 1200 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Central Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture
shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of
groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these
3 subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as well. Perhaps most
markedly, burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod, continuing into the
Late Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic subperiod. In
addition, the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered to constitute
evidence of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least partially
accounts for the lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1200 TO 350 B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 350 B.P.) (Collins 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas,
unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The
Late Prehistoric period is generally divided into 2 phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin
phase sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to
suggest that the Austin-phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north, and
lack the ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 B.P. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay.
However, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The

12

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994) as well as increased participation
on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time that heavy settlement
of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was
greatly diminished.
During the Spanish period, the region lay at the edge of the main route from San Antonio
to East Texas, the Old San Antonio Road1. In 1691, Domingo Terán de los Ríos crossed the
southern edge of the county on his way to the East Texas missions and the Red River. The
Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre expedition explored the upper San Marcos River in 1709, and Louis
Juchereau de St. Denis was attacked by Apaches in 1714 at the San Marcos River crossing. A
mission to be called San Marcos was authorized in 1729 near the site of present San Marcos,
but the authorization was later rescinded in favor of San Antonio. San Xavier Mission and San
Francisco Xavier Presidio were located briefly at the site in 1755-56, but no permanent
settlement was attempted until 1807, when some 80 persons were moved to the Old San
Antonio Road crossing of the San Marcos River. San Marcos de Neve, 1 of a chain of defense
settlements, was abandoned 4 years later, after flooding and attacks by Comanche and
Tonkawa Indians. To encourage settlement after the Mexican War for Independence, the
government of Coahuila and Texas issued land grants in the county to Juan Martín Veramendi
in 1831, Juan Vicente Campos in 1832, and Thomas Jefferson Chambers in 1834. The first
Anglo-American settler in Hays County, Thomas G. McGehee, was issued a league of land in
1835 by the Mexican government and was farming north of the site of present San Marcos in
1846.
On 1 March 1848, the state legislature formed Hays County from territory formerly part
of Travis County. William W. Moon, Eli T. Merriman, and Mike Sessom, original settlers and
members of John Coffee Hays’ company of Texas Rangers, worked with General Edward
Burleson, a member of the Texas Senate, to have the new county named for Hays. County
organization and the designation of San Marcos as the county seat gave impetus to settlement;
the population grew from 387 in 1850 to 2,126 in 1860. The county shrank slightly on
12 February 1858, when it lost acreage to the new Blanco County and gained a portion of
Comal County. On 10 January 1862, the legislature again transferred another small area to
Blanco County. Boundaries remained stable for nearly a century, until resurvey of the HaysTravis county line in 1955 added more than 16,000 acres to Hays County.
A stage line from Austin to San Antonio crossed the county in 1848, the year that
Edward Burleson built the first sawmill. W.A. Thompson built the first cotton gin in the early
1850s, and, between 1855 and 1885, Ezekiel Nance built and operated 5 gins, 5 gristmills, a
sawmill, a shingle mill, and a beef packery. Alfred B.F. Kerr organized the first church in Hays

1
The following history of Hays County has been compiled from Barkley (1970), Dobie (1936), Swisher (1878), and
Wyatt (1977), as summarized in the online Handbook of Texas History.

HJN 070071 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

County in 1847, and a school was built at San Marcos in 1849. Another school was opened at
Snake Lake in 1851, and John D. Pitts built a school in Stringtown before 1860. The Johnson
Institute, founded in 1852 by Thomas Jefferson Johnson, drew students from a large area of
Central Texas until it closed in 1872.
The early settlers of Hays County were a mix of old Texans and Georgia and Arkansas
immigrants. With the coming of the Civil War, most of the residents favored secession. Colonel
Peter C. Woods’ 36th Texas Cavalry regiment was organized at Camp Clark, in neighboring
Guadalupe County, in 1862; Company A was primarily made up of Hays County men. During
the war, county beef helped to feed Confederate forces. Shortly after the war’s end, Colonel
George F. Snyder, a Georgian, established the first newspaper in Hays County, the Pioneer.
During Reconstruction, a Ku Klux Klan group was formed, and, in May 1876, a military
organization, the San Marcos Greys, was formed.
George Neill drove the first herd of cattle from Hays County to Kansas in 1867, and
other drives followed. Farming also became more profitable in the eastern part of the county
and helped encourage a fresh influx of settlers. By 1878, the county was out of debt, several
new communities had been organized, and schools had grown in number to match the
increased population. The Coronal Institute was founded in 1866 followed by the San Marcos
public school system in 1870. Southwest Texas Normal School was authorized at the turn of
the century and opened in 1903 as a teacher-training institution; it became Southwest Texas
State University in 1969. San Marcos Baptist Academy was established in 1907.
In 1880, the first Hays County rail line, built by the International-Great Northern Railroad,
was completed to San Marcos from Austin; it later extended to San Antonio. Another population
boom followed the railroad. The county population nearly doubled, from 7,555 in 1880 to
14,142 in 1900, and then remained virtually unchanged for the next 50 years despite the
influences of World War I and the depression of the 1930s. Even the economic stimulus of
World War II had only momentary effect. Hays County remained predominantly agricultural;
almost 90% of the mid-1960s farm income came from livestock. Not until the establishment of
the Gary Job Corps Training Center on the site of the former Gary Air Force Base in 1964 and
the growth of enrollment at the university in San Marcos did Hays County begin a period of
steady growth—from 19,934 in 1960 to 27,642 in 1970; 40,594 in 1980; and 65,614 in 1990.
Although agriculture remained significant in county economics, nonagricultural income, primarily
at the educational and training facilities, played an even larger role. The 1979 per capita
income of $6,009, however, remained well below the state average of $8,778.
Since early in the century, Hays County has enjoyed a steady influx of tourists attracted
by the caves, springs, and spas of Wimberley and San Marcos. Aquarena Springs and Wonder
Caves are particularly well known. Camp Ben McCulloch, near Driftwood, was organized in
1896 as a site for reunions of the United Confederate Veterans; their descendents continue the
annual tradition. More recently, the county caught the attention of environmentalists. Ezell
Cave, a watery cavern in San Marcos, is the habitat of several rare animal species, including
the Texas blind salamander, and 6 of the 10 known varieties of aquatic cave fauna are found
only in this cave and its underground waters. The only known habitat of the San Marcos
salamander is San Marcos Springs, and 2 other unique fish of the springs, the fountain darter
14

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

and San Marcos gambusia, were classed as endangered in 1990. Also on the endangered list
is Texas wild rice, which is not known to exist outside a small area near the springs.
During the 1970s and 1980s, growth in the northern and eastern parts of the county was
influenced by the expanding Austin metropolitan area and the Austin-San Antonio urban strip
along Interstate Highway 35. In 1973, Hays County became part of the Austin Metropolitan
Statistical Area. In addition to the county seat, San Marcos, which had a population of 28,743 in
1990, other county population centers are Wimberley (2,403) Kyle (2,225), Buda (1,795),
Dripping Springs (1,033), and Hays (252).

HJN 070071 AR

15

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated survey area
2. To provide preliminary assessments of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and for
designation as State Archeological Landmarks (SALs)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
at the THC’s online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (Atlas), the National Park Service’s (NPS’s)
online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL), the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas State Historical Association’s
and the General Libraries at The University of Texas at Austin’s Handbook of Texas Online, as
well as a program of intensive survey of the survey area. No cultural resources were
documented as a result of this survey, so the second and third of these goals were not pursued.
The rest of this chapter presents the methodological background for the current investigations
and the specific survey methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating the field survey, Horizon personnel reviewed existing information on file
at the THC and TARL for data on previously recorded cultural resource sites and previous
archeological investigations conducted within a 1.6-km (1.0-mi) radius of the project area.
Based on this archival research, 2 previously recorded archeological sites—41HY19 and
41HY262—exist within 1.6 km (1.0 mi) of the project area. Both sites are located west of the
current APE on the southeast bank of Onion Creek at the mouths of unnamed tributary streams.
Site 41HY19, also known as the Henderson Site, was informally reported in 1963 by E.
Mott Davis of The University of Texas at Austin as a likely burned rock midden containing
abundant burned rock, mussel shell, chipped stone debris, and tools, including, according to the
site form on file at the THC, “2 Meserves, not in situ; many Tracis, ‘Trolan,’ very few

HJN 070071 AR

17

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

arrowpoints, many Pedernales; Nolan, Lange, Marcos, Ellis, lots of knives; no Montells; several
Darls; possibly a Marshal; double-ended knives, [and] one Pedernales with flaring stem and
twisted blade.” The site was revisited in 1983 or 1984 by Mike Davis and Pat Mercado-Allinger,
though no record of this visit was produced. The site was officially recorded in 1994 by Hicks &
Company during an archeological and historical survey of the Heep Trust property (Davis et al.
1994; Davis and Jones 1994). The site was described as an open prehistoric campsite and
burned rock midden, and additional diagnostic artifacts were observed that confirmed the
putative multiple-component aboriginal occupation sequence suggested by the earlier site
records. Minimally, cultural components dating to the Middle and Late Archaic periods were
confirmed, and earlier reports suggest that 1 or more Late Prehistoric components may be
represented as well. The 1994 site form mentions that human skull fragments were reportedly
found on the site by the landowner near the edge of an existing looter excavation, suggesting
that the site may contain, or once contained, human burials. Site 41HY19 was recommended
as eligible for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as an SAL, and additional archeological
investigations were recommended.
Also recorded during the 1994 Hicks & Company survey of the Heep Trust property, site
41HY262, also known as the Rylander Site, was described as a multiple-component aboriginal
open campsite and historic-age farmstead. The aboriginal component reportedly consisted of
aboriginal hearths and likely other cultural features as well as a surface scatter of lithic debitage.
The historic-age component consisted of a ca-1910 house with associated outbuildings, animal
pens, and surface artifact scatter. Site 41HY262 was recommended as eligible for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as an SAL, and additional archival research and archeological
testing were recommended.
In addition, Horizon personnel consulted the NPS’s NRIS database to determine
whether or not any NRHP-listed historic properties exist in the vicinity of the project area. The
City of Buda contains 1 listed NRHP historic property, the Onion Creek Post Office and
Stagecoach House, which is located at 109 North Loop 4. Also, 1 listed NRHP historic district is
present in Buda, the Downtown Buda Historic District, roughly bounded by Elm, Main, China,
and Austin streets. Neither the NRHP-listed property nor district is located in the vicinity of the
current project area, and the proposed undertaking would not result in any direct, indirect, or
cumulative impacts to these properties.
The THC’s online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas was consulted for information on
listed SALs in the vicinity of the project area. No cultural resources in the City of Buda have
been designated as SALs.
In Central Texas, aboriginal archeological sites are commonly found in upland areas and
alluvial terraces near stream/river channels and springs. While only a few previously
documented archeological sites occur in the vicinity of the project area, no systematic cultural
resource investigations designed to locate archeological sites have been conducted in the
immediate vicinity of the APE. While the project area is situated in an upland environment, the
proximity of the project area to Onion Creek and the City of Buda would tend to suggest, other
things being equal, that the project area has at least a moderate potential to contain potentially
significant cultural resources. The current project’s APE, however, has experienced rather
18

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

extensive previous impacts associated with construction within the existing ROW of 221 Drive,
associated utilities and ROW construction and landscaping, and adjacent commercial
development. These previous impacts would likely have removed any significant cultural
deposits within the APE, should any have existed.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

On 3 May 2007, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd and Jared Wiersema, under the
direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, conducted an intensive survey of the APE
to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
construction project. At the time of the survey, the sky was overcast and thunderstorms
threatened, but the ground was dry. The existing 221 Drive is covered in road pavement;
flanking storm water drainage ditches; driveways; utility lines; and mowed, short-grass-covered
areas adjacent to the road (Figures 3 to 6). Areas of proposed new ROW consist of a vacant lot
covered in short, mowed grasses as well as the front yards, driveways, and parking lots of
developed commercial parcels. Those portions of the APE not covered in pavement and
driveways are covered in mowed, short grasses, and ground surface visibility was generally less
than 30%. The modern ground surface within the existing and proposed new ROW was
thoroughly inspected for historic and prehistoric cultural resources. Horizon’s archeologists
examined 100% of the project area by traversing 2 parallel transects across the length of the
APE.
The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) for cultural
resource surveys state that, for linear surveys, a minimum of 16 shovel tests per mile, or
10 shovel tests per kilometer, be excavated within a ROW corridor measuring 30 m (100 ft) in
width. The shovel testing density may be increased in areas with higher probabilities to contain
cultural resources, such as stream terraces, and decreased in areas with low probabilities for
cultural resources, such as heavily disturbed areas or upland settings with minimal soil cover.
Thus, a minimum of 8 shovel tests would be required in the approximately 0.6-km- (0.4-mi-) long
by 38-m- (125-ft-) wide survey corridor. Despite the extent of existing disturbances within the
APE, Horizon excavated a total of 12 shovel tests within the APE wherever soils could actually
be located beyond paved areas in which shovel tests could be excavated, thereby exceeding
the TSMASS requirements (Figure 7).
Appendix A presents the stratigraphy and soil
characteristics observed in the 12 shovel tests.
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching in stream terraces and other areas with
the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are
capable of reaching (approximately 1.0 m [3.3 ft] below surface). The project area is located in
an upland setting well away from Holocene-age alluvial terrace deposits, and the near-surface
sediments in the project area are Pleistocene-age clays. Furthermore, the entire APE
associated with the proposed undertaking had been rather extensively disturbed as a result of
prior commercial construction. Shovel testing therefore constituted an adequate survey
technique for identifying cultural resources within the APE. No settings conducive to
preservation of deeply buried cultural deposits are present in the project area, and mechanical
trenching was consequently not employed as a site prospecting technique.

HJN 070071 AR

19

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 3. Overview of Intersection of 221 Drive and Pit Stop Trace (View Northeast)

Figure 4. Overview of 221 Drive from Cul-de-Sac at East End (Facing West)

20

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

Figure 5. Overview of Vacant Lot (foreground) and CR 221 (background) (Facing West)

Figure 6. Overview of Parking Lot at East End of Project Area (Facing Southeast)

HJN 070071 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 7. Locations of Shovel Tests in the Project Area

22

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

This survey set out to employ a non-collection policy for cultural materials. Nondiagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were to be
described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location in
which they were found. In the event that any diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points,
ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) were identified in the field, they were to be
collected and placed in resealable plastic bags labeled with relevant provenience information.
No cultural resources were encountered during the survey, so the proposed collection policy
was not brought into play.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken and a photographic
log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and
non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same
location in which they were found. In the event that any cultural materials were collected during
the survey, they were to be temporarily housed at Horizon’s laboratory facilities in Austin,
Texas, and processed for analysis. Any artifacts collected from public lands during the survey
would need to be curated at an approved curational facility according to the guidelines of an
approved curation facility, such as TARL. Curation includes standardized preparation and
labeling of field notes, photographs, and cultural materials. Arrangements for the dispensation
of any cultural materials collected from private land would be negotiated among the City of
Buda, any applicable landowners, and the THC. As no cultural resources were observed during
the survey, the collections policy was not brought into play.

HJN 070071 AR

23

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The City of Buda, Texas, is proposing to build an approximately 0.6-km- (0.4-mi-) long
extension of Loop 4 in Buda, Hays County, Texas. The proposed undertaking would construct
an approximately 0.6-km- (0.4-mi-) long extension of Loop 4 within a combination of existing
and new ROW extending from the intersection of Loop 4 (also known as Main Street in
downtown Buda) and the northbound IH 35 frontage road eastward to CR 118. The APE
consists of a linear corridor measuring approximately 0.6 km (0.4 mi) in length by 38 m (125 ft)
in width. The western half of the proposed Loop 4 extension would consist of an expansion of
the existing 221 Drive, which ends in a cul-de-sac approximately 299 m (980 ft) east of its
intersection with the northbound IH 35 frontage road, and the eastern half of the APE traverses
a vacant lot and a paved parking lot. The APE encompasses approximately 2.6 ha (6.4 ac).
The proposed Loop 4 extension project is being sponsored by the City of Buda, a
political subdivision of the State of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition, the City of Buda may consult with TxDOT during project
design, construction, and/or ongoing maintenance of the roadway extension, and the project
may therefore additionally fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the NHPA via the indirect
involvement of the FHWA. Since the proposed undertaking represents a publicly sponsored
project with the potential for damaging or destroying cultural resources, the City of Buda was
required to provide for a cultural resource evaluation of the proposed impact area to meet its
legal responsibilities under existing state, and possibly also federal, guidelines.
To meet its responsibilities under these statutes, the City of Buda tasked HNTB, through
its archeological subcontractor Horizon, to conduct a cultural resource survey of the APE
associated with the proposed project. On 3 May 2007, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd and
Jared Wiersema, under the direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, conducted an
intensive survey of the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be
impacted by the proposed construction project. At the time of the survey, the sky was overcast
and thunderstorms threatened, but the ground was dry. The existing 221 Drive is covered in
road pavement; flanking storm water drainage ditches; driveways; utility lines; and mowed,
short-grass-covered areas adjacent to the road. Areas of proposed new ROW consist of a
vacant lot covered in short, mowed grasses as well as the front yards, driveways, and parking
lots of developed commercial parcels. Those portions of the APE not covered in pavement and
driveways are covered in mowed, short grasses, and ground surface visibility was generally less
than 30%. The modern ground surface within the existing and proposed new ROW was

HJN 070071 AR

25

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

thoroughly inspected for historic and prehistoric cultural resources. Horizon’s archeologists
examined 100% of the project area by traversing 2 parallel transects across the length of the
APE and excavated 12 shovel tests, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project
area of this size.
The APE has experienced extensive previous impacts from the commercial and
transportation-related construction, including the existing ROWs of 221 Drive and Pit Stop
Trace; driveways; utility lines; and the front lawns and parking lots of developed commercial
parcels, though 1 vacant lot covered in mowed, short grasses was undeveloped. No cultural
resources, historic or prehistoric, were documented as a result of the cultural resource survey.

26

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is the determination
of whether or not an archeological site possesses the potential to make a contribution to 1 or
more previously defined research questions. Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey
level are rarely sufficient to contribute in a meaningful manner to such research issues. The
objective is rather to determine which archeological sites could be most profitably investigated
further in pursuance of regional, methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore,
adequate information on site function, context, and chronological placement from archeological
and, if appropriate, historical perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because
research questions vary as a function of geography and temporal period, determination of the
site context and chronological placement of cultural properties is a particularly important
objective during the inventory process.
Ultimately, management decisions regarding archeological properties are a function of
the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs. Archeological
resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of
archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for determination as SALs.

HJN 070071 AR

27

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

28

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

6.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ARCHEOLOGICAL LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are
located in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any
county, city, or political subdivision of the state are state archeological landmarks and are
eligible for designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
structure as an SAL if it (1) is publicly or privately owned and listed on the NRHP and (2) meets
one of the following 6 eligibility criteria:
A. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad
patterns of our history;
B. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. Is important to a particular cultural or ethnic group;
D. Is the work of a significant architect, master builder, or craftsman;
E. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction,
possesses high aesthetic value, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinctions; or
F. Has yielded or may be likely to yield information important to the understanding of
Texas culture or history.

HJN 070071 AR

29

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The APE has experienced extensive previous impacts from the commercial and
transportation-related construction, including the existing ROWs of 221 Drive and Pit Stop
Trace; driveways; utility lines; and the front lawns and parking lots of developed commercial
parcels, though 1 vacant lot covered in mowed, short grasses was undeveloped. No cultural
resources, historic or prehistoric, were documented as a result of the cultural resource survey.

6.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of the Loop 4 extension project
area documented in this report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by
the proposed undertaking. No new cultural resources were identified in the remainder of the
project area as a result of intensive survey activities, and previously documented cultural
resources in the vicinity of the project area would not be adversely affected by the proposed
undertaking.
Cultural resource clearance is recommended for the project. However, in the unlikely
event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point
during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously
surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the THC should be notified of the
discovery.

30

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Barkley, M.S.
1970
A History of Central Texas. Austin Printing, Austin, Texas.
Batte, C.D.
1984
Soil Survey of Comal and Hays Counties. US Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Washington, D.C.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas.
No. 53, Austin.

Texas Water Development Board, Report

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dice, L.R.
1943
The Biotic Provinces of North America. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.

HJN 070071 AR

31

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Davis, M.W., and J.T. Jones
1994
Phase II Archeological and Historical Research and Investigation for the Heep Trust
Property, Travis and Hays Counties, Texas. Hicks & Company, Austin, Texas.
Davis, M.W., T. Jones, T. Howard, and P. Heisler
1994
An Archeological and Historical Research Project Conducted for the Heep Trust
Property, Hays and Travis Counties, Texas. Hicks & Company, Austin, Inc.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Dobie, D.R.
1936
San Marcos Record, 25 September 1936.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J.T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas. Submitted to the US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.

32

070071_arch_survey_report.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.

Proctor, C.V., Jr., T.E. Brown, J.H. McGowen, and N.B. Waechter
1974
Geologic Atlas of Texas, Austin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology
in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R.A. Ricklis and M.B.
Collins, pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Swisher, B.F.
1878
Historical Sketch of Hays County. American Sketch Book 4.
Thornwaite, C.W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
38:55-94.

Geographical Review

Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Wyatt, T.T.
1977
Historical Markers in Hays County.
Marcos, Texas.

HJN 070071 AR

Hays County Historical Commission, San

33

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Loop 4 Extension Project, Buda, Hays County, Texas

Table A-1. Loop 4 Extension Project Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Depth
(cmbs)

Soils

Artifacts

Easting

Northing

JW-1

613999

3329175

0-60

Disturbed mix of clay and road gravel

None

JW-2

614015

3329176

0-50

Disturbed mix of clay and road gravel

None

JW-3

614035

3329171

0-20

Disturbed mix of clay and road gravel

None

JW-4

614231

3329202

0-50

Dark brown clay loam

None

50-60

Dark brown loamy clay

JW-5

614255

3329211

0-50

Dark brown clay

None

JW-6

614300

3329220

0-10

Disturbed mix of clay and road gravel

None

MM-1

614089

3329178

0-20

Gravelly black clay

None

MM-2

614165

3329180

0-20

Gravelly black clay

None

MM-3

614218

3329192

0-20

Gravelly black clay

None

MM-4

614261

3329196

0-20

Black silty clay with asphalt inclusions

None

MM-5

614300

3329188

0-20

Gravelly black clay

None

MM-6

614300

3329193

0-20

Gravelly black clay

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1927 (NAD 27)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercatur

HJN 070071 AR

A-1

