Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station
Project, Harris County, Texas
By:
Charles E. Bludau, Jr., Jeffrey D. Owens, and Jesse O. Dalton

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9077
LJAES014-11292N
Prepared for:

Prepared by:

LJA Environmental Services, Inc.
Houston, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

October 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station
Project, Harris County, Texas
By:
Charles E. Bludau, Jr., Jeffrey D. Owens, and Jesse O. Dalton

Prepared for:

LJA Environmental Services, Inc.
2929 Briarpark Drive, Suite 600
Houston, Texas 77042

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
LJAES014-11292N

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9077

October 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by LJA Environmental
Services, Inc. (LJAES) on behalf of the Cedar Bayou Park Utility District to conduct a cultural
resources inventory survey and assessment for the proposed construction of a new wastewater
lift station and associated pipeline in eastern Harris County, Texas. The project area covers a
total area of approximately 0.6 hectare (1.5 acres) in a largely undeveloped wooded area within
the Cedar Bayou Park West residential subdivision located northwest of the intersection of Bayou
Boulevard and Fleming Drive in Baytown, Harris County, Texas. An existing wastewater plant
(WWTP) occupies a small area in the northern portion of the project area. For purposes of the
cultural resources survey, the project area is assumed to consist of the entire 0.6-hectare (1.5acre) tract.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by Cedar Bayou Park Utility District, a
political subdivision of the state of Texas. As such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition, the project may require the use of Nationwide Permits
(NWP) issued by the US Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District. As NWPs are federal
permits, those portions of the overall project area that fall under the purview of NWPs would also
fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA). As the
proposed project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the project sponsor is required to
provide the applicable federal agencies and the Texas Historical Commission, which serves as
the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an opportunity to review
and comment on the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties listed on or
considered eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) under the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) and/or for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks
(SAL) under the Antiquities Code of Texas, as appropriate.
On October 7, 2019, Horizon project archeologist Charles Edward Bludau, Jr. conducted
an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal
Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9077. The
purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that potentially would be
impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area and
thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. The project area is situated on densely wooded uplands and terraces on either side
of McGee Gully, which flows southeastward across the project area and discharges into Cedar

BOA11165

v

Management Summary

Bayou a short distance to the east of the project area. The area around the existing WWTP in
the northern portion of the project area had been recently mowed.
In addition to a pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of three shovel tests per 0.4 hectare (1.0 acre) for
project areas between 0.0 and 0.8 hectare (0.0 and 2.0 acres) size. As such, a minimum of five
shovel tests were necessary within the 0.6-hectare (1.5-acre) project area. Horizon excavated a
total of 10 shovel tests, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of this size. Shovel
testing typically revealed moderately deep to deep deposits of clay extending to depths of
60.0 centimeters (23.6 inches) or more below surface. Many shovel tests contained iron staining
and dense clayey sediments at depths ranging from the surface to the bottoms of shovel tests,
and many shovel tests exhibited signs of disturbance in near-surface sediments in the form of
heavily mottled clays. It is Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the potential to contain
subsurface archeological deposits were fully penetrated and that the project area was adequately
assessed for archeological resources.
No cultural resources, historic-age or prehistoric, were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant archeological resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No archeological resources were identified within the
project area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or that qualify
for inclusion in the NRHP under 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic
properties affected,” and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the
proposed undertaking. However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under
the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are
inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the
project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity
of the inadvertent discovery, and the THC should be notified immediately. Following completion
of the survey, all project records will be prepared for permanent curation at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL).

vi

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 7
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 7
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 7
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 8
2.4
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................11

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................13
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) ....................................................13
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) ........................................................14
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) .......................................................15
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) ...................................................16
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ......................................................16
3.6
Historic Period (ca. A.D. 1700 to Present) ....................................................17

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................25

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................29

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................33

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................35
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................35
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....36
7.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................37
7.4
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................38
7.5
Management Recommendations ..................................................................39

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................41
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

BOA11292

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1-1.
Figure 1-2.
Figure 1-3.
Figure 2-1.
Figure 4-1.
Figure 5-1.
Figure 5-2.
Figure 5-3.
Figure 5-4.

Vicinity Map of Project Area ................................................................................ 2
Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle .............................. 3
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph .................................................... 4
Soils Mapped within Project Area........................................................................ 9
Locations of Documented Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area ....26
Overview of Survey Area (Facing Southwest) ....................................................30
Overview of Existing WWTP within Survey Area (Facing Southwest).................30
Overview of Survey Area (Facing West) ............................................................31
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated Within Project Area .................................32

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 2-1.
Table 4-1.

viii

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area .................................................... 8
Summary of Documented Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area ....25

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by LJA Environmental
Services, Inc. (LJAES) on behalf of the Cedar Bayou Park Utility District to conduct a cultural
resources inventory survey and assessment for the proposed construction of a new wastewater
lift station and associated pipeline in eastern Harris County, Texas. The project area covers a
total area of approximately 0.6 hectare (1.5 acres) in a largely undeveloped wooded area within
the Cedar Bayou Park West residential subdivision located northwest of the intersection of Bayou
Boulevard and Fleming Drive in Baytown, Harris County, Texas (Figures 1-1 to 1-3). An existing
wastewater plant (WWTP) occupies a small area in the northern portion of the project area. For
purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area is assumed to consist of the entire 0.6hectare (1.5-acre) tract.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by Cedar Bayou Park Utility District, a
political subdivision of the state of Texas. As such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition, the project may require the use of Nationwide Permits
(NWP) issued by the US Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District. As NWPs are federal
permits, those portions of the overall project area that fall under the purview of NWPs would also
fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA). As the
proposed project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the project sponsor is required to
provide the applicable federal agencies and the Texas Historical Commission, which serves as
the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an opportunity to review
and comment on the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties listed on or
considered eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) under the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) and/or for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks
(SAL) under the Antiquities Code of Texas, as appropriate.
On October 7, 2019, Horizon project archeologist Charles Edward Bludau, Jr. conducted
an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal
Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9077. The
cultural resources investigations consisted of archival research, an intensive cultural resources
survey of the project area, and the production of a report suitable for review by the State Historic
Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules
of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 26, and the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA)
Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.

BOA11292

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1-1. Vicinity Map of Project Area
2

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

Figure 1-2. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

BOA11292

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1-3. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

4

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses cultural resources survey methods
Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources survey, and Chapter 7.0 presents
cultural resources management recommendations for the project. Chapter 8.0 lists the
references cited in the report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

BOA11292

5

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in northern Baytown in eastern Harris County, Texas. Harris
County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas, and the project area is located
about 13.8 kilometers (8.6 miles) north of Trinity Bay, an inlet of the Gulf of Mexico formed by the
confluence of Buffalo Bayou and the San Jacinto River between Houston and Baytown, Texas.
The Gulf of Mexico represents a structural basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas
Coastal Plain, which extends as far north as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and
westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock,
most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin, that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its
margins (Abbott 2001). The Houston area in general is underlain by rocks and unconsolidated
sediments that are quite young in a geological sense, ranging from modern to Miocene in age.
These consist predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic bodies arranged in an offlapped
sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine facies making up a
relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities between these
formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that occurred during periods
of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in this fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As a result of the
geometry of basin filling, successively younger rock units crop out in subparallel bands from the
basin margin toward the modern coastline.
The project area is situated within the city limits of Baytown, Texas. McGee Gully, a
channelized waterway, flows southeastward across the project area to its confluence with Cedar
Bayou approximately 0.2 kilometer (0.1 mile) east of the project area. Cedar Bayou flows
southward approximately 14.0 kilometers (8.7 miles) into Trinity Bay. Elevations across the
project area range from approximately 1.5 to 7.6 meters (5.0 to 25.0 feet) above mean sea level
(amsl).

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Geologically, the project area is underlain by the Beaumont Formation (USGS 2019). The
Beaumont, or Prairie, terrace is the youngest continuous coastwise terrace fronting the modern
Gulf (Abbott 2001). The Beaumont Formation consists of clay, silt, and fine sand arranged in
spatial patterns that reflect the distribution of fluvial (e.g., channel, point bar, levee, and

BOA11292

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

backswamp) and mudflat/coastal marsh facies (Van Siclen 1985). Sandy deposits associated
with littoral facies are also frequently considered part of the Beaumont. Many investigators (cf.
DuBar et al. 1991; Fisk 1938, 1940) have correlated the Beaumont terrace with the Sangamon
Interglacial (ca. 130 to 75 thousand years ago [kya]), although age estimates range from Middle
Wisconsinan (Alford and Holmes 1985) to 100 to 600 kya (Blum and Price 1994). While debate
about the temporal affiliations of and correlations among the deposits that underlie the major
coastline terraces remain active, they are of little direct geoarcheological relevance because
virtually all investigators agree that these deposits considerably predate the earliest demonstrated
dates of human occupation in North America.
Geomorphologically, the project area is underlain by one soil type—Dylan clay, 3 to 5%
slopes (Table 2-1; Figure 2-1) (NRCS 2019). This soil consists of Pleistocene-age clayey
fluviomarine deposits.
In southeast Texas Aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in deep
alluvial sediments adjacent to major streams and in coastal settings. Based on the physiographic
setting of the project area on Pleistocene-age uplands and terraces adjacent to Cedar Bayou and
one of its tributaries, the project area has moderate to high potential to contain aboriginal
archeological resources. However, due to the antiquity of the landform, these resources would
be expected to occur in surficial or shallowly buried sediments potentially lacking in integrity due
to erosion, the poor preservation contexts represented by the perennially or seasonally saturated
soils, and prior disturbances associated with construction of the existing WWTP in the northern
portion of the project area. Historic-age cultural resources may occur in any physiographic setting
and tend to be observable on the modern ground surface, though the relatively remote and semiwaterlogged setting of the project area suggests that use of the project area in the historical past
was probably limited.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). While
the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway (1985)
present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes three separate
climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late Glacial

Table 2-1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code
DylC

Soil Name
Dylan clay,
3 to 5% slopes

Typical Profile
(inches)

Parent Material
Clayey fluviomarine deposits derived from
igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary
rock on stream terraces

0 to 4: Clay (A)
4 to 14: Clay (Bw)
14 to 16: Clay (Bss)
16 to 80: Clay (Bkss)

Source: NRCS (2019)
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

8

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

Figure 2-1. Soils Mapped within Project Area

BOA11292

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were
gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During
the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable.
The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The
drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions
lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate
that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by 1,500
years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern US and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects the
influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with the
urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and concrete to give the
Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout much
of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water, humidity in
the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often exceeds 50%
even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high humidity
characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and a modest
diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly high
temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in January to a
high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to 9°C (38 to 47°F)
in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average low temperatures
range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range from 27 to 29°C (75 to
79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The Houston region experiences two precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott
2001). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of infrequent cold
fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs in the late summer
to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical storms and hurricanes
from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter and early spring are
relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional thunderstorms that are
relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual precipitation varies from
a low of approximately 101.6 centimeters (40.0 inches) to a high of more than 132.1 centimeters
(52.0 inches). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5.1 to 7.0 centimeters (2.0 to
3.0 inches) in March to more than 19.1 centimeters (7.5 inches) occurring locally on the coast
during September. Almost all of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely
rare, occurring in measurable amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

10

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Harris County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texan biotic province (Blair
1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces
and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some species reach
the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. Four broad communities that
characterize that portion of the Texas biotic province that lies on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal
marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie, (3) coastal gallery forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest
(cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are strongly
controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the seasonal
water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically dominated by
little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter environments
are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria, bulrushes, smooth
cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush, saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh
aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and
other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained environments are characterized by such
taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum, gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass,
red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort. A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore
zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon, nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many
birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth
of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal
zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs and
woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the north
and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses are
found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver bluestem,
buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian sunflower,
Engelman daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow neptunia,
snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush, bluebonnet, ragweed,
croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring in the coastal prairie
include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live oak, elm, hackberry,
bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as the coastal prairie
grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland environment with common
stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie is home to a diverse fauna,
including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many small rodents, amphibians,
reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and pronghorn were also present
at various times in the past.

BOA11292

11

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbriar, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are grasses
such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest include
white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and rodents,
turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various times in the past, and a
number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger deciduous
trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory vegetation varies
from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and young trees.
Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle, greenbriar, Virginia
creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A variety of fauna is also
present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit, mink, skunk, various small
rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was also present at times in the
past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the transition zone to the coastal
prairie environment.

12

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21-county
area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 199.6 km (124.0 miles) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline. Much of the
archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern Great
Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990). Further
distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of Southeast
Texas. These two subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland subregion has a
much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas comprises a zone
about 25.7 kilometers (16.0 miles) inland from the coast that covers the area influenced by Gulf
tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological variability
characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands, marine
coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable ecological
diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to denote
Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural characteristics of
Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring regions. For instance, the
Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and Southeast Texas, and
Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time in
Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit evidence of
reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be associated
with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of subsistence-related
activities. Inland sites also tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired clay balls (at some
sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites tend to consist of
multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain oyster shell tools, large quantities of pottery
(in later cultural components), numerous bone tools, and only a few lithic artifacts.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;

BOA11292

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists have historically discounted claims of much earlier human
occupation during the Pleistocene glacial period. However, recent investigations of the Buttermilk
Creek Complex in Bell County, Texas, have raised the possibility that a pre-Clovis culture may
have been present in North America as early as 15,500 years ago (Waters et al. 2011).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end-scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas are
known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the exploitation of
small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in
this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented elsewhere in North
America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been practiced during all
prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into two periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period
(8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture shows
greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.

14

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods. In
Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of Bell,
Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The Bell
point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains. Many of
the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and several new
types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and probably the GaryKent series. The Late Archaic period (1,500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is characterized by Gary, Kent,
Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition developed
in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981; Patterson
1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period but reached
full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as boatstones and
bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang knives, stingray
spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial practices included the
systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre, and use of locally made
grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most burials are found in extended
supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials are also known. Burial direction
is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to site. Patterson et al. (1993) report
that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton
counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area by
about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the ConroeLivingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears to have
progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995). Southeastern
Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where Aten (1983)
established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
128.7 kilometers (80.0 miles) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal
exception of a few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found
on the Gulf coast west of the Sabine Lake area.
Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods (Aten
1984; Patterson 1995; Perttula et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility ware

BOA11292

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown Plain for
about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods before
once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety, Goose
Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor pottery
types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway (Aten
1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte types
are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste (like
Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the latter
part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in Southeast
Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e., spearthrower) and
spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though they continued to be
used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the Late Prehistoric period
(Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In fact,
Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in Southeast Texas as early
as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points that consisted of marginally
retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a generalized date of adoption of the bowand-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca. A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas.
In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade
technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba, Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial
sequence for these point types has not been established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn
points appear to predate Perdiz points throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto Plain
and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that are
often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek pottery
remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt Coated
pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in Southeast Texas
during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue. Aten (1983) has reconstructed

16

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century, including the
Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (possibly Karankawa), and Tonkawa. The presence of the
Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central Texas in the
17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought to have
occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the corresponding
mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east of the San
Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe may be in
doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic Indian
sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and Cuney
points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified by the
presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. A.D. 1700 TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when Álvarez
de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay;
however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The
first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site on Galveston Island, where
the burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as
increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time
heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian
population was greatly diminished. The Alabama-Coushatta Indians who currently reside in
Southeast Texas, are migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early
19th centuries (Newcomb 1961).
By 1519, Spain had claimed much of the Texas coast, extending across the southeastern
Texas coastal and interior landscape and including present-day Galveston and Harris counties.
Between the Neches and Trinity rivers there was a small tribe of Native Americans called the
Orcoquisac by the Spaniards, who may have been akin to the Atakapan speakers who occupied
western Louisiana and the inner-coastal Texas woodlands (Newcomb 1961; Swanton 1911).
Little is known about the Texas sect of Atakapans, whose name is a Choctaw word for “maneaters” (Newcomb 1961). Their language was likely of Tunican stock, but scant data are available
about their linguistic origins (Swanton 1911). According to Newcomb, the Akokisas, settled on
the lower Trinity and San Jacinto rivers as well as the eastern shores of Galveston Bay; to the
north lived a lesser known group, the Patiris, and, to their north, the Bidais (Newcomb 1961;
Swanton 1911). Altogether, their population estimates are around 3,500 people (Newcomb
1961). The Galveston Bay focus likely practiced a hunter-gatherer subsistence strategy, for the

BOA11292

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

salt water flooding in the region would be cumbersome to any agricultural practices (Newcomb
1961).
It is possible that Cabeza de Vaca and/or members of the Narvaez expedition encountered
the Atakapan communities as early as 1528, and it is also possible that La Salle’s excursions in
1684 would have encountered these groups. However, the first documented European account
of the Atakapans was left by French naval officer Simars de Bellisle in 1719 (Newcomb 1961).
During his expedition, de Bellisle was stranded on the shore of Galveston Bay after a mishap on
a supply run for fresh water, and he was taken captive and forcibly inducted into a tribe of Akokisas
(Newcomb 1961). After taking a widowed wife, escaping to live with the Caddo tribe to the north,
and living with a Hasinai woman, Angelica, the Frenchman eventually escaped native captivity
and returned to Galveston Bay to work as a guide for Bernard de la Harpe, who led the first French
expedition into present-day Oklahoma (Newcomb 1961). The Atakapans in southeastern Texas
continued to trade deer and bison skins with the encroaching French settlers in Louisiana
throughout the 1730s and 1740s until the Spanish Crown sent Captain Joaquin de Orobio
Bazterra to investigate alleged French settlements in 1745 or 1746 (Henson 2010; Newcomb
1961). During this incursion, Bazterra visited several Orcoquisac villages along Spring Creek, a
tributary of the San Jacinto River. He found no identifiable roads, maps, or any indications of
French presence (Henson 2010; Newcomb 1961).
Around 1756, the Spanish erected an outpost near the mouth of the Trinity River in what
is now Chambers County to combat the French presence in the region. This settlement consisted
of a presidio named San Augustin de Ahumada and a mission named Nuestra Senora de la Luz
(Ladd 2010). Atakapans were intermixed with 50 families of Tlascalan Indians brought in from
central Mexico to help “pacify [them] more successfully” (Newcomb 1961). Collectively, this shortlived outpost was known as El Orcoquisac, named after the tribe. After a series of unfortunate
events that included mutinous internal fighting and ravaging by hurricanes, the fort outpost was
abandoned by the Spanish in 1771 (Ladd 2010). The Bidais to the north were subjected to
Spanish violence after trading firearms with the Lipan Apaches, who were enemies of the Spanish
Crown (Newcomb 1961). A group of Atakapans settled somewhere along the Colorado River to
the west of present-day Harris County in the mid-19th century, but they virtually disappeared from
any records (Newcomb 1961). It is speculated that the remainder of the Atakapans who were not
decimated by European epidemics or warfare either married into neighboring tribes, such as the
displaced Alabama-Coushatta or the Caddo, or returned to Louisiana to join their linguistic and
cultural kin, the eastern band of Atakapans (Newcomb 1961). Either way, all Atakapan speakers
were gone from Texas by 1859.
During the height of the War of Mexican Independence, numerous Anglo-American
filibusters explored what is now Harris County looking for land in exchange for helping to drive
away the Spanish colonial government and their authoritarian rule over the Mexican Republicans
and revolutionaries. Launching from New Orleans, many expeditions used Galveston Island and
the Bolivar Peninsula on Galveston Bay as a base of operations, and the expeditions of the last
of the “terrestrial buccaneers” included a failed filibustering expedition led by Dr. James Long and
Jean Lafitte (Hester 1977). Mexican revolutionary figure Francisco Xavier Mina and French

18

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

privateer Jean Lafitte also landed their filibustering crews in the Galveston region during this time,
but no settlements resulted from their efforts.
When Stephen F. Austin received his empresario grant in 1824 to allow 300 settlers move
to an allotment of 67,000 acres granted by the Mexican government, many Anglo-American
families mistakenly assumed the lands surrounding the San Jacinto estuary were a part of the
contract (Baker 2010). The empresario contract specifically forbade Galveston Island and the
Gulf shore to colonial settlement, so Austin’s colonizers turned northward to the land that is now
Harris County, which borders the northern end of the forbidden lands (Henson 2010). During this
time, there were no indications of Native American habitation in the former Atakapan lands
(Henson 2010). In July of the same year, land commissioner and intermediary to the Mexican
government, Baron de Bastrop, issued 29 titles to colonist families, which included early Anglo
settlers Nathaniel Lynch, William Scott, and John Harris. Harris and Scott built a house and
established a store and warehouse on Buffalo Bayou (Beazley 2010). Later, John Harris, along
with his brother, David Harris, established the first steam sawmill-gristmill in Harrisburg as well as
an important trading post at Bell’s Landing on the Brazos River that serviced vessels traveling to
and from New Orleans and other Gulf ports (Beazley 2010). Between 1828 and 1833, an
additional 23 empresario titles were granted to families that settled along waterways such as the
San Jacinto River and tributaries (Henson 2010).
Because of its strategic position at the confluence of the San Jacinto River and Buffalo
Bayou, John Harris’ Harrisburg was designated a head of navigation and an important port of
entry for both immigrants and freight by 1833 (Henson 2010). Goods were often shipped
northwest up the Brazos River to the newly colonized communities of San Felipe and Washingtonon-the-Brazos. Harrisburg was also a hub for a dendritic road system that forked out in every
direction—eastward, travelers could make their way to Anahuac, Liberty, or Nacogdoches;
northward, travelers could head towards Spring Creek and the Brazos settlements; southward,
travelers could follow Brays Bayou to a community on Oyster Creek (Henson 2010). This region
was known as the San Jacinto District until 1833, when it was formally renamed the Harrisburg
District (Kleiner 2010). An original member of Stephen Austin’s Old Three Hundred, Humphrey
Jackson was deemed alcade of the San Jacinto District in 1824, 1825, and 1827 until 1828 when
the empresarios were relieved and comisarios replaced their positions. Jackson also served as
the ex officio militia captain of the San Jacinto region (Kleiner 2010). The Harrisburg Municipality
boundaries were defined by the nascent Texas Congress in October of 1835, and the Texas
provisional government officially recognized the municipality in 1836 (Henson 2010). During this
time, David G. Burnet, the first President of the Texas Republic, purchased 6.5 hectares
(16.0 acres) in Lynchburg, a smaller village within the scope of the Harrisburg Municipality.
Burnet and his wife sailed from New Jersey to Texas in 1831, where they purchased a 15horsepower steam sawmill and eventually settled on the San Jacinto River on the property
purchased from Nathaniel Lynch (Henson 2010). Lorenzo de Zavala, who had served as the first
minister of plenipotentiary of the Mexican legation in Paris under Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna,
moved to the north side of Buffalo Bayou below Harrisburg with his wife from New York and their
two children (Estep 2010). Because of his experience with legislative, executive, ministerial, and
diplomatic measures, along with his education, Zavala was instrumental in the early formation of

BOA11292

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

the Republic of Texas, helped draft the Constitution, and served in the Permanent Council (Estep
2010).
At midnight on March 16, interim President Burnet and Vice President Lorenzo de Zavala
were elected by the delegates of the Convention of 1836 at Washington-on-the-Brazos, drafted
the new Texas Constitution, and adopted the Texas Declaration of Independence. On the next
morning, the two left for Harrisburg in a strategic move in case the Mexican army should press
northeastward (Henson 2010). The group reached their home in Harrisburg by March 25, and by
April 12 the President and his cohorts evacuated by steamboat to Lynchburg when the news
arrived that Santa Anna’s army had crossed the Brazos River to pursue Zavala and other cabinet
members (Henson 2010). From Lynchburg, the Republic officials and their families escaped in
the steamboat Cayuga, to Galveston Island, where they disembarked and awaited the fate of the
newly formed Republic (Henson 2010). On midnight of April 14, Santa Anna’s army of
approximately 700 men marched into Harrisburg in pursuit of the Texas government, where they
looted and burned most of the freshly evacuated settlement (Henson 2010; Kemp 2010). the
Battle of San Jacinto took place on April 21 on Peggy McCormick’s farm adjacent to Zavala’s
property near the confluence of Buffalo Bayou and the San Jacinto River (Kemp 2010). The battle
was short lived (only 18 minutes long). The Mexican army suffered 630 casualties and
730 soldiers were taken prisoner (Kemp 2010). The result of the battle was a transference of
almost a million square miles of territory—Texas was annexed from Mexico and the territories
known today as New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada, California, Utah, and parts of Colorado, Wyoming,
Kansas, and Oklahoma changed sovereign hands (Kemp 2010).
In December 1836, the First Texas Congress passed several measures, including the
official delineation of Harrisburg County, the naming of Andrew Briscoe as the chief justice, and
the designation of the city of Houston as both county seat and capitol of the Republic of Texas
(Henson 2010). At first, Harrisburg County encompassed Galveston Island, but an addendum
was made in May 1838—Galveston became its own county and Harrisburg maintained its current
boundaries (Henson 2010). In December 1839, the Texas Congress changed the name of
Harrisburg County to Harris County in honor of John R. Harris, one its first successful residents
(Henson 2010). The first courthouse, a two-story framed building, and a log-jail were constructed
in 1837 on the courthouse square by Dr. Morris L. Birdsall, the county contractor, and the first
county court convened the same year overseen by district judge Benjamin C. Franklin and first
judge of probate, Andrew Briscoe (Henson 2010).
After the Mexican Revolution, economic recovery in Harrisburg hit a slow pace, but by
1850, General Sidney Sherman, a Battle of Jacinto war hero, along with a group of Boston
capitalists, drew up the plans and gathered funding for the construction of the Buffalo Bayou,
Brazos, and Colorado Railway, thereby pilot-lighting the railroad age in the state of Texas (Werner
2010). Sherman’s rail commission began construction in 1851 and 32.2 kilometers (20.0 miles)
of track were laid from Stafford’s Point terminating at Buffalo Bayou (Werner 2010). By 1860, the
Buffalo Bayou, Brazos and Colorado Railway, otherwise commonly known as the Harrisburg Line,
stretched all the way to Alleyton, 128.7 kilometers (80.0 miles) to the east, and five other
independent railways were constructed by the onset of the Civil War (Werner 2010). Mainly,
these lines, such as the Galveston, Houston and Henderson, the Texas and New Orleans, the

20

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

Houston and Texas Central, and the Houston Tap and Brazoria, served the prosperous southern
economy by shipping staple slave labor-dependent goods like sugar and cotton (Werner 2010).
A large proportion of residents in Harris County were African-American slaves brought in
by farmers and ranchers who immigrated in from the deep South. These slaves provided the
backbone of labor for the early economy in southeast Texas by picking cotton, cultivating fields,
and harvesting and processing sugar cane. Additionally, cattle ranching was an important
agricultural focus in the area south of Buffalo Bayou. Many of these cattle ranches continued in
operation well into the 20th century (Henson 2010). Many other immigrants of various
nationalities flocked to Harris County by the 1840s in search for promising social, economic, and
political pursuits. These included both Germans and French, who brought their cultural influences
as well as respected religious denominations rooted in varying sects of Catholicism and
Protestantism (Henson 2010). On April 21, 1837, President Sam Houston, ordered all Mexican
prisoners of war to be released, and the US census of 1850 documented no Mexican-born males
living in Harris County or its surrounding counties (Henson 2010). However, by the 1880s a few
Mexican families were documented as living in Houston, and with the construction and
opportunities presented by the advent of the Houston Ship Channel and railroads, many Mexicans
migrated to the Houston area by the turn of the century (Henson 2010). These waves of migration
were prompted in part by the unfavorable social conditions and political unrest in Mexico that
followed the Mexican Revolution.
By the 1890s, large parcels of land along the newly laid North Galveston, Houston, and
Kansas City Railroad were purchased by land developers from the Midwest with the intention of
attracting Midwesterners to migrate south to escape the harsh winters (Henson 2010). This rail
line ran along the southern boundaries of Buffalo Bayou towards Morgan’s Point and south to the
mouth of Clear Creek, upon which the townships of Pasadena, Deer Park, and La Porte were
settled in 1892. Similarly, the towns of South Houston, Genoa, and Webster were established
along the Galveston, Houston, and Henderson Railroad in the 1880s (Henson 2010). Due to the
favorable conditions for growing rice, a Japanese consular official, Sadatsuchi Uchida, worked
with local officials and businesses to bring in Japanese immigrants to help grow a burgeoning
rice-dependent economy (Rhoads 2010). In 1903, Seito Saibara founded Webster, a successful
rice farm near the town of Webster in Harris County, and subsequently, the Japanese population
in Texas began to accumulate numbers; however, the rice market crashed after World War I, and
many rice farmers focused on other crops such as citrus fruit (Rhoads 2010).
During the Reconstruction period following the Civil War, several rail lines entered
northern Harris County that economically tied the region to various terminal ports in Houston.
These lines included the Houston and Great Northern, the Trinity and Brazos Valley, the Houston
East and West Texas, and the Burlington-Rock Island railroads (Henson 2010). Similar to the
history of progress in southern Harris County, several towns were established along these rail
lines that saw rapid growth and economic prosperity, such as Humble, whose population rocketed
after the Moonshine Hill oil boom of 1905 (Henson 2010). The towns of Spring and Tomball grew
rapidly to meet the demands of the lumbering and farming interests of the early 20th century
(Henson 2010). During the late 19th century in eastern Harris County along the San Jacinto
River, the only commercial structures of note were two small ports and boatyards in Lynchburg

BOA11292

21

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

and Goose Creek and a brick factory on Cedar Bayou (Henson 2010). However, when crude oil
was discovered on the banks of the San Jacinto estuary at Goose Creek and Tabbs Bay in 1903,
an economic boom occurred, drawing in migrant families that build a shantytown between 1915
and 1917 (Henson 2010). This tent city was replaced by the town of Pelly in 1917, and then in
1919, the predecessor of ExxonMobil, the Humble Oil and Refining Company, built its first refinery
in the area right along the San Jacinto River just north of the mouth of Goose Creek (Henson
2010). Soon, several small towns bordered the refinery site—the company town, Humble; the
workers’ residence, Baytown; and the executive middle-class district, Goose Creek (Henson
2010). In the mid-1920s, these three towns were incorporated into one larger town named “TriCities” which was then finally renamed “Baytown” in 1948 (Henson 2010). The Houston-North
Shore Railway developed an electric interurban train in 1925 for the burgeoning oil business
workforce that connected the region and ran along the northern side of Buffalo Bayou to downtown
Houston (Henson 2010).
In 1911, the US Congress authorized the formation of the Harris County Ship Channel
Navigation District, whose goal is was to improve the water ways around the confluences of the
San Jacinto River and Buffalo Bayou to make the port accessible to ocean-going vessels (Henson
2010). The US Army Corps of Engineers oversaw the completion of the district by widening and
deepening the channel and creating a thoroughfare from the Gulf of Mexico to inner Harris County.
After its completion, several independent oil refineries moved to the area, and numerous wharves,
warehouses, and docks, including the Long Reach docks, were constructed and maintained by
the profitable Harris County Navigation District (Henson 2010). This influx of infrastructure
bolstered population growth—in 1920, the population of Harris Country was 70,974; in 1930, that
number rose to 172,661. Main exports from the ports included wheat, grain, sorghum, cotton,
rice, cement, and petroleum products, and main imports included crude oil, iron ore, molasses,
coffee, and foreign-made automobiles (Henson 2010).
During the 1960s at the height of the Cold War with Russia, the US, under the direction of
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, purchased a 404.7-hectare (1,000.0-acre) site from Rice
University just east of Webster at the edge of Clear Lake (Alexander and Kleiner 2010). Upon
this land, the epicenter of the newly founded National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) was constructed and named the Manned Spacecraft Center, later renamed the Lyndon
B. Johnson Space Center in 1973 (Alexander and Kleiner 2010). By 1966, the Manned
Spacecraft Center employed a staff of more than 5,000 people in more than a dozen functional
structures (Alexander and Kleiner 2010). To meet the growing infrastructure demands of the
Space Center, several towns were established around the area, including Clear Lake City, the
largest town along Clear Lake’s northern shore (Alexander and Kleiner 2010). Post-World War II
population increased from 169,633 in 1940 to 277,740 in 1950 and then to 436,457 in 1960.
The first fully air-conditioned and enclosed sports stadium in the world was built in 1965
and named the Harris County Domed Stadium. Known today as the Astrodome, this stadium has
been home to numerous events, including major-league baseball, major-league soccer,
Portuguese-style bullfighting, rodeos, college basketball, concerts, religious events, and housing
for Hurricane Katrina refugees. In 2009, the Astrodome was permanently closed due to several
code violations issued by the Houston Fire Marshall’s Office. In 2017, the THC designated the

22

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

Astrodome as an SAL (Chandler 2010). Harris County also contains two public hospitals and
maintains several major transportation systems, such as a passenger Amtrak line, interstate and
intrastate highways, and high-rise bridges over the San Jacinto Ship Channel and the Houston
Ship Channel. Today, there are more than 4,690,000 people living in Harris County, although the
growth rate has slowed considerably since 2010.

BOA11292

23

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed the THC’s online Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA) database for information on previously recorded cultural
resources sites and previous archeological investigations conducted within a 1.6-kilometer (1.0mile) radius of the project area (THC 2019). Based on this archival research, two previously
recorded archeological sites, 41HR312 and 41CH380, and three cemeteries have been recorded
within a 1.6-kilometer (1.0-mile) radius of the project area (Table 4-1; Figure 4-1). One of the
Table 4-1. Summary of Documented Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area

Site
No./Name

Site Type

NRHP/SAL
Eligibility
Status1

Distance from
Project Area

Potential to
be Impacted
by Project?

Undetermined

0.1 mile

No

Determined
ineligible

0.1 mile

No

Archeological Sites
41HR312

Historic-age brickyard
(late19th century)

41CH380

Aboriginal ceramic scatter
(Late Prehistoric)

Cemeteries
Bush-Morgan
Cemetery
(CH-C016)

Cemetery

N/A

0.8 mile

No

Morgan
Cemetery
(CH-C015)

Cemetery

N/A

0.5 mile

No

Roberts
Cemetery
(HR-C330)

Cemetery

N/A

1.0 mile south

No

1

Determined eligible/ineligible = Site determined eligible/ineligible by SHPO
Recommended eligible/ineligible = Site recommended as eligible/ineligible by site recorder and/or sponsoring
agency but eligibility has not been determined by SHPO
Undetermined = Eligibility not assessed or no information available
NRHP National Register of Historic Places
SAL
State Antiquities Landmark
SHPO State Historic Preservation Office

BOA11292

25

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Figure 4-1. Locations of Documented Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area

26

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

previously recorded archeological sites, 41HR312, is located immediately adjacent to the current
project area, though its mapped boundaries are depicted as terminating at the property line that
constitutes the eastern margin of the current project area. Site 41HR312 was recorded in 1976
during a cultural resources survey conducted for the Texas Water Quality Board (TWQB) and
Cedar Bayou Park Utility District, possibly in connection with the proposed construction of the
WWTP that currently stands within the project area. Site 41HR312 was recorded as a historicage brickyard possibly dating from 1870 or 1880. Observed cultural materials included a scatter
of brick, glass shards, ceramic sherds, and metal, and brick foundations were observed in the
eastern portion of the site. The site was revisited in 1980, at which time the remnants of a
subterranean cistern and two circular kiln features were also noted.
Examination of historical US Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps dating from
1916 to present and aerial photographs dating from 1953 to present indicate that there have been
no standing structures of potentially historic age within the project area within the 20th century.
The project area primarily remained a densely forested woodland until development of the
neighboring residential subdivisions began in the early 2000s. The existing WWTP within the
northern portion of the project area was constructed in the late 1970s or early 1980s (NETR 2019).
Based on the TASA database, one prior cultural resources survey has been conducted
within the project area (THC 2019). This survey was conducted in 1976 for the TWQB and Cedar
Bayou Park Utility District, and it was during this survey that site 41HR312 was recorded. This
prior survey is depicted on the TASA as circular linear survey, though it is more likely that the
survey covered the interior of the area shown on the map. If this interpretation of the prior survey
area is correct, the 1976 survey covered the entirety of the current project area.

BOA11292

27

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

On October 7, 2019, Horizon project archeologist Charles Edward Bludau, Jr. conducted
an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal
Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9077. The
purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that potentially would be
impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area and
thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. The project area is situated on densely wooded uplands and terraces on either side
of McGee Gully, which flows southeastward across the project area and discharges into Cedar
Bayou a short distance to the east of the project area. The area around the existing WWTP in
the northern portion of the project area had been recently mowed (Figures 5-1 to 5-3).
In addition to a pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of three shovel tests per 0.4 hectare (1.0 acre) for
project areas between 0.0 and 0.8 hectare (0.0 and 2.0 acres) size. As such, a minimum of five
shovel tests were necessary within the 0.6-hectare (1.5-acre) project area. Horizon excavated a
total of 10 shovel tests, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of this size (Figure 54). Shovel tests generally measured 30.0 centimeters (11.8 inches) in diameter and were
excavated to a target depth of 1.0 meter (3.3 feet) below surface, to the top of pre-Holocene
deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable. All sediments were screened through 6.35millimeter (0.25-inch) hardware cloth. Standard shovel test logs were completed for each shovel
test describing the location, strata, soil texture and color, archeological materials (if present), and
any unusual characteristics of the surrounding landscape. All sediments excavated from shovel
tests were replaced in the shovel test hole upon completion of recording. The Universal
Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of each shovel test were determined using hand-held
Garmin eTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices based on the North American Datum of
1983 (NAD 83). Specific shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.
Shovel testing typically revealed moderately deep to deep deposits of clay extending to
depths of 60.0 centimeters (23.6 inches) or more below surface. Many shovel tests contained
iron staining and dense clayey sediments at depths ranging from the surface to the bottoms of
shovel tests, and many shovel tests exhibited signs of disturbance in near-surface sediments in
the form of heavily mottled clays. It is Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the potential to
contain subsurface archeological deposits were fully penetrated and that the project area was
adequately assessed for archeological resources.

BOA11292

29

Chapter 6.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 5-1. Overview of Survey Area (Facing Southwest)

Figure 5-2. Overview of Existing WWTP within Survey Area (Facing Southwest)

30

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

Figure 5-3. Overview of Survey Area (Facing West)

During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic log
was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for archeological resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and
nondiagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were to
be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location
in which they were found. As no archeological resources were observed during the survey, the
collections policy was not enacted. Following completion of the survey, all project records will be
prepared for permanent curation at TARL.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project tract as defined in 36 CFR
800.3.

BOA11292

31

Chapter 6.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 5-4. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated Within Project Area
32

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

On October 7, 2019, Horizon project archeologist Charles Edward Bludau, Jr. conducted
an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal
Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9077. The
purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that potentially would be
impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area and
thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. The project area is situated on densely wooded uplands and terraces on either side
of McGee Gully, which flows southeastward across the project area and discharges into Cedar
Bayou a short distance to the east of the project area. The area around the existing WWTP in
the northern portion of the project area had been recently mowed.
In addition to a pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of three shovel tests
per 0.4 hectare (1.0 acre) for project areas between 0.0 and 0.8 hectare (0.0 and 2.0 acres) size.
As such, a minimum of five shovel tests were necessary within the 0.6-hectare (1.5-acre) project
area. Horizon excavated a total of 10 shovel tests, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project
area of this size. Shovel testing typically revealed moderately deep to deep deposits of clay
extending to depths of 60.0 centimeters (23.6 inches) or more below surface. Many shovel tests
contained iron staining and dense clayey sediments at depths ranging from the surface to the
bottoms of shovel tests, and many shovel tests exhibited signs of disturbance in near-surface
sediments in the form of heavily mottled clays. It is Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the
potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits were fully penetrated and that the project
area was adequately assessed for archeological resources.
No cultural resources, historic-age or prehistoric, were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.
Furthermore, no cultural resources associated with previously recorded site 41HR312, which is
mapped immediately to the east of the current project area, were observed within the current
project area during the survey.

BOA11292

33

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with three
primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
archeological resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not
the resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important
historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of Texas,
archeological resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the
significance of archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs,
respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

BOA11292

35

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The four criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or
history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant. This
concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures, districts,
or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent research
questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by three requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least one of the four criteria for eligibility listed
above, and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As
discussed here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory
and history according to various periods of development in various times and at various places.
Thus, the significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic
development and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular
period of development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP
under Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding
of prehistory. All four criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought
to bear for historic sites.

36

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

7.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

BOA11292

37

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

On October 7, 2019, Horizon project archeologist Charles Edward Bludau, Jr. conducted
an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal
Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9077. The
purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that potentially would be
impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area and
thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. The project area is situated on densely wooded uplands and terraces on either side
of McGee Gully, which flows southeastward across the project area and discharges into Cedar
Bayou a short distance to the east of the project area. The area around the existing WWTP in
the northern portion of the project area had been recently mowed.
In addition to a pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of three shovel tests
per 0.4 hectare (1.0 acre) for project areas between 0.0 and 0.8 hectare (0.0 and 2.0 acres) size.
As such, a minimum of five shovel tests were necessary within the 0.6-hectare (1.5-acre) project
area. Horizon excavated a total of 10 shovel tests, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project
area of this size. Shovel testing typically revealed moderately deep to deep deposits of clay
extending to depths of 60.0 centimeters (23.6 inches) or more below surface. Many shovel tests
contained iron staining and dense clayey sediments at depths ranging from the surface to the
bottoms of shovel tests, and many shovel tests exhibited signs of disturbance in near-surface
sediments in the form of heavily mottled clays. It is Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the
potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits were fully penetrated and that the project
area was adequately assessed for archeological resources.
No cultural resources, historic-age or prehistoric, were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.
Furthermore, no cultural resources associated with previously recorded site 41HR312, which is

38

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

mapped immediately to the east of the current project area, were observed within the current
project area during the survey.

7.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant archeological resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No archeological resources were identified within the
project area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or that qualify
for inclusion in the NRHP under 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic
properties affected,” and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the
proposed undertaking. However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under
the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are
inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the
project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity
of the inadvertent discovery, and the THC should be notified immediately. Following completion
of the survey, all project records will be prepared for permanent curation at TARL.

BOA11292

39

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Alexander, C.C., and D.J. Kleiner
2010
Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://
tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/sql01>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed
July 1, 2019.
Alford, J.J., and J.C. Holmes
1985
Meander Scars as Evidence of Major Climate Changes in Southeast Louisiana.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 75:395-403.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory, pp.
72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The Florida
State Museum, Gainesville.

Baker, E.C.
2010
Stephen Fuller Austin. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/fau14>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 27, 2019.
Beazley, J.
2010
John Richardson Harris. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/fha85>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 27, 2019.
Blair, W.F.
1950
Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.

BOA11292

41

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Blum, M.D., and D.M. Price
1994
Glacio-Eustatic and Climatic Controls on Quaternary Alluvial Plain Deposition, Texas
Coastal Plain. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies
44:85-92.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V. M. Bryant, Jr., and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Chandler, W.
2010
Astrodome. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/xva01>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 1, 2019.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
DuBar, J.R., T.E. Ewing, E.L. Lundelius, E.G. Otvos, and C.D. Winkler
1991
Quaternary Geology of the Gulf of Mexico Coastal Plain. In The Geology of North
America, Volume K2: Quaternary Non-Glacial Geomophology, Conterminous United
States, edited by R. B. Morrison, pp. 583-610. Geological Society of America, Boulder,
Colorado.
Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 8, Archeological
Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI)
2019
Digital orthographic photography sourced by ESRI for ArcGIS Online. <arcgis.com>.
Accessed August 30, 2019.
Estep, R.
2010
Lorenzo De Zavala. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/fza05>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 28, 2019.

42

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

Fisk, H.N.
1938
Geology of Grant and LaSalle Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 10.
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.
1940

Louisiana

Geology of Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 18. Louisiana
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.

Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Henson, M.S.
2010
Harris County. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/hch07>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 27, 2019.
Hester, G.H. (editor)
1977
The Heritage of North Harris County. North Harris County Branch, American
Association of University Women, Houston.
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kemp, L.W.
2010
Battle of San Jacinto. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/qes04.> Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 28, 2019.
Kleiner, D.J.
2010
Jackson, Humphrey. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/fja08.> Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 27, 2019.
Ladd, K.
2010

El Orcoquisac. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/hve49>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 27, 2019.

BOA11292

43

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Larkin, T. J., and G. W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.
Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
National Environmental Title Research (NETR)
2019
Historic Aerials by NETR Online.
September 18, 2019.

<http://www.historicaerials.com>.

Accessed

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2019
Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed September 18, 2019.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.

Open Street Map (OSM)
2019
OpenStreetMap. <http://www.openstreetmap .org>. Available under the Open
Database License:
<www.opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl>.
Accessed
August 30, 2019.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.

44

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

Houston

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

Perttula, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus
Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330.

Rhoads, E.J.M.
2010
Japanese. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/pjj01>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 27, 2019.
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose,
D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes. Research
Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Swanton, J.R.
1911
Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of the Gulf of Mexico.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 43. US Government Printing Office,
Washington D.C.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2019
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas. Access-restricted online database. Texas Historical
Commission. <https://atlas.thc.state.tx.us/>. Accessed September 18, 2019.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1994
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Mont Belvieu, Texas, quadrangle.
2019

Texas Geology Web Map Viewer. <https://txpub.usgs.gov/txgeology/>. Accessed
September 18, 2019.

Van Siclen, D.C.
1985
Pleistocene Meander-Belt Ridge Patterns in the Vicinity of Houston, Texas.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 35:525-532.
Waters, M.R., S.L. Forman, T.A. Jennings, L.C. Nordt, S.G. Driese, J.M. Feinberg, J.L. Keene, J.
Halligan, A. Lindquist, J. Pierson, C.T. Hallmark, M.B. Collins, and J.E. Wiederhold
2011
The Buttermilk Creek Complex and the Origins of Clovis at the Debra L. Friedkin Site,
Texas. Science 331:1599-1603.

BOA11292

45

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Werner, G.C.
2010
Buffalo Bayou, Brazos, and Colorado Railway. The Handbook of Texas Online.
<https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/eqb16>. Uploaded June 15, 2010.
Accessed July 1, 2019.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

46

BOA11292_arch_survey_report

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
1.3-acre Cedar Bayou Park Lift Station Project, Harris County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

CB1

313890

3298242

0-60+

CB2

313917

3298247

0-5

313928

3298202

None

Gray sandy clay loam

None

Yellowish-gray clay

None

Gray sandy clay loam

None

Yellowish-gray clay

None

Gray sandy clay loam

None

5-60+

Yellowish-gray clay

None

0-5
5-60+

CB4

313903

3298197

Artifacts

Reddish-gray clay

5-60+
CB3

Soils

0-5

CB5

313928

3298166

0-60+

Yellowish-gray clay w/ iron staining

None

CB6

313939

3290138

0-60+

Yellowish-gray clay w/ iron staining

None

CB7

313952

329899

0-60+

Yellowish-gray clay w/ iron staining

None

CB8

313985

3298084

0-60+

Yellowish-gray clay w/ iron staining

None

CB9

313953

3298055

0-5

Brown sandy clay loam

None

Yellowish-gray clay

None

Brown sandy clay loam

None

Yellowish-gray clay

None

5-60+
CB10

313954

3298010

0-5
5-60+

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

BOA11292

A-1

