Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources
Survey of the City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water
Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

US Army Corps of Engineers Project No. 200600250
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4551
HJN 050182 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Chiang, Patel & Yerby, Inc.
Austin, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

August 2007

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources
Survey of the City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water
Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Chiang, Patel & Yerby, Inc.
The Avallon, Building 1
10415 Morado Circle, Suite 200
Austin, Texas 78759

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 050182 AR

US Army Corps of Engineers Project No. 200600250
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4551

August 2007

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The City of Meridian, Bosque County, Texas, is proposing to construct an approximately
23.8-kilometer- (km-) (14.8-mile- [mi-]) long water pipeline extending from the City of Clifton to
the City of Meridian in Bosque County, Texas. The pipeline would be installed within a 15meter- (m-) (50-foot- [ft-]) wide easement primarily within the rights-of-way (ROWs) of existing
roads, though small segments of the line would be constructed within new ROWs. The City of
Meridian proposes to construct a transport pipeline between the cities of Clifton and Meridian as
well as a system of groundwater collection pipelines within the Meridian city limits. The
transport pipeline would be installed within the existing ROWs of Farm-to-Market Road
(FM) 3220 in Clifton and FM 1991 extending from Clifton to Meridian, though a short segment
would be directionally drilled under the North Bosque River within proposed new ROW. The
transport pipeline would measure approximately 20.1 km (12.5 mi) in length. The system of
proposed collection pipelines within the Meridian city limits would be installed primarily within
existing city street ROWs, though short segments would be constructed along property
boundaries between residential lots and in an open pasture at the northern edge of town. The
proposed collection pipeline system would measure approximately 3.7 km (2.3 mi). Collectively,
the proposed Meridian Treated Water Delivery System covers a total linear distance of 23.8 km
(14.8 mi), including 20.1 km (12.5 mi) of transport pipeline between Meridian and Clifton and
3.7 km (2.3 mi) of collection pipelines within the City of Meridian.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the City of Meridian, a political
subdivision of the State of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition, the City of Meridian will be applying to the US Army
Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District (USACE), for permitting under Section 404 of the Clean
Water Act (CWA) to build the pipeline across 13 stream and river crossings (USACE Project No.
200600250), including the North Bosque River, identified by Chiang, Patel & Yerby, Inc.
(CP&Y), the City of Meridian’s engineering contractor for this project; therefore, the project also
falls under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA). As
the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact potentially
significant cultural resources, the City of Meridian is required to provide for a cultural resources
inventory of the Area of Potential Effect (APE) and to assess the significance of any cultural
resources located within the APE that potentially may be adversely affected by proposed
development.

HJN 050182 AR

iii

Management Summary

On behalf of the City of Meridian, CP&Y retained Horizon to obtain the necessary
cultural resource clearances for the project. From June 18 to 20, 2007, Horizon archeologists
Reign Clark, field director, and Michael Mudd, archeological field technician, under the direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a combination of intensive and
reconnaissance-level cultural resource survey of the 23.8-km- (14.8-mi-) long APE to locate any
cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction
project. Horizon conducted an intensive cultural resource survey of the proposed 20.1-km(12.5-mi-) long transport pipeline extending from the cities of Clifton to Meridian and a
reconnaissance survey of the 3.7-km- (2.3-mi-) long system of collection pipelines within the
Meridian city limits to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted
by the proposed construction project.
Horizon’s archeologists traversed the 15-m- (50-ft-) wide, linear ROW of the proposed
transport pipeline in a single transect, providing 100% survey coverage of the APE. The
modern ground surface was thoroughly examined for historic and prehistoric cultural resources,
and erosional features and stream cutbank profiles were carefully examined to obtain
information on local stratigraphy and to identify any exposed cultural resources. Shovel tests
were excavated at intervals averaging 656 ft (200 m) apart, though shovel tests were excavated
more closely together in some areas, such as stream crossings. A total of 102 shovel tests
were excavated, including 101 shovel tests within the proposed transport pipeline ROW and
1 shovel test within the Meridian city limits in an open pasture through which a segment of the
proposed collection pipeline system would pass, thereby meeting the Texas State Minimum
Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS).
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching in stream terraces and other areas with
the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are
capable of reaching (approximately 1.0 m [3.3 ft] below surface. However, surface and nearsurface deposits throughout the APE, including the North Bosque River crossing, consist of
dense clay sediments with abundant limestone gravels and caliche-rich clay deposits, and deep
alluvial packages with the potential to contain intact, buried archeological deposits were not
observed anywhere in the APE. As such, the potential for intact, buried cultural resources
within the APE is very low, even considering the proximity to a major river. Shovel testing
effectively penetrated all Holocene-age sediments in the APE and is considered to constitute an
adequate survey technique for identifying cultural resources within the APE. As no deep alluvial
deposits were encountered during the survey that would require backhoe trenching, mechanical
trenching was not employed as a site-prospecting technique.
One previously recorded archeological site, 41BQ278, is mapped in Texas Historical
Commission (THC) site files on the west bank of the North Bosque River within or in the vicinity
of the current APE; however, the site was recommended as ineligible for inclusion in the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and for designation as a Texas State Archeological
Landmark (SAL) when it was originally recorded, and no traces of the site were encountered
during the current survey.
In addition, a single cemetery, Clifton Memorial Park Cemetery, is located on the east
side of FM 1991 just north of the Clifton Municipal Airport toward the southern end of the project
iv

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

area. While the cemetery property abuts the existing FM 1991 ROW, the cemetery gates are
set approximately 35 m (115 ft) back from the road and are accessed via a circular drive that
provides access to the cemetery entrance. Horizon contacted Mr. Don McCrary of Clifton,
Texas, the cemetery groundskeeper, and Mr. McCrary confirmed that the boundaries of the
cemetery have not changed since it was founded in 1952 and that there is no possibility that any
unmarked burials are located within the existing FM 1991 ROW. The proposed undertaking
would have no potential effect on the Clifton Memorial Park Cemetery.
Based on the results of the intensive and reconnaissance cultural resource survey of the
proposed APE, no historic properties would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
cultural resources, prehistoric or historic, were documented within the APE during the survey.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort to
identify historic properties within the APE. As no cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as SALs according
to 13 TAC 26.12, no further cultural resources work is recommended in connection with the
proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed.
However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently
discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area,
even in previously surveyed areas, all ground-disturbing work should cease immediately and the
THC and the USACE should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 050182 AR

v

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ..................................................................................... 7
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology ........................................................................... 7
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.......................................................................... 8
2.3
Climate ............................................................................................................ 9
2.4
Biota .............................................................................................................. 10

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND..................................................................................... 13
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 12,000 to 8500 B.P.) ............................................... 13
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 8500 to 1200 B.P.) ......................................................... 14
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1200 to 350 B.P.) .............................................. 14
3.4
Historic Period (ca. 350 B.P. to Present) ....................................................... 14

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................. 19
4.1
Archival Research ......................................................................................... 19
4.2
Survey Methods............................................................................................. 21

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................. 33

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................. 37
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................. 37
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .... 38
6.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Archeological Landmark ................... 39
6.4
Summary of Inventory Results ...................................................................... 40
6.5
Management Recommendations ................................................................... 40

7.0

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................. 41

HJN 050182 AR

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.
Figure 11.
Figure 12.
Figure 13.
Figure 14.
Figure 15.
Figure 16.
Figure 17.
Figure 18.

viii

Location of Meridian Treated Water Delivery System Project Area ............................ 2
Location of Groundwater Collection Pipeline System in City of Meridian .................... 3
Jurisdictional Stream Crossings in Project Area Identified by CP&Y .......................... 4
Overview of City of Clifton Municipal Lot at South End of APE (Facing South) ........ 22
South Side of FM 3220 Existing ROW in City of Clifton (Facing Northeast) ............. 22
West Terrace of North Bosque River at Directional Drilling Site (Facing North) ....... 23
Gravel Driveway between North Bosque River and FM 1991 (Facing Northeast) .... 23
Typical View of Existing FM 1991 ROW (Facing North) ............................................ 24
Typical Low-Energy Tributary with Clay Banks (Tributary 6) (Facing Southwest) .... 24
Locations of Shovel Tests in Southern Portion of Project Area ................................. 25
Locations of Shovel Tests in Central Portion of Project Area.................................... 26
Locations of Shovel Tests in Northern Portion of Project Area ................................. 27
Pipeline ROW at East Live Oak Street and SH 22 in Meridian (Facing NE) ............. 29
Pipeline ROW at East River and North Rudasill Streets in Meridian (Facing NW) ... 29
Pipeline ROW along Private Property Boundaries in Meridian (Facing NE) ............. 30
Pipeline ROW in Pasture near K Street in Meridian (Facing NW) ............................. 30
Location of Clifton Memorial Park Cemetery on East Side of FM 1991 .................... 35
Entrance to Clifton Memorial Park Cemetery (Facing Northeast) ............................. 35

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The City of Meridian, Bosque County, Texas, is proposing to construct an approximately
23.8-kilometer- (km-) (14.8-mile- [mi-]) long water pipeline extending from the City of Clifton to
the City of Meridian in Bosque County, Texas (Figures 1 and 2). The pipeline would be installed
within a 15-meter- (m-) (50-foot- [ft-]) wide easement primarily within the rights-of-way (ROWs)
of existing roads, though small segments of the line would be constructed within new ROWs.
The City of Meridian proposes to construct a transport pipeline between the cities of Clifton and
Meridian as well as a system of groundwater collection pipelines within the Meridian city limits.
The transport pipeline would be installed within the existing ROWs of Farm-to-Market Road
(FM) 3220 in Clifton and FM 1991 extending from Clifton to Meridian, though a short segment
would be directionally drilled under the North Bosque River within proposed new ROW. The
transport pipeline would measure approximately 20.1 km (12.5 mi) in length. The system of
proposed collection pipelines within the Meridian city limits would be installed primarily within
existing city street ROWs, though short segments would be constructed along property
boundaries between residential lots and in an open pasture at the northern edge of town. The
proposed collection pipeline system would measure approximately 3.7 km (2.3 mi). Collectively,
the proposed Meridian Treated Water Delivery System covers a total linear distance of 23.8 km
(14.8 mi), including 20.1 km (12.5 mi) of transport pipeline between Meridian and Clifton and
3.7 km (2.3 mi) of collection pipelines within the City of Meridian.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the City of Meridian, a political
subdivision of the State of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977 [revised 1987], Title 9,
Chapter 191, VACS, Art. 6145-9). In addition, the City of Meridian will be applying to the US
Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District (USACE), for permitting under Section 404 of the
Clean Water Act (CWA) to build the pipeline across 13 stream and river crossings (USACE
Project No. 200600250), including the North Bosque River, identified by Chiang, Patel & Yerby,
Inc. (CP&Y), the City of Meridian’s engineering contractor for this project (Figure 3); therefore,
the project also falls under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA). As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to
impact potentially significant cultural resources, the City of Meridian is required to provide for a
cultural resources inventory of the Area of Potential Effect (APE) and to assess the significance
of any cultural resources located within the APE that potentially may be adversely affected by
proposed development.

HJN 050182 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Meridian Treated Water Delivery System Project Area

2

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Groundwater Collection Pipeline System in City of Meridian

HJN 050182 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 3. Jurisdictional Stream Crossings in Project Area Identified by CP&Y

4

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

On behalf of the City of Meridian, CP&Y retained Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
(Horizon), to obtain the necessary cultural resource clearances for the project. From June 18
to 20, 2007, Horizon archeologists Reign Clark, field director, and Michael Mudd, archeological
field technician, under the direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a
combination of intensive and reconnaissance-level cultural resource survey of the 23.8-km(14.8-mi-) long APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted
by the proposed construction project. This survey was conducted by Horizon under subcontract
to CP&Y on behalf of the City of Meridian under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4551.
This report presents the results of this cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds
of the project area, respectively. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the cultural resource survey and describes cultural
resources documented during the survey, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report.

HJN 050182 AR

5

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in central Bosque County, Texas, near the boundary of
4 significant physiographic provinces—the Grand Prairie, the Blackland Prairie, and Eastern and
Western Cross Timbers. The Grand Prairie, within which the project area is situated, is a
narrow physiographic zone between the Blackland Prairie and Eastern Cross Timbers to the
east and the Western Cross Timbers to the west. The eastern Grand Prairie developed on
limestone, and weathering and erosion have resulted in thin, rocky soils. The western margin of
the Grand Prairie, where post oak woods form the Western Cross Timbers, is underlain
primarily by sandstone. North and west of Fort Worth, the plateau-like surface is well exposed,
and numerous streams dissect terrain that is mostly flat or that gently slopes southeastward.
The Grand Prairie is a mixed-grass prairie dominated by little bluestem and containing isolated
live oak mottes, junipers, and mesquite savannas (Hayward et al. 1996). The project area is
situated on the uplands that form the eastern boundary of the North Bosque River drainage, and
the APE runs parallel to the North Bosque River bed along most of its length, crossing the North
Bosque River near the City of Clifton near the southern end of the project area. Elevations
across the project area range from approximately 253 m (830 ft) above mean sea level (amsl) at
the northern end in the City of Meridian to as low as 195 m (640 ft) amsl at the North Bosque
River crossing near the southern end in the City of Clifton. Overall, topographic elevations
slope gradually down to the south and average about 232 m (760 ft) amsl across the APE.
Hydrologically, the study area is situated within the Brazos River basin. Along most of
its length, the APE runs northwest to southeast along the edge of the uplands that form the
eastern boundary of the North Bosque River. Toward the southern end of the project area, the
APE turns southwestward, crossing the North Bosque River near the City of Clifton. The North
Bosque River flows southeastward approximately 45 km (28 mi) to the north side of the City of
Waco, at which point it discharges into the Brazos River. The Brazos River, in turn, flows
southeastward across the Blackland Prairie and the Gulf Coastal Plain, ultimately discharging
into the Gulf of Mexico near Freeport, Texas. Twelve higher-order streams traverse the APE
and flow into the North Bosque River, including Montgomery Creek, the Stanifer Branch, and
10 unnamed tributaries (see Figure 3).

HJN 050182 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project area is underlain predominantly by a thick sequence of Cretaceous-age,
sedimentary rock strata, though Quaternary alluvial sediments are common on the floodplains of
major drainages (Stringer 1980). In Bosque County, Cretaceous-age materials consist mainly
of interbedded limestones, calcareous marls, and sands of the Trinity, Fredericksburg, and
Washita groups. The limestone and marls derive mainly from the Glen Rose, Walnut, and
Comanche Peak Limestone formations. Brackett, Maloterre, Purves, and Tarrant soils occupy
the gently sloping to steep-benched hills and ridges where the limestones are near the surface.
Denton and Slidell soils occur in shallow valley areas where interbeds of calcareous clayey marl
occur. These soils tend to be more limy and have less distinct horizons than the sandier
Windthorst and Selden soils.
The 23.8-km- (14.8-mi-) long Meridian Treated Water Delivery System project area is
situated primarily on the uplands on the east side of the North Bosque River, which are
underlain by the Lower Cretaceous Walnut Clay Formation (Kwa) (Flawn 1970). The Walnut
Clay Formation (Kwa) consists of calcareous clay; thick beds of chalky, marly, and nodular
limestone, and a few hard beds of limestone; and thin beds of shale. Near the southern end of
the project area, the APE descends from the uplands and crosses the North Bosque River
floodplain and continues onto the uplands on the west side of the river. The North Bosque River
floodplain is characterized primarily by Holocene and Quaternary alluvial deposits (Qal), which
consist of a mixture of low terrace deposits of gravel, sand, silt, and silty clay.
Geomorphologically, the project area is situated on the Krum-Sunev Association, which
consists of nearly level and gently sloping clayey and loamy soils (Stringer 1980). The soils of
this association form long, narrow bands in concave stream valleys, in this case the North
Bosque River Valley. Krum soils make up about 34% of this soil unit, Sunev soils compose
about 23%, and a mosaic of Bosque, Cranfill, Denton, Frio, Purves, San Saba, Seawillow, and
Slidell soils compose the remaining 43% (Stringer 1980). Krum soils typically have a surface
layer of dark grayish-brown, calcareous clay about 13 centimeters (cm) (5 inches [in]) thick
underlain by very dark grayish-brown, brown, and brownish-yellow calcareous silty clay to a
depth of 160 cm (60 in). Sunev soils typically have a surface layer of dark grayish-brown,
calcareous clay loam about 46 cm (18 in) thick underlain by brown to pale brown calcareous
clay loam extending to a depth of 152 cm (60 in).
Specifically, the project area traverses a complex mosaic of 13 mapped soil units,
including Brackett-Eckrant association, hilly (10); Cranfill gravelly clay loam, 3 to 5% slopes
(11); Cranfill gravelly clay loam, 3 to 5% slopes, eroded (12); Denton silty clay, 1 to 3% slopes
(17); Denton silty clay, 3 to 5% slopes (18); Frio silty clay loam, occasionally flooded (23); Krum
clay, 0 to 1% slopes (25); Krum clay, 1 to 3% slopes (26); Maloterre-Tarrant complex, 1 to 8%
slopes (27); Purves clay, 1 to 3% slopes (36); Seawillow Variant clay loam, 1 to 5% slopes (43);
Slidell clay, 0 to 1% slopes (45); and Sunev clay loam, 1 to 3% slopes (48) (Stringer 1980).
With the exception of narrow bands of alluvium associated with streams that cross the APE, the
majority of the APE is underlain by mature clayey sediments that formed in situ from the clay,
marl, and limestone deposits that characterize the Lower Cretaceous Walnut Clay Formation.

8

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

In Central Texas, aboriginal cultural resources are relatively common on alluvial terraces
adjacent to prominent streams and springs but are comparatively rare in upland settings. Away
from streams, clayey sediments are common on and near the modern ground surface
throughout the Grand Prairie. Due to the relative antiquity of these sediments, combined with
their shrink-swell characteristics and erosional potential, aboriginal cultural resources are rare in
the uplands. Where they do occur, they tend to consist of surficial scatters of artifacts that lack
depth and horizontal or vertical integrity. While significant aboriginal sites may occur at great
depths in streams that contain deep alluvial packages, significant aboriginal sites are
exceedingly rare in the uplands. Historic-age cultural resources may occur almost anywhere in
this region and tend to be visible on or near the modern ground surface.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
Bryant and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central
Texas from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial
period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands
were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985).
During the Post-Glacial period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more
stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas.
The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic
conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway
(1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably
achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Bosque County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern climate
is typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate is
influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified by
polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer, and
fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.
On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature in Texas
manifest regional clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east
to west and mean annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast
(Larkin and Bomar 1983). In Central Texas, climate has fluctuated from subtropical humid to
subtropical subhumid. Average annual precipitation totals 81 cm (32 in) and temperature
averages 19°C (67°F) annually, ranging from 36°C (96°F) in August (the warmest month) to

HJN 050182 AR

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

15°C (59°F) in January (the coldest month). During this time, however, drier periods lasting
from 3 to 7 years, when total annual rainfall ranged from 30 to 64 cm (12 to 25 in), were
followed by abnormally wet years with 114 to 127 cm (45 to 50 in) of rainfall.
Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are
associated with frontal storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with
warm, moist air masses moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The
topographic discontinuity along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf
storm trace and increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall
(Baker 1975). Two extreme examples are the excess of 91 cm (36 in) of rain that fell within an
18-hour period in the vicinity of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 56-cm (22-in) deluge
that fell in less than 3 hours near O’Harris, Texas, in May 1935 (Baker 1975). Lower rainfall
amounts are characteristic of winter and late summer. In winter, frontal storms pass so
frequently that there is little time for moisture to increase, and prevailing upper-level winds from
west to east often dominate over meridional flow, meaning that much of the available moisture
is derived from the Pacific rather than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer, cool fronts rarely
penetrate into the region, and rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal convective storms.

2.4

BIOTA

The project area is situated in the southwestern portion of the Texan biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces (Dice 1943).
Some species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texan province. The
boundary, characterized as “approximate,” between Blair’s (1950) Texan and Balconian
provinces passes through western Williamson County, northwest of the project area. Rainfall in
the Texan province is barely in excess of water need, and the region is classified by Thornwaite
(1948) as a C2 (moist subhumid) climate with a moisture surplus index of from 0 to 20%.
Edaphic controls on vegetation types are important in the Texan biotic province, which is
located near the border between moisture surplus and moisture deficiency. Sandy soils support
oak-hickory forests dominated by post oak (Quercus stellata), blackjack oak (Q. marilandica),
and hickory (Carya buckleyi). Clay soils originally supported a tall-grass prairie, but much of this
soil type has been placed under cultivation. Dominant tall-grass prairie species include western
wheatgrass (Agrophyron smithii), silver beardgrass (Andropogon saccharoides), little bluestem
(Andropogon scoparius), and Texas wintergrass (Stipa leucotricha). Major areas of oak-hickory
forest include the Eastern and Western Cross Timbers, and major tall-grass prairie areas
include the Blackland, Grand, and Coastal prairies. Some characteristic associations of the
Austroriparian province occur locally in the Texan province, such as a mixed stand of loblolly
pine (Pinus taeda) and blackjack and post oak in Bastrop County and a series of peat and bog
marshes distributed in a line extending from Leon to Gonzales counties.
The fauna associated with this region are represented by a mixture of species from the
Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, Kansan, Balconian, and Texan biotic provinces. At
least 49 species of mammals occur in the Texan province, including Virginia opossum
(Didelphis virginiana), eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus), fox squirrel (Sciurus niger), desert

10

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

pocket gopher (Geomys breviceps), fulvous harvest mouse (Reithrodontomys fulvescens),
white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus), eastern
cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus floridanus), raccoon (Procyon lotor), striped skunk (Mephitis
mephitis), white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), black-tailed jackrabbit (Sylvilagus
californicus), ground squirrel (Citellus tridecemlineatus), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
virginiana), hispid pocket mouse (Perognathus hispidus), deer mouse (Peromyscus
maniculatus), black-tailed jackrabbit (Lepus californicus), pygmy mouse (Baiomys taylori), ninebanded armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus), and jaguar (Felis onca). Both species of Terrapene
known from the Austroriparian province—eastern box turtle (T. Carolina) and desert box turtle
(T. ornata)—occur in the Texan.
Sixteen species of lizards, including 7 grassland and 9 forest species, are also found,
including green anole (Anolis carolinensis), eastern fence lizard (Sceloporus undulates),
common ground skink (Leiolopisma laterale), glass snake (Ophiosaurus ventralis [grassland
species]), collared lizard (Crotaphytus collaris), Texas spiny lizard (Sceloporus olivaceous),
Texas horned lizard (Phrynosoma cornutum), and Great Plains skink (Eumeces obsoletus
[forest species]). Only 5 species of urodele fauna are known from this area, including smallmouthed salamander (Ambystoma texanum), tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum), and
eastern lesser siren (Siren intermedia), and the Texan province acts as a barrier to urodele
distribution between the endemic Balconian province fauna to the west and the Austroriparian
fauna to the east. Anuran fauna is composed primarily of Austroriparian or otherwise widely
distributed species, including eastern spadefoot toad (Scaphiopus holbrookii), Gulf Coast toad
(Bufo valliceps), Woodhouse’s toad (Bufo woodhousii), southern cricket frog (Acris gryllus),
southern chorus frog (Pseudacris nigrita), gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor), green treefrog (Hyla
cinerea), North American bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana), northern leopard frog (Rana pipiens),
and narrow-mouthed toad (Microhyla carolinensis). Additional anuran species that fail to cross
from the Texan into the Austroriparian province include pacific tree frog (Pseudacris clarkia),
Strecker’s chorus frog (Pseudacris streckeri), and striped whipsnake (Microhyla olivacea).
Other reptile and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include 6-lined racerunner
(Aspidoscelis sexlineata), rat snake (Ptyas mucosus), eastern hognose snake (Heterodon
platirhinos), rough green snake (Opheodrys aestivus), copperhead (Agkistrodon contortrix),
western diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox), Blanchard’s cricket frog (Acris crepitans),
diamondback water snake (Nerodia rhombifer rhombifer), and Houston toad (Bufo
houstonensis).
Common bird species include northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus), eastern
meadowlark (Sturnella magna), mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), killdeer (Charadrius
vociferus), field sparrow (Spizella pusilla), red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis), turkey vulture
(Cathartes aura), belted kingfisher (Ceyrle alcyon), and mockingbird (Mimus polyglottos).
Small herds of bison and antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early
historic periods, but these species are no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

HJN 050182 AR

11

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) Central Texas Archeological
Region. Prewitt (1981, 1985) demarcated the southeastern boundary of his Central Texas
Archeological Region at the town of Bastrop in Bastrop County. The indigenous human
inhabitants of Central Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and gathering lifestyle
throughout all of prehistory, and, in contrast to much of the rest of North America, mobility and
settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 12,000 TO 8500 B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (cf. Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (12,000 to 8500 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various
periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted,
lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers,
gravers, and bone foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized
into egalitarian bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic
subsistence and settlement pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence
patterns in Central Texas are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence
focused on the exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the
PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as
has been documented elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern
appears to have been practiced throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the
PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point
styles. These include the Early PaleoIndian period, which is recognized based on large, fluted

HJN 050182 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

projectile points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late
PaleoIndian period, which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 8500 TO 1200 B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(8500 to 1200 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Central Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture
shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of
groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these
3 subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as well. Perhaps most
markedly, burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod, continuing into the
Late Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic subperiod. In
addition, the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered to constitute
evidence of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least partially
accounts for the lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1200 TO 350 B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 350 B.P.) (Collins 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas,
unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The
Late Prehistoric period is generally divided into 2 phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin
phase sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to
suggest that the Austin-phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north, and
lack the ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 B.P. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay.

14

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

However, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The
first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994) as well as increased participation
on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time that heavy settlement
of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was
greatly diminished.
The Tonkawa, Waco, and Tawakoni Indians were well-established in Central Texas by
the time the first Europeans explored the region. 1 Nearby Comanches occasionally raided
travelers or settlers in the Bosque territory to steal horses and property. The first exploring
expedition recorded travel in this region was conducted in 1721 by the Marqués de San Miguel
de Aguayo, a Spaniard who established many missions in Texas. During a trip from San
Antonio de Béxar to an East Texas mission, he ventured away from the regular road, the Old
San Antonio Road, and wandered north. The expedition camped near the Brazos River and a
major tributary, and the Marqués de San Miguel de Aguayo named this tributary Bosque,
Spanish for “woods,” and the area that is now Bosque County derives its name from the river.
European settlement of the area began in 1825 when Sterling C. Robertson obtained a
grant from the Mexican government to colonize the area along the Brazos River. Few of the
original homesteaders chose to live within the current boundaries of Bosque County, though the
grant prompted initial European travel through the area. The land granted was later
transformed into districts, one of which was the Milam District, from which Bosque County would
later be carved. George B. Erath, a surveyor for both the Republic of Texas and the state of
Texas, is credited with naming many of the streams and landmarks in Texas. In the late 1830s,
he named Meridian Creek and the Meridian Knobs based on their proximity to the
98th meridian. In 1841, the botched Texan-Santa Fe expedition passed through the region, and
many of the travelers chose to stay. In 1847, a prominent banker from New York, Richard B.
Kimball, obtained a grant of land from the state of Texas along the west bank of the Brazos
River 14 miles north of the mouth of the Paluxy River. Soon, Kimball formed a partnership with
Jacob De Cordova to develop this land. They planned to establish a town to lure prospective
settlers to the area. A site was chosen along the Brazos River at which there was a shallow
ford, and they named the town after Kimball. As this was the best spot to cross the river for
miles, many east-to-west travelers came through town. The Chisolm Trail crossed the
waterway at this location, and Kimball came to represent a favored stopping place for settlers,
ranchers, and cowboys. Following a somewhat prosperous start, however, Kimball was
bypassed by the railroads that were built in the county later in the decade; therefore, the town
quickly declined, and only a few people remain there today.
In 1850, McLennan County was carved out of the Milam District. The same year, the
Universal Immigration Company of England purchased 27,000 acres of land from Richard

1

Much of the following historical summary derives from Bosque County History Book Committee (1985),
Bosque County Centennial Association (1954), and Pool (1954, 1964).

HJN 050182 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Kimball and laid out a town site on the west bank of the Brazos. In the late 1850s, the company
sent over 30 families, comprising approximately 120 people. They settled in an area between
the present-day towns of Kopperl and Kimball under a massive rock formation called Solomon’s
Nose and named their idealistic colony Kent. Unfortunately, the citizens of Kent fell to the same
fate that their predecessors did more than a century before in Jamestown, Virginia. The first
harsh winter caused many hardships that led to a high number of fatalities. During the following
spring, in their last attempts to survive as a community, they bought several cattle and some
seed corn; however, they failed to build a fence around the crop and the cows ate all of the corn
before it could be harvested. The settlement quickly broke up, and the colonists migrated
separately to other areas. Some moved back to England.
Bosque County was officially formed in February 1854 from McLennan County. Soon, a
site was chosen on which to locate the county seat. Erath laid out the town of Meridian in the
center of the county on land donated by Dr. Josephus M. Steiner. Town lots were sold at a
public auction on July 4, 1854. Soon thereafter, the first courthouse, a one-story log cabin, was
erected in the middle of town. This building served the needs of the residents until 1869, when
a larger frame structure was built. In 1871, this second courthouse burned. For 4 years, the
business of the county was conducted in a tent. In 1875, the third, and present, courthouse was
completed, a 3-story structure constructed of native stone.
Also in 1854, Norwegian immigrants began to move to the area. Ole Canuteson, the
first, believed that the land was much like that in Norway. The state of Texas offered 320 acres
to each family that would settle in the new county, and the Norwegians took advantage of the
offer. Cleng Peerson, the “father” of Norwegian immigration to America, led the settlers to the
region. The bulk of them settled in a triangular area bounded by the present-day towns of
Clifton, Norse, and Cranfills Gap. Peerson was 67 years old when he moved to Bosque County,
and he lived the remainder of his life in the area. Many descendants of the Canutesons,
Ringnesses, Dahls, Questads, and other Norwegian settlers still live in Bosque County.
The first county election took place on August 7, 1854. The turnout was small, but
county officials were chosen and the local government began to function. The next significant
election took place on February 23, 1861, when secession was the issue. The citizens voted in
favor of secession by 233 to 81, though the Norwegians voted against secession by 52 to 42.
Like many other European immigrants in Central Texas, the Norwegians of southern Bosque
County maintained Union sentiments throughout the conflict, though they did not join in the
fighting.
The history of the Civil War era in Bosque County is sketchy because of skimpy recordkeeping. Between 1861 and 1865, many men from the county served in the military. The most
significant contributions were to the Second Frontier District, the Nineteenth Texas Infantry, and
Company H of Colonel T.C. Hawpe’s regiment. The latter 2 units saw action in the Louisiana
and Arkansas campaigns, and a few of the members fought with the Army of Northern Virginia.
The majority of the soldiers, however, guarded the area against Indians. In January 1865, many
of them fought in the Battle of Dove Creek against the Kickapoos. Although the battle took
place in what is now Tom Green County, many Bosque County fighters participated, about 10 of
whom died in the conflict. Probably the most significant impact of the Civil War in Bosque
16

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

County was that it slowed, and in some places halted, development. Few people moved to new
counties at the time, and the Norwegians stopped coming.
The county began to make progress in the decades following the Civil War. During
Reconstruction, the county population grew from 4,981 in 1870 to 11,216 in 1880. Additionally,
the black population increased from 293 in 1860 to 528 in 1870. Lawlessness, however,
flourished, including the killing of freedmen. In early 1870, the situation was so bad that the
Austin Daily State Journal reported Bosque County was averaging 2 killings each week.
Bosque County whites blamed the Republican government for these problems; the Democratic
Party has dominated the county ever since.
By 1880, the population had grown to 11,216, and the value of the farms in the county
had finally surpassed the $1 million mark. New communities were established. Furthermore, in
1881, the Texas Central and the Santa Fe railroads came to the area, and several towns began
to thrive. The number of manufacturing establishments increased from 11 in 1880 to 85 in
1900. The county, however, did not sustain this surge of growth, and, by 1920, only 21
manufacturers remained; the number was the same in 1977.
By the turn of the century, the population had increased to 17,390, but growth fell off
subsequently in livestock production, crop production, and manufacturing. There were several
reasons for the local depression. The soil was exhausted and eroding. Declining prices, spring
floods, summer droughts, unseasonable weather, and onslaughts of insects plagued farmers.
During the second decade of the 20th century, Bosque County witnessed its first decline in
population, decreasing from a peak of 19,013 in 1910 to 18,032 in 1920. The downward trend
continued until 1980. During the decade before the Great Depression, Bosque County farmers
and ranchers witnessed noticeable losses in agriculture. From 1920 to 1930, the value of all
farms decreased from $26,308,381 to $17,255,955. The production of wheat alone dropped by
more than 500,000 bushels. Manufacturers were down to 11 by 1930. When the depression hit
the entire nation in 1929, Bosque County was already suffering hard times.
The residents of the county had remained faithful followers of Democratic politics from
1876 to 1932. The only break occurred in 1928, when they opposed Democratic candidate
Alfred Smith because he was a Catholic with New York mannerisms. In November 1932, the
county joined the voters of Texas and the rest of the nation to give Franklin D. Roosevelt an
overwhelming victory at the polls. On March 25, 1933, when citizens in need of aid were
required to assemble at the city hall in Clifton to register for assistance, 107 residents applied.
Within a few days, half of them were employed clearing the municipal park under the Federal
Emergency Relief Act. The Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) opened Camp Clifton on the
banks of the Bosque River on June 21, 1933. The CCC was assigned to beautify the city park
and to construct low-water dams on nearby streams. Merchants of Clifton welcomed the
workers with open arms. In June, articles in the local paper called for cotton growers to plow
under a portion of their crops. Reportedly, at least 90% of the cotton farmers of the county
supported the program; county farmers received an estimated $125,831 cash for the destroyed
cotton. When Congress passed the National Industrial Recovery Act, “blue eagles” began to
appear in store windows throughout the county. While the New Deal assisted Bosque County
residents, however, it could not stop the downward trend that had begun in the 1920s.

HJN 050182 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

A succession of dry years in the late 1940s and 1950s forced many farmers to abandon
their farms. The total number of farms dropped from 2,229 in 1930 to 1,558 in 1950. Only
1,002 farms were registered in 1982. During the mid-20th century, agricultural production and
some livestock production also decreased. Fortunately for the county, manufacturing picked up
the slack when agriculture dropped off. Manufacturing establishments steadily increased in
number and value every census year after 1947. After 1970, employment opportunities
increased due to industrial growth in lumber, stone products, limestone, and, most significantly,
apparel and textiles.
During the 1980s, Bosque County grew in population and economy. In the late 1970s
and 1980s, residents of Clifton, the largest town, carried out “Operation Comeback.” The town
grew by 40% in population and by more than 100% in businesses. The town renovated old
buildings to open a modern home for senior citizens, established Goodall-Witcher Hospital, and
opened a 150-employee garment factory, an oilfield-tool manufacturing plant, and a 100employee lime plant.
Several prominent individuals have hailed from Bosque County. Among them were
Calvin M. Cureton, state attorney general and a member of the state Supreme Court; Earle B.
Mayfield, US senator; James E. and Miriam A. Ferguson, governors of Texas; and the Tandy
family, who formed the Tandy Corporation.

18

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and for
designation as Texas State Archeological Landmarks (SALs)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
at the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC’s) online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the
National Park Service’s (NPS’s) online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), and the Texas State Historical Association’s and
the General Libraries at The University of Texas at Austin’s The Handbook of Texas Online, as
well as a program of intensive pedestrian survey of the project area. No cultural resources were
documented as a result of this survey, so the second and third of these goals were not pursued.
The rest of this chapter presents the methodological background for the current investigations
and the specific survey methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing information on file at the
abovementioned archives for information on previously recorded cultural resource sites and
previous archeological investigations conducted within a 1.6-km (1.0-mi) radius of the project
area. Based on this research, very few systematic cultural resource investigations have been
performed in the vicinity of the proposed project area. In the City of Meridian, 1 small blockarea cultural resource survey was performed near the southwestern city limits on the east bank
of the North Bosque River, though no cultural resource sites were documented as a result of
this survey. In the Clifton area, at least 4 previous cultural resource surveys, all of which were
linear surveys of road and pipeline alignments, have been performed. One of these previous
surveys was conducted along FM 3220, extending from the western end of the current project

HJN 050182 AR

19

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

area to the point at which the proposed alignment leaves the FM 3220 right-of-way to cross the
North Bosque River. No previous cultural resource surveys have been conducted in the vicinity
of the portion of the proposed project corridor that extends along FM 1991. Thus, the portion of
the project area that extends along FM 3220 north of Clifton appears to have been previously
surveyed for cultural resources, but the remainder of the proposed project area has not.
Three archeological sites have been previously documented within 1.6 km (1.0 mi) of the
proposed project area, including 1 site (41BQ239) in the vicinity of Meridian and 2 sites
(41BQ278 and 41BQ279) in the vicinity of Clifton. Site 41BQ239, also known as the Meridian
Bridge Site, is located at the western edge of the City of Meridian on the east side of the North
Bosque River. THC site files describe the site as an aboriginal (i.e., prehistoric, protohistoric, or
early historic) scatter of mussel shells eroding from the riverbank; however, no cultural artifacts
were observed when the site was recorded, which raises the possibility that the concentration of
mussel shells is not necessarily of cultural derivation (i.e., this may be a natural deposit of
mussel shells rather than a cultural site). The 2 previously recorded sites in the Clifton area are
also located along the North Bosque River. Site 41BQ279, also known as the Stinnett Mill Site
and Mill Dam, is situated on the North Bosque River about 0.3 km (0.2 mi) south of the point at
which the proposed project corridor crosses the river. The other site, 41BQ278, appears to be
located within or in immediate proximity to the proposed corridor of the current project. This site
was recorded during a previous cultural resource survey and is located on the western bank of
the North Bosque River at the approximate location of the current project’s river crossing. This
site was described as a scatter of lithic artifacts and mussel shell fragments in disturbed context.
The site was recommended as ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP and/or for designation as an
SAL, and no further investigations were recommended.
The NPS’s NRIS online database was searched to identify any historic properties listed
on the NRHP in the vicinity of the proposed project area. The City of Meridian contains
5 NRHP-listed historic properties, and the City of Clifton contains 32 NRHP-listed historic
properties. The proposed undertaking has no potential to directly impact any of the NRHP-listed
historic properties in the vicinities of Meridian and Clifton; similarly, as the proposed pipeline
would be a subsurface conduit, the project would not have any indirect or viewshed impacts on
NRHP-listed historic properties in the area.
The THC’s online Texas Historic Sites Atlas was searched to identify any SALs in the
vicinity of the proposed project area. Two of the NRHP-listed properties in the City of Meridian,
the Bosque County Courthouse and the First National Bank Building, have also been
designated as SALs. One of the archeological sites, 41BQ279, in the vicinity of the City of
Clifton has been designated as an SAL. This historic property, also known as the Stinnett Mill
Site and Mill Dam, is located on the North Bosque River about 0.3 km (0.2 mi) south of the point
at which the proposed project corridor crosses the river. The proposed undertaking would not
impact any of the SALs in the vicinity of the project area, and the project would not have any
indirect or viewshed impacts on SALs in the area.
Examination of US Geological Survey (USGS) topographic quadrangles indicates that
there are 3 cemeteries in the vicinity of the project area, including 1 cemetery at the
southwestern edge of the City of Meridian and 2 cemeteries along the route of FM 1991. One of
20

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

the latter cemeteries, the Clifton Memorial Park, is located immediately adjacent to the existing
FM 1991 right-of-way on the east side of the road in the vicinity of the Clifton Municipal Airport.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

The scope of work implemented during the cultural resource survey of the Meridian
Treated Water Delivery System project area consisted of a program of intensive pedestrian
survey, including surface inspection and manual shovel test excavations, as well as
reconnaissance survey, including vehicular survey and judgmental pedestrian walkover with
shovel testing. From June 18 to 20, 2007, Horizon archeologists, including Reign Clark, field
director, and Michael Mudd, archeological technician, under the direction of Jeffery D. Owens,
Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resource survey of the proposed 20.1-km(12.5-mi-) long transport pipeline extending from the cities of Clifton to Meridian and a
reconnaissance survey of the 3.7-km- (2.3-mi-) long system of collection pipelines within the
Meridian city limits to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted
by the proposed construction project.
The proposed 20.1-km- (12.5-mi-) long transport pipeline right-of-way (ROW) begins at
an existing municipal water treatment facility on the northwestern side of the City of Clifton from
which treated water would be pumped to the City of Meridian (Figure 4). From this municipal lot
at the southern terminus of the project area, the APE extends northeastward along the south
side of FM 3220 within the existing ROW (Figure 5), crossing the North Bosque River in an
approximately 595-m- (1,950-ft-) long segment of proposed new ROW extending from FM 3220
on the south side of the river to FM 1991 on the east side of the river, including a short segment
in a Clifton city park on the southwest side of the river (Figure 6) and a segment that would be
installed within the existing ROW of a gravel driveway of a local residence on the northeast side
of the river (Figure 7). The City of Meridian proposes to directionally bore underneath the North
Bosque River, and the bore hole sites would be spaced approximately 198 m (650 ft) apart.
The proposed transport pipeline continues northwestward within the existing ROW of FM 1991,
crossing back and forth several times between the east and west sides of the road (Figures 8
and 9), and enters the City of Meridian from the southeast along Broadway Street.
Horizon’s archeologists traversed the 15-m- (50-ft-) wide, linear ROW of the proposed
transport pipeline (see Figure 1) in a single transect, providing 100% survey coverage of the
APE. The modern ground surface was thoroughly examined for historic and prehistoric cultural
resources, and erosional features and stream cutbank profiles were carefully examined to
obtain information on local stratigraphy and to identify any exposed cultural resources. Shovel
tests were excavated at intervals averaging 656 ft (200 m) apart, though shovel tests were
excavated more closely together in some areas, such as stream crossings. A total of
102 shovel tests were excavated, including 101 shovel tests within the proposed transport
pipeline ROW and 1 shovel test within the Meridian city limits in an open pasture through which
a segment of the proposed collection pipeline system would pass (Figures 10 to 12). For linear
surveys, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) for cultural
resource surveys require that a minimum of 16 shovel tests per mile (10 shovel tests per
kilometer) be excavated within a ROW corridor measuring 30 m (100 ft) in width, or 8 shovel

HJN 050182 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 4. Overview of City of Clifton Municipal Lot at South End of APE (Facing South)

Figure 5. South Side of FM 3220 Existing ROW in City of Clifton (Facing Northeast)

22

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

Figure 6. West Terrace of North Bosque River at Directional Drilling Site (Facing North)

Figure 7. Gravel Driveway between North Bosque River and FM 1991 (Facing Northeast)

HJN 050182 AR

23

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 8. Typical View of Existing FM 1991 ROW (Facing North)

Figure 9. Typical Low-Energy Tributary with Clay Banks (Tributary 6) (Facing Southwest)

24

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

Figure 10. Locations of Shovel Tests in Southern Portion of Project Area

HJN 050182 AR

25

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 11. Locations of Shovel Tests in Central Portion of Project Area

26

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

Figure 12. Locations of Shovel Tests in Northern Portion of Project Area

HJN 050182 AR

27

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

tests per mile (5 shovel tests per kilometer) within a 15-m- (50-ft-) wide ROW. The shovel
testing density may be increased in areas with higher probabilities to contain cultural resources,
such as stream terraces, or decreased in areas with low probabilities for cultural resources,
such as heavily disturbed areas or upland settings with minimal soil cover. For the current
project, a minimum of 100 shovel tests would be required within the proposed 20.1-km- (12.5mi-) long by 15-m- (50-ft-) wide transport pipeline ROW extending from the cities of Clifton to
Meridian. Horizon excavated a total of 101 shovel tests during the intensive survey of the
proposed transport pipeline portion of the APE, thereby meeting the TSMASS requirements.
Shovel tests measured approximately 30 cm in diameter and were excavated to a target
depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the top of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the
maximum depth practicable. In practice, shovel tests were terminated at depths ranging from
5 to 80 cm below surface (cmbs) due to the relatively shallow nature of Holocene soils
throughout the APE and the proximity of bedrock (i.e., dense deposits of limestone gravels and
caliche-rich clay sediments) to the surface. Most shovel tests were terminated at depths of
10 to 30 cmbs, though a very small proportion of shovel tests, usually located near stream
crossings, were excavated to depths of 70 to 80 cmbs. All sediments were screened through
6.35-millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth.
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching in stream terraces and other areas with
the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are
capable of reaching (approximately 1.0 m [3.3 ft] below surface). The APE is located primarily
in an upland setting east of the North Bosque River, and the streams that cross the APE to
discharge into the North Bosque River (see Figure 3), including the North Bosque River itself,
are incised into local clay sediments and lack alluvial terrace deposits within the APE. Surface
and near-surface deposits throughout the APE, including the North Bosque River crossing,
consist of dense clay sediments with abundant limestone gravels and caliche-rich clay deposits,
and very few shovel tests penetrated below depths of 10 to 30 cmbs due to the density of these
mature, ancient sediments. As such, the potential for deeply buried, intact archeological
deposits within the APE is very low, even considering the proximity to a major river. Shovel
testing effectively penetrated all Holocene-age sediments in the APE and is considered to
constitute an adequate survey technique for identifying cultural resources within the APE. As no
deep alluvial deposits were encountered during the survey that would require backhoe
trenching, mechanical trenching was not employed as a site-prospecting technique.
Horizon archeologists performed a reconnaissance-level survey of the 3.7-km- (2.3-mi-)
long system of collection pipelines within the Meridian city limits (see Figure 2). The system of
proposed collection pipelines within the Meridian city limits would be installed primarily within
ROWs of existing city streets, including Broadway Street, East Live Oak Street, North Rudasill
Street, East River Street, Short Street, East Hamilton Street, Hill Street, D Street, Moccasin
Drive, and East G Street (Figures 13 to 16). Short segments of the proposed collection pipeline
system depart from existing city street ROWs and run along property boundaries between
developed residential lots, and 1 short segment near the northern end of the project area
traverses an open pasture. The proposed pipeline collection system in the City of Meridian was
not intensively surveyed because previous impacts associated with road construction, utility line

28

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

Figure 13. Pipeline ROW at East Live Oak Street and SH 22 in Meridian (Facing NE)

Figure 14. Pipeline ROW at East River and North Rudasill Streets in Meridian (Facing NW)

HJN 050182 AR

29

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 15. Pipeline ROW along Private Property Boundaries in Meridian (Facing NE)

Figure 16. Pipeline ROW in Pasture near K Street in Meridian (Facing NW)

30

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

installation, and urban and suburban landscaping have resulted in extensive prior disturbance
to the proposed ROWs of the collection lines.
Consequently, Horizon performed a
reconnaissance survey of the portion of the APE located within the City of Meridian to determine
the project’s potential to impact significant cultural resources. The existing roads along which
the pipeline segments would be installed were driven and surveyed via vehicular survey. Any
areas that were considered to have a higher potential for cultural resources were examined
more thoroughly. Extensive photo-documentation was utilized during the reconnaissance
survey, and 1 shovel test was excavated in an open pasture situated near the northern end of
the project area that had experienced relatively fewer impacts than the remainder of the portion
of the APE located in the City of Meridian.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel testing results.
Digital photographs were taken, and a
photographic log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural
resources. Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s
marks) and non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, metal scrap) were to be
described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location in
which they were found. As no cultural materials were observed during the survey, the
collections policy was not brought into play.

HJN 050182 AR

31

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The City of Meridian, Bosque County, Texas, is proposing to construct an approximately
23.8-km- (14.8-mi-) long water pipeline extending from the City of Clifton to the City of Meridian
in Bosque County, Texas (see Figures 1 and 2). The pipeline would be installed within a 15-m(50-ft) wide easement primarily within the ROWs of existing roads, though small segments of
the line would be constructed within new ROWs. The City of Meridian proposes to construct a
transport pipeline between the cities of Clifton and Meridian as well as a system of collection
pipelines within the Meridian city limits. The transport pipeline would be installed within the
existing ROWs of FM 3220 in Clifton and FM 1991 extending from Clifton to Meridian, though a
short segment would be directionally drilled under the North Bosque River within proposed new
ROW. The transport pipeline would measure approximately 20.1 km (12.5 mi) in length. The
system of proposed collection pipelines within the Meridian city limits would be installed
primarily within existing city street ROWs, though short segments would be constructed along
property boundaries between residential lots and in an open pasture at the north edge of town.
The proposed collection pipeline system would measure approximately 3.7 km (2.3 mi).
Collectively, the proposed Meridian Treated Water Delivery System covers a total linear
distance of 23.8 km (14.8 mi), including 20.1 km (12.5 mi) of transport pipeline between
Meridian and Clifton and 3.7 km (2.3 mi) of collection pipelines within the City of Meridian.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the City of Meridian, a political
subdivision of the State of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition, the City of Meridian will be applying to the USACE for
permitting under Section 404 of the CWA to build the pipeline across 13 stream and river
crossings (USACE Project No. 200600250), including the North Bosque River, identified by
CP&Y, the City of Meridian’s engineering contractor for this project (see Figure 3); therefore, the
project also falls under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the NHPA. As the project represents a
publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact potentially significant cultural
resources, the City of Meridian is required to provide for a cultural resources inventory of the
APE and to assess the significance of any cultural resources located within the APE that
potentially may be adversely affected by proposed development.
On behalf of the City of Meridian, CP&Y retained Horizon to obtain the necessary
cultural resource clearances for the project. From June 18 to 20, 2007, Horizon archeologists
Reign Clark, field director, and Michael Mudd, archeological field technician, under the direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a combination of intensive and

HJN 050182 AR

33

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

reconnaissance-level cultural resource survey of the 23.8-km- (14.8-mi-) long APE to locate any
cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction
project. Horizon conducted an intensive cultural resource survey of the proposed 20.1-km(12.5-mi-) long transport pipeline extending from the cities of Clifton to Meridian and a
reconnaissance survey of the 3.7-km- (2.3-mi-) long system of collection pipelines within the
Meridian city limits to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted
by the proposed construction project.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey.
One previously recorded aboriginal archeological site, 41BQ278, was identified during
initial archival research conducted for this project that was believed to be possibly located within
or in immediate proximity to the proposed APE of the current project on the western bank or
terrace of the North Bosque River in the City of Clifton. This site was described as a scatter of
lithic artifacts and mussel shell fragments in disturbed context. The site was recommended as
ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP and/or for designation as an SAL when it was originally
recorded, and no further investigations were recommended. No traces of site 41BQ278 were
documented during the current survey. The western bank of the North Bosque River was
discovered to consist of shallow caliche-rich clay sediments overlying local bedrock, and
extensive prior disturbances from landscaping associated with a city park and prior installation
of a subsurface utility line were observed.
A single cemetery, Clifton Memorial Park Cemetery, was encountered during the survey
on the northeast side of FM 1991 approximately 1.4 km (0.9 mi) north of the intersection of
FM 1991 and FM 3221 near the Clifton Municipal Airport (Figures 17 and 18). While the
cemetery property abuts the existing FM 1991 ROW, the cemetery gates are set approximately
35 m (115 ft) back from the road and are accessed via a circular drive that provides access to
the cemetery entrance. The proposed transport pipeline easement along this segment of
FM 1991 would be installed on the west side of the road opposite the cemetery, and the
cemetery entrance is therefore set back approximately 50 m (164 ft) from the proposed pipeline
ROW on the opposite side of the road. A brief inspection of grave markers revealed dates of
interment ranging from 1936 to 2007.
Supplemental research on the Clifton Memorial Park Cemetery was conducted following
the completion of fieldwork to assess the potential for the cemetery boundaries to have changed
over time and the corresponding likelihood that any unmarked burials may be located outside
the currently marked cemetery boundaries (e.g., within the existing FM 1991 ROW). Mr. Don
McCrary of Clifton, Texas, who serves as a caretaker of the Clifton Memorial Park grounds, was
contacted via telephone on July 9, 2007. Mr. McCrary stated that the cemetery was officially
founded in 1952 and that the property boundaries, as well as the fence lines that mark them,
have not changed since the cemetery was founded. According to Mr. McCrary, the 1936
interment observed in the cemetery during the survey is actually a reinterment of a burial moved
from elsewhere so that husband and wife could rest together.

34

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

Clifton Memorial
Park Cemetery

Source: MapQuest 2007

Figure 17. Location of Clifton Memorial Park Cemetery on East Side of FM 1991

Figure 18. Entrance to Clifton Memorial Park Cemetery (Facing Northeast)

HJN 050182 AR

35

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is the determination
of whether or not an archeological site possesses the potential to make a contribution to 1 or
more previously defined research questions. Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey
level are rarely sufficient to contribute in a meaningful manner to such research issues. The
objective is rather to determine which archeological sites could be most profitably investigated
further in pursuance of regional, methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore,
adequate information on site function, context, and chronological placement from archeological
and, if appropriate, historical perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because
research questions vary as a function of geography and temporal period, determination of the
site context and chronological placement of cultural properties is a particularly important
objective during the inventory process.
Ultimately, management decisions regarding archeological properties are a function of
the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs. Archeological
resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of
archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for determination as SALs.

HJN 050182 AR

37

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

38

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

6.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ARCHEOLOGICAL LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are
located in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any
county, city, or political subdivision of the state are state archeological landmarks and are
eligible for designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
structure as an SAL if it (1) is publicly or privately owned and listed on the NRHP and (2) meets
one of the following 6 eligibility criteria:
A. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad
patterns of our history;
B. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. Is important to a particular cultural or ethnic group;
D. Is the work of a significant architect, master builder, or craftsman;
E. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction,
possesses high aesthetic value, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinctions; or
F. Has yielded or may be likely to yield information important to the understanding of
Texas culture or history.

HJN 050182 AR

39

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were documented as a result of the
intensive and reconnaissance cultural resource survey of the Meridian Treated Water Delivery
System project area. No cultural resources were encountered on the modern ground surface or
in any of the shovel tests excavated during the survey.
One previously recorded archeological site, 41BQ278, is mapped in THC site files on the
west bank of the North Bosque River within or in the vicinity of the current APE; however, the
site was recommended as ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as an SAL
when it was originally recorded, and no traces of the site were encountered during the current
survey.
In addition, a single cemetery, Clifton Memorial Park Cemetery, is located on the east
side of FM 1991 just north of the Clifton Municipal Airport toward the southern end of the project
area. While the cemetery property abuts the existing FM 1991 ROW, the cemetery gates are
set approximately 35 m (115 ft) back from the road and are accessed via a circular drive that
provides access to the cemetery entrance. The proposed transport pipeline easement along
this segment of FM 1991 would be installed on the west side of the road opposite the cemetery,
and the cemetery entrance is therefore set back approximately 50 m (164 ft) from the proposed
pipeline ROW on the opposite side of the road. Horizon contacted Mr. Don McCrary of Clifton,
Texas, the cemetery groundskeeper, and Mr. McCrary confirmed that the boundaries of the
cemetery have not changed since it was founded in 1952 and that there is no possibility that any
unmarked burials are located within the existing FM 1991 ROW. The proposed undertaking
would have no potential effects on the Clifton Memorial Park Cemetery.

6.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the intensive and reconnaissance cultural resource survey of the
proposed APE, no historic properties would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
cultural resources, prehistoric or historic, were documented within the APE during the survey.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort to
identify historic properties within the APE. As no cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as SALs according
to 13 TAC 26.12, no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the
proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed.
However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently
discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area,
even in previously surveyed areas, all ground-disturbing work should cease immediately and the
THC and the USACE should be notified of the discovery.

40

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Baker, V.R.
1975
Flood Hazards Along the Balcones Escarpment in Central Texas—Alternative
Approaches to the Recognition, Mapping, and Management. Geological Circular
No. 75-5. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bosque County Centennial Association
1954
Bosquerama, 1854-1954:
Centennial Celebration of Bosque County, Texas.
Meridian, Texas.
Bosque County History Book Committee
1985
Bosque County, Land and People. Dallas: Curtis Media.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Butzer, K.W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas.
No. 53, Austin.

HJN 050182 AR

Texas Water Development Board, Report

41

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dice, L.R.
1943
The Biotic Provinces of North America. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Flawn, P.T.
1970
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Waco Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hayward, O.T., P.M. Allen, and D.L. Amsbury
1996
Lampasas Cut Plain: Episodic Development of an Ancient and Complex Regional
Landscape, Central Texas. In Guidebook to Upland, Lowland, and In-Between
Landscapes in Lampasas Cut Plain, edited by D.L. Carlson, pp. 1-1 to 1-97. Friends
of the Pleistocene South-Central Cell, 1996 Field Trip. Department of Anthropology,
Texas A&M University, College Station, and Department of Geology, Baylor
University, Waco.
Johnson, E.H.
1931
The Natural Regions of Texas. University of Texas Bulletin 3113. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas. US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Karbula, J.W., P. McLoughlin, and S. Seibel
1998
Archeological Investigations of Southeast Metropolitan Park: Intensive Testing of
Site 41TV441; Travis County, Texas. Hicks & Company Archeology Series No. 64.
Travis County Parks Series No. 1. Hicks & Company, Austin, Texas.

42

050182_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Meridian 14.8-Mile Treated Water Delivery System, Bosque County, Texas

Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Makemson, W.K
1904
Historical Sketch of First Settlement and Organization of Williamson County.
Georgetown, Texas.
MapQuest
2007
Map of Bosque County, Texas. http://www.mapquest.com/.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Nash, S.R., G.D. Staples, and M.D. Freeman
2002
Cultural Resource Survey of the Parmer Lane Extension Project, FM 1431 to FM
2243, Williamson County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 14, Archaeological
and Cultural Sciences Group, Austin, Texas.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.

Pool, W.C.
1954
A History of Bosque County. San Marcos, Texas: San Marcos Record Press.

HJN 050182 AR

43

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

1964

Bosque Territory. Kyle, Texas: Chaparral.

Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology
in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R.A. Ricklis and M.B.
Collins, pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Stringer, B.R.
1980
Soil Survey of Bosque County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Washington, D.C.
Thornwaite, C.W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
38:55-94.

Geographical Review

Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

44

050182_arch_survey_report

