Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater System Improvement Project,
Liberty, Liberty County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5851
HJN 110005 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Schaumburg & Polk, Inc.
Schaumburg & Polk, Inc.
Beaumont, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

March 2011

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater System Improvement Project,
Liberty, Liberty County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Schaumburg & Polk, Inc.
Schaumburg & Polk, Inc.
8865 College Street
Beaumont, Texas 77707

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 110005 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5851

March 2011

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The City of Liberty (the City) is proposing to construct approximately 823 meters (m)
(2,700 feet [ft]) of 18-inch-diameter gravity sewer pipeline within an expanded area of proposed
new right-of-way (ROW) located 5 to 10 feet away from an existing gravity sewer pipeline for the
City’s Wastewater Improvement Project. The proposed ROW would extend from the existing
Wallisville Road Lift Station, located on the west side of Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 563
approximately 1.1 kilometers (km) (0.7 miles [mi]) south of US Highway (US) 90, eastward
approximately 823 m (2,700 ft) along the terraces of Abbott Creek to the intersection of Layl
Drive and Avenue G in Liberty, Liberty County, Texas. The majority of the proposed ROW
would run along the northern bank of Abbott Creek, crossing to the southern bank of the creek
near the eastern end of the project area and extending away from the creek up onto the
adjoining upland formation. The proposed undertaking would consist of installing an 18-inchdiameter sewer line in an area of proposed new ROW adjoining an existing sewer line ROW at
depths of 1.5 to 3.0 m (5.0 to 10.0 ft) below surface within an easement measuring a maximum
of 9 m (30 ft) in width. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed undertaking would
cover a maximum area of approximately 0.8 hectares (ha) (1.9 acres [ac]).
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by the City, a political subdivision of the
state of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas
(Natural Resource Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). In addition, the City is proposing to use funds
from a Clean Water State Revolving Fund (CWSRF) loan (CWSRF Project No. 72124) from the
Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) for wastewater system improvements. The CWSRF
program provides funds from a capitalization grant from the US Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and is administered by the TWDB; as such, the project also falls under the
jurisdiction of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA). As the project represents a
publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural resources, the
City was required to provide for a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the project’s
APE and to assess the project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the
APE. The City subcontracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), via its
engineering contractor, Schaumburg & Polk, Inc. (SPI), to conduct a cultural resource inventory
survey of the APE associated with the proposed project.
On January 19, 2011, Horizon archeologist Michael Mudd, under the overall direction of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to

HJN 110005 AR

iii

Management Summary

locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The survey consisted of pedestrian walkover of the APE with systematic shovel
testing and backhoe trenching. The survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit
No. 5851.
The APE was traversed on foot by Horizon’s archeologist in a single linear transect, and
the modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. Horizon excavated a total of 8 shovel tests and 1 backhoe trench during the survey,
thereby exceeding the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS)
requirements for a project area of this size.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey. Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
new cultural resources were identified in the APE as a result of survey activities, and no
previously recorded sites occur in the vicinity of the project area. Furthermore, no listed historic
properties are present in the vicinity of the project area that would be adversely affected by the
proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) according to 36 CFR 60.4
or for designation as State Archeological Landmarks (SALs) according to 13 TAC 26, and no
further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It is
recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely event
that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during
construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed
areas, all work should cease immediately and the Texas Historical Commission (THC) should
be notified of the discovery.

iv

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ..................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology ........................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.......................................................................... 5
2.3
Climate ............................................................................................................ 6
2.4
Flora and Fauna .............................................................................................. 7

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND..................................................................................... 11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) ..................................................... 12
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) ......................................................... 12
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) ........................................................ 13
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) .................................................... 14
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ....................................................... 15
3.6
Historic Period (ca. A.D. 1700 to Present) ..................................................... 15

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................. 21
4.1
Archival Research ......................................................................................... 21
4.2
Survey Methods............................................................................................. 22

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................. 27

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................. 29
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................. 29
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .... 30
6.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Archeological Landmark ................... 31
6.4
Summary of Inventory Results ...................................................................... 31
6.5
Management Recommendations ................................................................... 31

7.0

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................. 33
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test and Backhoe Trench Data

HJN 110005 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.

Location of Project Area on Topographic Map ............................................................ 2
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ........................................................... 3
Overview of Disturbed APE near West End of Project Area (Facing East) ............... 23
View of APE 5 to 10 Feet North of Existing Sewer Line (Facing East) ..................... 23
Locations of Shovel Tests and Backhoe Trench in Project Area .............................. 25
Location of BT-1 near East End of APE on Southeast Bank of Abbott Creek (Facing
Southwest) ................................................................................................................ 26
Figure 7. Profile of BT-1 Showing Deep Clay Deposits under 55 cm of Artificial Fill ................ 26

vi

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The City of Liberty (the City) is proposing to construct approximately 823 meters (m)
(2,700 feet [ft]) of 18-inch-diameter gravity sewer pipeline within an expanded area of proposed
new right-of-way (ROW) located 5 to 10 feet away from an existing gravity sewer pipeline for the
City’s Wastewater Improvement Project (Figures 1 and 2). The proposed ROW would extend
from the existing Wallisville Road Lift Station, located on the west side of Farm-to-Market Road
(FM) 563 approximately 1.1 kilometers (km) (0.7 miles [mi]) south of US Highway (US) 90,
eastward approximately 823 m (2,700 ft) along the terraces of Abbott Creek to the intersection
of Layl Drive and Avenue G in Liberty, Liberty County, Texas. The majority of the proposed
ROW would run along the northern bank of Abbott Creek, crossing to the southern bank of the
creek near the eastern end of the project area and extending away from the creek up onto the
adjoining upland formation. The proposed undertaking would consist of installing an 18-inchdiameter sewer line in an area of proposed new ROW adjoining an existing sewer line ROW at
depths of 1.5 to 3.0 m (5.0 to 10.0 ft) below surface within an easement measuring a maximum
of 9 m (30 ft) in width. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed undertaking would
cover a maximum area of approximately 0.8 hectares (ha) (1.9 acres [ac]).
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by the City, a political subdivision of the
state of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas
(Natural Resource Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). In addition, the City is proposing to use funds
from a Clean Water State Revolving Fund (CWSRF) loan (CWSRF Project No. 72124) from the
Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) for wastewater system improvements. The CWSRF
program provides funds from a capitalization grant from the US Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and is administered by the TWDB; as such, the project also falls under the
jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as
amended. As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to
impact significant cultural resources, the City was required to provide for a cultural resources
inventory and assessment of the project’s APE and to assess the project’s possible impacts on
any significant cultural resources in the APE.
The City subcontracted with Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), via its engineering contractor, Schaumburg & Polk, Inc.
(SPI), to conduct a cultural resource inventory survey of the APE associated with the proposed
project.

HJN 110005 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on Topographic Map

2

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

HJN 110005 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

On January 19, 2011, Horizon archeologist Michael Mudd, under the overall direction of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive
pedestrian survey of the APE with systematic shovel testing and backhoe trenching, and the
production of a report suitable for review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in
accordance with the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure,
Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council of Texas Archeologists’ (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural
Resources Management Reports. The survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit
No. 5851.
This report presents the results of this cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds,
respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the cultural resource survey and describes cultural
resources documented during the fieldwork, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

4

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in central Liberty County, Texas, on the southeastern
outskirts of the City of Liberty. Liberty County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in
southeastern Texas, and the project area is located about 32 km (20 mi) north of Trinity Bay, an
inlet of the Gulf of Mexico located at the mouth of the Trinity River east of Houston, Texas. The
Gulf of Mexico represents a structural basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas
Coastal Plain, which extends as far north as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and
westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock,
most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin, that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from
its margins (Abbott 2001). The Houston area is underlain by rocks and unconsolidated
sediments that are quite young in a geological sense, ranging from modern to Miocene in age.
These consist predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic bodies arranged in an offlapped
sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine facies making up a
relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities between these
formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that occurred during
periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in this fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As a
result of the geometry of basin filling, successively younger rock units crop out in subparallel
bands from the basin margin toward the modern coastline.
The project area is situated along the banks of Abbott Creek, a channelized tributary of
the Trinity River with a concrete-lined bed. Abbott Creek flows generally westward to its
confluence with Clayton Bayou in a broad, low-lying, forested marsh area that forms the broad,
eastern floodplain of the Trinity River. The Trinity River, in turn, flows southward and
discharges into the Gulf of Mexico at Trinity Bay. Local drainage in the project area is toward
the west. Topographically, the project area is relatively flat and roughly runs along the 8-m-(25ft) above mean sea level (amsl) contour.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project area is underlain by the Late Pleistocene- to Holocene-age Deweyville
Formation (Qd) (Shelby et al. 1968). The Deweyville Formation consists of sand, silt, and clay,
with some gravel inclusions, that comprises a variety of alluvial structures along the Trinity

HJN 110005 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

River, including point bars, natural levees, stream channels, and backswamp deposits at a level
only slightly above that of the current floodplain (Shelby et al. 1968). The surface of the
Deweyville Formation is characterized by relict meanders of much larger radius of curvature
than those of present streams with some scattered pimple mounds that measures no more than
approximately 15 m (50 ft) in thickness. Higher-elevation Deweyville surfaces near Liberty cut
into the underlying Beaumont Formation, which is the youngest continuous coastwise terrace
fronting the modern Gulf (Abbott 2001), and are intermediate in position between the Beaumont
surface and the level of most Deweyville deposits. Many investigators (cf. DuBar et al. 1991;
Fisk 1938, 1940) have correlated the Beaumont terrace with the Sangamon Interglacial (ca.
130 to 75 thousand years ago [kya]), although age estimates range from Middle Wisconsinan
(Alford and Holmes 1985) to 100 to 600 kya (Blum and Price 1994). While debate about the
temporal affiliations of and correlations among the deposits that underlie the major coastline
terraces remains active, they are of little direct geoarcheological relevance because virtually all
investigators agree that these deposits considerably predate the earliest demonstrated dates of
human occupation in North America.
Specifically, the project area traverses a single mapped soil unit—Woodville fine sandy
loam, 5 to 8% slopes (WvD)—that consists of clayey alluvium weathered from sandstone and
shale. A typical stratigraphic profile of this soil unit consists of fine sandy loam from 0 to
15 centimeters (cm) (0 to 6 inches [in]) below surface underlain by clay to a depth of 183 cm
(72 in) below surface.
While aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in deep alluvial
sediments adjacent to major streams in Texas, the relative antiquity of the fluviodeltaic loamy
and clayey sediments that constitute the soils on the coastal plain, such as those that comprise
the current project area, suggests that any cultural resources would be constrained to the
modern ground surface, rather than in deeply buried contexts, in erosional settings lacking
integrity. Intact, buried archeological deposits may occur within alluvial sediments near major
streams, though only very shallow alluvial sediments of possible Holocene age are mapped
within the current project area, and the only streams in the vicinity of the APE are channelized
canals. Historic-age cultural resources may occur in any physiographic setting, though they are
comparatively rare in the frequently flooded, marshy environs of Southeast Texas.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
While the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway
(1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes
3 separate climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late
Glacial Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present).
Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas
was considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region
was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and
Holloway 1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a

6

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous
woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway
1985). During the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have
been more stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post
oak savannas. The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued
into the mid-Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more
mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and
Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were
probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern US and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects
the influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with
the urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and concrete to give
the Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout
much of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water,
humidity in the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often
exceeds 50% even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high
humidity characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and
a modest diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly
high temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in
January to a high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to
9°C (38 to 47°F) in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average
low temperatures range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range
from 27 to 29°C (75 to 79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The Houston region experiences 2 precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott 2001;
Wheeler 1976). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of
infrequent cold fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs
in the late summer to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical
storms and hurricanes from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter
and early spring are relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional
thunderstorms that are relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual
precipitation varies from a low of approximately 100 centimeters (cm) (40 inches [in]) to a high
of more than 132 cm (52 in). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5 to 8 cm (2 to
3 in) in March to more than 19 cm (7.5 in) occurring locally on the coast during September.
Almost all of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely rare, occurring in
measurable amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Harris County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texas biotic province (Blair
1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces
and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some species reach

HJN 110005 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahon et al. (1984) further
define 4 broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic province that lies
on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie, (3) coastal gallery
forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are
strongly controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the
seasonal water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically
dominated by little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter
environments are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria,
bulrushes, smooth cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush,
saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal
waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained
environments are characterized by such taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum,
gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass, red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort.
A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon,
nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and
many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish
to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs
and woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the
north and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses
are found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver
bluestem, buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian
sunflower, Engelman daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow
neptunia, snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush,
bluebonnet, ragweed, croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring
in the coastal prairie include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live
oak, elm, hackberry, bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as
the coastal prairie grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland
environment with common stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie
is home to a diverse fauna, including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many
small rodents, amphibians, reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and
pronghorn were also present at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,

8

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbrier, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are
grasses such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest
include white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and
rodents, turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various times in the
past, and a number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger
deciduous trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory
vegetation varies from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and
young trees. Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle,
greenbrier, Virginia creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A
variety of fauna is also present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit,
mink, skunk, various small rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was
also present at times in the past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the
transition zone to the coastal prairie environment.

HJN 110005 AR

9

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21county area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 200 km (124 mi) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline. Much of the
archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern Great
Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990).
Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These 2 subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25 km (16 mi) inland from the coast that covers the area influenced by
Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological variability
characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands, marine
coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable ecological
diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to
denote Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural
characteristics of Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring
regions. For instance, the Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and
Southeast Texas, and Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for
Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time
in Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit
evidence of reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be
associated with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of
subsistence-related activities. Inland sites also tend to contain modest pottery assemblages,
fired clay balls (at some sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal
sites tend to consist of multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain oyster shell tools,
large quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), numerous bone tools, and only a few
lithic artifacts.

HJN 110005 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period.
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is
represented by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred endscrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas
are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is
little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian
period (8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far
less pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and
corresponding decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a
diversified resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas,
however, this hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The
appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone
assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural

12

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

stage. Material culture shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in
the application of groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
In Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains.
Many of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and
several new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and
probably the Gary-Kent series.
The Late Archaic period (1,500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is
characterized by Gary, Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos
points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition
developed in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981;
Patterson 1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period
but reached full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as
boatstones and bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang
knives, stingray spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial
practices included the systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre,
and use of locally made grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most
burials are found in extended supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials
are also known. Burial direction is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to
site. Patterson et al. (1993) report that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary
tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area
by about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the
Conroe-Livingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears
to have progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995).
Southeastern Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where
Aten (1983) established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
129 km (80 mi) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal exception of a
few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found on the Gulf
coast west of the Sabine Lake area.

HJN 110005 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods
(Aten 1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility
ware throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown
Plain for about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods
before once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety,
Goose Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor
pottery types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway
(Aten 1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte
types are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste
(like Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined
by the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the
latter part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in
Southeast Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the
Late Prehistoric period (Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995;
Wheat 1953). In fact, Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in
Southeast Texas as early as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points
that consisted of marginally retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a
generalized date of adoption of the bow-and-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca.
A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas. In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to
be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba,
Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial sequence for these point types has not been
established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn points appear to predate Perdiz points
throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto
Plain and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek
pottery remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt
Coated pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

14

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue.
Aten (1983) has
reconstructed the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century,
including the Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (possibly Karankawa), and Tonkawa. The
presence of the Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central
Texas in the 17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought
to have occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the
corresponding mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east
of the San Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe
may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic
Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and
Cuney points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified
by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. A.D. 1700 TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez
Cabeza de Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near
Galveston Bay; however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until
after 1700. The first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission
system, as well as the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native
culture and social systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where
the burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as
increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the
time heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous
Indian population was greatly diminished. The Alabama/Coushatta Indians who currently reside
in Southeast Texas are migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early
19th centuries (Newcomb 1961).
Although Spain claimed the Texas Gulf Coast, the future Liberty County area was
contested by French interests seeking to expand from Louisiana to the east and Spanish
interests from the west and south during most of the 18th century 1 . Though the Spanish crown
granted Pánfilo de Narváez the privilege to colonize the lands between the Rio Grande and the

1

The following history of Liberty County, Texas, derives from Fincher (1937), Johnson (1916), Moneyhon
(1980), Partlow (1974), and Pickett (1936), as summarized in The Handbook of Texas Online.

HJN 110005 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

cape of Florida in 1526, Karankawa Indians, including Coapites and related groups, were the
sole occupants of the future Liberty County until the 1740s. Rumors of French exploration on
the Texas coast by Joseph Blancpain and others prompted the Spanish to send Joaquín de
Orobio y Basterra on an exploratory expedition in 1748, and fears of French intrusion continued.
The Spanish established Nuestra Señora de la Luz Mission and San Agustín de Ahumada
Presidio in 1756; the mission was for the Akokisa and Bidai Indians. Spanish maps in 1757
showed the Atascosito settlement and a Spanish military road known as the Atascosito Road,
which crossed the Trinity near the present site of Liberty. Ten years later, the Marqués de Rubí
included the area in his tour of inspection, but parts of the mission were destroyed by a storm in
1766 and the presidio was abandoned in 1772. According to some sources, a trading-post
settlement named Arkokisa or Arkosisa (variants of Akokisa) existed from roughly 1770 to 1790
near what later became the townsite of Liberty.
The Louisiana Purchase altered the balance of power between the Spanish and the
French in 1803, and Spanish efforts to discourage American immigration to Texas increased.
Nonetheless, the open land attracted numerous immigrants from Louisiana, Mississippi, and the
adjoining states. In 1818, Charles F.A. Lallemand and Antoine Rigaud made an unsuccessful
attempt to colonize Bonapartist refugees at Champ d'Asile, near the site of present-day Liberty.
Coushatta Indians, who arrived in Texas from Alabama around 1807 and were later placed on
an East Texas reservation, inhabited the east bank of the Trinity during this period. After
Mexico won its independence from Spain, more American settlers came in response to
promised grants of land, and much of what later became Liberty County and adjacent counties
soon were part of an empresario grant made to Joseph B. Vehlein in 1826 and transferred to
the Galveston Bay and Texas Land Company in 1830. A new Atascosito District developed in
Mexican Texas when settlers established an independent colony in 1826. Local administration
of the area was conducted at Atascosito until 1831. In the battle for allegiance, some residents
of the Liberty area supported the Mexican government and participated in quelling the
Fredonian Rebellion. However, the Law of April 6, 1830, which prohibited further American
immigration, pushed settlers too far. When the Mexican government failed to recognize titles
given by the Galveston Bay and Texas Land Company, settlers and squatters in the coastal
area petitioned the commander-in-chief of Coahuila and Texas for land titles and organization of
a local government. In 1831, land commissioner José Francisco Madero organized a
municipality known as Villa de la Santísima Trinidad de la Libertad, which embraced most of
Southeast Texas; it was bounded on the east by the Sabine River, on the west by the San
Jacinto, by Nacogdoches Municipality on the north, and by the Gulf of Mexico to the south.
Hugh B. Johnston served as alcalde. The new seat of government, called Liberty by the AngloAmericans, was located about 3 miles southwest of old Atascosito. In activities that led to the
Anahuac disturbances of 1832, John Davis Bradburn, commander of the fort at Anahuac,
attempted to annul the act, arrested Madero and the land commissioners who had given titles in
the Liberty area and attempted to dissolve the municipality. Some settlers pledged loyalty to
Antonio López de Santa Anna in the Turtle Bayou Resolutions. Nonetheless, the territory
between the San Jacinto and Sabine rivers continued to be known thereafter as Liberty and
functioned as a municipality.

16

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

As events began to foreshadow the Texas Revolution, Augustine B. Hardin, Pierre J.
Menard, Henry W. Millard, Claiborne West, and Hugh B. Johnston represented the area at the
Consultation. By 1835, despite governmental difficulties and a lack of land titles, the
municipality's population increased to more than 1,000. Andrew Briscoe's Liberty Volunteers
were organized in 1835 and later fought at the battle of Concepción and the siege of Bexar.
Soldiers from Liberty County formed the Third Infantry Company, Second Regiment, under
William M. Logan; this unit fought along with other men from the county at the battle of San
Jacinto. Mexican prisoners captured at San Jacinto were sent to Liberty before release. Liberty
County, formed and organized in 1836 in the new Republic of Texas, originally included all of
the future Tyler County and parts of what later became Hardin, Chambers, San Jacinto, and
Polk counties. Liberty was named county seat and incorporated in 1837. Sam Houston
maintained 2 homes in the area and purchased more than 20,000 acres of land within the
county's original boundaries.
Antebellum Liberty County was characterized by plantations along the Trinity that raised
cotton, sugarcane, tobacco, indigo, grains, and vegetables. Lumber mills were in operation, and
Liberty shipped cotton, hides, Indian corn, cattle, and lumber down the Trinity. The county
economy received a further boost in 1840 when James Taylor White established the cattle
industry with an extensive ranch at Turtle Bayou in what is now Chambers County. Cattle
drives began moving eastward to Louisiana, and some cattlemen sold their animals to a
meatpacking plant at Liberty Landing, operated by the English firm Jones and Company. Cattle
numbered 14,058 in 1840 and 45,670 in 1850. Wealthy aristocratic Creole planters from
Louisiana arrived in Liberty County with their slaves in 1845, and, by 1850, the county
population had grown to 2,522. Sawmills made the lumber industry the county's first major
industry. River travel by steamboat flourished from 1838 to 1878. Early attempts to build a
railroad from Liberty to Livingston were interrupted by the Civil War. Efforts to extend the
navigable portion of the Trinity began in 1852 and continued spasmodically thereafter. Only the
Texas and New Orleans Railroad (later the Southern Pacific) from Houston via Liberty and
Beaumont to Orange was in place by 1860.
Liberty County residents voted 422 to 10 for secession and contributed to several
Confederate units in the Civil War. The Liberty Invincibles, organized in 1861, were later
Company F of the Fifth Regiment of Texas Volunteers. The Moss Bluff Rebels, also organized
in 1861, served mostly as cavalry Company F of Maj. J.B. Likens's battalion. Captains W.D.
Davis and Edward Bradford Pickett commanded companies, while other groups served under
S.G. Cleveland and Thomas Dudley Wooten. A militia company was organized to guard the
home front.
After the war, many freedmen worked for their former masters or settled in the county
and started small farms. The black population was 1,079 in 1860 and 1,975 in 1870. The
Freedmen's Bureau operated in Liberty from 1866 until 1868, with Dr. J. Orville Shelby and A.H.
Mayer serving as the bureau representatives for most of the period. Suffrage caused conflict
during Reconstruction. Officials arrested and tried a Republican organizer for “exciting Negroes
to acts of hostility to whites,” and Republican voters in the county dropped from 255 in 1869 to 0
in 1873. The black population approached parity with the white in 1880, but declined thereafter

HJN 110005 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

to about a third of the county population in the early decades of the 20th century. In 1871,
steamboat travel resumed when the Trinity River Navigation Company, with headquarters at
Liberty, incorporated to run steamboats from that city to Galveston. US government assistance
for making the Trinity more navigable came after 1880, and, by 1940, a total of 236 miles of
waterway had been constructed. Nonetheless, railroad construction, which began largely after
Reconstruction, caused a severe blow to the port of Liberty. The Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe
(later the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe) crossed the northern part of the county through
Cleveland, Romayor, Fuqua, and other former timber towns by 1900, and, by 1907, 10 miles of
the proposed Trinity Valley and Northern line from Dayton to Cleveland had been completed.
The Beaumont, Sour Lake and Western Railway (later the Missouri Pacific) built across the
central part of the county through Eastgate, Kenefick, Sandune Station, Hardin, and Hull parallel
to the Texas and New Orleans, and Ross S. Sterling's Dayton-Goose Creek line reached
Dayton in 1917. Liberty County had 22 white schools in operation by 1880. The population
remained nearly constant from 1870, when the figure of 4,414 included some residents of what
became San Jacinto County that year, to 1890, when it numbered 4,230. In the next decade,
however, it nearly doubled in size, reaching 8,102 in 1900 in an expansion that reflected
important growth in the county's agriculture and industry. Much as they had become a center
for Texas cattle production, Liberty County and the Atascosito District became a center of the
Texas rice industry around 1900, when irrigation plants were developed at Stilton and White's
Bayou and the Raywood Rice Company began promotion of rice culture. E.W. Boyt, for
example, combined rice growing and cattle raising on a large spread in Liberty and Chambers
counties.
Prospecting for oil began about 1901, chiefly in the southern part of the county. Daisetta
and Hull became oil towns after a nearby field was discovered in 1918. Wells were brought in at
Old River Lake by 1904. Others were opened at North Dayton, Esperson Dome, Moss Bluff,
Davis Hill, and South Liberty in 1925 and Hankamer in 1929. Pipelines crossed the county. By
1990, oilfields in Liberty County had cumulatively produced almost 496 million barrels of oil, as
well as significant amounts of natural gas. The county population increased steadily in the first
half of the 20th century, reaching 14,637 by 1920 and 24,541 by 1940. The number of farms
increased from 1,001 in 1900 to an all-time high of 1,961 in 1940. Corn, rice, and cotton, the
major crops, though fluctuating somewhat in relative importance, accounted for 85 to 92% of
Liberty County agricultural revenue in the 1920s and 1930s. Livestock raising was also
important. In 1930, swine raising peaked at 31,242 hogs, and, in 1936, Liberty County was the
leading hog county in the state. Hog production declined in the 1930s and recovered somewhat
by 1940. Cattle raising held steady at some 30,000 head through 1950. Lumbering also
remained an important county industry.
With its varied agriculture and resource industries, Liberty County was spared some of
the worst effects of the agricultural fluctuations of the 1920s and the Great Depression. The
number of tenant farmers increased from 294 in 1920 to 709 (46% of county farmers) in 1930,
and remained high through the 1930s. The value of farms actually increased by almost 30%
during the 1930s. During World War II, a camp for German prisoners of war operated at the
fairgrounds in Liberty. Manufacturing in the county, which had been minimal, expanded as a
result of the war, from 22 establishments employing 370 workers in 1940 to 52 firms employing

18

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

744 workers by 1948. In that year, Texas Gulf Sulphur Company (later Texasgulf) mined sulfur
at Moss Bluff, south of Liberty. Forty manufacturing plants operated in 1958, along with
165 mineral companies, and a Central Chemical Corporation plant was completed by 1962.
Cotton and corn declined after the war, and soybeans joined rice as the most important crops.
More than 2/3 of the county's farms had electricity by 1945, and farm tenancy declined
dramatically during the 1940s. Further improvement in transportation came in the 1960s, when
US 59 was built through the county. Cleveland became a lumber and oilfield supply center,
Dayton a rice and oilfield center, and Hull and Daisetta oil and lumber markets. Liberty,
remaining a key port on the barge canal, shipped sulfur, chemicals, and steel. Agribusiness and
tourism expanded in this period, and many residents found work in the Houston metropolitan
area.

HJN 110005 AR

19

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for designation as State Archeological Landmarks (SALs) and for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their SAL
and NRHP assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
on the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the
National Park Service’s (NPS) online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas
State Historical Association’s (TSHA) Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a program of
intensive survey of the project area. No cultural resources were documented as a result of this
survey, so the second and third of these goals were not pursued. The rest of this chapter
presents the methodological background for the current investigations and the specific survey
methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey corridor. No archeological sites, historic cemeteries,
or listed NRHP or SAL historic properties have been previously documented within the APE.
However, within a 1.6-km (1.0-mi) radius of the project area, 1 previously recorded
archeological site, 41LB59, occurs on the toe of a low bluff that overlooks the confluence of
Abbott Creek and Clayton Bayou west of the western terminus of the APE. Originally recorded
as an archeological site in 1986, this locale represents 1 of many sites from which a local
artifact hunter collected projectile points between 1946 and 1986. As such, no professional

HJN 110005 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

archeological investigations have ever been conducted on site 41LB59, and the significance
and current condition of the site remain unknown.
Two large-scale cultural resource surveys have been conducted in the immediate vicinity
of the current project’s APE, including 1 that covered a large area west of FM 563 and 1 that
covered a large area north of Abbott Creek east of FM 563. The latter survey probably covered
some portions of the current project’s APE, and it would appear that up to approximately 30% of
the current project area has been previously surveyed for cultural resources.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

On January 19, 2011, Horizon archeologist Michael Mudd, under the overall supervision
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resource survey of
the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed construction project. The survey consisted of pedestrian walkover of the APE with
systematic shovel testing and backhoe trenching. Field conditions were generally favorable at
the time of the survey—the winter sky was slightly overcast, but visibility was good. The APE is
situated off the banks of Abbott Creek, a channelized tributary of the Trinity River with a narrow,
cement-lined channel. The existing ROW of a subsurface sewer line runs along the banks of
Abbot Creek in this area, and the current project proposes to install a new 18-inch-diameter
sewer line within an area of expanded proposed new ROW 1.5 to 3.0 m (5.0 to 10.0 ft) north of
the existing line at depths of 1.5 to 3.0 m (5.0 to 10.0 ft) below surface. In general, the
proposed ROW passes through a moderately densely wooded area along the banks of Abbot
Creek, though vegetation along the existing sewer line ROW was cleared during prior
construction to provide access to the line (Figures 3 to 4). The project area has been relatively
extensively disturbed as a consequence of prior construction of the existing sewer line and
channelization of Abbott Creek, and the APE would appear to be no more than 30% intact.
The project area is situated in a low, relatively flat, fluviodeltaic environment situated off
of Abbott Creek, a channelized canal, on mature, sandy loam sediments of the Deweyville
Formation. The sediments within the project area were deposited during the Late Pleistocene
or early Holocene epochs; as such, they would appear to possess at least some potential to
contain cultural resources. However, given the shallow character of alluvial sediments that have
been mapped within the project area (ca. 15 cm [6 in] in depth) overlying dense clay, any
cultural materials that may occur within the APE therefore would be expected to occur on or
near the modern ground surface in deflated, previously disturbed contexts and likely would lack
integrity.
In general, intensive cultural resource survey activities entail a pedestrian walkover with
surface inspection as well as excavation of subsurface probes, such as shovel tests and/or
backhoe trenches. The 9-m- (30-ft-) wide APE was traversed on foot by Horizon’s archeologist
in a single linear transect, and the modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for
aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) for cultural resource surveys state that, for linear projects, a minimum of
16 subsurface probes per mile of 30-m- (100-ft-) wide ROW is required unless field conditions
warrant excavation of more probes (e.g., due to the presence of culturally sensitive areas) or

22

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

Figure 3. Overview of Disturbed APE near West End of Project Area (Facing East)

Figure 4. View of APE 5 to 10 Feet North of Existing Sewer Line (Facing East)

HJN 110005 AR

23

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

less probes (e.g., due to extensive prior disturbances or cultural low-probability areas). In the
event that a probe yields evidence of subsurface cultural deposits, additional probes may be
necessary to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of the subsurface deposits associated
with the cultural resource. Thus, a minimum of 3 subsurface probes would be required within
the 823 m (2,700 ft) long by 9-m- (30-ft-) wide project area. Horizon excavated a total of
8 shovel tests during the survey, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project
area of this size (Figure 5). In general, shovel tests measured approximately 30 cm (12 in) in
diameter and were excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the
top of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable, and all sediments were
screened through 6.35-millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth. In practice, 7 of the 8 shovel
tests were terminated at depths of 25 to 35 cm below surface (cmbs) due to the presence of
dense clay sediments on and near the modern ground surface. One shovel test was excavated
to a depth of 60 cmbs before encountering comparable dense clay sediments. Specific shovel
test data are summarized in Appendix A.
In addition to shovel testing, the TSMASS require backhoe trenching in stream terraces
and other areas with the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that
shovel tests are capable of reaching (approximately 80 to 100 cmbs or more in sandy sediments
or 40 to 60 cmbs in clayey sediments). While the shallow character of sediment deposits with
the potential to contain cultural resources would have argued against excavating any backhoe
trenches during this project, the City had already arranged for a backhoe to be available during
the survey, so Horizon excavated a single backhoe trench to confirm the accuracy of the survey
results from shovel testing (Figures 6 to 7). This backhoe trench (BT 1) was excavated on the
southern bank of Abbott Creek near the eastern terminus of the project area and revealed a
deep sequence of dense clay sediments beneath a surface layer composed of 55 cm of artificial
fill materials. Specific backhoe trench data are summarized in Appendix A.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic
log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and
non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same
location in which they were found. As no cultural resources were observed during the survey,
the collections policy was not brought into play.
The Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all subsurface probes,
including shovel tests and backhoe trenches, were determined using hand-held Garmin
ForeTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices based on the North American Datum of
1983 (NAD 83).
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project areas as defined in
36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3. The TSMASS requirements for subsurface
probes were exceeded for a project area of this size.

24

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

Figure 5. Locations of Shovel Tests and Backhoe Trench in Project Area

HJN 110005 AR

25

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 6. Location of BT-1 near East End of APE on Southeast Bank of Abbott Creek
(Facing Southwest)

Figure 7. Profile of BT-1 Showing Deep Clay Deposits under 55 cm of Artificial Fill

26

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The City of Liberty (the City) is proposing to construct approximately 823 meters (m)
(2,700 feet [ft]) of 18-inch-diameter gravity sewer pipeline within an expanded area of proposed
new right-of-way (ROW) located 5 to 10 feet away from an existing gravity sewer pipeline for the
City’s Wastewater Improvement Project. The proposed ROW would extend from the existing
Wallisville Road Lift Station, located on the west side of Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 563
approximately 1.1 kilometers (km) (0.7 miles [mi]) south of US Highway (US) 90, eastward
approximately 823 m (2,700 ft) along the terraces of Abbott Creek to the intersection of Layl
Drive and Avenue G in Liberty, Liberty County, Texas. The majority of the proposed ROW
would run along the northern bank of Abbott Creek, crossing to the southern bank of the creek
near the eastern end of the project area and extending away from the creek up onto the
adjoining upland formation. The proposed undertaking would consist of installing an 18-inchdiameter sewer line in an area of proposed new ROW adjoining an existing sewer line ROW at
depths of 1.5 to 3.0 m (5.0 to 10.0 ft) below surface within an easement measuring a maximum
of 9 m (30 ft) in width. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed undertaking would
cover a maximum area of approximately 0.8 hectares (ha) (1.9 acres [ac]).
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by the City, a political subdivision of the
state of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas
(Natural Resource Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). In addition, the City is proposing to use funds
from a Clean Water State Revolving Fund (CWSRF) loan (CWSRF Project No. 72124) from the
Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) for wastewater system improvements. The CWSRF
program provides funds from a capitalization grant from the US Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and is administered by the TWDB; as such, the project also falls under the
jurisdiction of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA). As the project represents a
publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural resources, the
City was required to provide for a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the project’s
APE and to assess the project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the
APE. The City subcontracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), via its
engineering contractor, Schaumburg & Polk, Inc. (SPI), to conduct a cultural resource inventory
survey of the APE associated with the proposed project.
On January 19, 2011, Horizon archeologist Michael Mudd, under the overall direction of
Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed

HJN 110005 AR

27

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

undertaking. The APE is situated off the banks of Abbott Creek, a channelized and concretepaved canal, in a low-lying, forested area that had been extensively disturbed during prior
construction in the existing sewer line ROW that runs adjacent to the area of proposed
expanded new ROW that constituted the current project’s APE. The project area appeared to
be no more than approximately 30% intact. The APE was traversed on foot by Horizon’s
archeologist in a single linear transect, and the modern ground surface was thoroughly
inspected for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. Horizon excavated a total of
8 shovel tests and 1 backhoe trench during the survey, thereby exceeding the TSMASS
requirements for a project area of this size.
No cultural resources, prehistoric or historic, were observed on the modern ground
surface or in any of the shovel tests excavated during the survey.

28

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for designation
as SALs and for inclusion in the NRHP.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their SAL
and NRHP evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with
important historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of
Texas, archeological resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the
significance of archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs,
respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory
process.

HJN 110005 AR

29

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

30

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

6.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ARCHEOLOGICAL LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are
located in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any
county, city, or political subdivision of the state are state archeological landmarks and are
eligible for designation.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under
Section 26.8 of Part 2 of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may
designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

6.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologists, the modern ground surface was
thoroughly inspected for cultural resources, and a total of 8 shovel tests and 1 backhoe trench
were excavated within the APE, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project area
of this size. No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a
result of the survey.

6.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
new cultural resources were identified in the APE as a result of survey activities, and no
previously recorded sites occur in the vicinity of the project area. Furthermore, no listed historic

HJN 110005 AR

31

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

properties are present within or immediately adjacent to the project area that would be
adversely affected by the proposed undertaking. No evidence of site 41LB59, a previously
recorded site recorded west of the project area, was encountered during the survey.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as SALs according
to 13 TAC 26, and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the
proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed.
However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently
discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area,
even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the THC should be
notified of the discovery.

32

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Alford, J.J., and J.C. Holmes
1985
Meander Scars as Evidence of Major Climate Changes in Southeast Louisiana.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 75:395-403.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory,
pp. 72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The
Florida State Museum, Gainesville.

Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Blum, M.D., and D.M. Price
1994
Glacio-Eustatic and Climatic Controls on Quaternary Alluvial Plain Deposition, Texas
Coastal Plain. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies
44:85-92.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.

HJN 110005 AR

33

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.

DuBar, J.R., T.E. Ewing, E.L. Lundelius, E.G. Otvos, and C.D. Winkler
1991
Quaternary Geology of the Gulf of Mexico Coastal Plain. In The Geology of North
America, Volume K2: Quaternary Non-Glacial Geomorphology, Conterminous
United States, edited by R. B. Morrison, pp. 583-610. Geological Society of America,
Boulder, Colorado.
Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas.
Reports of Investigations, No. 8,
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Fincher, R.
1937
History of Liberty County. Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Texas.
Fisk, H.N.
1938
Geology of Grant and LaSalle Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 10.
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.
1940

Louisiana

Geology of Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 18. Louisiana
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.

Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.

34

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

Johnson, F.W.
1916
A History of Texas and Texans, 5 vols., edited by E.C. Barker and E.W. Winkler.
Chicago and New York: American Historical Society.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
McMahon, C.A., R.G. Frye, and K.L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Moneyhon, C.H.
1980
Republicanism in Reconstruction Texas. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:163.

Partlow, M.
1974
Liberty, Liberty County, and the Atascosito District. Austin: Pemberton.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.

HJN 110005 AR

35

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Pickett, A.
1936
Historic Liberty County. Dallas: Tardy.
Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc.,
Corpus Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330.

Shelby, C.A., M.K. McGowen, S. Aranow, W.L. Fisher, L.F. Brown, Jr., J.H. McGowen, C.G.
Groat, and V.E. Barnes
1968
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Beaumont Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin (revised 1992).
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C.
Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
(USDA) US Department of Agriculture
2008
Digital orthophoto quarter-quadrangle, Liberty County, Texas. National Agriculture
Imagery Program, Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
(USGS) US Geological Survey
1984
Liberty, Texas, 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

36

110005_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

Wheeler, F.F.
1976
Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.

HJN 110005 AR

37

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test and Backhoe Trench Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
City of Liberty Wastewater Improvement Project, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test and Backhoe Trench Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1

ST/BT
No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

M-1

328571

3325601

0-60

Pale brown sandy clay with dark
brown clay mottled (disturbed fill)

60+

Pale gray clay

Soils

Artifacts
None

M-2

328653

3325634

0-30

Dark gray clay

None

M-3

328755

3325633

0-30

Dark gray clay

None

M-4

328845

3325629

0-30

Dark gray clay

None

M-5

328905

3325623

0-30

Dark gray clay

None

M-6

328981

3325640

0-30

Dark gray clay

None

M-7

329077

3325664

0-25

Light olive-gray clay

None

M-8

329194

3325688

0-15

Light brown sandy loam

15-35

Dark gray clay

0-40

Dark gray clay with road gravels

40-55

Reddish-brown clay with road gravels

55-120

Black clay

BT-1

329181

3325673

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
BT = Backhoe trench
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 110005 AR

A-1

