Cultural Resources Investigations along the
Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas
By:
Russell K. Brownlow

HJN 090059 AR
TAC Permit No. 5316
Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Mustang Engineering, L.P.
Houston, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

June 2010

Cultural Resources Investigations along the
Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas
By:
Russell K. Brownlow

Prepared for:

Mustang Engineering, L.P.
16001 Park Ten Place
Houston, Texas 77084

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Principal Investigator: Russell K. Brownlow, MA, RPA,
HJN 090059 AR

TAC Permit No. 5316

June 2010

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Between 23 and 25 November 2009, Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon)
conducted cultural resources investigations along segments of a proposed reroute of the
LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE pipeline right-of-way (ROW) in Harris County, Texas. A portion of
the proposed ROW will be located within the boundaries of the San Jacinto Battleground State
Historic Site (Site), a property owned and maintained by the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department (TPWD). As such, the portion of the ROW within the Site boundaries falls under
the regulations of the Antiquities Code of Texas (ACT). The remainder of the proposed ROW
will be located on private property where there are no state or federal triggers that would
necessitate cultural resources investigations. In compliance with the ACT, Horizon conducted
cultural resources investigations along the portions of the proposed ROW within and
immediately adjacent to the Site at the request of Mustang Engineering, L.P. (Mustang) and on
behalf of LyondellBasell Industries (LyondellBasell). Due to the proposed ROW’s location within
and adjacent to the boundaries of the Site, the primary purpose of the investigations was to
determine if any cultural resources associated with the Battle of San Jacinto were located within
the proposed ROW, and, if so, to salvage them prior to the installation of the proposed pipeline.
The investigations consisted of a metal detector survey along the portions of the
proposed ROW that lie within and immediately adjacent to the Site boundaries. These
investigations resulted in the recovery of approximately 51.5 pounds (23.4 kilograms) of entirely
modern materials consisting primarily of aluminum cans and construction debris associated with
water tanks and other facilities located adjacent to the proposed ROW. No munitions or other
military items associated with the Battle of San Jacinto or any items determined to be historic in
nature were recovered during the investigations.
Based on the fact that the investigations produced only modern debris with no materials
associated with the Battle of San Jacinto, it is Horizon’s opinion that the undertaking will have
no impact on significant cultural resources within the boundaries of the Site and that no further
investigations are warranted. Horizon therefore recommends that cultural resources clearance
be granted for the undertaking.

HJN 090059 AR

iii

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1

2.0

PROJECT AREA DESCRIPTION ............................................................................... 5
2.1
General Description ......................................................................................... 5
2.2
Current Land Use ............................................................................................ 5
2.3
Physiography and Hydrology ......................................................................... 10
2.4
Soils ............................................................................................................... 12

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND..................................................................................... 15

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ........................................................................................... 23

5.0

METHODOLOGY ...................................................................................................... 25
5.1
Area Assessed During Field Effort ................................................................ 26
5.2
Field Methods ................................................................................................ 26

6.0

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................... 33
6.1
Results........................................................................................................... 33
6.2
Recommendations......................................................................................... 40

7.0

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................. 41
ADDENDUM: ARCHEOLOGICAL MONITORING

HJN 090059 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1. Topographic map depicting the proposed pipeline ROW ............................................. 2
Figure 2. Aerial photograph depicting the proposed pipeline ROW ............................................. 3
Figure 3. View along ROW adjacent to Independence Parkway (facing north) ........................... 6
Figure 4. View along ROW adjacent to Independence Parkway (facing south)........................... 6
Figure 5. View of ROW along southwest boundary of the Site (facing southeast)....................... 7
Figure 6. View of ROW along southwest boundary of the Site (facing northwest)....................... 7
Figure 7. View of ROW at eastern Site gate ................................................................................ 8
Figure 8. View of existing ROW along east side of Park Road looking southwest ...................... 8
Figure 9. General view of southern extent ROW (existing) looking northeast ............................. 9
Figure 10. General view of southern terminus of ROW looking southwest .................................. 9
Figure 11. Example of open cut utility trench within ROW along Independence Parkway......... 11
Figure 12. Profile view of open utility trench showing fill materials ............................................ 11
Figure 13. Distribution of dredge materials in northern portion of ROW (from Cox and Tomka,
2002; Figure 9) .......................................................................................................... 13
Figure 14. Distribution of dredge materials in northern portion of ROW (from Cox and Tomka,
2002; Figure 10) ........................................................................................................ 13
Figure 15. Atlas map showing location of the proposed ROW (THC 2009) ............................... 24
Figure 16. Topographic map depicting area covered during field assessment .......................... 27
Figure 17. Aerial photograph depicting area covered during field assessment ......................... 28
Figure 18. Field crew attempting to cut a path through dense undergrowth .............................. 29
Figure 19. Example of small cleared areas within dense undergrowth ...................................... 29
Figure 20. View of the density of wooded area along Site boundary ......................................... 30
Figure 21. Cleared area at eastern Site gate ............................................................................. 30
Figure 22. Example of materials recovered during metal detector survey ................................. 34
Figure 23. Other materials recovered during metal detector survey .......................................... 34
Figure 24. Close up of non-aluminum materials recovered during metal detector survey ......... 35
Figure 25. Example of debris behind structures adjacent to Site boundary ............................... 35
Figure 26. Examples of debris behind structures adjacent to Site boundary ............................. 36
Figure 27. Examples of debris behind structures adjacent to Site boundary ............................. 36
Figure 28. Iron debris associated with tank construction ........................................................... 38
Figure 29. View of height of artificial fill (fill in left of photo) ....................................................... 38
Figure 30. Discarded bulkhead materials .................................................................................. 39
Figure 31. Discarded chain link fence materials ........................................................................ 39
Figure 32. Modern pocket watch found on surface of survey area ............................................ 40

vi

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1. Soils along the proposed ROW .................................................................................... 12

HJN 090059 AR

vii

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

This document reports the results of cultural resources investigations conducted along
portions of a proposed reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE pipeline right-of-way (ROW)
in Harris County, Texas (Figures 1 and 2). The proposed ROW measures 9,314.2 feet (2,839.0
meters [m]) in length by 150.0 feet (45.7 m) in width. The entire length of the proposed pipeline
will be installed within existing road and pipeline ROWs, with the vast majority of the pipeline
being installed via horizontal directional drill (HDD) with minimal surface impact. However,
approximately 1093.3 feet (333.2 m) of the length of pipeline that will be installed via HDD
beneath the roadside ditch along Independence Parkway will also be located within the
boundaries of the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site (Site), a property owned and
maintained by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD). As a result, this segment of
the proposed ROW falls under the regulations of the Antiquities Code of Texas (ACT). The
remainder of the proposed ROW will be located within existing, privately owned ROWs that will
not require any federal permitting actions, and, as such, is not subject to the regulations of
Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended.
Although only 1093.3 feet (333.2 m) of the length of pipeline will be located within the
boundaries of the Site, approximately 1712.5 feet (522.0 m) of the length of pipeline will be
installed within an existing, privately owned pipeline ROW that borders the southwestern
boundary of the Site. Due to the proximity of this portion of the ROW to the boundaries of the
Site, TPWD and the Friends of the San Jacinto Battleground (FSJB) requested that this
segment of the ROW also be assessed for cultural resources prior to the construction of the
proposed pipeline. In compliance with the ACT and the requests of TPWD and FSJB, Mustang
Engineering, L.P. (Mustang), on behalf of LyondellBasell Industries (LyondellBasell), contracted
with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) to assess the portions of the ROW within
and immediately adjacent to the boundaries of the Site for cultural resources. Based on the
proposed ROW’s location in proximity to the San Jacinto Battleground, the primary purpose of
the investigations was to determine if any cultural resources associated with the Battle of San
Jacinto were located within the proposed ROW, and, if so, to salvage them prior to the
installation of the proposed pipeline.
The cultural resources investigations consisted of an archival review, a metal detector
survey, shovel testing over identified anomalies, and the production of a report suitable for
review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas

HJN 090059 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Topographic map depicting the proposed pipeline ROW

2

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Figure 2. Aerial photograph depicting the proposed pipeline ROW

HJN 090059 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and
the Council of Texas Archeologists’ (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management
Reports. Russell Brownlow (Horizon’s cultural resources director) served as the project’s
Principal Investigator. He, along with Reign Clark (Horizon project archeologist), Michael Mudd,
and Jared Wiersema (Horizon field technicians), conducted the investigations along the
segments of the proposed ROW on 23 and 24 November 2009.
The cultural resources investigations along the proposed ROW located within and
immediately adjacent to the boundaries of the Site resulted in the recovery of approximately
51.5 pounds (23.4 kilograms [kg]) of entirely modern materials. The recovered materials
consisted primarily of aluminum cans and construction debris associated with water tanks and
other facilities located adjacent to the proposed ROW. No munitions or other military items
associated with the Battle of San Jacinto or any items determined to be historic in nature were
recovered during the investigations.
Based on the fact that the investigations produced only modern debris with a complete
lack of any materials associated with the Battle of San Jacinto, it is Horizon’s opinion that the
undertaking will have no impact on significant cultural resources within the boundaries of the
Site and that no further investigations are warranted within the confines of the proposed ROW.
Moreover, the vast majority of the proposed pipeline will be installed via HDD with minimal
surface impacts. Horizon therefore recommends that cultural resources clearance be granted
for the undertaking. However, in the unlikely event that any cultural materials such as cannon
balls or other military accoutrements associated with the Battle of San Jacinto are inadvertently
discovered along the proposed ROW, all work at the location of the find should cease
immediately and the TPWD and THC should be notified of the discovery.

4

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

2.0 PROJECT AREA DESCRIPTION

2.1

GENERAL DESCRIPTION

The proposed reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE pipeline ROW is located east
of Buffalo Bayou and along the southwestern boundary of the Site in Harris County, Texas (see
Figures 1 and 2). More specifically, the ROW initiates just west of Independence Parkway and
south of the Site headquarters at an existing pump station, extends south along Independence
Parkway, then extends to the southeast along the southwestern boundary of the Site to the
eastern side of Vista Road, then extends southwest paralleling Vista Road until it terminates
within an existing chemical plant property. It can be found on the US Geological Survey
(USGS) 7.5-minute Highlands, Texas, and La Porte, Texas, topographic quadrangles (see
Figure 1).
The proposed ROW measures 9,314.2 feet (2,839.0 m) in length by 150.0 feet (45.7 m)
in width. The entire length of the proposed pipeline will be installed within existing road and
pipeline ROWs, with the vast majority of the pipeline being installed via HDD with minimal
surface impact. However, approximately 1093.3 feet (333.2 m) of the length of pipeline that will
be installed via HDD beneath the roadside ditch along Independence Parkway will also be
located within the boundaries of the Site, a property owned and maintained by the TPWD
(Figures 3 and 4; see also Figures 1 and 2). After passing though the Site boundary along
Independence Parkway, the ROW then turns to the southeast and extends for approximately
1712.5 feet (522.0 m) within an existing, privately owned pipeline ROW that borders the
southwestern boundary of the Site and crosses Vista Road just south of the Site’s eastern gate
(Figures 5 through 7; see also Figures 1 and 2). After crossing Vista Road via HDD, the ROW
then extends to the southwest for approximately 4800.00 feet (1463.1 m) within existing,
privately owned pipeline ROW that already contains numerous pipelines (Figures 8 and 9; see
also Figures 1 and 2). The proposed ROW terminates southwest of the intersection of
Independence Parkway and Vista Road within an existing chemical plant (Figure 10; see also
Figures 1 and 2). The entire ROW encompasses an area of approximately 32.1 acres.

2.2

CURRENT LAND USE

As previously noted, the entire length of the proposed ROW will be located within
existing, previously disturbed road and pipeline ROWs. The northern portion of the proposed
ROW that extends along Independence Parkway will be installed via HDD beneath the roadside

HJN 090059 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Project Area Description

Figure 3. View along ROW adjacent to Independence Parkway (facing north)

Figure 4. View along ROW adjacent to Independence Parkway (facing south)

6

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Figure 5. View of ROW along southwest boundary of the Site (facing southeast)

Figure 6. View of ROW along southwest boundary of the Site (facing northwest)

HJN 090059 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Project Area Description

Figure 7. View of ROW at eastern Site gate

Figure 8. View of existing ROW along east side of Park Road looking southwest

8

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Figure 9. General view of southern extent ROW (existing) looking northeast

Figure 10. General view of southern terminus of ROW looking southwest

HJN 090059 AR

9

Chapter 2.0: Project Area Description

drainage ditch that extends along the eastern side of the road (see Figures 3 and 4). This
existing ditch has been heavily modified to facilitate drainage, and standing water was present
in the ditch during the time of the assessment. The bordering roadbed has been elevated
several feet on top of artificial fill that slopes down to the center of the ditch. The presence of
observed utility boxes and natural gas pipeline markers along the ditch indicate that a variety of
utilities are present within this corridor, and that the potential for intact cultural deposits within
the ditch are generally low. At the time of the assessment, additional gas line and
communication cable installation was evidenced within the ditch by open utility trenches
(Figures 11 and 12). As can be seen in Figure 12, at least certain areas within the drainage
ditch are composed of artificial fill (cobbly clay) that would appear to be associated with the
raising/filling of adjacent properties. The areas immediately east of the drainage ditch, within
the Site fence line, are densely wooded with hackberry and tallow trees, along with an extremely
dense tangle of undergrowth consisting of a variety of briars and other thick vegetation.
When the proposed ROW turns to the southeast, it then will be located within an existing
pipeline ROW that borders the southwestern Site boundary (see Figure 5). As there are several
structures present within this existing ROW bordering the Site property, the pipeline will be
installed via HDD underneath these structures. After bypassing the structures, the pipeline will
then be installed via open trenching within the confines of the existing pipeline ROW down to
Vista Road. This existing ROW is covered in dense briars that obscure the surface of the ROW
(see Figure 6) down to the eastern Site gate where routine mowing has created a cleared area
(see Figure 7). The area immediately northeast of this existing ROW, within the Site
boundaries, is also densely wooded with hackberry and tallow trees. Like the area along
Independence Parkway, a dense undergrowth of briars and other thorny vines tangle the area
just inside the Site fence line.
Once the proposed ROW reaches Vista Road by the Site’s eastern gate, the pipeline will
be installed via an HDD below Vista Road. On the east side of the road, the ROW then turns to
the southwest and extends along an existing ROW outside of the Site boundaries that extend
along each side of Vista Road (see Figures 8 and 9). This existing ROW, containing several
existing pipelines, is covered with short grasses that are routinely mowed and maintained. At
the intersection of Vista Road and Independence Parkway, the pipeline will then be installed via
HDD beneath Independence Parkway into an existing chemical plant where the ROW
terminates.

2.3

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The proposed ROW is located on a landform bounded to the west by Buffalo Bayou and
to the north and east by the San Jacinto River. Generally speaking, the topography along the
ROW is relatively flat with an average elevation of 25 feet above mean sea level (amsl).
Drainage of the area is facilitated by Buffalo Bayou to the west, Tucker Bayou to the south, and
Santa Anna Bayou to the northeast. Tucker Bayou empties into Buffalo Bayou, which meets the
San Jacinto River to the north of the ROW. Santa Anna Bayou empties directly into the San
Jacinto River.

10

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Figure 11. Example of open cut utility trench within ROW along Independence Parkway

Figure 12. Profile view of open utility trench showing fill materials

HJN 090059 AR

11

Chapter 2.0: Project Area Description

2.4

SOILS

A total of 2 soil types are mapped along the proposed ROW.
Table 1 below (NRCS 2009).

They are presented in

Table 1. Soils along the proposed ROW
SOIL NAME

SOIL TYPE

MAXIMUM
SOIL DEPTH
(INCHES)

SETTING

Lake Charles clay, 0 to
1% slopes (LcA)

clay

0 to 80

Typically found on moderately well-drained
flats; often found to possess Gilgai features
(pimple mounds)

Lake Charles clay, 1 to
3% slopes (LcB)

clay

0 to 80

Typically found on moderately well-drained
flats; often found to possess Gilgai features
(pimple mounds)

Although only 2 natural soils are mapped along the ROW, previous cultural resources
investigations detailed by Cox and Tomka (2002) suggest that a portion of the proposed ROW is
covered by thick deposits of dredge material. Cox and Tomka’s (2002) Figure 9 indicates that
approximately 1500.0 ft (456.0 m) of the northernmost extent of the proposed ROW is situated
within distributed dredge sediments. Similarly, Cox and Tomka’s (2002) Figure 10 also
indicates that waterline installation monitoring conducted in 2000 in the vicinity of the
northernmost portion of the proposed ROW documented dredge deposits of up to 6.0 ft (1.8 m)
thick along portions of Independence Parkway. Excerpts of Cox and Tomka’s (2002) figures are
presented herein for reference (Figures 13 and 14).

12

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Proposed ROW

Extent of
dredge
material

Figure 13. Distribution of dredge materials in northern portion of ROW (from Cox and
Tomka, 2002; Figure 9)
Extent of
dredge
material

Proposed ROW
Site Boundary

Figure 14. Distribution of dredge materials in northern portion of ROW (from Cox and
Tomka, 2002; Figure 10)

HJN 090059 AR

13

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The Project Area is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21county area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 200 kilometers (km) (124 miles) inland from the Texas gulf coastline. In broad
terms, much of the archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between
the Southern Great Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995;
Story 1990). Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of Southeast Texas. These 2 sub-regions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the
inland sub-region has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast
Texas comprises a zone about 25 km (16 miles) inland from the coast that covers the area
influenced by gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable
ecological variability characterizes this sub-region, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes,
wetlands, marine coastline, and barrier islands. The inland sub-region also encompasses
considerable ecological diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney
woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to
denote Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural
characteristics of Southeast Texas cultural periods are often different than in neighboring
regions. For instance, the Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and
Southeast Texas, and Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for
Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time
in Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit
evidence of reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be
associated with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of
subsistence-related activities. Inland sites tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired
clay balls (at some sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites
tend to consist of multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain oyster shell tools, large
quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), numerous bone tools, and few lithic
materials.

HJN 090059 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

3.1

PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 BC)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 BC (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (but see Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is
represented by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 BC) (Patterson 1995). This stage
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end
scrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas
are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is
little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 BC), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian
period (8000 to 5000 BC), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).
3.2

Archaic Period (5000 BC to AD 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 BC to AD 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Southeast Texas.
Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and
corresponding decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a
diversified resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas,
however, this hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The
appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone
assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural

16

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

stage. Material culture shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in
the application of ground stone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
In Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 BC) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains.
Many of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 BC) and
several new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and
probably the Gary-Kent series. The Late Archaic period (1500 BC to AD 100) is characterized
by Gary, Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition
developed in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981;
Patterson 1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period
but reached full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as
boatstones and bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang
knives, stingray spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial
practices included the systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre,
and use of locally made grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most
burials are found in extended supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials
are also known. Burial direction is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to
site. Patterson et al. (1993) report that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary
tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton counties.
3.3

Early Ceramic Period (AD 100 to 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 BC, in the Galveston Bay area by
about AD 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about AD 300, and in the ConroeLivingston inland area by about AD 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears to have
progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995).
Southeastern Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where
Aten (1983) established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
129 km (80 miles) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal exception of
a few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found on the Gulf
coast west of the Sabine Lake area.

HJN 090059 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods
(Aten 1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility
ware throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown
Plain for about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods
before once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety,
Goose Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor
pottery types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway
(Aten 1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte
types are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste
(like Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.
3.4

Late Prehistoric Period (AD 600 to 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (AD 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the
latter part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in
Southeast Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland sub-region along with the bow and arrow through the
Late Prehistoric period (Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995;
Wheat 1953). In fact, Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in
Southeast Texas as early as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points
that consisted of marginally retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a
generalized date of adoption of the bow-and-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca.
AD 600) in Central and Southeast Texas. In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to
be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba,
Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial sequence for these point types has not been
established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn points appear to predate Perdiz points
throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto
Plain and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek
pottery remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt
Coated pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

18

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

3.5

Protohistoric Period (AD 1500 to 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue.
Aten (1983) has
reconstructed the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century,
including the Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco/Karankawa, and Tonkawa. The presence of the
Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central Texas in the
17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought to have
occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the
corresponding mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east
of the San Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe
may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson et al. 1993; Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in
identifying Historic Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and
possibly Fresno and Cuney points after AD 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites
are usually identified by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types
of pottery.
3.6

Historic Period (post AD 1700 )

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez
Cabeza de Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near
Galveston Bay; however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until
after 1700. The first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission
system, as well as the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native
culture and social systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where
the burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as
increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the
time heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous
Indian population was greatly diminished. The Alabama/Coushatta Indians who currently reside
in Southeast Texas are migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early
19th centuries (Newcomb 1961).
The Atakapas lived on the Lower Neches and Sabine rivers. In 1746, they occupied
2 villages on opposite sides of the Neches near the site of present-day Beaumont. Orcoquiza
Indians occupied the area from the Neches River to halfway between the Trinity and the Brazos.
Six burial mounds have been discovered at Joseph Grigsby’s plantation at Port Neches on the
west bank of the Neches 12 miles below Beaumont, and pottery sherds have been found at
Sabine Lake and in many places throughout the area. The disappearance of the Indians has

HJN 090059 AR

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

been attributed to migration and/or smallpox epidemics; most were gone by the 1820s, when
the first EuroAmerican settlers arrived.
The French and Spanish disputed ownership of the area during the 18th century.
Spanish claims were based on the 1528 expedition of Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca, and
French involvement began with La Salle in 1685. By 1730, French fur traders had crossed the
lower Sabine to trade with the Orcoquizas on the Trinity River; however, the area was rarely
visited by EuroAmerican traders because it was bounded on the east by unfordable rivers and
bayous and on the north by the Big Thicket. To prevent French penetration, the Spanish
established San Agustín de Ahumada Presidio and Nuestra Señora de la Luz Mission near the
mouth of the Trinity in 1756. In 1777, Antonio Gil Ibarbo conducted an expedition to investigate
the English presence in Spanish territory, and, in 1785, José de Evia camped at Sabine Pass
and mapped Sabine Lake and the Sabine and Neches rivers. By 1803, when the US acquired
Louisiana, the area of Orange County was under Spanish control as part of the Atascosito
District. In conjunction with filibustering efforts to discourage Spanish shipping after 1816, the
area provided a path for slave smuggling between Louisiana, Point Bolivar, and the Sabine
River until the 1830s. Pirate Jean Laffite maintained a slave barracks on the Sabine River
10 miles north of the site of present Orange to house black slaves in transit. In 1821,
filibustering efforts ceased when the Treaty of Córdova ended Spanish ownership in the region
and made it part of Mexico. Anglo-American colonization subsequently met both hostility and
encouragement from the Mexican government, as settlement efforts brought new families to the
area from 1821 to 1836.
Specific to the current project, the proposed ROW crosses through a portion of the San
Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site and also extends along its southwestern boundary.
According to the Handbook of Texas Online (2009):
The battle of San Jacinto was the concluding military event of the Texas
Revolution. On March 13, 1836, the revolutionary army at Gonzales began to retreat
eastward. It crossed the Colorado River on March 17 and camped near present Columbia
on March 20, recruiting and reinforcements having increased its size to 1,200 men. Sam
Houston's scouts reported Mexican troops west of the Colorado to number 1,325. On
March 25 the Texans learned of James W. Fannin's defeat at Goliad, and many of the
men left the army to join their families on the Runaway Scrape. Sam Houston led his
troops to San Felipe de Austin by March 28 and by March 30 to the Jared E. Groce
plantation on the Brazos River, where they camped and drilled for a fortnight. Ad interim
President David G. Burnet ordered Houston to stop his retreat; Secretary of War Thomas
J. Rusk urged him to take a more decisive course. Antonio López de Santa Anna decided
to take possession of the Texas coast and seaports. With that object in view he crossed
the Brazos River at present Richmond on April 11 and on April 15, with some 700 men,
arrived at Harrisburg. He burned Harrisburg and started in pursuit of the Texas
government at New Washington or Morgan's Point, where he arrived on April 19 to find
that the government had fled to Galveston. The Mexican general then set out for
Anahuac by way of Lynchburg. Meanwhile, the Texans, on April 11, received the Twin
Sisters and with the cannon as extra fortification crossed the Brazos River on the Yellow
Stone and on April 16 reached Spring Creek in present Harris County. On April 17, to the
gratification of his men, Houston took the road to Harrisburg instead of the road to

20

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Louisiana and on April 18 reached White Oak Bayou at a site within the present city limits
of Houston. There he learned that Santa Anna had gone down the west side of the bayou
and the San Jacinto River, crossing by a bridge over Vince's Bayou. The Mexicans would
have to cross the same bridge to return.
Viewing this strategic situation on the morning of April 19, Houston told his troops
that it looked as if they would soon get action and admonished them to remember the
massacres at San Antonio and at Goliad. On the evening of April 19 his forces crossed
Buffalo Bayou to the west side 2½ miles below Harrisburg. Some 248 men, mostly sick
and ineffective, were left with the baggage at the camp opposite Harrisburg. The march
was continued until midnight. At dawn on April 20 the Texans resumed their trek down
the bayou and at Lynch's Ferry captured a boat laden with supplies for Santa Anna. They
then drew back about a mile on the Harrisburg road and encamped in a skirt of timber
protected by a rising ground. That afternoon Sidney Sherman with a small detachment of
cavalry engaged the enemy infantry, almost bringing on a general action. In the clash
Olwyns J. Trask was mortally wounded, one other Texan was wounded, and several
horses were killed. Mirabeau B. Lamar, a private, so distinguished himself that on the
next day he was placed in command of the cavalry. Santa Anna made camp under the
high ground overlooking a marsh about three-fourths of a mile from the Texas camp and
threw up breastworks of trunks, baggage, packsaddles, and other equipment. Both sides
prepared for the conflict. On Thursday morning, April 21, the Texans were eager to
attack. About nine o'clock they learned that Martín Perfecto de Cos had crossed Vince's
bridge with about 540 troops and had swelled the enemy forces to about 1,200. Houston
ordered Erastus (Deaf) Smith to destroy the bridge and prevent further enemy
reinforcements. The move would prevent the retreat of either the Texans or the Mexicans
towards Harrisburg.
Shortly before noon, Houston held a council of war with Edward Burleson, Sidney
Sherman Henry W. Millard, Alexander Somervell, Joseph L. Bennett, and Lysander
Wells. Two of the officers suggested attacking the enemy in his position; the others
favored waiting Santa Anna's attack. Houston withheld his own views at the council but
later, after having formed his plan of battle had it approved by Rusk. Houston disposed
his forces in battle order about 3:30 in the afternoon while all was quiet on the Mexican
side during the afternoon siesta. The Texans' movements were screened by trees and
the rising ground, and evidently Santa Anna had no lookouts posted. The battle line was
formed with Edward Burleson's regiment in the center, Sherman's on the left wing, the
artillery under George W. Hockley on Burleson's right, the infantry under Henry Millard on
the right of the artillery, and the cavalry under Lamar on the extreme right. The Twin
Sisters were wheeled into position, and the whole line, led by Sherman's men, sprang
forward on the run with the cry, "Remember the Alamo!" "Remember Goliad!" The battle
lasted but eighteen minutes. According to Houston's official report, the casualties were
630 Mexicans killed and 730 taken prisoner. Against this, only nine of the 910 Texans
were killed or mortally wounded and thirty were wounded less seriously. Houston's ankle
was shattered by a rifle ball. The Texans captured a large supply of muskets, pistols,
sabers, mules, horses, provisions, clothing, tents, and $12,000 in silver. Santa Anna
disappeared during the battle and search parties were sent out on the morning of the 22.
The party consisted of James A. Sylvester, Washington H. Secrest, Sion R. Bostick, and
a Mr. Cole discovered Santa Anna hiding in the grass. He was dirty and wet and was
dressed as a common soldier. The search party did not recognize him until he was

HJN 090059 AR

21

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

addressed as "el presidente" by other Mexican prisoners. One of the eight inscriptions on
the exterior base of the San Jacinto Monument reads: "Measured by its results, San
Jacinto was one of the decisive battles of the world. The freedom of Texas from Mexico
won here led to annexation and to the Mexican War, resulting in the acquisition by the
United States of the states of Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada, California, Utah, and
parts of Colorado, Wyoming, Kansas, and Oklahoma. Almost one-third of the present
area of the American nation, nearly a million square miles of territory, changed
sovereignty."

22

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Archival research conducted online via the THC’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas
(Atlas) indicated that the area traversed by the proposed ROW has been assessed in whole or
part for cultural resources on at least 5 separate occasions (see light blue hatched areas in
Figure 15). These include areas assessed in 1994 and 1997 for projects permitted by the US
Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), investigations in 2000 and 2003 conducted for the TPWD,
and investigations conducted in 2008 for a project permitted by the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC). None of these previous investigations resulted in the documentation of
any cultural resources within the limits of the currently proposed ROW. However, there are a
number of previously recorded archeological sites documented in the vicinity of the
northernmost portion of the proposed ROW (THC 2009).
The most obvious site documented near the proposed ROW is the San Jacinto
Battleground, a site listed as a National Historic Landmark (NHL). The Battle of San Jacinto,
fought on 21 April 1836, was the concluding event of the Texas War for Independence and
represented the culmination of the war, making possible the annexation of Texas to the United
States in 1845.
Based on the Atlas data, there are 4 additional sites that have been recorded in close
vicinity to the proposed ROW (see Figure 7). Three of these sites are located just west of the
northwestern terminus of the proposed ROW. They consist of a destroyed prehistoric shell
midden (41HR33), another probable shell midden (41HR104), and a historic debris scatter
(41HR576) composed of late 19th and early 20th century picnic debris and restaurant dump
materials. All 3 of these sites are located on the banks above Buffalo Bayou. The fourth site
(41HR227) is an extensive site located just north of the northwestern terminus of the proposed
ROW. It was recorded as a destroyed prehistoric occupation, but it appears to have been
mapped incorrectly on the Atlas maps. The sketch map for this site shows it to be located
adjacent to sites 41HR118 and 41HR119, which are both located approximately 5.0 km (3.0
miles) to the east on the banks of Mitchell Bay.
In addition to the aforementioned previously recorded sites, there are 13 other previously
recorded sites documented within a 1.0-km (0.6-mile) perimeter of the proposed ROW.
These consist of 7 prehistoric shell middens (41HR105, 41HR115, 41HR121, 41HR122,
41HR123, 41HR415, and 41HR416), a prehistoric campsite (41HR808), a prehistoric campsite

HJN 090059 AR

23

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

ROW

Figure 15. Atlas map showing location of the proposed ROW (THC 2009)
that also contains battlefield materials and evidence of a historic homestead (41HR488), 2
scatters of historic debris (41HR316 and 41HR865), the original location of the old San Jacinto
Townsite (41HR526), and the USS Texas Battleship (41HR744). None of these 13 sites are
located within the immediate vicinity of the currently proposed ROW, and no previously
recorded archeological sites or cemeteries are located within the boundaries of the proposed
ROW.

24

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

5.0 METHODOLOGY

Prior to initiating field efforts, Horizon met with Debra Beene at the THC to discuss the
field methodologies. On previous Mustang projects in the vicinity of the San Jacinto
Battleground, the THC had required an archeological monitor to be present during construction
efforts, even after the ROW had been surveyed for cultural resources due to the potential for
unidentified cannon balls or other items associated with the Battle of San Jacinto. This resulted
in suspended construction efforts each time a cannon ball or other military artifacts were
encountered. In an effort to negate the need for costly construction monitoring in an area where
the primary form of artifact would consist of metal artillery/weaponry, Horizon proposed a
geophysical assessment of the proposed ROW in order to locate all metal items within the limits
of the ROW prior to construction. By locating and excavating all such metal items (both modern
and historic), the THC would then be assured that there would exist no chance for accidental
discoveries during construction of the pipeline and therefore no need for archeological
monitoring efforts. The THC verbally approved of this proposed approach, and Horizon then
contacted Michael Strutt, TPWD’s Director of the State Parks Cultural Resources Program, to
discuss approved methodologies.
Horizon had originally proposed to assess the ROW utilizing an Electromagnetic
Induction Meter (EM). However, Mr. Strutt indicated that the only approved geophysical method
during assessments within the Site boundary was the use of handheld metal detectors that met
or exceeded the following standards:
•

Approved machines must be capable of a manual ground balance option;

•

Approved machines must be equipped with 2 deep-seeking, ground-compensating very
low frequency signals (one at 4 kilohertz and one at 15 kilohertz);

•

Search coils to be a minimum of 9.0 inches (23.0 centimeters) in size

Mr. Strutt indicated that the Site owned a Fisher 1270 metal detector that was often
utilized during assessments within the boundaries of the Site. He indicated that any unit
comparable to this model would be acceptable. Moreover, he also indicated that the Horizon
field crew could also utilize the Site’s Fisher 1270 during the assessment of the proposed ROW.

HJN 090059 AR

25

Chapter 5.0: Methodology

5.1

AREA ASSESSED DURING FIELD EFFORT

As previously noted, the entire length of the proposed pipeline will be located within
existing, previously disturbed road and pipeline ROWs. However, approximately 1093.3 feet
(333.2 m) of the pipeline will be installed via HDD underneath the roadside ditch along
Independence Parkway, an area that is also within the boundaries of the Site. In addition,
approximately 1712.5 feet (522.0 m) of the proposed pipeline will be located within an existing
ROW that borders the Site boundary. Although no surface impacts are proposed inside the
actual fence line of the Site, TPWD and FSJB requested that a 75.0- to 100.0-foot- (22.9- to
30.5-m-) wide corridor from the centerline of the proposed ROW into the Site property be
assessed for cultural resources prior to the construction of the proposed pipeline. Based on this
request, the Horizon field crew conducted a metal detector survey over the areas shown in
Figures 16 and 17.

5.2

FIELD METHODS

On 23 and 24 November 2009, a 4-person Horizon archeological field crew conducted a
metal detector survey over the areas noted in Figures 16 and 17. The survey utilized 2 Fisher
1270 metal detectors, 1 owned by TPWD and the other owned by Horizon. Prior to initiating the
field effort, the metal detector operators set all discrimination settings to “0” to ensure that the
full range of metal types would be detected. The ground balance on each unit was then
adjusted to the specific location of the assessment activities. On the Fisher 1270, the use of the
ground balance function also ensures that all discrimination settings are disabled. Finally, the
sensitivity settings on each unit were then set to the highest allowable based on the soil
conditions (typically 8 to 9). Upon calibrating each unit, the field crew then broke into two 2-man
teams, with 1 person sweeping the area with a metal detector and the other person excavating
all detected anomalies. To avoid radio interference between the 2 metal detectors, the detector
operators always maintained a minimum distance of 20.0 feet (6.1 m) between units.
TPWD’s metal detecting specifications require that project sites be cleared of all tall
grass or shrubs, with a maximum height of grass less than 2 inches. Unfortunately, the areas
depicted in Figures 16 and 17 consist of heavily forested areas along the boundaries of the Site
where mowing/clearing was not possible or desired by TPWD. In fact, the area was so choked
with briars and other thorny undergrowth that movement within the brambles was only possible
within the small clearings that were thinly scattered throughout the forested area (Figures 18
through 20). When such areas were encountered, these areas were swept with the metal
detectors as thoroughly as possible. However, it should be stated that few areas were
completely devoid of vegetation and the requisite constant movement of the metal detectors in
order to operate was routinely impeded by dense vegetation within the forested areas along the
Site boundary. The only areas with mowed grasses consisted of the drainage ditch along
Independence Parkway and the area on either side of the eastern Site gate (Figure 21).
During the metal detecting efforts, 1 crew member operated the metal detector while the
second crew member excavated each detected anomaly. This typically consisted of the
excavator removing a plug of soil from the detected anomaly area. The detector operator then

26

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Figure 16. Topographic map depicting area covered during field assessment

HJN 090059 AR

27

Chapter 5.0: Methodology

Figure 17. Aerial photograph depicting area covered during field assessment

28

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Figure 18. Field crew attempting to cut a path through dense undergrowth

Figure 19. Example of small cleared areas within dense undergrowth

HJN 090059 AR

29

Chapter 5.0: Methodology

Figure 20. View of the density of wooded area along Site boundary

Figure 21. Cleared area at eastern Site gate

30

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

swept the original location and the soil plug to determine if the anomaly had been excavated. If
the anomaly was still present at the original location, the excavator continued to excavate
further until the anomaly was eventually detected within the excavated soil. The excavator then
proceeded to divide the excavated soil plugs until the anomaly was eventually recovered. The
plugs were divided by hand and then finger-sorted due to the fact that the soils consisted of
dense, wet clays that would not pass through a 1/4-inch (0.6-millimeter) screen. Upon the
recovery of the detected anomaly, the location was again swept with the metal detector to
confirm the recovery of the detected anomaly and ensure that no other materials were present.
All “meaningful” artifacts (i.e., historic-era artifacts associated with the battle of San
Jacinto) were to be mapped in situ via a Total Data Station, documented on appropriate field
forms, and then collected for later analysis. All other items (e.g., aluminum cans, pull tabs, litter,
etc.) were to be collected and discarded off-site. As will be discussed later, no meaningful
artifacts were recovered as a result of the metal detecting survey, and, as such, the collection
and mapping policy did not come into play aside from the off-site litter disposal.
It should be noted that every effort was put forth to cover the areas presented in Figures
16 and 17 as thoroughly as possible. However, once the assessment of the forested areas and
the area encompassing the eastern Site gate was complete, the field crew moved to the
roadside ditch along Independence Parkway. Upon initiating the assessment of the ditch,
continuous linear anomalies were immediately detected. These linear anomalies were
presumed to be the communication cables and other various utilities within the existing road
ROW. In addition, Mr. Strutt indicated that the standing water within the ditch could also reflect
the detector signal, providing false readings. Furthermore, a considerable amount of fill material
within the ditch was evidenced by open utility trenches and impromptu shovel tests conducted
within the elevated areas of the ditch. Based on the presence of existing utilities, standing
water, and thick deposits of fill material (not to mention considerable amounts of modern
debris), the Horizon crew abandoned efforts to assess the roadside ditch along Independence
Parkway.
While one could argue that this heavily disturbed ditch could still harbor materials
associated with the Texan army’s approach to the battlefield, it should be noted that the
proposed pipeline will be installed via a HDD beneath this roadside ditch. The HDD will install
the pipe approximately 45.0 to 55.0 feet (13.7 to 16.8 m) below the surface, well beyond the
limits of any potential cultural deposits. At this depth, the pipe will never be excavated for
maintenance. Rather, if anomalies within the pipe are ever detected in the future, it will be
abandoned in place with no impacts to the surface of the ROW.

HJN 090059 AR

31

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

RESULTS

Horizon’s metal detecting efforts along the portions of the proposed ROW within and
adjacent to the Site resulted in the recovery of approximately 51.5 pounds (23.4 kg) of entirely
modern metal debris (Figures 22 through 24). The vast majority of the recovered materials
consisted of modern trash such as aluminum cans, pull tabs, aluminum foil, etc., while the
remainder consisted of modern metal materials such as nuts, bolts, welding rods, iron
construction scrap, etc. that are associated with the structures adjacent to the proposed ROW.
All these materials were recovered and disposed of off-site. No munitions or other military items
associated with the Battle of San Jacinto or any items determined to be historic in nature were
recovered during the investigations.
Beginning in proximity to the eastern gate of the Site, the majority of recovered debris
consisted of pull tabs, pop tops, aluminum foil, and aluminum can fragments. This area appears
to be a location where Site visitors routinely discard such materials from their cars (see Figures
20 and 21). As this area is routinely mowed and maintained, the discarded debris gets
shredded and dispersed over the area, resulting in a considerable number of detected
anomalies. In addition to the shredded debris at this location, several nuts/bolts associated with
the Site gate were recovered along with a fragment of a lawn mower blade.
Moving into the wooded area to the southwest between Vista Road and Independence
Parkway, the field crew encountered considerable amounts of aluminum cans and other modern
debris that has been discarded in the woods. This wooded area contains a considerable
amount of modern debris other than aluminum cans, including discarded “for sale” signs, tires,
plastic containers filled with used motor oil, fire extinguishers, PVC pipe, concrete rubble,
electrical boxes, etc. (Figures 25 through 27). This modern debris is heaviest behind the
structures that border the Site boundary near Independence Parkway where the shop workers
appear to discard all of their debris over the fence. While the Horizon crew made every effort to
collect and remove the detected metal anomalies and even aluminum cans of the surface of the
survey area, the debris at this location was too large and too numerous to recover amidst the
tangle of briars. However, TPWD should be aware of its presence and make efforts to deter
continued future debris disposal at this location.

HJN 090059 AR

33

Chapter 6.0: Results and Recommendations

Figure 22. Example of materials recovered during metal detector survey

Figure 23. Other materials recovered during metal detector survey

34

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Figure 24. Close up of non-aluminum materials recovered during metal detector survey

Figure 25. Example of debris behind structures adjacent to Site boundary

HJN 090059 AR

35

Chapter 6.0: Results and Recommendations

Figure 26. Examples of debris behind structures adjacent to Site boundary

Figure 27. Examples of debris behind structures adjacent to Site boundary

36

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Turning north into the wooded area along Independence Parkway, the detected
anomalies reduced considerably and consisted primarily of modern debris such as aluminum
cans that have been discarded along Independence Parkway. There is an old barbed wire
fence situated approximately 10.0 feet (3.0 m) inside the tree line along Independence Parkway.
Although only a few of the fence posts are still standing, the barbed wire itself lies buried just
below the surface of the property. Although it was detected along the length of Site boundary
along Independence Parkway, the wire was not recovered due to its considerable length.
At the northern extent of the Site property along Independence Parkway within the
survey area, several TPWD water tanks have been constructed (see Figure 2). At this location,
the crews encountered a considerable amount of anomalies that turned out to be construction
debris associated with the tank construction. Recovered materials included welding rods, nuts,
bolts, and circular iron cut-outs from the tanks (Figure 28; see also Figures 23 and 24).
Attempts were made to recover the majority of this construction debris. However, a chainlink
fence surrounding the tanks precluded the detection of materials in closer proximity to the metal
fence.
Finally, moving north of the TPWD tanks within the tree line along Independence
Parkway, the field crew again encountered primarily debris discarded from cars along
Independence Parkway. This area is bordered to the east by a large artificial pond. Upon
initially entering the area, the field crew observed considerable amounts of concrete rubble and
gravels over the surface of the area. This debris extends along the entire length of this portion
of the wooded area (between the TPWD tanks and the paved area to the north where Besaw’s
BBQ is located). Shortly after observing the rubble and gravels, it became apparent that this
entire area is covered with a considerable amount of artificial fill of which at least a portion may
be associated with the construction of the pond to the east. Impromptu shovel testing revealed
fill materials in excess of 1.5 feet (45.7 centimeters [cm]) thick. Based on an observed artificial
slope at one location, it became evident that the fill material may be upwards of 4.0 feet (1.2 m)
thick (Figure 29). This area corresponds with the area of dredge materials noted by Cox and
Tomka (2002; see Figures 13 and 14). At this point, metal detecting efforts along this section of
the survey area were abandoned due to the presence of thick dredge and fill deposits. Although
the field efforts at this location were abandoned, the field crew did note other types of metal
debris present in this wooded area. Observed debris consisted of what appears to be the
discarded remnants of a bulkhead constructed of railroad ties and long iron bolts and the
discarded materials associated with the chainlink fence around the Site property (Figures 30
and 31).
While the field efforts resulted only in the recovery of modern debris, 1 recovered
specimen was somewhat more interesting than the typical litter found within the survey area.
This specimen, recovered on the surface of the artificial fill just north of the TPWD water tanks,
consisted of a discarded pocket watch (Figure 32). Removal of the back cover of the specimen
revealed a “Made in the U.S.A.” stamp inside the watch. This stamp suggests a post-World War
II production of the pocket watch. Cox and Tomka’s (2002) dredge distribution maps indicate
that dredge deposits in this area were distributed between 1931 and 1971. As the pocket watch
specimen was found on the surface, its placement within the survey area could even postdate

HJN 090059 AR

37

Chapter 6.0: Results and Recommendations

Figure 28. Iron debris associated with tank construction

Figure 29. View of height of artificial fill (fill in left of photo)

38

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Figure 30. Discarded bulkhead materials

Figure 31. Discarded chain link fence materials

HJN 090059 AR

39

Chapter 6.0: Results and Recommendations

Figure 32. Modern pocket watch found on surface of survey area

1971. As it was found near the intersection of the Site road by the TPWD water tanks and
Independence Parkway, it may have been lost during construction efforts associated with the
water tanks, the Site fence, or road at this location. Regardless, the specimen appears to
date to the latter half of the 20th century and is clearly not associated with the Battle of San
Jacinto.

6.2

RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the fact that the investigations produced only modern debris with a complete
lack of any materials associated with the Battle of San Jacinto, it is Horizon’s opinion that the
undertaking will have no impact on significant cultural resources within the boundaries of the
Site and that no further investigations are warranted within the confines of the proposed ROW.
Moreover, the vast majority of the proposed pipeline will be installed via HDD with minimal
surface impacts. Horizon therefore recommends that cultural resources clearance be granted
for the undertaking. However, in the unlikely event that any cultural materials such as cannon
balls or other military accoutrements associated with the Battle of San Jacinto are inadvertently
discovered along the proposed ROW, all work at the location of the find should cease
immediately and the TPWD and THC should be notified of the discovery.

40

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives in Gulf Coast Prehistory,
edited by D.D. Davis, pp. 44-76, Ripley P. Bulletin Monograph in Anthropology and
History No. 5. Florida State University, Gainesville.

Butzer, K.W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Cox, I.W., and S.A. Tomka
2002
San Jacinto Battleground State Historical Park:
A Historical Synthesis and
Archaeological Management Plan. Archaeological Survey Report No. 318. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas as San Antonio, Texas.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas.
Reports of Investigations, No. 8,
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.

HJN 090059 AR

41

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A study of the cultural prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No. 61.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Handbook of Texas Online
2009

“Battle of San Jacinto.”
<http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/SS/qes4.html>.
May 2009.

Accessed 13

Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

American

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:163.

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2009

42

Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed 3 December 2009.

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc.,
Corpus Christi, Texas.
Ricklis, R.A.
1995
Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330.
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C.
Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2009
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Restricted Database. Texas Historical Commission.
<http://www.pedernales.thc.state.tx.us/>. Accessed 19 November 2009.
US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2009
Digital orthophoto quarter-quadrangle, Harris County, Texas. National Agriculture
Imagery Program, Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1982
7.5-minute Series Highlands, Texas, Topographic Quadrangle Maps.
1982

7.5-minute Series LaPorte, Texas, Topographic Quadrangle Maps.

HJN 090059 AR

43

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

44

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

ADDENDUM:
ARCHEOLOGICAL MONITORING

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

A.1

INTRODUCTION

Subsequent to the completion of the survey/metal-detecting field efforts and the
submittal of the results contained within the main body of this report to the THC and TPWD for
review, the THC concurred with Horizon’s recommendations in a letter dated 12 January 2010.
Along with this concurrence, the letter also indicated that both the THC and TPWD requested
archeological monitoring efforts during the pipeline construction efforts within and adjacent to
the boundaries of the Site (see Figures 16 and 17). This addendum presents the results of the
requested monitoring efforts.
In early February 2010, Mustang informed Horizon that the construction efforts would
soon be initiated. As Horizon already held TAC permit No. 5316 for the survey/metal-detecting
efforts along the proposed ROW, Horizon requested an amendment to this permit to cover the
required monitoring efforts in a letter dated 10 February 2010. The THC approved of the permit
amendment on the same day.
In compliance with the THC and TPWD requests, a Horizon archeologist was on-site to
monitor all ground-disturbing activities associated with the construction efforts of the proposed
pipeline within and adjacent to the boundaries of the Site. These construction efforts
commenced on 17 March 2010 and terminated on 28 April 2010.

A.2

METHODOLOGY

During the pipeline construction activities, a Horizon archeologist was on-site to monitor
all ground disturbance activities during pipeline installation within and adjacent to the
boundaries of the Site. This included horizontal directional drill (HDD) bore entry and exit
locations, open-cut trenches, and any other ground-disturbing activities. The archeologist
monitored all disturbed ground surfaces, excavated soil matrices, and any resulting bore/trench
profiles (when safely possible) for any materials or cultural deposits associated with the Battle of
San Jacinto. In addition, the archeologist also utilized a metal detector to assess excavated soil
matrices.
If, at any point during the monitoring efforts, cultural materials or deposits associated
with the Battle of San Jacinto were encountered, the archeologist was to instruct the
construction crews to cease activities at the immediate location of the discovery. The
archeologist was to then assess the integrity of the discovery as well as the potential for
associated materials. If the discovery was determined to be an isolated artifact that had
incidentally been removed from its original context by machinery, the artifact was to be collected
and every effort was to be made to determine its original horizontal and vertical provenience. If
the original provenience was determined, the archeologist was to then determine if any other
cultural deposits were associated with the location. Once these efforts were complete, and if
the archeologist determined that the discovery was an isolated find with no associated deposits,
the archeologist was to then inform the construction crews that work efforts could resume at the
location of the discovery.

HJN 090059 AR

A-1

Addendum: Archeological Monitoring

If intact cultural materials or deposits were encountered during the monitoring efforts, the
archeologist was to instruct the construction crews to cease activities at the immediate location
of the discovery and then cordon off the location to protect it from further impacts. The
archeologist was to then immediately contact Horizon’s cultural resources director (CRD) to
report the discovery. Horizon’s CRD would then contact Mustang to report the discovery and
determine what further steps were necessary (including contacting TPWD).
During the monitoring efforts, the archeologist kept a daily journal of all observations
made while on-site. Digital photographs with a photo log were completed as appropriate. A
handheld GPS unit, utilizing the UTM coordinate system and the NAD 83 map datum, was to be
used to mark the general location of any incidentally disturbed discoveries (if any were
documented). Any intact cultural materials were to be mapped utilizing a Total Data Station
(TDS) once they were dealt with following any instructions from TPWD.
Recovered “meaningful” artifacts were to be bagged and labeled accordingly. Modern
debris such as pull tabs, aluminum cans, etc. were to be recovered and disposed of off-site in
accordance with TPWD requirements.
Recovered “meaningful” artifacts were to be
subsequently prepared for curation at TPWD’s archeology laboratory following TPWD laboratory
manual standards.

A.3

RESULTS

Horizon’s archeological monitoring efforts conducted throughout the pipeline
construction efforts resulted in the documentation of no prehistoric or historic-era cultural
materials or deposits within any of the excavated HDD bore/exit locations, open-cut trenches, or
any other location of the proposed pipeline ROW within and adjacent to the boundaries of the
Site (Figures A-1 through A-3). The only cultural item observed within the excavated locations
consisted of a short segment of metal pipe (Figure A-4). This specimen was recovered adjacent
to several existing subsurface pipelines that were exposed during the construction efforts and
clearly represents modern waste associated with prior pipeline construction efforts. Because it
was considered modern refuse, it was disposed of off-site. Aside from this modern pipe
segment, the monitoring efforts resulted in entirely negative findings.
In addition to producing negative results, the monitoring efforts also served to confirm
the presence of thick dredge deposits at the north end of the proposed ROW, just south of the
Site headquarters on Independence Parkway. Referring back to subsection 2.4 (Soils) in the
main body of this report, Cox and Tomka’s (2002) earlier investigations indicated the presence
of dredge deposits up to 6.0 ft (1.8 m) thick along portions of Independence Parkway (see
Figures 13 and 14 in the main body of this report). During the current monitoring efforts, an
HDD bore pit excavated near an existing compressor station west of Independence Parkway
and south of the Site headquarters revealed mottled clay soils indicative of dredge spoil
(Figures A-5 and A-6). While this served confirm the presence of the dredge materials at this
location, the actual thickness of the dredge material was not discernible due to the fact that the
excavated HDD bore pit immediately filled with water during the excavation (see Figure A-5).

A-2

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Figure A-1. HDD bore exit pit on the west side of Independence Parkway

Figure A-2. Open cut trench along the southern boundary of the Site

HJN 090059 AR

A-3

Addendum: Archeological Monitoring

Figure A-3. HDD bore pit near the eastern gate of the Site

Figure A-4. Modern pipe fragment recovered during the monitoring efforts

A-4

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

Cultural Resources Investigations along the Proposed Reroute of the LyondellBasell CVOS ETBE
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Harris County, Texas

Figure A-5. Excavated HDD pit at the north end of the proposed ROW

Figure A-6. Mottled clay dredge spoil from the excavated HDD pit

HJN 090059 AR

A-5

Addendum: Archeological Monitoring

A.4

RECOMMENDATIONS

At the request of the THC and TPWD, Horizon conducted archeological monitoring of all
ground disturbance activities associated with LyondellBasell’s CVOS ETBE pipeline. This
monitoring failed to document any prehistoric or historic-era cultural materials or deposits,
including any associated with the Battle of San Jacinto. Based on this absence of any observed
cultural materials/deposits, it is Horizon’s opinion that LyondellBasell has fulfilled its obligations
in compliance with the requirements of the THC, TPWD, and the ACT, and that no additional
archeological field investigations are warranted.

A-6

090059_arch_survey_reroute_report (with monitoring addendum)

