An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract,
Montgomery County, Texas
By:
Abigail Peyton
With contributions by
Russell K. Brownlow and Jeffrey D. Owens

HJN 070042 AR
Texas Antiquities Committee Permit No. 4468
Prepared for:

Prepared by:

The Woodlands Development Company
The Woodlands, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas
May 2007

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract,
Montgomery County, Texas
By:
Abigail Peyton
With contributions by
Russell K. Brownlow and Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

The Woodlands Development Company
2201 Timberloch Place
The Woodlands, Texas 77380

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Abigail Peyton, MA, RPA, Principal Investigator
HJN 070042 AR

Texas Antiquities Committee Permit No. 4468
May 2007

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The Woodlands Development Company (WDC) is proposing to develop the 400-acre
(ac) (162-hectare [ha]) Sterling Ridge Tract located in southwestern Montgomery County,
Texas. The proposed 400-ac (162-ha) tract is located east of the intersection of Harding Store
Road and Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 2978, approximately 1.5 miles (mi) (2.4 kilometers [km])
north of the small community of Oklahoma, Texas. Because the Sterling Ridge Tract will be
owned and maintained by WDC, the undertaking falls under the regulations of the Texas
Antiquities Code (TAC). WDC has contracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
(Horizon) to secure all applicable environmental clearances for the undertaking. Horizon
conducted the survey under TAC Permit No. 4468. The purpose of the survey was to determine
if any archeological/historical sites were located within the proposed development, and, if any
existed, to determine their eligibility for formal designation as State Archeological Landmarks
(SALs).
From 2 to 5 April 2007, a 4-person Horizon field crew conducted an intensive pedestrian
survey of the Sterling Ridge Tract to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially
would be impacted by the proposed development. This entailed intensive surface inspection as
well as subsurface shovel testing. To meet the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS), a minimum of 1 shovel test per 3 acres is required on projects of this
size. As such, a minimum of 133 shovel tests were required within the 400-ac (162-ha) Sterling
Ridge Tract. Horizon exceeded the TSMASS and excavated a total of 156 shovel tests.
The intensive surface inspection and shovel testing regimen resulted in entirely negative
findings. No cultural resources of any kind, including prehistoric or historic archeological sites,
isolated occurrences of artifacts, or historic structures or objects, were identified as a result of
intensive survey activities. In general, the Sterling Ridge Tract consisted predominately of
marshy lowlands interspersed with open plowed fields underlain by predominately shallow
sandy soils. Additionally, soils were found to be consistently saturated at shallow depths due to
the swampy conditions of the region and the ubiquitous water table. Due to the generally lowlying nature of the Sterling Ridge Tract, it is likely that this area has a history of being frequently
inundated, resulting in highly volatile deposits. As such, despite the presence of moderately
deep sands, it seems prudent to assume that these areas have a low probability for harboring
cultural materials. Rather, aboriginals likely targeted areas of higher elevation outside of the
marshy lowlands.

HJN 070042 AR

iii

Management Summary

Based on the survey-level investigations documented in this report, it is Horizon’s
opinion that no potentially significant cultural resources will be affected by the development of
the proposed 400-ac (162-ha) Sterling Ridge Tract. Horizon therefore recommends that cultural
resources clearance be granted for the project. However, in the unlikely event that any human
remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or
ongoing maintenance of the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should
cease immediately and the Texas Historical Commission (THC) should be notified of the
discovery.

iv

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ..................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING....................................................................................5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology..........................................................................5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.........................................................................5
2.3
Climate ...........................................................................................................9
2.4
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................11

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................13
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 BC) ......................................................14
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 BC to AD 100) ............................................................14
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (AD 100 to 600) .........................................................15
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (AD 600 to 1500) .....................................................16
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ......................................................17
3.6
Historic Period (ca. 1700 A.D. to Present) ....................................................17

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................23

5.0

METHODOLOGY ....................................................................................................25

6.0

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ..................................................................27
6.1
Results .........................................................................................................27
6.2
Management Recommendations..................................................................27

7.0

REFERENCES CITED.............................................................................................29
APPENDIX A: SHOVEL TEST DATA

HJN 070042 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.

vi

Topographic map of the Sterling Ridge Tract ..............................................................2
Aerial photograph of the Sterling Ridge Tract ..............................................................3
View of cleared upland pasture in the central portion of the Sterling Ridge Tract ........6
View of shallow mottled clays typically encountered in upland areas...........................6
View of lowland marshy area characteristic of the Sterling Ridge Tract .......................7
View of shallow water table typically encountered in the lowland marshy areas ..........7
Overview of Dry Creek as it traverses the Sterling Ridge Tract ...................................8
Existing residential housing subdivision that borders the Sterling Ridge Tract.............8

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The Woodlands Development Company (WDC) is proposing to develop the 400-acre
(ac) (162-hectare [ha]) Sterling Ridge Tract located in southwestern Montgomery County,
Texas. The proposed 400-ac (162-ha) tract is located east of the intersection of Harding Store
Road and Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 2978, approximately 1.5 miles (mi) (2.4 kilometers [km])
north of the small community of Oklahoma, Texas (Figures 1 and 2). Because the Sterling
Ridge Tract will be owned and maintained by WDC, the undertaking falls under the regulations
of the Texas Antiquities Code (TAC). WDC has contracted with Horizon Environmental
Services, Inc. (Horizon) to secure all applicable environmental clearances for the undertaking.
Horizon conducted the survey of the property under TAC Permit No. 4468. The purpose of the
survey was to determine if any archeological/historical sites were located within the proposed
development, and, if any existed, to determine their eligibility for formal designation as State
Archeological Landmarks (SALs).
The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive
pedestrian survey of the 400-ac (162-ha) Sterling Ridge Tract, and the production of a report
suitable for review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the
Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27,
and the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management
Reports. Abigail Peyton (Horizon staff archeologist), Diamond Kapanday, Michael Mudd, and
Jared Wiersema (Horizon field technicians) conducted the field investigations from 2 to 5 April
2007 to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed development. This entailed intensive surface inspection as well as subsurface shovel
testing.
To meet the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS), a
minimum of 1 shovel test per 3 acres is required on projects of this size. As such, a minimum of
133 shovel tests were required within the 400-ac (162-ha) Sterling Ridge Tract. Horizon
exceeded the TSMASS and excavated a total of 156 shovel tests. The Sterling Ridge Tract
itself was found to be relatively undeveloped, consisting of a mixture of cleared agricultural
fields, marshy bottomlands, and riparian woodlands. Several modern residential structures
were found to be located along the periphery of the tract with only 1 apparently abandoned
modern residential complex located in the central portion of the 400-ac (162-ha) tract.
Sprawling suburban subdivisions form the eastern and northern boundaries of the tract, while
FM 2978 and Mathews Lane form the western and southern boundaries of the property.

HJN 070042 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Topographic map of the Sterling Ridge Tract
2

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 2. Aerial photograph of the Sterling Ridge Tract

HJN 070042 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

The intensive surface inspection and shovel testing regimen resulted in entirely negative
findings. No cultural resources of any kind, including prehistoric or historic archeological sites,
isolated occurrences of artifacts, or historic structures or objects, were identified as a result of
intensive survey activities. In general, the Sterling Ridge Tract consisted predominately of
marshy lowlands interspersed with upland cleared agricultural fields. In the upland areas,
sandstone and ironstone gravel lenses were frequently encountered directly above clay
stratums at depths ranging from 30 to 100 centimeters below the surface (cmbs) (12 to 39
inches below the surface [inbs]). The lowland areas were dominated by thick riparian
vegetation underlain by saturated sandy sediments with the water table frequently observed at
shallow depths. Due to the generally low-lying nature of the Sterling Ridge Tract, it is likely that
this area has a history of being frequently inundated, resulting in highly volatile deposits. As
such, despite the presence of moderately deep sands, it seems prudent to assume that these
areas have a low probability for harboring cultural materials. Rather, aboriginals likely targeted
areas of higher elevation outside of the marshy lowlands.
Based on the survey-level investigations documented in this report, it is Horizon’s
opinion that no potentially significant cultural resources will be affected by the development of
the proposed 400-ac (162-ha) Sterling Ridge Tract. Horizon therefore recommends that cultural
resources clearance be granted for the project. However, in the unlikely event that any human
remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or
ongoing maintenance of the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should
cease immediately and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

4

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The Sterling Ridge Tract is located in southwestern Montgomery County, Texas, and
can be found on US Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5’ Oklahoma topographic quadrangle (see
Figure 1). Montgomery County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas
inland from the Gulf of Mexico shore. The Gulf of Mexico represents a structural basin formed
by lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal Plain, which extends as far north as the
Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists of
seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin, that
reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001). The Houston area is
underlain by rocks and unconsolidated sediments that are quite young in a geological sense,
ranging from modern to Miocene in age. These consist predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic
bodies arranged in an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and
estuarine facies making up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding
disconformities between these formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional
hiatuses that occurred during periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in this fill are of
Late Cretaceous age. As a result of the geometry of basin filling, successively younger rock
units crop out in subparallel bands from the basin margin toward the modern coastline.
The Sterling Ridge Tract is traversed by Dry Creek and several unnamed tributaries.
Dry Creek, in this region, was found to be a fairly substantial waterway swollen by spring rains
and flanked by steep sandy banks. Dry Creek flows in a southeasterly direction eventually
draining into Spring Creek. Spring Creek in turn discharges into the San Jacinto River, which
flows southeastward toward the Gulf of Mexico.
Elevations across the Sterling Ridge Tract
range from approximately 43 to 58 meters (m) (140 to 190 feet [ft]) above mean sea level
(amsl). General overview photographs of the Sterling Ridge Tract are provided in Figures 3 to
8.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The Sterling Ridge Tract is underlain by the Lissie Formation and the Willis Formation
(Shelby et al. 1968). The Lissie Formation consists of sand, silt, and clay, with some gravel.
The Willis Formation consists of mostly clay, silt, and sand. The Sterling Ridge Tract is situated

HJN 070042 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Figure 3. View of cleared upland pasture in the central portion of the Sterling Ridge Tract

Figure 4. View of shallow mottled clays typically encountered in upland areas
6

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 5. View of lowland marshy area characteristic of the Sterling Ridge Tract

Figure 6. View of shallow water table typically encountered in the lowland marshy areas

HJN 070042 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Figure 7. Overview of Dry Creek as it traverses the Sterling Ridge Tract

Figure 8. Existing residential housing subdivision that borders the Sterling Ridge Tract

8

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

on sandy soils of the Conroe association and the Splendora-Boy-Segno association (McClintock
et al. 1971). The Conroe association consists of deep, gently sloping sandy soils with clayey
subsoils. The Splendora-Boy-Segno association consists of deep, nearly level loamy and sandy
soils. Specifically, the Sterling Ridge Tract is underlain by Bibb soils, frequently flooded (Bb),
Boy fine sand (Bo), Conroe loamy fine sand, 0 to 5% slopes (CoC), Fuquay loamy fine sand
(Fs), and Sunsweet soils (Ss).
Bibb soils, frequently flooded (Bb) are typically very saturated and generally occur
between natural levees and uplands and on the floodplains of streams. A typical profile of this
soil type consists of 51 cm (20 in) of a grayish-brown very fine sandy loam that transitions to an
underlying layer of gray very fine sandy loam that extends to a depth of 109 cm (43 in).
Boy fine sand (Bo) consists of nearly level to gently sloping moderately well-drained soils
typically found in convex areas. A typical profile of this soil type consists of a surface layer of
grayish-brown fine sand that extends to a depth of 18 cm (7 in) followed by a subsurface layer
of pale-brown loamy fine sand to a depth of 193 cm (47 in). Below this layer is a light brownishgray sandy clay loam with red and brown mottles to depth of 178 cm (70 in).
Conroe loamy fine sand, 0 to 5% slopes, (CoC) consists of nearly level to gently sloping
soils generally found on broad ridges or slopes. A typical profile of this soil type consists of a
surface layer of grayish-brown loamy fine sand to a depth of 7 cm (3 in) followed by a yellowishbrown loamy fine sand that extends to a depth of 61 cm (24 in). Below this layer is a yellowishbrown sandy clay to a depth of 69 cm (27 in) underlain by a yellowish-brown clay with red
mottles to a depth of 100 cm (39 in). Finally, brittle clay with red, yellow, gray, and brown
mottles extends to a depth of 190 cm (75 in).
Fuquay loamy fine sand (Fs) consists of nearly level to gently sloping well-drained soils.
A typical profile consists of a surface layer of brown loamy fine sand to a depth of 10 cm (4 in)
followed by a subsurface layer of pale-brown loamy fine sand to a depth of 58 cm (23 in)
underlain by a yellowish-brown sandy clay loam that extends to a depth of 287 cm (90 in).
Sunsweet soils (Ss) are generally gently sloping well-drained soils found on ridgetops
and are typically bare of vegetation. A typical profile consists of a surface layer of yellowishbrown sandy clay loam to a depth of 13 cm (5 in) followed by a yellowish-brown sandy clay to a
depth of 30 cm (12 in) underlain by mottled red and yellow sandy clay to a depth of 53 cm (21
in). Below this layer is a succession of strata consisting of mottled red and yellow sandy clay to
a depth of 107 cm (42 in) followed by mottled brownish-yellow and red sandy clay to a depth of
132 cm (52 in) underlain by mottled weak-red and pale-brown sandy clay loam to a depth of 178
cm (70 in).

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
While the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway
(1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes

HJN 070042 AR

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

3 separate climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late
Glacial Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present).
Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas
was considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region
was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and
Holloway 1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a
slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous
woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway
1985). During the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have
been more stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post
oak savannas. The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued
into the mid-Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more
mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and
Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were
probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern US and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects
the influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with
the urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and concrete to give
the Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout
much of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water,
humidity in the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often
exceeds 50% even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high
humidity characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and
a modest diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly
high temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in
January to a high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to
9°C (38 to 47°F) in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average
low temperatures range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range
from 27 to 29°C (75 to 79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The Houston region experiences 2 precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott 2001;
McClintock et al. 1971). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage
of infrequent cold fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second
occurs in the late summer to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of
tropical storms and hurricanes from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast,
winter and early spring are relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional
thunderstorms that are relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual
precipitation varies from a low of approximately 100 cm (40 in) to a high of more than 132 cm
(52 in). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5 to 8 cm (2 to 3 in) in March to
more than 19 cm (7.5 in) occurring locally on the coast during September. Almost all of the
measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely rare, occurring in measurable
amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

10

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Montgomery County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texas biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahan et al.
(1984) further define 4 broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic
province that lies on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie,
(3) coastal gallery forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are
strongly controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the
seasonal water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically
dominated by little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter
environments are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria,
bulrushes, smooth cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush,
saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal
waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained
environments are characterized by such taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum,
gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass, red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort.
A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon,
nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and
many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish
to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs
and woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the
north and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses
are found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver
bluestem, buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian
sunflower, Engelman daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow
neptunia, snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush,
bluebonnet, ragweed, croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring
in the coastal prairie include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live
oak, elm, hackberry, bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as
the coastal prairie grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland
environment with common stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie
is home to a diverse fauna, including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many
small rodents, amphibians and reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison
and pronghorn were also present at various times in the past.

HJN 070042 AR

11

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbrier, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are
grasses such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest
include white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and
rodents, turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bears were also present at various times in the
past, and a number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger
deciduous trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory
vegetation varies from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and
young trees. Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle,
greenbrier, Virginia creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A
variety of fauna is also present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit,
mink, skunk, various small rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bears were
also present at times in the past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the
transition zone to the coastal prairie environment.

12

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The Sterling Ridge Tract is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a
21-county area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east
and measuring about 200 km (124 miles) inland from the Texas gulf coastline. In broad terms,
much of the archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the
Southern Great Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995;
Story 1990). Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin
subregions of Southeast Texas. These 2 subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the
inland subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast
Texas comprises a zone about 25 km (16 miles) inland from the coast that covers the area
influenced by gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable
ecological variability characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes,
wetlands, marine coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses
considerable ecological diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney
woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting-andgathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to
denote Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural
characteristics of Southeast Texas cultural periods are often different than in neighboring
regions. For instance, the Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and
Southeast Texas, and Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for
Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time
in Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit
evidence of reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be
associated with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of
subsistence-related activities. Inland sites tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired
clay balls (at some sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites
tend to consist of multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain oyster shell tools, large
quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), numerous bone tools, and few lithic
materials.

HJN 070042 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 BC)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 BC (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (but see Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is
represented by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 BC) (Patterson 1995). This stage
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end
scrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas
are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is
little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 BC), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian
period (8000 to 5000 BC), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).
3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 BC TO AD 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 BC to AD 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Southeast Texas.
Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and
corresponding decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a
diversified resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas,
however, this hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The

14

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone
assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural
stage. Material culture shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in
the application of groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
In Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 BC) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains.
Many of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 BC) and
several new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and
probably the Gary-Kent series. The Late Archaic period (1500 BC to AD 100) is characterized
by Gary, Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition
developed in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981;
Patterson 1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period
but reached full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as
boatstones and bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang
knives, stingray spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial
practices included the systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre,
and use of locally made grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most
burials are found in extended supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials
are also known. Burial direction is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to
site. Patterson et al. (1993) report that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary
tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (AD 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 BC, in the Galveston Bay area by
about AD 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about AD 300, and in the ConroeLivingston inland area by about AD 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears to have
progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995).
Southeastern Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where
Aten (1983) established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area

HJN 070042 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

80 miles (129 km) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal exception of
a few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found on the Gulf
Coast west of the Sabine Lake area.
Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and early part of the Historic period (Aten
1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility ware
throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown Plain
for about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods
before once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety,
Goose Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor
pottery types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway
(Aten 1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte
types are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste
(like Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (AD 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (AD 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the
latter part of the Late Prehistoric period; however, as previously discussed, ceramics appear
earlier in Southeast Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland sub-region along with the bow and arrow through the
Late Prehistoric period (Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995;
Wheat 1953). In fact, Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in
Southeast Texas as early as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points
that consisted of marginally retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a
generalized date of adoption of the bow-and-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca.
AD 600) in Central and Southeast Texas. In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to
be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba,
Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto
Plain and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek
pottery remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt

16

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Coated pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue.
Aten (1983) has
reconstructed the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century,
including the Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (possibly Karankawa), and Tonkawa. The
presence of the Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central
Texas in the 17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought
to have occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the
corresponding mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east
of the San Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe
may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic
Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and
Cuney points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified
by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1700 A.D. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez
Cabeza de Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near
Galveston Bay; however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until
after 1700. The first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission
system, as well as the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native
culture and social systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where
the burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as
increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the
time heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous
Indian population was greatly diminished. The Alabama/Coushatta Indians who currently reside
in Southeast Texas are migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early
19th centuries (Newcomb 1961).
The earliest European explorer of what became Montgomery County was probably the
Frenchman René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, who evidently passed through the area in

HJN 070042 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

16871. When news of French incursions reached Spanish authorities, they sent several
expeditions to the region to reclaim it for Spain. During the mid-19th century the Spanish made
several attempts to establish settlements in the area and eventually set up 3 missions on the
banks of Spring Creek within the current boundaries of Montgomery County, but the missions
were abandoned in 1756 and no permanent Spanish settlements were established. The future
Montgomery County area was included in the colonization contracts issued by Spanish and later
Mexican authorities to empresario Stephen F. Austin, and, during the early 1820s, AngloAmerican settlers began moving into the region. Forty-two families of Austin’s colony obtained
land titles from the Mexican government and settled in western Montgomery County. Among
the earliest settlers was Andrew Montgomery, who established a trading post at the crossroads
of the Loma del Toro and lower Coushatta traces. He was soon joined by relatives and others,
and the settlement eventually grew into the town of Montgomery. During the early 1830s, the
population of the region increased rapidly, and, in December 1837, the Republic of Texas
Congress established Montgomery County, which was named for its largest settlement. The
new county was carved from Washington County, and its borders originally extended from the
Brazos River on the west to the Trinity on the east, and from the Old San Antonio Road on the
north to the San Jacinto River on the south, an area that included future Grimes, Walker, San
Jacinto, Madison, and Waller counties. The county’s present boundaries were established after
the establishment of Waller County in 1870.
On the eve of the Civil War, Montgomery County was in most ways typical of the
counties of the region, decidedly Southern in character and outlook, with a rapidly developing
plantation economy. Montgomery remained the largest town, but several other trading centers
had emerged, including Danville, Bay’s Chapel, Cincinnati, and Waverly. Methodist minister
I.L.G. Strickland began preaching in Montgomery in the early 1840s, and, in the early 1850s,
Baptists had organized the first church there. Several private schools also began operating
during the 1850s, including the Montgomery Academy, which earned a reputation as one of the
preeminent schools of the region. The Civil War and its aftermath brought profound changes to
the county. Not surprisingly, given its large number of slaveholders, Montgomery County’s
citizens overwhelmingly supported the Southern cause, and nearly 80% (318 of 416) of those
who went to the polls cast their votes in favor of secession. The county’s men volunteered for
the Confederate army in large numbers, a sizeable number of them serving in the Fourth Texas
Regiment of Hood’s Texas Brigade; others joined Terry’s Texas Rangers (Eighth Texas
Cavalry). Many of the early volunteers saw considerable action during the war, and as many as
3/4 of them were killed or injured before war’s end. For those who remained at home, there
were other problems to deal with, including lack of markets for goods, shortages, and wild
fluctuations in Confederate currency. The end of the war brought wrenching changes to the
county’s economy. For many of Montgomery County’s white inhabitants, the abolition of slavery
meant devastating economic loss. Prior to the Civil War, slaves had constituted nearly half of all
taxable property in the county, and their loss, coupled with a decline in property values, caused
a profound disruption for most planters. The African-American population of Montgomery

1

The following history of Montgomery County, Texas, derives from Bement (1987), Gandy (1952), Martin (1950), and
Montgomery (1975), as summarized in The Handbook of Texas Online.

18

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

County fared even worse. Most blacks left the farms owned by their former masters to seek
better working and living conditions; however, for the vast majority, the change brought only
marginal improvement. Most ended up working as agricultural laborers or as sharecroppers,
receiving 1/3 or 1/2 of the crop for their labors.
Montgomery County escaped much of the strife that many other Texas counties
experienced during Reconstruction. No permanent federal garrison was stationed in the county,
and there was no Freedmen’s Bureau. Citizens nevertheless chafed under local Republican
rule, and there were isolated acts of violence and intimidation directed at African-American
officials. By the early 1870s, the local white elite had once more gained control of the county’s
affairs, and, through the use of the White Primary, literacy tests, and threats, managed to
effectively disenfranchise the black population until the 1960s. Like most of the counties in the
state, Montgomery County experienced a prolonged post-war agricultural depression. During
the Civil War, prices for cotton had skyrocketed, and landowners had planted ever-increasing
amounts of land in cotton to reap the benefits. After the war, falling prices and the loss of cheap
slave labor combined to severely depress the local economy. To make ends meet, many
landowners opted to grow even more cotton, badly depleting the soil in the process. By the
1880s, the soil in many areas of the county was so poor that cotton yields were as low as 1/3 to
3/4 of a bale per acre. Some farmers turned to livestock-raising or other small grains, such as
corn and wheat, but cotton nevertheless remained the county’s leading cash crop until the end
of the century.
The county’s economy began to recover in the 1870s and early 1880s with the
construction of several railroads. In 1871, the International-Great Northern Railroad was built
across the county; in 1879, a narrow-gauge line known as the Houston, East, and West Texas
was constructed; and, in 1880, the Houston and Texas Central built a branch line from
Navasota to Montgomery and extended eastward to Conroe. The construction of the railroads
touched off an intense controversy concerning the location of the county seat. The first railroad
missed the town of Montgomery. Willis, a new town on the railroad, was voted county seat in
1874, but the county seat was moved back to Montgomery in 1880, after the Houston and
Texas Central was built. In 1889, however, the county seat was moved to the fledgling
community of Conroe, which was situated at the junction of the International-Great Northern and
the newly built Gulf, Colorado, and Santa Fe Railway. The construction of the railroads also
sparked a major period of expansion in the county. Numerous new towns grew up, and the
population, which had risen only slightly since the Civil War, saw a marked increase. Despite
the loss of considerable territory due to the splitting off of several new counties, the number of
residents grew from 6,483 to 10,154 between 1870 and 1880, and population increased to more
than 17,000 over the next 2 decades.
The construction of the railroads also marked the beginnings of the county’s great
lumbering boom. Commercial lumbering had begun in the county prior to the Civil War, but the
lack of easy access to river or rail transportation severely hampered efforts to exploit the area’s
rich timber resources. With the arrival of the railroads, however, lumbering quickly developed
into a major industry. By 1882, 45 steam sawmills were in operation, and lumbering emerged
as the county’s largest source of income within a short time. The lumber boom gave rise to

HJN 070042 AR

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

numerous new communities, including Bobville, Cowl Spur, Dobbin, Egypt, Fostoria, Honea,
Karen, Keenan, Mostyn, Leonides, and Security, all of which developed as lumber shipping
points or mill sites. The boom also helped to transform the county in other ways. As late as the
early 1870s, 80% of the county was still covered by thick pine forests. Over the next 4 decades,
much of the county was deforested, permanently altering the landscape and opening the way
for a steady increase in livestock-raising and farming.
The agricultural economy, which had been on the wane since the Civil War, began to
recover in the 1880s. Spurring its growth was the introduction of tobacco, which began to be
planted in large quantities in the 1890s. Much of the tobacco was a fine-grade variety known as
Vuelta Abajo, grown from seeds imported each year from Cuba. The center of the industry was
Willis, which had 7 cigar factories by 1895. High railroad shipping costs and the high initial
investment and labor involved in curing and sweating the tobacco, however, discouraged many
farmers; between 1898 and 1901, the amount of land given over to tobacco production fell
dramatically from more than 1,000 acres to only 70. The subsequent lifting of a US tariff on
Cuban tobacco, which had kept prices artificially high, finally ended the experiment, and no
tobacco was being grown in the county within a few years. The agricultural economy stagnated
at the turn of the century; however, by 1910, it began to show slow but steady growth.
The county, however, experienced a dramatic reversal of fortune in 1932, when oil was
discovered southeast of Conroe. Evidence of oil had been found in the county as early as 1901,
when Santa Fe Railroad engineers drilled a water well and noted traces of oil. Natural gas was
found southwest of Conroe in 1924, and several major oil companies acquired leases in the
area. The initial tests, however, were unsuccessful, and the companies lost interest. In August
1931, however, wildcatter George William Strake began drilling a test well southeast of Conroe
and, on 13 December of the same year, hit oil; by June 1932, Strake had brought in a second,
even larger well, which was spewing out more than 900 barrels daily. The discovery
immediately triggered a tremendous oil boom. Within days, thousands of fortune-seekers,
wildcatters, financiers, roughnecks, and hangers-on flooded the area. The population of Conroe,
estimated at 2,500 in December 1931, blossomed to more than 10,000 within a few months. At
the beginning of 1933, more than 100 wells had been drilled, and more that 25,000 barrels per
day were being produced; by the end of the year, the number of producing wells had grown to
679, and the daily output was more than 52,000 barrels. Oil was subsequently discovered in
several other areas of the county, and the combined oilfields of Montgomery County made it
one of the richest oil-producing areas in the nation. Although the vast majority of Montgomery
County residents did not benefit directly from the oil discovery, oil money contributed to a
general prosperity that helped offset the worst effects of the depression. Proceeds from the oil
also helped to remake the face of the county. Roads were graded and paved, new schools
were built, and public buildings and monuments were erected. Conroe experienced a
construction boom as numerous new buildings, including banks, offices, and homes, were
erected with oil money. The population of the county swelled during the boom, growing by
nearly 10,000 between 1930 and 1940, increasing from 14,588 to 23,055. The prosperity
continued during the years of World War II. Oil refineries and a carbon black manufacturing
plant were built, and efforts were intensified to produce as much oil as possible for the war

20

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

effort. After the war, oil production declined somewhat, but it has remained one of the county’s
leading sources of income; in 1990 alone, more than 2.7 million barrels of oil were produced.
In recent years, Montgomery County has become a recreation destination for many
Houston residents. The area, with its abundant lakes and forest, offers numerous opportunities
for hunting, boating, fishing, and hiking. Among the most popular attractions are the Sam
Houston National Forest, W. Goodrich Jones State Forest, Lake Conroe, and Lake Woodlands.
Visitors to the area are also attracted by the shopping opportunities in Conroe, the annual
county fair, and the Conroe Main Street Festival.

HJN 070042 AR

21

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Archival research conducted online via the THC’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas
indicated that no archeological sites are located within 1 mi (1.6 km) of the proposed 400-ac
(162-ha) tract (2007). Additionally, no previously recorded sites were found on the Atlas maps
within or immediately adjacent to the proposed development tract. The Atlas maps did indicate
that the Hickory Grove Cemetery is located approximately 0.75 mi (1.2 km) south of the
proposed development tract. This cemetery contains approximately 60 marked graves, the
earliest dating to the 1890s. Based on this preliminary archival research, 3 cultural resource
surveys have been conducted in close vicinity to the proposed Sterling Ridge Tract. These
surveys, conducted by Horizon and Greiner Engineering Sciences, Inc., resulted in sparse
findings with the majority of archeological sites recorded in close proximity to Spring Creek and
its tributaries. While these previous cultural resource surveys are located adjacent to the
currently proposed Sterling Ridge Tract, none actually overlap any portion of the proposed
development tract.
Upon internal review of the Horizon report that documented the findings of the survey
located directly adjacent to the Sterling Ridge Tract, it was found that 3 recorded sites are
located southeast of the Sterling Ridge property boundary (Brownlow 2003). These sites,
41MQ185, 41MQ186, and 41MQ187, have yet to be included on the Atlas maps. Sites
41MQ185 and 41MQ186 are small aboriginal campsites, and site 41MQ187 is a historic dump
site. After some testing efforts, all 3 sites were recommended as ineligible for formal
designation as SALs and construction efforts were allowed to proceed. In fact, the construction
of the Woodlands Detention Pond has likely completely obliterated site 41MQ186, which was
located near the southeastern border of the Sterling Ridge Tract.

HJN 070042 AR

23

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

5.0 METHODOLOGY

A 4-person Horizon field crew conducted the intensive pedestrian survey of the
proposed 400-ac (162-ha) Sterling Ridge Tract from 2 to 5 April 2007. This survey included
intensive surface inspection as well as subsurface shovel testing. To meet the TSMASS, a
minimum of 1 shovel test per 3 acres is required for projects of this size. As such, a minimum of
133 shovel tests were required within the 400-ac (162-ha) development tract. Horizon
exceeded the TSMASS and excavated a total of 156 shovel tests within the proposed Sterling
Ridge Tract.
All excavated matrices were screened through 6-millimeter (mm) (1/4-inch) hardware
mesh and examined for cultural materials. In addition, all cutbank exposures were inspected for
cultural deposits as well as the presence of deep alluvium. In general, the majority of the
Sterling Ridge Tract is dominated by stands of dense riparian vegetation, making surface
visibility consistently low (ca. 10 to 25%) throughout much of the area. Several large open
pastures and agricultural fields occupy the central and southern portion of the Sterling Ridge
Tract, and surface visibility was considerably higher in these areas (ca. 30 to 65%).
The field crew set out to employ a non-collection policy for non-diagnostic cultural
materials, including lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap. Such materials
were to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced where they
were found. In the event that diagnostic cultural materials (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, etc.)
were encountered, they were to be collected and placed in resealable plastic bags labeled with
relevant provenience information. However, because no cultural resources were observed, this
practice was not brought into play.
Field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms, cultural materials
observed, etc. Standardized shovel test forms were completed for each excavated shovel test,
and photographs with a photo log were completed when appropriate. Shovel test location data
were acquired via a handheld Global Positioning System (GPS) unit using the Universal
Transverse Mercatur (UTM) coordinate system and map datum North American Datum (NAD)
27. Shovel test locations are presented in Figure 9, and shovel test data are provided in
Appendix A.

HJN 070042 AR

25

Chapter 5.0: Methodology

Figure 9. Shovel test locations within the Sterling Ridge Tract

26

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

RESULTS

The intensive surface inspection and shovel testing regimen resulted in entirely negative
findings. No cultural resources of any kind, including prehistoric or historic archeological sites,
isolated occurrences of artifacts, or historic structures or objects, were identified as a result of
intensive survey activities. In addition, no previously documented cultural resources are present
in the vicinity of the project area. In general, the Sterling Ridge Tract consisted predominately
of marshy lowlands interspersed with upland cleared agricultural fields. In the upland areas
sandstone and ironstone gravel lenses were frequently encountered directly above clay
stratums at depths ranging from 30 to 100 centimeters below the surface (cmbs) (12 to 39
inches below the surface [inbs]). The lowland areas were dominated by thick riparian
vegetation underlain by saturated sandy sediments with the water table frequently observed at
shallow depths. Due to the generally low-lying nature of the Sterling Ridge Tract, it is likely that
this area has a history of being frequently inundated, resulting in highly volatile deposits. As
such, despite the presence of moderately deep sands, it seems prudent to assume that these
areas have a low probability for harboring cultural materials. Rather, aboriginals likely targeted
areas of higher elevation outside of the marshy lowlands.

6.2

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the survey-level investigation documented in this report, it is Horizon’s opinion
that no potentially significant cultural resources will be affected by the development of the
proposed 400-ac (162-ha) Sterling Ridge Tract. Horizon therefore recommends that cultural
resources clearance be granted for the project. However, in the unlikely event that any human
remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or
ongoing maintenance of the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should
cease immediately and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 070042 AR

27

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory,
pp. 72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The
Florida State Museum, Gainesville.

Bement, L.C.
1987
Buried in the Bottoms: The Archeology of Lake Creek Reservoir, Montgomery
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Brownlow, R.K.
2003
An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey and Subsequent Testing of the Proposed
Woodlands Southwest Detention Pond, The Woodlands, Montgomery County,
Texas. HJN 030019 AR. Horizon Environmental Services, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.

HJN 070042 AR

29

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Butzer, K.W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas.
Reports of Investigations, No. 8,
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Gandy, W.H.
1952
A History of Montgomery County, Texas. Unpublished Masters thesis, University of
Houston.
Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J.T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

30

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

American

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Martin, W.N.
1950
A History of Montgomery, Texas. Unpublished Masters thesis, Sam Houston State
Teachers College.
McClintock, W.R., Jr., T.L. Galloway, and B.R. Stringer
1971
Soil Survey of Montgomery County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, and Forest Service in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
McMahon, C.A., R.G. Frye, and K.L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Montgomery, R.N.
1975
The History of Montgomery County. Austin: Jenkins.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:163.

Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

HJN 070042 AR

31

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc.,
Corpus Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330.

Shelby, C.A., M.K. McGowen, S. Aranow, W.L. Fisher, L.F. Brown, Jr., J.H. McGowen, C.G.
Groat, and V.E. Barnes
1968
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Beaumont Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin (revised 1992).
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C.
Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2007
Texas Archeological Site Atlas restricted database. Texas Historical Commission.
<http://www.pedernales.thc.state.tx.us>. Accessed 9 April 2007.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

32

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

APPENDIX A:
SHOVEL TEST DATA

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Waypoint
#
MM‐1

Shovel
Test #
MM‐1

Easting

Northing

250001

3339902

MM‐2

MM‐2

250008

3340002

MM‐3

MM‐3

250003

3340106

MM‐4

MM‐4

250005

3340200

MM‐5

MM‐5

249998

3340298

MM‐6

MM‐6

250005

3340391

MM‐7

MM‐7

250324

3340479

MM‐8

MM‐8

250314

3340352

MM‐9

MM‐9

250338

3340258

MM‐10

MM‐10

250325

3340118

MM‐11

MM‐11

250308

3340021

MM‐12

MM‐12

249721

3341212

HJN 070042 AR

Shovel Test Data for Sterling Ranch Survey (HJN 070042 AR)
Depth
Soil Description
(cmbs)
0‐45
pale brown wet sand
45‐65
pale brown wet clay sand
0‐65
pale brown wet sand
65‐75
yellowish‐brown clay
0‐50
pale grayish‐brown sand
50‐60
yellowish‐brown clay
0‐50
light grayish‐brown moist sand
50‐60
light reddish‐brown clay
0‐60
light grayish‐brown sand
60‐70
light reddish‐brown clay
0‐30
very wet gritty and gravelly sand
30+
water table
0‐40
dark grey sand
pale reddish‐brown sand with some small iron
40‐100
gravels
0‐30
dark grey sand
30‐100
pale yellowish‐brown sand
0‐60
light grey sand
60‐100
very light grey sand
0‐30
light grey sand

Artifacts
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

Comments
very saturated
very saturated

very saturated

none
none
none
none
none
none

30‐70

pale grey sand with water table at base

none

0‐40
40‐100
0‐20
20‐30

medium brown sand
compact pale brown sand
very compact pale brown sand
very light brownish‐yellow clay

none
none
none
none

very compact sand
Dry Creek
lower 25 cm very
saturated

along 2‐track road

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Waypoint
#
MM‐13

Shovel
Test #
MM‐13

Easting

Northing

249833

3341203

MM‐14

MM‐14

249931

3341188

MM‐15

MM‐15

250031

3341172

MM‐16

MM‐16

250132

3341170

MM‐17

MM‐17

250233

3341183

MM‐18

MM‐18

250344

3341206

MM‐19

MM‐19

250437

3341194

MM‐20

MM‐20

250556

3341190

MM‐21

MM‐21

250669

3341193

MM‐22

MM‐22

250783

3341181

MM‐23

MM‐23

250798

3341082

MM‐24

MM‐24

250812

3340808

A-2

Shovel Test Data for Sterling Ranch Survey (HJN 070042 AR)
Depth
Soil Description
(cmbs)
0‐20
grey sand
20+
water table
0‐30
pale grey sand with reddish‐brown clay mottles
30‐40
reddish‐brown clay
0‐30
pale grey sand with reddish‐brown clay mottles
30‐40
reddish‐brown clay
0‐30
pale grey sand with reddish‐brown clay mottles
30‐40
reddish‐brown clay
0‐30
wet grey sand
30‐60
pale yellowish‐brown sandy clay
60‐70
pale yellowish‐brown clay
0‐25
light grey sand
25‐60
pale yellowish‐brown gravelly sand
60‐100
reddish‐brown clay sand
0‐50
light grayish‐brown sand
50+
water table
0‐30
pale grey sand
30‐100
very light yellowish‐brown fine sand
0‐25
pale grey sand
25‐100
very light yellowish‐brown fine sand
0‐30
pale grey sand
30‐100
very light yellowish‐brown fine sand
0‐35
grey sand
35‐100
light yellowish‐brown fine sand
0‐20
light grey sand
20‐100
pale brown sand

Artifacts

Comments

none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

very saturated
very saturated
very saturated
very saturated
very saturated

very iron stone gravelly
very iron stone gravelly
drainage

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Shovel Test Data for Sterling Ranch Survey (HJN 070042 AR)
Depth
Soil Description
(cmbs)
0‐20
light grey sand
20‐100
pale brown sand
0‐5
light brown wet sand
5‐15
yellowish‐brown dense compact clay
0‐10
pale brown wet sand
10‐20
pale grey wet clay sand

Waypoint
#
MM‐25

Shovel
Test #
MM‐25

Easting

Northing

250783

3340594

MM‐26

MM‐26

249660

3341101

MM‐27

MM‐27

249769

3341100

MM‐28

MM‐28

249872

3341100

0‐15

very wet pale brown sand

none

MM‐29

MM‐29

249976

3341100

0‐20

very wet pale brown sand

none

MM‐30

MM‐30

250103

3341100

0‐10

very wet pale brown sand

none

MM‐31

MM‐31

250199

3341100

0‐20

moist grey sand

none

20‐45
45‐55

light yellowish‐brown fine sand
yellowish‐brown clay

none
none

0‐25

light grey sand

none

25‐50
50‐60
0‐10
10‐35
35‐45
0‐15
15‐45
45‐55
0‐15

pale yellowish‐brown sand
yellowish‐brown clay
light grey sand
pale yellowish‐brown sand
yellowish‐brown clay
dark grey sand
pale brown wet sand
pale brown wet clay sand
pale grey moist sand

none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

MM‐32

MM‐33

MM‐34

MM‐35

MM‐32

MM‐33

MM‐34

MM‐35

250294

250439

250543

250641

HJN 070042 AR

3341100

3341100

3341097

3340609

Artifacts
none
none
none
none
none
none

Comments

heavy small gravels
very saturated
water table at base
very saturated surface‐
water at base
very saturated surface‐
water at base
very saturated surface‐
water at base
top of gradual hill
sloped

top of gradual hill
sloped

very saturated

very saturated

A-3

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Waypoint
#

Shovel
Test #

Easting

Northing

MM‐36
MM‐37

MM‐36
MM‐37

250432
250209

3340603
3340594

MM‐38

MM‐38

249985

3340595

MM‐39

MM‐39

249780

3340574

AP‐1
AP‐2

AP‐1
AP‐2

250083
250090

3339905
3340005

AP‐3

AP‐3

250105

3340103

AP‐4
AP‐5
AP‐6
AP‐7
AP‐8
AP‐9
AP‐10
AP‐11
AP‐12

AP‐4
AP‐5
AP‐6
AP‐7
AP‐8
AP‐9
AP‐10
AP‐11
AP‐12

250109
250092
250229
250227
250208
250234
250222
250205
249903

3340248
3340454
3340474
3340373
3340244
3340166
3340082
3339962
3341404

AP‐13

AP‐13

250006

3341399

A-4

Shovel Test Data for Sterling Ranch Survey (HJN 070042 AR)
Depth
Soil Description
(cmbs)
15‐70
pale brown moist sand
70‐85
reddish‐brown clay
0‐100
pale brown fine sand
0‐10
pale grey fine sand
10‐100
pale brown fine sand
0‐30
pale grey sand
30‐80
pale grayish‐brown wet sand
0‐10
dark brown fine sand
10‐100
strong brown fine sand
0‐100
brown sand
0‐60
brown sand
60‐70
brown‐orange clay loam
0‐50
brown saturated sand
50‐60
orange clay
0‐100
tan sand
0‐100
tan sand
0‐100
tan sand
0‐100
tan sand
0‐100
tan sand
0‐50
brown sand ‐ water table at base
0‐70
brown sand ‐ water table at base
0‐50
tan sand with orange clay at base
0‐10
brown sandy loam
10‐45
tan sand
45‐55
yellowish‐orange clay
0‐10
brown sandy loam

Artifacts
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

Comments

upland rise

very saturated
water table at base

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Waypoint
#

Shovel
Test #

Easting

Northing

AP‐14

AP‐14

250121

3341391

AP‐15

AP‐15

250326

3341418

AP‐16
AP‐17
AP‐18
AP‐19
AP‐20
AP‐21
AP‐22
AP‐23
AP‐24

AP‐16
AP‐17
AP‐18
AP‐19
AP‐20
AP‐21
AP‐22
AP‐23
AP‐24

250403
250503
250605
250699
250806
250726
250786
250701
249591

3341398
3341386
3341378
3341418
3341409
3340970
3340893
3340718
3340793

AP‐25
AP‐26
AP‐27
AP‐28
AP‐29

AP‐25
AP‐26
AP‐27
AP‐28
AP‐29

249730
249802
250035
250087
250185

3340815
3340799
3340791
3340779
3340812

AP‐30

AP‐30

250293

3340801

AP‐31

AP‐31

250393

3340793

HJN 070042 AR

Shovel Test Data for Sterling Ranch Survey (HJN 070042 AR)
Depth
Soil Description
(cmbs)
10‐40
tan sand
40‐50
yellow clay
0‐10
brown sand
10‐40
tan sand
40‐50
yellow clay
0‐15
brown moist sand
15‐50
mottled tan sandy clay
0‐50
tan sand with yellow clay at base
0‐40
tan sand with red‐orange clay at base
0‐30
brown gravelly sand
0‐40
tan gravelly sand with orange clay at base
0‐40
tan sand with orange/red clay at base
0‐70
tan sand with water table at base
0‐70
tan gravelly sand with sandstone at base
0‐100
tan sand
0‐60
tan moist sand
60‐65
orange clay loam
0
no shovel test dug ‐ swampy
0
no shovel test dug ‐ swampy
0‐70
very wet tan sand with clay at base
0‐40
very wet tan sand
0‐40
very wet tan sand
40‐50
gravelly wet sand with clay loam
0‐50
tan sand
50+
brown clay
0‐100
tan sand with sandstone gravels

Artifacts
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

Comments

water table at base

open field
A-5

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Waypoint
#
AP‐32
AP‐33
AP‐34

Shovel
Test #
AP‐32
AP‐33
AP‐34

Easting

Northing

250499
250592
250603

3340794
3340784
3340698

AP‐35
AP‐36
AP‐37
AP‐38
AP‐39
AP‐40
AP‐41
AP‐42
AP‐43
DK‐1

AP‐35
AP‐36
AP‐37
AP‐38
AP‐39
AP‐40
AP‐41
AP‐42
AP‐43
DK‐1

250482
250409
250306
250202
250102
250009
249904
249808
249701
249917

3340682
3340726
3340686
3340720
3340736
3340715
3340746
3340705
3340701
3339903

DK‐2

DK‐2

249935

3340010

DK‐3

DK‐3

249954

3340118

DK‐4

DK‐4

249921

3340325

DK‐5

DK‐5

249895

3340411

DK‐6

DK‐6

249904

3340488

A-6

Shovel Test Data for Sterling Ranch Survey (HJN 070042 AR)
Depth
Soil Description
(cmbs)
0‐40
brown gravelly sand with sandstone at base
0‐10
swampy mottled clay loam at surface
0‐50
brown sand
50+
water table in clay loam
0‐50
tan sand with water table at base
0‐60
tan sand with orange clay loam at base
0‐50
tan sand with orange clay loam at base
0‐40
tan sand with mottled wet clay at base
0‐30
moist sandy clay
0‐40
very wet brown sand with clay loam at base
0‐10
very wet sandy clay loam
0‐10
very wet sandy clay loam
0‐70
wet tan sand
0‐20
dark tan sandy loam
20‐80
tan sandy loam
80‐100
moist tan sandy loam with orange clay inclusions.
0‐90
tan sandy loam
compact tan sandy loam with orange clay
90‐100
inclusions
0‐90
tan sandy loam
90+
hard and dry clay
0‐50
disturbed mottled sandy clay
50+
hard and dry clay
0‐90
wet tan sandy loam
90+
water table
0‐30
moist tan sandy loam

Artifacts

Comments

none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

creek terrace

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Waypoint
#

Shovel
Test #

Easting

Northing

DK‐7

DK‐7

250452

3340460

DK‐8

DK‐8

250423

3340355

DK‐9

DK‐9

250352

3340185

DK‐10

DK‐10

250449

3340138

DK‐11

DK‐11

250454

3340033

DK‐12
DK‐13

DK‐12
DK‐13

250439
249868

3339927
3341353

DK‐14

DK‐14

249971

3341321

DK‐15

DK‐15

250076

3341309

DK‐16

DK‐16

250178

3341279

HJN 070042 AR

Shovel Test Data for Sterling Ranch Survey (HJN 070042 AR)
Depth
Soil Description
(cmbs)
30‐40
moist orange sandy loam
45
large root disturbance
0‐10
dark brown organic sand
10‐100
light tan sandy loam
0‐10
grey sandy loam
10‐100
light tan sandy loam
wet light tan sand with grey and orange clay
0‐50
inclusions
50+
water table
0‐60
moist tan sandy loam
60‐80
wet light tan sandy loam ‐ water table at base
0‐50
grey sandy loam
50
large root disturbance
0‐5
gravelly fill disturbance
0‐30
dark grey sandy loam
30‐60
tan sandy loam with small sandstone gravels
60+
yellowish‐brown clay
0‐20
light brown sandy loam
20‐50
tan sandy loam with small clay inclusions
50+
yellowish‐brown clay
0‐20
light brown sandy loam
20‐40
tan sandy loam with sandstone gravels
40‐42
thin lens of sandstone
42+
yellowish‐brown clay
0‐20
light brown sandy loam
20‐40
tan sandy loam ‐ compact

Artifacts

Comments

none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

next to 2‐track road

A-7

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Waypoint
#

Shovel
Test #

Easting

Northing

DK‐17

DK‐17

250280

3341293

DK‐18

DK‐18

250401

3341338

DK‐19

DK‐19

250510

3341324

DK‐20

DK‐20

250609

3341357

DK‐21

DK‐21

250718

3341400

DK‐22

DK‐22

250820

3341410

DK‐23

DK‐23

250792

3341004

DK‐24

DK‐24

250746

3340903

A-8

Shovel Test Data for Sterling Ranch Survey (HJN 070042 AR)
Depth
Soil Description
(cmbs)
40+
yellowish‐brown clay
0‐20
light brown sandy loam
20‐40
tan sandy loam‐ compact
40+
yellowish‐brown clay
0‐20
greyish‐brown sandy loam
20‐30
orange sandy loam with sandstone
30‐40
reddish‐brown sandy loam with sandstone
40+
red sandstone
0‐30
grey sandy loam

Artifacts

Comments

none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

30‐100

light tan sandy loam

none

0‐20
20‐30
30+
0‐20
20‐60
60+
0‐20
20‐60
60+
0‐30
30‐70
70+
0‐20
20‐60
60‐70

reddish‐brown sandy loam
light reddish‐brown sandy loam with sandstone
reddish‐brown clay
moist grey sandy loam
wet light tan sandy loam
reddish‐brown clay
moist grey sandy loam
wet light tan sandy loam
reddish brown clay
grey fine sand
light tan fine sand
large root disturbance
grey sandy loam
light tan fine sand
light tan sand with moist orange clay inclusions

none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

decomposed root at 30
cmbs

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Waypoint
#

Shovel
Test #

Easting

DK‐25

DK‐25

250800

DK‐26

DK‐26

249595

DK‐27

DK‐27

249693

Shovel Test Data for Sterling Ranch Survey (HJN 070042 AR)
Depth
Northing
Soil Description
(cmbs)
70+
reddish‐brown moist clay
3340694
0‐20
light grey moist sand
20‐90
light tan moist sand
90‐100
wet light tan sand with reddish‐brown clay
3340926
0‐20
moist tan sandy loam
20‐25
light tan sandy loam with heavy roots

3340879

light tan sand

none

0‐30

wet tan sandy loam
wet light grayish‐brown sand with small orange
clay inclusions
water table
greyish‐tan wet sandy loam
greyish‐tan wet sandy loam with orange clay
inclusions
wet orange clay
greyish‐tan wet sandy loam
greyish‐tan wet sandy loam with orange clay
inclusions
brown sandy clay ‐ water table at base
greyish‐tan coarse sand
brown coarse sand with dense gravels
brown coarse sand with moderate gravels
water table
wet tan sand
light tan sand with orange clay

none

DK‐28

249803

3340822

40+
0‐20
20‐30

DK‐29

DK‐29

249944

3340907

30+
0‐20
20‐40

DK‐31

DK‐31

250059

3340879

DK‐30

DK‐30

250158

3340894

HJN 070042 AR

40+
0‐10
10‐30
30‐80
80+
0‐20
20‐80

Comments

none
none
none
none
none
none

25‐30

30‐40
DK‐28

Artifacts

large root disturbance at
base

none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

very saturated
very saturated

A-9

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Shovel Test Data for Sterling Ranch Survey (HJN 070042 AR)
Depth
Soil Description
(cmbs)
80+
water table
0‐30
reddish‐brown sandy loam with sandstone
30+
orange clay with sandstone
0‐20
grey sandy loam
20‐45
tan sand
45‐50
yellowish‐brown sandy clay
0‐5
reddish‐brown sand with very heavy gravels
0‐10
wet tan sandy loam
10‐30
wet tan sandy loam
30+
orange clay
0‐100
reddish‐brown sand
0‐100
reddish‐brown sand

Waypoint
#

Shovel
Test #

Easting

Northing

DK‐32

DK‐32

250262

3340899

DK‐33

DK‐33

250361

3340866

DK‐34
DK‐35

DK‐34
DK‐35

250461
250563

3340846
3340892

JW‐1
JW‐2

JW‐1
JW‐2

249840
249849

3339910
3340015

JW‐3

JW‐3

249850

3340114

0

manicured yard

none

JW‐4

JW‐4

249837

3340317

0‐50

red sand with heavy pea gravel

none

50‐100

red sand with moderate pea gravel

none

0‐20
20‐100
0‐20
20‐100
0
0‐100
0‐100
0‐100
0‐20

brown sand
wet pale brown sand
brown sand
wet pale brown sand
modern house location ‐ no shovel test dug
pale brown sand
pale brown sand
pale brown sand
brown sand

none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

JW‐5

JW‐5

249857

3340400

JW‐6

JW‐6

249843

3340511

JW‐7
JW‐8
JW‐9
JW‐10
JW‐11

A-10

No ST
JW‐7
JW‐8
JW‐9
JW‐10

250450
250575
250562
250547
249822

0
3340142
3340042
3339931
3341296

Artifacts
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

Comments

near 2‐track road

disturbed by drainage
ditch
possibly disturbed by
pond nearby

fenceline

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the 400-Acre Sterling Ridge Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Waypoint
#

Shovel
Test #

Easting

Northing

Shovel Test Data for Sterling Ranch Survey (HJN 070042 AR)
Depth
Soil Description
(cmbs)
20‐80
pale brown sand with heavy gravels
80+
dense gravels
0‐20
dark brown sand
20‐80
pale brown sand
80+
dense gravels
0‐20
dark brown silty sand
20‐60
pale brown sand
60+
dense gravels
0‐60
wet pale brown sand

Artifacts
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

JW‐12

JW‐11

249913

3341257

JW‐13

JW‐12

250003

3341234

JW‐14

JW‐13

250109

3341236

JW‐15

JW‐14

250209

3341222

0‐60

wet pale brown sand

none

JW‐16

JW‐15

250310

3341251

JW‐17

JW‐16

250413

3341243

JW‐18

JW‐17

250525

3341238

JW‐19

JW‐18

250629

3341240

JW‐20
JW‐21

JW‐19
JW‐20

250731
250834

3341237
3341244

0‐20
20‐100
0‐20
20‐80
0‐20
20‐100
0‐20
20‐100
0‐40
0‐20
20‐60
60‐90
0‐80
0‐80
0‐100

dark brown silty sand
pale brown sand
dark brown silty sand
pale brown sand
dark brown silty sand
pale brown sand
dark brown silty sand
pale brown sand
wet pale brown sand
greyish‐brown sand
yellowish‐brown sand
pale brown sand
pale brown sand
pale brown sand
pale brown sand

none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

JW‐22
JW‐23
JW‐24

JW‐21
JW‐22
JW‐23

250816
250733
250740

HJN 070042 AR

3340807
3340742
3340577

Comments

very saturated at 60
cmbs

water table at base

heavy gravels

A-11

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Waypoint
#
JW‐25
JW‐26
JW‐27
JW‐28
JW‐29
JW‐30
JW‐31

Shovel
Test #
JW‐24
JW‐25
JW‐26
JW‐27
JW‐28
JW‐29
JW‐30

Easting

Northing

249606
249727
249831
249910
250014
250111
250207

3341005
3340979
3340965
3341012
3341008
3341007
3341006

JW‐32

JW‐31

250307

3341000

JW‐33

JW‐32

250411

3340993

JW‐34

JW‐33

250516

3341003

JW‐35

JW‐34

250623

3341003

Shovel Test Data for Sterling Ranch Survey (HJN 070042 AR)
Depth
Soil Description
(cmbs)
0‐40
pale brown sand
0‐60
pale brown sand
0‐60
pale brown sand
0‐20
brown silty sand
0‐20
brown silty sand
0‐100
pale grayish‐brown sand
0‐60
pale grayish‐brown sand
60‐100
yellowish‐brown sand with some clay content
0‐60
pale brown sand
60‐80
wet brown clayey sand
0‐40
brown silty sandy loam
40‐90
pale brown sand
0‐5
brown silty sand
5‐15
red and orange mottled clay
0‐80
very wet pale brown sand
80‐100
pale brown wet sand
0‐60
pale brown sand

Artifacts

Comments

none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none

water at base
water at base
water at base
totally flooded

JW‐36

JW‐35

250540

3340602

JW‐37

JW‐36

250338

3340602

0‐100

pale brown sand

none

JW‐38

JW‐37

250094

3340578

0‐50
50‐70
0‐100
0‐60

wet brown sand
yellowish‐brown sand
reddish‐brown sand
greyish‐brown sand with red clay mottles

none
none
none
none

JW‐39
JW‐40

A-12

JW‐38
JW‐39

249874
249671

3340565
3340606

very saturated

water table at base

water at base
very saturated
some clay content past
80 cmbs
water table at base
Dry Creek

070042_arch_survey_report.docx

