Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources
Survey of the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s
Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project,
Bexar County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4365
HJN 070012 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Bexar Metropolitan Water District
San Antonio, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

March 2007

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources
Survey of the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s
Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project,
Bexar County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Bexar Metropolitan Water District
2047 West Malone Avenue
San Antonio, Texas 78225

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 070012 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4365

March 2007

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The Bexar Metropolitan Water District (BexarMet) is proposing to install water utility
pipelines on 2 separate tracts of land—the Dym and Rogers tracts—in northern Bexar County,
Texas, to support development of residential subdivisions in connection with the Trinity Aquifer
Water Supply Project. The Dym Tract is located west of US Highway 281 (US 281) between
East Borgfeld Drive and Estate Gate Drive just south of the Bexar-Comal county line. On this
tract, BexarMet proposes to install approximately 2.3 kilometers (km) (1.4 miles ([mi]) of
subsurface water pipeline within a right-of-way (ROW) measuring 15 meters (m) (50 feet [ft]) in
width. Four well pads covering a total area of approximately 2.3 hectares (ha) (5.8 acres [ac])
would also be installed at existing well sites. The Rogers Tract is located in the area north of
North Loop 1604, east of Northwest Military Parkway, and southeast of the Camp Bullis Military
Reservation. On this tract, BexarMet proposes to install approximately 5.6 km (3.5 mi) of
subsurface water pipeline within a ROW measuring approximately 11 m (36 ft) in width as well
as 4 well pads and 1 flex pad that cover a total area of approximately 1.3 ha (3.3 ac).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by BexarMet, a political subdivision of the
State of Texas; as such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of
Texas. As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact
significant cultural resources, BexarMet was required, under the Antiquities Code of Texas
(Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977 [revised 1987], Title 9, Chapter 191, VACS, Art. 61459), to provide for a cultural resource inventory of the project’s area of potential effect (APE) and
to assess the project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. On
the Dym Tract, the APE consists of the proposed 2.3-km- (1.4-mi-) long by 15-m- (50-ft-) wide
pipeline ROW plus the combined 2.3-ha (5.8-ac) area covered by the 4 well pad sites. On the
Rogers Tract, the APE consists of the proposed 5.6-km- (3.5-mi-) long by 11-m- (36-ft-) wide
proposed pipeline ROW plus the combined 1.3-ha (3.3-ac) area covered by the 5 well and flex
pad sites.
To meet its responsibilities under the Antiquities Code of Texas, BexarMet tasked its
design contractor, Chiang, Patel & Yerby, Inc. (CP&Y), to provide necessary clearances for
cultural resources, and CP&Y subcontracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
(Horizon), to conduct a cultural resource inventory survey of the APE associated with the
proposed project. Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon reviewed the State of Texas’s cultural
resource site files via the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC’s) online Texas Archeological

HJN 070012 AR

iii

Management Summary

Sites Atlas for information on previous cultural resource surveys and previously recorded
cultural resource sites in the vicinity of the proposed project areas. Horizon discovered that,
while the Dym Tract project area had not been previously surveyed, the Rogers Tract had
already been surveyed for cultural resources in its entirety. In addition, approximately 2.6 km
(1.6 mi) (about 46%) of the proposed pipeline ROW on the Rogers Tract would be installed
within an existing utility easement that already contains multiple overhead and subsurface utility
lines that had presumably been extensively disturbed by previous utility construction and
maintenance activities. However, the state’s site files depicted a previously recorded
archeological site, 41BX920, extending along the southeastern boundary of the Camp Bullis
Military Reservation in an area traversed by a 0.8-km- (0.5-mi-) long segment of the proposed
pipeline ROW. The site form on file for this site describes it as a low-density scatter of
aboriginal lithic artifacts that measures approximately 40 m in diameter; however, the site file
maps show the site to extend across an area measuring roughly 1.0 km (0.6 mi) in length.
Additional archeological sites have been previously recorded in the general vicinity of the APE
on the Rogers Tract, but none of them were located in the immediate vicinity.
Horizon proposed to perform an intensive cultural resource survey of the entire APE on
the Dym Tract (as it had not been previously surveyed) and a combination of reconnaissancelevel and intensive survey on the Rogers Tract (as it had already been surveyed). Intensive
survey consisted of pedestrian walkover and surface inspection with shovel testing in areas with
potential for buried archeological deposits, whereas reconnaissance survey consisted only of a
brief walkover and photo-documentation of existing disturbances within the APE. As the Rogers
Tract had been previously surveyed in its entirety, and as approximately 45% of the proposed
pipeline alignment would be installed within an existing utility corridor, Horizon proposed to
perform only a reconnaissance-level survey of the majority of the Rogers Tract APE. However,
due to the presence of a previously documented archeological site (41BX920) along the
southeastern boundary of Camp Bullis and what appeared to be some uncertainties in the site
files as to the exact location and size of this site, Horizon proposed to perform an intensive
cultural resource survey along this 0.8-km (0.5-mi) segment to determine whether or not any
portions of site 41BX920 extended into the APE that may be potentially impacted by the
proposed action. The THC concurred with Horizon’s recommendations and issued Texas
Antiquities Permit No. 4365 for the project.
On January 22, 2007, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd and Jared Wiersema, under
the direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a combination of intensive
and reconnaissance-level cultural resource survey activities on the Dym and Rogers tracts to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. Despite the presence of shallow soils and surficial bedrock exposures that may
have argued against excavating any shovel tests whatsoever, a total of 23 shovel tests were
excavated within the Dym Tract APE, thereby exceeding the Texas State Minimum
Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) for a project area of this size. No shovel tests were
excavated within the surveyed portion of the Rogers tract due to the extent of prior disturbances
and geomorphological conditions that argued against shovel testing.

iv

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

No cultural resources of any kind, including prehistoric or historic archeological sites,
isolated occurrences of artifacts, or historic structures or objects, were identified as a result of
the cultural resource survey of these 2 project areas. Abundant chert fragments were observed
in the Rogers Tract survey area; however, all of the chert had been broken by a combination of
natural erosive forces and prior heavy equipment disturbances. None of the chert fragments
exhibited any signs of cultural modification, and no portions of a nearby previously recorded
archeological site, 41BX920, were observed.
Based on the results of the intensive and reconnaissance cultural resource survey of the
proposed APEs on the Dym and Rogers tracts, no potentially significant archeological resources
would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No new archeological sites were identified in
the project areas as a result of the survey, and no previously recorded archeological sites are
present in the immediate vicinity. No further investigations are recommended within the
proposed pipeline ROWs on the Dym and Rogers tracts based on the current project design,
and archeological clearance is recommended for the proposed undertaking.
In the event that future reroutes or alternate alignments are proposed, or if new projectrelated facilities are added, additional cultural resource survey investigations may be necessary.
Furthermore, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently
discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area,
even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and THC should be
notified of the discovery.

HJN 070012 AR

v

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ..................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING....................................................................................5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology..........................................................................5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.........................................................................6
2.3
Climate ...........................................................................................................8
2.4
Biota...............................................................................................................9

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 12,000 to 8500 B.P.)...............................................11
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 8500 to 1200 B.P.) ........................................................12
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1200 to 350 B.P.)..............................................12
3.4
Historic Period (ca. 350 B.P. to Present) ......................................................12

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................19
4.1
Archival Research ........................................................................................19
4.2
Survey Methods ...........................................................................................20
4.2.1 Dym Tract .........................................................................................22
4.2.2 Rogers Tract.....................................................................................26

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................31

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................33
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................33
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Archeological Landmark...................34
6.3
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................35
6.4
Management Recommendations..................................................................35

7.0

REFERENCES CITED.............................................................................................37
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 070012 AR

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.
Figure 11.

viii

Location of the Dym Tract Project Area .....................................................................2
Location of the Rogers Tract Project Area .................................................................3
Locations of Shovel Tests in the Dym Tract APE .....................................................23
West End of Dym Tract APE on Mud Creek Tributary Floodplain (Facing West)......24
Western End of Dym Tract APE at Mud Creek Tributary (Facing Northwest) ...........24
Typical Ground Surface in Upland Portions of Dym Tract APE (Facing North).........25
Overview of Well Pad in Dym Tract APE (Facing East)............................................25
Typical View of Survey Area in Rogers Tract APE (Facing Northeast) .....................27
Overview of Well Pad in Rogers Tract APE (Facing South) .....................................27
Salado Creek Crossing in Rogers Tract APE (Facing East) .....................................28
Typical View of Existing Utility Line ROW in Rogers Tract APE (Facing East) .........28

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The Bexar Metropolitan Water District (BexarMet) is proposing to install water utility
pipelines on 2 separate tracts of land—the Dym and Rogers tracts—in northern Bexar County,
Texas, to support development of residential subdivisions in connection with the Trinity Aquifer
Water Supply Project. The Dym Tract is located west of US Highway 281 (US 281) between
East Borgfeld Drive and Estate Gate Drive just south of the Bexar-Comal county line (Figure 1).
On this tract, BexarMet proposes to install approximately 2.3 kilometers (km) (1.4 miles ([mi]) of
subsurface water pipeline within a right-of-way (ROW) measuring 15 meters (m) (50 feet [ft]) in
width. Four well pads covering a total area of approximately 2.3 hectares (ha) (5.8 acres [ac])
would also be installed at existing well sites. The Rogers Tract is located in the area north of
North Loop 1604, east of Northwest Military Parkway, and southeast of the Camp Bullis Military
Reservation (Figure 2). On this tract, BexarMet proposes to install approximately 5.6 km
(3.5 mi) of subsurface water pipeline within a ROW measuring approximately 11 m (36 ft) in
width as well as 4 well pads and 1 flex pad that cover a total area of 1.3 ha (3.3 ac).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by BexarMet, a political subdivision of the
State of Texas; as such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of
Texas. As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact
significant cultural resources, BexarMet was required, under the Antiquities Code of Texas
(Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977 [revised 1987], Title 9, Chapter 191, VACS, Art. 61459), to provide for a cultural resource inventory of the project’s area of potential effect (APE) and
to assess the project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. On
the Dym Tract, the APE consists of the proposed 2.3-km- (1.4-mi-) long by 15-m- (50-ft-) wide
pipeline ROW plus the combined 2.3-ha (5.8-ac) area covered by the 4 well pad sites. On the
Rogers Tract, the APE consists of the proposed 5.6-km- (3.5-mi-) long by 11-m- (36-ft-) wide
proposed pipeline ROW plus the combined 1.3-ha (3.3-ac) area covered by the 5 proposed well
and flex pad sites.
To meet its responsibilities under the Antiquities Code of Texas, BexarMet tasked its
design contractor, Chiang, Patel & Yerby, Inc. (CP&Y), to provide necessary clearances for
cultural resources, and CP&Y subcontracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
(Horizon), to conduct a cultural resource inventory survey of the APE associated with the
proposed project. Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon reviewed the State of Texas’s cultural
resource site files via the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) online Texas Archeological

HJN 070012 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of the Dym Tract Project Area
2

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of the Rogers Tract Project Area

HJN 070012 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Sites Atlas for information on previous cultural resource surveys and previously recorded
cultural resource sites in the vicinity of the proposed project areas. Horizon discovered that,
while the Dym Tract project area had not been previously surveyed, the Rogers Tract had
already been surveyed for cultural resources in its entirety. In addition, approximately 2.6 km
(1.6 mi) (about 46%) of the proposed pipeline ROW on the Rogers Tract would be installed
within an existing utility easement that already contains multiple overhead and subsurface utility
lines that had presumably been extensively disturbed by previous utility construction and
maintenance activities. However, the state’s site files depicted a previously recorded
archeological site, 41BX920, extending along the southeastern boundary of the Camp Bullis
Military Reservation in an area traversed by a 0.8-km- (0.5-mi-) long segment of the proposed
pipeline ROW (see Figure 2). The site form on file for this site describes it as a low-density
scatter of aboriginal lithic artifacts that measures approximately 40 m in diameter; however, the
site file maps show the site to extend across an area measuring roughly 1.0 km (0.6 mi) in
length. Additional archeological sites have been previously recorded in the general vicinity of
the APE on the Rogers Tract, but none of them were located in the immediate vicinity.
Horizon proposed to perform an intensive cultural resource survey of the entire APE on
the Dym Tract (as it had not been previously surveyed) and a combination of reconnaissancelevel and intensive survey on the Rogers Tract (as it had already been surveyed). Intensive
survey consisted of pedestrian walkover and surface inspection with shovel testing in areas with
potential for buried archeological deposits, whereas reconnaissance survey consisted only of a
brief walkover and photo-documentation of existing disturbances within the APE. As the Rogers
Tract had been previously surveyed in its entirety, and as approximately 45% of the proposed
pipeline alignment would be installed within an existing utility corridor, Horizon proposed to
perform only a reconnaissance-level survey of the majority of the Rogers Tract APE. However,
due to the presence of a previously documented archeological site (41BX920) along the
southeastern boundary of Camp Bullis and what appeared to be some uncertainties in the site
files as to the exact location and size of this site, Horizon proposed to perform an intensive
cultural resource survey along this 0.8-km (0.5-mi) segment to determine whether or not any
portions of site 41BX920 extended into the APE that may be potentially impacted by the
proposed action. The THC concurred with Horizon’s recommendations and issued Texas
Antiquities Permit No. 4365 for the project.
On January 22, 2007, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd and Jared Wiersema, under
the direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resource survey of
the APEs on the Dym and Rogers tracts to locate any cultural resource properties that
potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project. This report presents the
results of this cultural resource survey. Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0
and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural background, respectively, of the overall project
area. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of archival research, and cultural
resource survey methods implemented during the survey. Chapter 5.0 presents the results of
the cultural resource survey, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource management
recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the report, and
Appendix A summarizes shovel test data for the Dym Tract (no shovel tests were excavated on
the Rogers Tract).

4

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The Dym and Rogers tracts are located north of San Antonio in northern Bexar County
in South-Central Texas near the common junction of 3 significant physiographic provinces—the
Edwards Plateau, the Balcones Canyonlands, and the Gulf Coastal Plain. The Edwards
Plateau and Balcones Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that arcs across
Texas to form a distinct boundary between uplands composed primarily of limestone bedrock
and lower plains composed mostly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary is marked by an
abrupt scarp (the Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational ramp, but the
entire length of this transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography, bedrock,
hydrology, soil, vegetation, and animal life. The Gulf Coastal Plain, which extends as far north
as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment,
consists of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic
origin, that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001).
Specifically, the project area is located within the Balcones Canyonlands, which
comprise a mosaic of dissected limestone uplands between the Edwards Plateau to the north
and the flat to rolling fluviodeltaic bodies of the Gulf Coastal Plain to the south and east,
resulting in a landscape of uplands dissected by moderately broad, shallow valleys. Soil is thin
to absent over the bedrock and supports a mixed savanna flora, though soil may be moderately
deep in valley floors, where it supports mixed riparian woodlands and forests. Karst features
include sinks, caves, and rockshelters, but such are neither common nor extensive. Edwards
chert is locally abundant and, in some areas, widespread across the Balcones Canyonlands and
is of high quality in some places.
Hydrologically, the study area is situated within the San Antonio River basin. The Dym
Tract is situated on the uplands just south of Cibolo Creek, but local tributaries actually drain
southwards into the San Antonio River system. Specifically, the Dym Tract spans a series of
uplands between 2 unnamed tributaries that conjoin farther downstream to form Mud Creek.
The western end of the proposed Dym Tract APE extends onto the floodplain and of the Mud
Creek tributary, and the eastern portion of the alignment crosses another unnamed tributary of
Mud Creek in 2 locations. While both streams contain moderately deep alluvial packages
farther downstream, the Dym Tract project area is situated near the headwaters of both stream

HJN 070012 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

channels where sediment deposits overlying the local limestone bedrock are deflated and
comparatively shallow. The Rogers Tract project area traverses a series of uplands at the
headwaters of numerous intermittent drainages that flow southwards into Salado Creek, and the
proposed route crosses Salado Creek near its western end.
Salado Creek flows
southeastwards, combining with Panther Springs Creek before discharging into the San Antonio
River. Elm Creek flows into Salado Creek in the vicinity of San Antonio International Airport in
northern San Antonio, and Salado Creek continues southwards to flow into the San Antonio
River on the south side of the San Antonio metropolitan area. The San Antonio River, in turn,
flows southeastwards across the Gulf Coastal Plain, ultimately discharging into the Gulf of
Mexico a short distance southeast of Victoria, Texas.
The Dym Tract project area is situated on a series of upland landforms south of Cibolo
Creek, and elevations across the project area range from about 366 to 402 m (1,200 to 1,320 ft)
above mean sea level (amsl). The lowest elevation occurs at the western end of the proposed
route where it crosses the Mud Creek tributary channel, and the highest point occurs near one
of the well pads at the eastern end of the alignment. The Rogers Tract traverses a series of
uplands in the vicinity of Salado Creek, and elevations across the project area range from about
305 to 354 m (1,000 to 1,160 ft). The lowest elevation occurs at the Salado Creek crossing,
while the rest of the project area hugs the upper elevations of a series of upland landforms.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The northern one-third of Bexar County is characterized by undulating to hilly terrain,
with alkaline soils over limestone and limy earths with shallow to deep loamy soils. Multiple
geological formations are associated with the physiographic province in which the project area
is located. In general, the bedrock throughout Central Texas is composed of Upper Cretaceous
formations that dip slightly to the east and are predominantly composed of calcareous clay,
shale, limestone, and marl, with a small portion of sandstone (Sellards et al. 1932). These
geologic units are overlain in some areas by unconsolidated Quaternary alluvial floodplain and
fluviatile terrace deposits. On the surface, these formations weather into a rounded, gently
rolling topography with a few bluff faces exposed in stream valleys where more resistant strata
are present, though the stream valleys in northern Bexar County tend to be relatively broad and
shallow.
Specifically, the project area is situated on the Edwards Limestone Formation, undivided
(Barnes 1982). The Edwards Formation is composed of hard, micritic limestone beds, some of
which are chert-bearing.
Other beds are extensively burrowed and weathered into
“honeycombed” porous rock. Caverns and sinkholes are known to occur throughout Central
and Southwestern Texas in Edwards Formation limestone, but they are not especially common.
Edwards Limestone constitutes one of the largest chert resources on the Great Plains
(Frederick and Ringstaff 1994; Frederick et al. 1994), and expansive outcrops of Edwards
Group chert are often accompanied by extensive aboriginal lithic scatters created during raw
material procurement (or “quarrying”) activities. In the absence of aggrading depositional
environments, such lithic procurement sites are typically restricted to the deflated modern
ground surface, on which the native limestone bedrock is typically exposed over large areas.

6

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

Soil in Bexar County, Texas, formed from the underlying sedimentary formations,
including limestone, chalky limestone, chalk, shaly clay, marly clay, sandy clay, calcareous clay,
sand, and sandstone (Taylor et al. 1991). Alluvial deposits of recent or ancient geologic time
occur along the principal rivers and streams of the county, but soil cover in upland environments
is typically minimal, and extensive bedrock outcrops are commonly exposed on the modern
ground surface.
The Dym Tract project area is underlain by the Tarrant-Brackett soil association, which
covers the northern one-third of Bexar County that is known as the limestone prairie or the hill
country, and, in the northwestern portion of the county, as the Edwards Plateau (Taylor et al.
1991). This soil association consists predominantly of shallow, gently sloping to very steep,
stony soils that formed over limestones of the Glen Rose and Edwards formations. Tarrant soils
have a clayey, very dark grayish-brown, calcareous surface layer that ranges up to about
25 centimeters (cm) (10 inches [in]) in thickness, and compose about 65% of this association.
Varying quantities of indurated limestone fragments are exposed on the modern ground surface,
and the underlying material is hard, fractured limestone. Brackett soils have a light-colored,
highly calcareous surface layer about 10 to 41 cm (4 to 16 in) thick overlying soft marl or
limestone interbedded with hard limestone and compose roughly 20% of this association.
Fractured limestone is common on the modern ground surface, and outcropping slabs of
limestone give the landscape a step-like appearance. Minor parts of this association consist of
Crawford (3%), Bexar (3%), Krum (4%), Patrick (2%), and Lewisville (3%) soils.
Specifically, the Dym Tract APE is situated on soils of the Krum complex (Kr) and
Brackett soils, 12 to 30% slopes (BrE) (Taylor et al. 1991). The Krum series consists of clayey
soils that are moderately deep, dark in color, and gently sloping that formed from slope alluvium
of the limestone prairies. The surface layer consists of dark to very dark grayish-brown, stony
soil up to 30 cm (12 in) in thickness overlying friable, calcareous, brown to yellowish-brown silty
clay. Within the Dym Tract APE, Krum soils are found on the floodplains of the unnamed
tributaries of Mud Creek at the western and eastern ends of the project area, respectively. The
upland portions of the project area are situated on Brackett soils, 12 to 30% slopes, an
extensive soil found on hilly uplands that developed over soft limestone interbedded with hard
limestone. The surface layer is typically grayish-brown, gravelly clay loam about 10 cm (4 in)
thick containing about 20%, by volume, limestone fragments. The subsurface layer is light
brownish-gray clay loam to silty clay about 20 cm (8 in) thick that contains lenses of soft
limestone and chalky marl. Both soils are underlain by a thick bed of soft limestone interbedded
with hard limestone that may contain lenses of chalky marl or calcareous clay.
The Rogers Tract project area is underlain by the Crawford-Bexar soil association, which
consists of moderately deep, stony soils that formed over limestone in the broad, gently sloping
to nearly level northern one-third of Bexar County (Taylor et al. 1991). Crawford soils, which
comprise 44% of the association, have a very dark grayish-brown to dark reddish-brown,
noncalcareous surface layer 30 to 41 cm (12 to 16 in) thick underlain by blocky, reddish-brown
clay that developed over broken limestone. Bexar soils constitute 41% of the association and
have a dark brown to reddish-brown, noncalcareous surface layer ranging from 15 to 36 cm
(6 to 14 in) in thickness with a cherty to stony clay loam texture. This layer is underlain by

HJN 070012 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

blocky, reddish-brown to red cherty clay that is, in turn, underlain by soft, weathered limestone
and hard, crystalline limestone. Minor parts of this association consist of Tarrant (10%) and
Lewisville and Houston Black (5%) soils.
Specifically, the Rogers Tract APE traverses approximately equal parts of various
Tarrant complex soils, including Tarrant association, gently undulating (TaB), Tarrant
association, rolling (TaC), and Tarrant association, hilly (TaD) (Taylor et al. 1991). Tarrant soils
generally consist of stony soils that are very shallow, dark-colored, and gently undulating to
steep. The surface layer is typically very dark grayish-brown, calcareous clay loam about 25 cm
(10 in) thick. Limestone fragments cover about 35% of the modern ground surface, and angular
limestone fragments make up about 20%, by volume, of the surface stratum. The subsurface
layer, about 20 cm (8 in) thick, consists of hard, fractured limestone. Cracks and voids in the
bedrock tend to fill up with dark grayish-brown clay loam from the overlying stratum.
In general, none of the soils in the project area has much potential to contain intact
archeological deposits at depth. Bedrock is exposed on the modern ground surface across
much of the region, and overlying soil cover in upland areas tends to be minimal. Primary rivers
may contain deep alluvial packages, but smaller streams tend to be characterized by broad,
shallow valleys with relatively thin, clayey sediments directly overlying limestone bedrock.
Ubiquitous and extensive exposures of Edward Formation chert made the area a popular locale
for lithic raw material procurement in the aboriginal past, but most lithic procurement sites tend
to occur in deflated contexts on uplands in the vicinity of chert exposures. Smaller streams
have some potential to contain buried archeological deposits, but soil depths, especially in the
upland environments in which the project area occurs, rarely exceed a few inches in depth.
Historic Spanish and Anglo settlement in Bexar County concentrated farther south near San
Antonio, and the lack of perennial water sources or arable soils tended to reduce the economic
viability of historic settlement in the hinterlands of Bexar County.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
Bryant and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central
Texas from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial
period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands
were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985).
During the Post-Glacial period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more
stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas.
The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic

8

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

conditions lasting from roughly 6,000 to 5,000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway
(1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably
achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Bexar County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern climate is
typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate is
influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified by
polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer, and
fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.
On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature manifest regional
clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east to west and mean
annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast (Larkin and Bomar
1983:18, 50). Regional temperature ranges from 4 to 36 degrees Celsius (°C) (39 to
96 degrees Fahrenheit (°F), with an average annual temperature of 18°C (64 F).
Average annual precipitation in the region is approximately 79 cm (31 in). Two annual
precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are associated with frontal
storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with warm, moist air masses
moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The topographic discontinuity
along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf storm trace and increases
the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall (Baker 1975). Two extreme
examples are the excess of 91 cm (36 in) of rain that fell within an 18-hour period in the vicinity
of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 56-cm (22-in) deluge that fell in less than 3 hours
near O’Harris, Texas, in May 1935 (Baker 1975). Lower rainfall amounts are characteristic of
winter and late summer. In winter, frontal storms pass so frequently that there is little time for
moisture to increase, and prevailing upper-level winds from west to east often dominate over
meridional flow, meaning that much of the available moisture is derived from the Pacific rather
than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer, cool fronts rarely penetrate into the region, and
rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal convective storms.

2.4

BIOTA

The project area is located in the Balconian biotic province on the southern fringes of the
Edwards Plateau (Blair 1950). The Edwards Plateau and associated Balcones Escarpment is
characterized by a mixture of species from the surrounding Austroriparian, Tamaulipan,
Chihuahuan, and Kansan, Balconian provinces. While 3 vegetational regions are recognized by
Tharp (1939) within the limits of the Balconian province, the project area is situated in the oakcedar region that corresponds to the dissected southern and eastern part of the Edwards
Plateau. Fifty-seven species of mammals are known from the Balconian province, though none
of these species are restricted to this province. Common mammalian species include whitetailed deer, opossum, eastern cottontail rabbit, raccoon, striped skunk, hispid cotton rat, whitefooted mouse, nine-banded armadillo, and fox squirrel. Common bird species include northern
bobwhite, eastern meadowlark, mourning dove, killdeer, field sparrow, red-tailed hawk, turkey
vulture, belted kingfisher, and mockingbird. Reptile and amphibian species common to this

HJN 070012 AR

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

biotic zone include six-lined racerunner, rat snake, eastern hognose snake, Gulf Coast toad,
Texas spiny lizard, rough green snake, copperhead, western diamondback rattlesnake, green
tree frog, Blanchard’s cricket frog, diamondback water snake, Houston toad, and green anole.
Although small herds of bison and antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early
historic periods, these species are no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

10

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located near the southern boundary of Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) Central
Texas Archeological Region. The indigenous human inhabitants of Central Texas practiced a
generally nomadic hunting and gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory, and, in contrast to
much of the rest of North America, mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have
changed markedly through time in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 12,000 TO 8500 B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (cf. Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (12,000 to 8500 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various
periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted,
lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers,
gravers, and bone foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized
into egalitarian bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic
subsistence and settlement pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence
patterns in Central Texas are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence
focused on the exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the
PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as
has been documented elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern
appears to have been practiced throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the
PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point
styles. These include the Early PaleoIndian period, which is recognized based on large, fluted
projectile points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late

HJN 070012 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

PaleoIndian period, which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 8500 TO 1200 B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(8500 to 1200 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Central Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture
shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of
groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these
3 subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as well. Perhaps most
markedly, burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod, continuing into the
Late Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic subperiod. In
addition, the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered to constitute
evidence of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least partially
accounts for the lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1200 TO 350 B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 350 B.P.) (Collins 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas,
unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The
Late Prehistoric period is generally divided into 2 phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin
phase sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to
suggest that the Austin-phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north, and
lack the ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 B.P. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay.
However, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The

12

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as increased
participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time that
heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian
population was greatly diminished.
The first Europeans to explore the Bexar County region came with an expedition in 1691
led by Domingo Terán de los Ríos and Fray Damián Massanet, who evidently reached the San
Antonio River near where the San Juan Capistrano Mission was later founded.1 Nearby, they
found a group of Payaya Indians living on the riverbank. The Indians, as Massanet recorded in
his diary, called the place Yanaguana; he, however, renamed the site San Antonio de Padua to
celebrate the memorial day of St. Anthony—June 13. The next group of Spanish explorers, an
expedition led by 2 Franciscans, fathers Antonio de San Buenaventura y Olivares and Isidro
Félix de Espinosa, and a military officer, Pedro de Aguirre, did not reach the area until April
1709. Much impressed by the setting and the availability of water, they noted that the area
might make a promising site for future settlement. In 1714, Louis Juchereau de St. Denis
crossed the region on his way to San Juan Bautista. Espinosa again visited the site in 1716 on
his way to East Texas with the expedition of Domingo Ramón and this time recommended San
Pedro Springs as a mission site. Near that spot, in May 1718, Martín de Alarcón led the
expedition that founded San Antonio de Valero Mission and San Antonio de Béxar (or Béjar)
Presidio, named for Viceroy Balthasar Manuel de Zúñiga y Guzmán Sotomayor y Sarmiento,
second son of the duke of Bexar. By the end of the winter of 1718, numerous Indians of the
Jamrame, Payaya, and Pamaya groups had joined the mission. In 1720, Fray Antonio Margil
de Jesús founded the San José y San Miguel de Aguayo Mission a short distance to the south.
Another mission, San Francisco Xavier de Naxara, was established in 1722 but proved
unsuccessful and was merged with San Antonio de Valero in 1726. In 1724, the San Antonio
de Valero mission compound, which had originally been located at the site of the present-day
Chapel of Miracles south of San Pedro Springs, was moved to Alamo Plaza. In 1731, after the
removal of the missions from East Texas, 3 additional missions—Nuestra Señora de la
Purísima Concepción de Acuña, San Francisco de la Espada, and San Juan Capistrano—were
founded along the San Antonio River.
During the 1720s, the Spanish population of the area was about 200, including
53 soldiers and their families and 4 civilians with their families. On March 9, 1731, 55 Canary
Islanders arrived at Bexar, and the villa of San Fernando de Béxar became the first municipality
in the Spanish province of Texas. The 5 missions, together with the presidio and the villa of
San Fernando, constituted the most important Spanish concentration in Texas. By the mid-

1

The following discussion of Bexar County history derives from Chabot (1937), De la Teja and
Wheat (1985), Johnston (1947), Poyo and Hinojosa (1991), and Ramsdell (1959), as presented in The
Handbook of Texas Online (2007).

HJN 070012 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

1730s, the total population of the area was some 900, including 300 Spanish and 600 Indian
converts. An epidemic in 1738 and 1739 devastated the missions, killing perhaps three-fourths
of the Indian population. At Mission San Antonio de Valero alone, only 182 of 837 Indians who
had been baptized survived. By 1740, however, the missions' populations began to recover.
The number of converts at the 5 missions reached more than 500, as many of the indigenous
Coahuilatecan peoples living in the region fled to them as a refuge from the Apaches and
Comanches.
The missions developed as self-supporting communities, each ringed with farmland
irrigated by a comprehensive system of acequias, or irrigation ditches. Crops included grain,
cotton, flax, beans, sugarcane, and vegetables. Each of the missions also maintained sizable
herds of cattle, sheep, and goats on extensive ranchlands located around Bexar. Governor
Manuel M. de Salcedo described Mission Concepción's ranch in 1809 as comprising some
38 square miles and extending east and northeast from the mission to Cibolo Creek. An
inventory in 1756 recorded that the Concepción ranch had 700 cattle, 1,800 sheep, and large
herds of goats and horses.
Both the missions and the villa of Bexar were subject to sporadic attacks of Apaches and
Comanches; nearly a quarter of the Spanish who died between 1718 and 1731 were reportedly
victims of Apache attacks. A truce was signed with the Apaches in August 1749, but occasional
attacks by Comanches and Apaches continued well into the 19th century.
In 1772, the government offices of Spanish Texas were moved from Los Adaes to
Bexar, and some of the East Texas settlers also moved. Nonetheless, Bexar remained a small
frontier outpost, as Father Juan A. Morfi described in a report of the late 1770s, with "fifty-nine
houses of stone and mud, seventy-nine of wood, all poorly built without a preconceived plan.
The whole town," he continued, "resembles a poor village rather than the capital of a province."
After the secularization of the missions in 1793 and 1794, they gradually became
satellite civilian communities under the authority of the town of Bexar. The mission lands were
distributed to the few remaining Indians and the increasing number of Spanish settlers; most of
the better land nearest the settled areas was controlled by the town's elite, which was made up
of the descendants of the original Canary Islanders and presidial soldiers. The complex
network of irrigation systems that had been operated by the missions was partially abandoned,
and, by 1815, the amount of irrigated farmland had declined markedly.
Despite the downturn brought on by the secularization of the Spanish missions, San
Antonio de Béxar continued to be an overwhelmingly agricultural community. Subsistence
farming was the rule. The largest number of cultivators worked small family plots, though many
farms were also worked by tenant farmers or day laborers. The elite landowners increased the
size of their holdings after the secularization of the missions, and some of the largest ranchers
exported horses and cattle to Coahuila or Louisiana.
During the late colonial period, Bexar continued to serve as the capital of the province of
Texas as well as the main shipping point for supplies headed for Nacogdoches and La Bahía.
Between 1811 and 1813, the city was also the center of revolutionary activity against Spanish

14

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

rule. In 1811, a former militia captain, Juan Bautista de Las Casas, following the lead of Miguel
Hidalgo y Costilla in Mexico, mounted an insurrection in Bexar that quickly spread throughout
the province of Texas. Las Casas's band of followers, which included the poorer soldiers and
civilians of the lower social stratum who resented the rule of the Spanish elite, scored early
successes, arresting the governor and his military staff and seizing the property of the most
ardent royalists. On March 1, 1811, however, some of the conservative military officers and
clergy supported by the isleños (aristocratic decedents of the original Canary Island settlers)
staged a counterrevolution. Las Casas was captured in Chihuahua and executed, and his head
was salted and shipped in a box to Bexar for display on Military Plaza in an attempt to dissuade
others from taking up his cause.
After Las Casas's death, the leadership of the insurrectionists fell to Bernardo Gutiérrez
de Lara, who led an army of Mexican revolutionaries and sympathetic Americans from
Louisiana that seized San Antonio in the spring of 1813 and proclaimed Texas an independent
state. In August, however, royalist forces commanded by José Joaquín Arredondo succeeded
in routing the insurrectionists and restoring order. Arredondo's victory was followed by a period
of reprisals that included confiscation, detentions, and executions; in San Antonio alone,
loyalists shot 327 supporters of the rebellion.
In the wake of the rebellion, the population of Bexar and the surrounding region fell
markedly and did not begin to grow again until the end of the decade. By 1820, however, Bexar
had some 2,000 inhabitants, with slightly more females (1,021) than males (973); several
hundred more lived on ranches in the outlying countryside. During the 1830s, the population
again increased slightly, although the number of inhabitants in Bexar declined as more town
dwellers moved out to adjoining farms and ranches.
Soon after the first Anglo-American colonists came to Texas in 1821, San Antonio
became the western outpost of settlement. In 1824, Texas and Coahuila were united into
1 state with the capital at Saltillo; a Department of Bexar was created with a political chief to
have authority over the Texas portion of the state. During the late 1820s and early 1830s,
increasing numbers of American settlers began moving to San Antonio, though the city
remained predominantly Mexican at the beginning of the Texas Revolution.
In late October 1835, Texas volunteers laid siege to the city, which was garrisoned by
the Mexican army under Martín Perfecto de Cos. On December 10, after fierce hand-to-hand
fighting, it was occupied by Texan forces. San Antonio was retaken by government forces
commanded by Antonio López de Santa Anna during the battle of the Alamo on March 6 of the
following year. After the subsequent defeat of Santa Anna's army in the battle of San Jacinto,
the city was reoccupied by Texan forces, but the area, claimed by both sides, continued to be
fought over. In March 1842, 6 years after Texas independence, Mexican general Rafael
Vásquez briefly occupied San Antonio, and, in September of the same year, Adrián Woll led
another Mexican invasion force that seized the city.
Because of the uncertainty posed by the frequent invasions, San Antonio and the
surrounding area were largely depopulated. Many settlers fled during the Runaway Scrape of
1836 or during subsequent attacks and did not return in large numbers until after Texas joined

HJN 070012 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

the Union. As late as 1844, San Antonio had only some 1,000 residents, nine-tenths of whom
were of Mexican descent.
The newly formed Bexar County covered much of the western edge of settlement in
Texas. During the late Mexican period, Texas had been divided into 4 departments, with the
department of Bexar stretching from the Rio Grande to the Panhandle and as far west as El
Paso. With the winning of Texas independence, the departments became counties, and on
December 20, 1836, Bexar County was established, with San Antonio as county seat. Since
1860, when the partitioning of Bexar County began, 128 counties have been carved from the
original county.
Despite the steady growth of the population in the late 1840s, fueled by large numbers of
immigrants from the Old South and from Germany, Bexar County was still a sparsely populated
region during the early years of statehood. In 1850, the county had a total population of 5,633,
3,488 of whom lived in San Antonio. The economy, as during the Spanish and Mexican
periods, was still based on ranching and subsistence agriculture. Most of the farms were small;
on the eve of the Civil War only 1 farm in the county was larger than 1,000 acres, and most
were smaller than 50 acres. The main source of revenue for the county was trade carried on by
team trains between San Antonio and Mexico and New Orleans. A number of German and
Anglo immigrants opened mercantile establishments in the city, but there was little in the way of
industry. In 1860, the county had only 28 manufacturing establishments with 135 employees.
In contrast to many other areas of Texas, slaves played only a minor role in the Bexar
County economy. In 1850, there were only 419 African Americans living in the county, 30 of
whom were free. By 1860, the number of slaves had grown to 1,395, or slightly less than 10%
of the county's total population. Most of the county’s 294 slaveholders owned 5 or fewer slaves,
and only 2 owned more than 40.
Bexar County, with its large German population, was a center for antislavery sentiment.
Nevertheless, county residents voted for secession 827 to 709 (54% for, 46% against). On
February 16, 1861, General David E. Twiggs, commander of the federal Department of Texas,
which was headquartered in San Antonio, surrendered all United States forces, arms, and
equipment to a committee of local secessionists backed by a large force of Texas Rangers
under Major Benjamin McCulloch. Although Bexar County escaped the destruction that
devastated other parts of the South, the war years were difficult for the county's citizens, who
were forced to deal with the lack of markets and wild fluctuations in Confederate currency, as
well as with concern for those on the battlefield. With many of the men away fighting, the
county and the surrounding region experienced an upsurge of cattle rustling and other crimes,
and a committee of vigilantes organized "necktie parties" for bandits, cattle thieves, and Union
sympathizers.
After the war San Antonio was occupied by Union soldiers, but the county was spared
much of the political violence that consumed other parts of Texas. The war and its aftermath,
however, had a serious effect on the county’s economy. Land prices fell significantly—by as
much as half—and most of the county’s businesses suffered. Many of the county’s farms also
fell idle. The amount of improved farmland declined by more than 60% between 1860 and

16

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

1870, from 13,697 to 5,546 acres. With little tax money coming in, San Antonio and county
officials were unable to fund many services. Public sanitation suffered, and as a result the
county had a serious cholera outbreak in 1866.
Except for San Antonio, which continued to be a commercial and military center, the
county remained scantily settled and undeveloped. Most of the population continued to be
concentrated in the San Antonio River valley, with only a few small settlements in the northern,
eastern, and western parts of the county. Economic recovery did not begin until the late 1860s
and early 1870s with the start of the great cattle drives. Because Bexar County was located at
the northern apex of the diamond-shaped area that was the original Texas cattle kingdom, it
became an increasingly important center for the ranching industry. By 1870, the number of beef
cattle in the county reached 55,325, nearly double the figure for 1860. A sharp increase in the
price of wool and the large amount of free range west and south of the city also spurred the
development of sheep ranching, particularly in the decade between 1870 and 1880.
The economic recovery, however, found its most important stimulus with the arrival of
the first railroad, the Galveston, Harrisburg and San Antonio Railway, which reached San
Antonio in February 1877. The completion of the rail link with the coast made the shipment of
local products far easier and helped to fuel a rapid growth in population. The number of
inhabitants in the county, which had grown by less than 2,000 between 1860 and 1870, nearly
doubled over the next decade, increasing from 16,043 in 1870 to 30,470 in 1880. Many of the
new residents were recent immigrants from Europe and Mexico. Of the total population in 1880,
7,912 were foreign-born, with the largest numbers coming from Mexico (3,498), Germany
(2,621), Ireland (471), England (334), and France (293). After the Civil War, the county’s black
population also grew dramatically as many freed slaves settled in and around San Antonio. By
1880, the number of African-American inhabitants had reached 3,867, nearly 3 times what it had
been in 1860.
In 1881, a second railroad, the International-Great Northern, reached the city from the
northeast. The completion of the 2 railroads not only brought new prosperity, but helped to
change the physical face of the county. Before the 1870s, most visitors had been struck by the
fact that San Antonio and environs, despite relatively large numbers of English, Irish, and
Germans, still more resembled a Mexican community than an American one. The influx of new
settlers and manufactured building products gradually transformed the city and county, altering
its appearance to more closely resemble that of other communities in Texas. The changing
character of Bexar was perhaps most tellingly revealed in 1890, when for the first time the
number of the county's inhabitants born in Germany (4,039) actually outnumbered those who
had been born in Mexico (3,561).
The construction of the railroads also stimulated the establishment or greatly spurred the
growth of numerous new communities, including Macdona, Von Ormy, Cassin, Atascosa,
Thelma, Beckman, Luxello, Converse, and Kirby, though the overwhelming majority of the
county's inhabitants still lived in San Antonio.
The 1880s also saw many new industries. By 1887, San Antonio listed among its
businesses 3 bookbinderies, 4 breweries, 3 carriage factories, 4 ice factories, 3 tanneries,

HJN 070012 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

1 wool-scouring plant, and an iron foundry.
Between 1880 and 1890, employees in
manufactures in the county grew from 362 to 2,518. After the turn of the century, the
manufacturing sector continued to show impressive growth. By 1920, the county had
328 factories employing 6,860 persons.
Despite the area’s relatively diversified economy, the depression hit Bexar County hard.
By the mid-1930s, many people were out of work and very glad of the New Deal programs that
gave them work paving streets and building bridges, sewers, and parks. Among the largest
projects of the period were the renovation of La Villita and the San Antonio missions, and the
construction of the Paseo del Rio along the San Antonio River in the center of the city.
During World War II, Bexar County’s already large military presence grew even more, as
the area’s bases became an important center for the training of army air corps cadets under the
auspices of the San Antonio Aviation Cadet Center. At the height of the war, more than
21,000 civilian war workers were employed at Kelly Field alone. After the war, the presence of
so many military personnel continued to bring changes to the county. Thousands of returning
veterans enrolled in local colleges and universities, and many others, attracted by the area
during their service years, moved to the city. San Antonio also developed into a major
retirement center for military families, drawn by the relatively low cost of living and the access to
the 2 large area military medical centers, Wilford Hall and Brooke Army Medical Center. Since
the end of the Second World War, the economy of the area has continued to depend heavily on
a large federal payroll from the various military bases and research facilities, and from the large
number of retired military residents.
Beginning in the second half of the 19th century, San Antonio also developed as an
important military center. The San Antonio Arsenal was opened in 1858, and, in 1878, the city
deeded 90 acres to the federal government for what eventually became Fort Sam Houston.
During World War I, Kelly and Brooks fields (which later became Kelly Air Force Base and
Brooks Air Force Base) were established to train pilots, and Camp Bullis and Camp Travis were
opened. At the end of the war, a part of Kelly Field became Duncan Field, and, in 1931,
Randolph Field was established as a primary flight training base. During World War II, Duncan
Field was reintegrated with Kelly, and Camp Normoyle, a motor base, was added.

18

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The archeological survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for designation as Texas State Archeological Landmarks (SALs)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their SAL
assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
on the THC’s online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the National Park Service’s (NPS’s) online
National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas State Historical Association’s and the
General Libraries at The University of Texas at Austin’s Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a
program of intensive and reconnaissance survey of the project area. As no cultural resources
were documented during the survey, the second and third goals were not brought into play. The
rest of this chapter presents the results of archival research, the methodological background for
the current investigations, and the specific survey methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey corridor. Archival research conducted on the THC’s
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas on January 5, 2007, indicated that the APE on the
Rogers Tract has been previously surveyed for cultural resources in its entirety. In addition,
approximately 2.6 km (1.6 mi) (about 46%) of the proposed pipeline ROW on this tract would be
installed within an existing utility easement that already contained multiple overhead and
subsurface utility lines and that had presumably been extensively disturbed by previous utility
construction and maintenance activities. Thus, the Rogers Tract APE was considered to have
minimal to no potential to contain any previously unrecorded cultural resources. However, a

HJN 070012 AR

19

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

previously recorded archeological site, 41BX920, extends along the southeastern boundary of
the Camp Bullis Military Reservation in an area traversed by a 0.8-km- (0.5-mi-) long segment of
the proposed pipeline ROW. The site form on file for this site describes it as a low-density
scatter of aboriginal lithic artifacts that measures approximately 40 m in diameter; however, the
site file maps show the site to extend across an area measuring roughly 1.0 km (0.6 mi) in
length. Numerous additional archeological sites have been previously recorded in the hills north
of the Rogers Tract APE, but none of them are located in the immediate vicinity of the proposed
pipeline ROW.
The APE on the Dym Tract had not been previously surveyed for cultural resources, and
no previously recorded archeological sites had been documented within or in the vicinity of the
proposed pipeline ROW. However, 1 archeological site, 41BX1671, had been previously
recorded in the Mud Creek tributary floodplain approximately 575 m (1,886 ft) south of the
western terminus of the proposed pipeline alignment. Site 41BX1671 was described as a
multiple-component aboriginal campsite possibly containing PaleoIndian, Early Archaic, and
Middle Archaic cultural components. The maximum soil depth on the site was recorded as
approximately 30 cm (12 in), and the spatial separation among the documented cultural
components appears to have been predominantly horizontal rather than stratigraphic, and
temporally diagnostic lithic artifacts (primarily projectile points) were found interspersed among
the sediments that were interdigitated with the fragmented limestone bedrock. The Mud Creek
valley south of the site was conjectured to contain deeper deposits, though the northern edge of
the site was described as deflated. Given the deflation noted along the northern site boundary
and the generally shallow character of Krum series soils, it seemed unlikely that any deeply
buried archeological deposits would be encountered in the Mud Creek floodplain; however, the
proximity of a previously recorded site containing early cultural materials suggested the
possibility of finding archeological materials at the western terminus of the Dym Tract APE.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

On January 22, 2007, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd and Jared Wiersema, under
the direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a combination of intensive
and reconnaissance-level cultural resource survey activities on the Dym and Rogers tracts to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. As the APE on the Dym Tract had not been previously surveyed, Horizon
performed an intensive cultural resources survey of the entire APE on this tract. The Rogers
Tract, on the other hand, had been previously surveyed for cultural resources in its entirety, and
approximately 46% of the proposed pipeline alignment would be installed within an existing
utility corridor; thus, Horizon performed only a reconnaissance-level survey of most of the
Rogers Tract APE. The reconnaissance survey consisted of a brief walkover and photodocumentation of existing disturbances within the APE. Judgmental shovel testing was to be
performed in any areas that appeared to have a potential to contain cultural resources, but no
such areas were encountered. However, Horizon intensively surveyed the 0.8-km- (0.5-mi-)
long segment of the APE that runs along the southeastern boundary of Camp Bullis to
determine whether or not any portions of site 41BX920 extend into the APE that may be
potentially impacted by the proposed action.

20

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

In general, intensive cultural resource survey activities entail a pedestrian walkover with
surface inspection as well as subsurface shovel testing.
The Texas State Minimum
Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) for cultural resource surveys state that, for linear
projects, a minimum of 16 shovel tests per mile of 30-m- (100-ft-) wide linear corridor is required
unless field conditions warrant excavation of more shovel tests (e.g., due to the presence of
culturally sensitive areas) or less shovel tests (e.g., due to extensive prior disturbances or
cultural low-probability areas). On the Dym Tract, 11 shovel tests would be required within the
2.3-km- (1.4-mi-) long by 15-m- (50-ft-) wide proposed ROW, and an additional 3 shovel tests
would be required within the combined 2.3-ha (5.8-ac) area covered by the 4 well pad sites, for
a total of 14 shovel tests on this tract. On the Rogers Tract, 3 shovel tests would be required
within the 0.8-km- (0.5-mi-) long by 11-m- (36-ft-) wide segment of the proposed pipeline ROW
proposed for intensive survey. In the event that a shovel test yields evidence of subsurface
cultural deposits, additional shovel tests may be necessary to determine the horizontal and
vertical extent of the subsurface deposits associated with the cultural resource. In general,
shovel tests measure approximately 30 cm (12 in) in diameter and are excavated to a target
depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the top of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the
maximum depth practicable, and all sediments are screened through 6.35-millimeter (mm)
(0.25-in) hardware cloth.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project areas as defined in
36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3, though the TSMASS minimum shovel testing
requirements were not met in all cases due to geomorphological characteristics of the project
areas that argued against extensive shovel testing.
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching in stream terraces and other areas with
the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that shovel tests are
capable of reaching (approximately 80 to 100 cm below surface [cmbs] or more in sandy
sediments or 40 to 60 cmbs in clayey sediments). Due to the presence of limestone bedrock at
or near the modern ground surface, overlying soils were either very shallow or absent across
the APEs in both the Dym and Rogers tract project areas; as such, shovel testing constituted an
effective and adequate technique for penetrating to the bottom of sediments with the potential to
contain cultural resources, and backhoe trenching was not necessary. Only 1 small portion of
the overall project area—the western terminus of the proposed Dym Tract ROW that crosses
the Mud Creek tributary floodplain—contained soils deeper than a few centimeters, though even
here bedrock was encountered at depths of 20 to 30 cmbs. Due to the fact that a previously
documented archeological site, 41BX1671, was found in a similar environment about 575 m
(1,886 ft) south of the Dym Tract project area, the shovel testing density was intensified in the
Mud Creek tributary to ensure that cultural resources would be detected if any were present.
The survey set out to employ a non-collection policy for cultural materials. Nondiagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were to be
described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location in
which they were found. Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials
with maker’s marks) were to be collected and placed in resealable plastic bags labeled with

HJN 070012 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

relevant provenience information. No cultural resources were encountered during the survey,
so the proposed collection policy was not brought into play.
4.2.1

Dym Tract

The Dym Tract (Figures 3 to 7) is located west of US 281 between East Borgfeld Drive
and Estate Gate Drive just south of the Bexar-Comal county line (see Figure 1). On this tract,
BexarMet proposes to install approximately 2.3 km (1.4 mi) of subsurface water pipeline within a
ROW measuring 15 m (50 ft) in width. Four well pads covering a total area of approximately
2.3 ha (5.8 ac) would also be installed at existing well sites. As the Dym Tract had not been
previously surveyed for cultural resources, the entire APE was subjected to an intensive cultural
resource survey. A total of 23 shovel tests were excavated in the Dym Tract APE, thereby
exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size (Figure 3). Most (n=15;
65%) of the shovel tests were excavated in the floodplain of the Mud Creek tributary at the
western end of the proposed pipeline ROW, whereas only a few (n=8; 35%) shovel tests were
excavated in upland portions of the APE due to the excellent ground surface visibility, absence
of soil cover, and ubiquity of limestone bedrock visible on the modern ground surface.
The western terminus of the Dym Tract APE traverses the floodplain of the Mud Creek
tributary (Figure 4), and this area was surveyed very thoroughly due to the presence of a
previously recorded archeological site, 41BX1671, in a comparable environment about 575 m
(1,886 ft) downstream of the current project area. Based on the site form on file on the THC’s
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas for this site, soils on site 41BX1671 measured up to 30 cm
(12 in) thick in the deepest part of the site, though soils along the northern site boundary (i.e., in
the direction of the current project area) were described as deflated. At the time of the survey,
the proposed ROW was accessible only as far west as the approximate location of the Mud
Creek tributary. West of that point, construction for a nearby residential subdivision was
underway as part of a different project not connected to the present undertaking (Figure 5). The
area had been denuded of vegetation, and the landscape was undergoing extensive cutting,
grading, and filling in preparation for future development. The channel of Mud Creek tributary
was not clearly discernable on the landscape, though an approximately linear stretch of darker
sediment and a slight divet in the topography probably mark the channel alignment (see
Figure 5). West of a silt fence that had been constructed by the contractor that was developing
the property west of the Mud Creek tributary, the ground surface was inspected and 2 shovel
tests were excavated. East of the silt fence, 2 tightly spaced transects of shovel tests were
excavated on either side of the proposed centerline of the Dym Tract pipeline ROW up to the
edge of the neighboring upland landform to the east. Shovel testing revealed 20 to 30 cm of
black to dark reddish-brown clay overlying limestone bedrock in the floodplain of the Mud Creek
tributary, and fragments of limestone bedrock were visible on the surface across the entire area.
Where vegetation was present, it consisted of short, sparse savannah grasses, and ground
surface visibility was effectively 100% across the entire area. No cultural resources were
observed on the modern ground surface or in any of the shovel tests excavated in the vicinity of
the Mud Creek tributary, and the area is considered to have minimal to no potential to contain
any intact, buried archeological deposits.

22

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 3. Locations of Shovel Tests in the Dym Tract APE

HJN 070012 AR

23

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 4. West End of Dym Tract APE on Mud Creek Tributary Floodplain (Facing West)

Figure 5. Western End of Dym Tract APE at Mud Creek Tributary (Facing Northwest)
24

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 6. Typical Ground Surface in Upland Portions of Dym Tract APE (Facing North)

Figure 7. Overview of Well Pad in Dym Tract APE (Facing East)
HJN 070012 AR

25

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

The upland portions of the APE contained virtually no soil cover whatsoever, and
indurated limestone bedrock was continuously distributed across the uplands on the modern
ground surface (see Figure 6). Vegetation consisted of sparse savannah grasses and shrubs
with isolated stands of cedar and oak trees, resulting in 100% ground surface visibility across
the entire upland portion of the APE. The entire APE was walked and the modern ground
surface was thoroughly inspected for cultural resources. Each of the 4 well pad sites was
similarly inspected (see Figure 7). While no areas with any discernable potential for deep
sediment deposits were encountered in the uplands, 8 shovel tests were nonetheless excavated
to verify the apparent lack of sediments. All of these shovel tests were terminated within 5 cm
of the ground surface due to the presence of dense deposits of fractured limestone slabs and
gravels. No cultural resources were observed on the modern ground surface or in any of the
shovel tests excavated in upland portions of the Dym Tract APE, and the area is considered to
have no potential to contain any unrecognized cultural resources.
4.2.2

Rogers Tract

The Rogers Tract (Figures 8 to 11) is located in the area north of North Loop 1604, east
of Northwest Military Parkway, and southeast of the Camp Bullis Military Reservation (see
Figure 2). On this tract, BexarMet proposes to install approximately 5.6 km (3.5 mi) of
subsurface water pipeline within a ROW measuring approximately 11 m (36 ft) in width and
5 well and flex pads that cover a total area of approximately 1.3 ha (3.3 ac). The Rogers Tract
APE had been previously surveyed for cultural resources in its entirety, and approximately 46%
of the proposed pipeline alignment would be installed within an existing utility corridor; thus,
Horizon performed only a reconnaissance-level survey of most of the Rogers Tract APE. The
reconnaissance survey consisted of a brief walkover and photo-documentation of existing
disturbances within the APE. Judgmental shovel testing was to be performed in any areas that
appeared to have a potential to contain cultural resources, but no such areas were encountered.
Horizon intensively surveyed the 0.8-km- (0.5-mi-) long segment of the APE that runs along the
southeastern boundary of Camp Bullis to determine whether or not any portions of site 41BX920
extend into the APE that may be potentially impacted by the proposed action.
The 0.8-km (0.5-mi) segment of the Rogers Tract APE abutting the southeastern
boundary of Camp Bullis was traversed on foot and the modern ground surface was thoroughly
examined for cultural resources. The area along the fenceline marking the Camp Bullis property
boundary had been previously cleared of vegetation, and a rudimentary two-track road ran the
entire length of the survey area (see Figure 8). Bulldozer and grader push piles were visible in
many areas, attesting to the prior use of heavy equipment in the creation and maintenance of
the road. The entire survey area had been extensively impacted as a result of these previous
construction activities, but the land-clearing operations resulted in 100% visibility of the modern
ground surface. Fractured limestone bedrock was observed on the ground surface across the
entire survey area. The area appears to be the location of chert-bearing limestone outcrops as
broken fragments of Edwards chert were observed throughout the survey area. The breakage
patterns on the chert were consistent with natural fracturing as well as artificial breakage
(presumably from heavy equipment operations), though no culturally modified pieces were
observed. Two well pad sites located adjacent to the survey area were also inspected (see

26

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 8. Typical View of Survey Area in Rogers Tract APE (Facing Northeast)

Figure 9. Overview of Well Pad in Rogers Tract APE (Facing South)
HJN 070012 AR

27

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 10. Salado Creek Crossing in Rogers Tract APE (Facing East)

Figure 11. Typical View of Existing Utility Line ROW in Rogers Tract APE (Facing East)
28

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 9). Due to the extent of previous disturbance and the ubiquity of bedrock on the modern
ground surface, no shovel tests were excavated on the Rogers Tract. Thus, the TSMASS were
not met for the Rogers Tract survey area, though the extent of existing impacts to near-surface
sediments and the shallowness of the soils argued against excavating any subsurface probes.
Any cultural resources present in the survey area would have been visible on the modern
ground surface; however, no cultural resources were observed.
The remainder of the Rogers Tract APE, which was proposed for reconnaissance-level
survey only, was driven in an all-terrain vehicle (ATV). As indicated by the initial archival
research, most of the APE followed an existing utility corridor containing 4 overhead power
transmission lines (see Figures 10 and 11), resulting in extensive prior impacts. Even the
Salado Creek channel was barely discernable on the landscape (see Figure 10). Between the
existing impacts to the APE and the fact that it has been previously surveyed in its entirety for
cultural resources, the Rogers Tract is considered to have no potential to contain any
unrecognized cultural resources.

HJN 070012 AR

29

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

BexarMet is proposing to install water utility pipelines on 2 separate tracts of land—the
Dym and Rogers tracts—in northern Bexar County, Texas, to support development of
residential subdivisions in connection with the Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project. The Dym
Tract is located west of US 281 between East Borgfeld Drive and Estate Gate Drive just south
of the Bexar-Comal county line (see Figure 1). On this tract, BexarMet proposes to install
approximately 2.3 km (1.4 mi) of subsurface water pipeline within a ROW measuring 15 m
(50 ft) in width. Four well pads covering a total area of approximately 2.3 ha (5.8 ac) would also
be installed at existing well sites. The Rogers Tract is located in the area north of North
Loop 1604, east of Northwest Military Parkway, and southeast of the Camp Bullis Military
Reservation (see Figure 2). On this tract, BexarMet proposes to install approximately 5.6 km
(3.5 mi) of subsurface water pipeline within a ROW measuring approximately 11 m (36 ft) in
width and 4 well pads and 1 flex pad that cover a total area of approximately 1.3 ha (3.3 ac).
On January 22, 2007, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd and Jared Wiersema, under
the direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a combination of intensive
and reconnaissance-level cultural resource survey activities on the Dym and Rogers tracts to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. As the APE on the Dym Tract had not been previously surveyed, Horizon
performed an intensive cultural resources survey of the entire APE on this tract. The Rogers
Tract, on the other hand, had been previously surveyed for cultural resources in its entirety, and
approximately 46% of the proposed pipeline alignment would be installed within an existing
utility corridor; thus, Horizon performed only a reconnaissance-level survey of most of the
Rogers Tract APE.
The reconnaissance survey consisted of a brief walkover and
photodocumentation of existing disturbances within the APE. Judgmental shovel testing was to
be performed in any areas that appeared to have a potential to contain cultural resources, but
no such areas were encountered. However, Horizon intensively surveyed the 0.8-km- (0.5-mi-)
long segment of the APE that runs along the southeastern boundary of Camp Bullis to
determine whether or not any portions of site 41BX920 extend into the APE that may be
potentially impacted by the proposed action.
Despite the presence of shallow soils and surficial bedrock exposures that may have
argued against excavating any shovel tests whatsoever, a total of 23 shovel tests were
excavated within the Dym Tract APE, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of this

HJN 070012 AR

31

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

size. No shovel tests were excavated within the surveyed portion of the Rogers tract due to the
extent of prior disturbances and geomorphological conditions that argued against shovel testing.
No cultural resources of any kind, including prehistoric or historic archeological sites,
isolated occurrences of artifacts, or historic structures or objects, were identified as a result of
the cultural resource survey of these 2 project areas. Abundant chert fragments were observed
in the Rogers Tract survey area; however, all of the chert had been broken by a combination of
natural erosive forces and prior heavy equipment disturbances. None of the chert fragments
exhibited any signs of cultural modification, and no portions of a nearby previously recorded
archeological site, 41BX920, were observed.

32

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for designation
as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their SAL
evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is the determination
of whether or not an archeological site possesses the potential to make a contribution to 1 or
more previously defined research questions. Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey
level are rarely sufficient to contribute in a meaningful manner to such research issues. The
objectives are, first, to locate and delineate site boundaries with the project’s APE and, second,
to determine which archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance
of regional, methodological, or theoretical research questions. Thus, adequate information on
site function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate,
historical perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions
vary as a function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and
chronological placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the
inventory process.
Ultimately, management decisions regarding archeological properties are a function of
the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs. Under the
Antiquities Code of Texas, archeological resources are evaluated according to criteria
established to determine the significance of archeological resources for designation as SALs.

HJN 070012 AR

33

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ARCHEOLOGICAL LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are
located in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any
county, city, or political subdivision of the state are state archeological landmarks and are
eligible for designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
structure as an SAL if it (1) is publicly or privately owned and listed on the NRHP and (2) meets
one of the following 6 eligibility criteria:
A. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad
patterns of our history;
B. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. Is important to a particular cultural or ethnic group;
D. Is the work of a significant architect, master builder, or craftsman;
E. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction,
possesses high aesthetic value, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinctions; or
F. Has yielded or may be likely to yield information important to the understanding of
Texas culture or history.

34

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

6.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were documented as a result of the
intensive and reconnaissance cultural resource survey of the Dym and Rogers tract APEs. No
cultural resources were encountered on the modern ground surface or in any of the shovel tests
excavated during the survey. While several archeological sites have been recorded in the
general vicinities of the 2 project areas, no previously recorded archeological sites are present
within or in the immediate vicinity of the APEs. Furthermore, no NRHP-listed historic properties
or SALs are located in the vicinities of the project areas.

6.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the intensive and reconnaissance cultural resource survey of the
proposed APEs on the Dym and Rogers tracts, no potentially significant archeological resources
would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No new archeological sites were identified in
the project areas as a result of the survey, and no previously recorded archeological sites are
present in the immediate vicinity. No further investigations are recommended within the
proposed pipeline ROWs on the Dym and Rogers tracts based on the current project design,
and archeological clearance is recommended for the proposed undertaking.
In the event that future reroutes or alternate alignments are proposed, or if new projectrelated facilities are added, additional cultural resource survey investigations may be necessary.
Furthermore, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently
discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area,
even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and THC should be
notified of the discovery.

HJN 070012 AR

35

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Baker, V.R.
1975
Flood Hazards Along the Balcones Escarpment in Central Texas—Alternative
Approaches to the Recognition, Mapping, and Management. Geological Circular
No. 75-5. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Barnes, V.E.
1982
Geologic Atlas of Texas—San Antonio Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Butzer, K.W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.

HJN 070012 AR

37

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas.
No. 53, Austin.

Texas Water Development Board, Report

Chabot, F.C.
1937
With the Makers of San Antonio. Yanaguana Society Publications 4, San Antonio,
Texas.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
De la Teja, J.F., and J. Wheat
1985
Bexar: Profile of a Tejano Community, 1820-1833.
Quarterly 89.

Southwestern Historical

Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Frederick, C.D., M.D. Glascock, H. Neff, and C.M. Stevenson
1994
Evaluation of Chert Patination as a Dating Technique: A Cast Study from Fort Hood,
Texas. US Army Fort Hood, Archeological Resource Management Series, No. 32.
Frederick, C.D, and C. Ringstaff
1994
Lithic Resources at Fort Hood:
Further Investigations.
In Archeological
Investigations on 571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell Counties,
Texas, edited by W.N. Trierweiler. United States Army Fort Hood, Archeological
Resource Management Series, No. 31, pp. 125-181.
Handbook of Texas Online
2007
Bexar County.
The Handbook of Texas Online <http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/
handbook/online/articles/BB/hcb7.html>. January 23, 2007.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J.T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Johnston, L.C.
1947
San Antonio: St. Anthony's Town. Librarians Council, San Antonio, Texas.

38

070012_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas. US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Poyo, G.E., and G.M. Hinojosa (editors)
1991
Tejano Origins in Eighteenth-Century San Antonio. Institute of Texan Cultures, San
Antonio.
Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.

Ramsdell, C.W.
1959
San Antonio: A Historical and Pictorial Guide. University of Texas Press, Austin.

HJN 070012 AR

39

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology
in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R.A. Ricklis and M.B.
Collins, pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Sellards, E.H., W.S. Adkins, and F.B. Plummer
1932
Stratigraphy. The Geology of Texas, Vol. 1. Bulletin No. 3232. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Taylor, F.B., R.B. Hailey, and D.L. Richmond
1991
Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas.
US Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Washington, D.C.
Tharp, B.C.
1939
The Vegetation of Texas.
History, Series 1:i-xvi, 1-74.

Texas Academy of Science, Publications in Natural

Wheat, J. B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

40

070012_arch_survey_report

APPENDIX A:
Shovel Test Data

Intensive and Reconnaissance Cultural Resources Survey of
the Bexar Metropolitan Water District’s Trinity Aquifer Water Supply Project, Bexar County, Texas

Table A-1. Rogers Tract Shovel Test Summary Data
1

UTM Coordinates

Depth
(cmbs)

Soils

Artifacts

3285726

0-20
20+

Black clay
Limestone bedrock

None

550220

3285720

0-20
20+

Black clay
Limestone bedrock

None

JW-03

550245

3285721

0-20
20+

Black clay
Limestone bedrock

None

JW-04

550277

3285726

0-25
25+

Dark reddish-brown clay
Limestone bedrock

None

JW-05

550304

3285735

0-30
30+

Dark reddish-brown clay
Limestone bedrock

None

JW-06

550323

3285747

0-30
30+

Dark reddish-brown clay
Limestone bedrock

None

JW-07

550359

3285754

0-10

Dark reddish-brown clay

None

JW-08

550400

3285775

0-20

Dark reddish-brown clay

None

JW-09

550810

3286067

Surface

Limestone bedrock at surface

None

JW-10

551159

3286199

Surface

Limestone bedrock at surface

None

JW-11

551286

3286000

Surface

Limestone bedrock at surface

None

JW-12

551560

3285785

Surface

Limestone bedrock at surface

None

JW-13

551382

3285468

Surface

Limestone bedrock at surface

None

JW-14

550809

3286060

Surface

Limestone bedrock at surface

None

MM-01

550206

3285727

0-25
25+

Very dark brown clay
Limestone bedrock

None

MM-02

550234

3285730

0-20

Very dark brown clay

None

MM-03

550265

3285740

0-20

Very dark brown clay

None

MM-04

550297

3285739

0-25

Very dark brown clay

None

MM-05

550337

3285751

0-20
20-30

Dark reddish-brown silty clay
Reddish-brown clay

None

MM-06

550368

3285763

0-10

Limestone gravels at surface

None

MM-07

550401

3285799

0-10

Dark brown clay

None

MM-08

550838

3286082

0-5
5+

Dark brown silty loam
Limestone bedrock

None

MM-09

551098

3286236

Surface

Surface

None

ST No.

Easting

Northing

JW-01

550205

JW-02

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1927 (NAD 27)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercatur

HJN 070012 AR

A-1

