An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 1.5-Mile-Long Amelia Cutoff Relief
Drainage Improvement Project, Beaumont,
Jefferson County Texas
By:
Jennifer L. Cochran

HJN 140133 AR
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6899
Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Jefferson County Drainage District No.6
Beaumont, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

August 2014

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed 1.5-Mile-Long Amelia Cutoff Relief
Drainage Improvement Project, Beaumont,
Jefferson County Texas
By:
Jennifer L. Cochran

Prepared for:
Jefferson County Drainage District No. 6
6550 Walden Road
Beaumont, Texas 77707

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jennifer L. Cochran, Principal Investigator
HJN 140113 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6899

August 2014

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

On 2 June 2014, Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) conducted an intensive
cultural resources survey of the Jefferson County Drainage District No. 6’s (JCDD6) proposed
1.5-mile [mi]- (2.4-kilometer [km]-) long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage Improvement Project in
Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas (Project Area). The proposed project would entail
acquisition of new right-of-way (ROW) and constructing approximately 1.5 miles (2.4 km) of new
ditch within the Amelia Cutoff Relief Project. The proposed ditch ROW measures approximately
140.0 feet (42.7 meters [m]) in width and is located immediately to the north of an existing water
supply canal ROW. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) for the Project Area totals 25.4 acres.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the JCDD6, a political subdivision of
the State of Texas; as such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code
of Texas (ACT). Additionally, potential impacts to wetland areas that may constitute “waters of
the US” within the Project Area could require the usage of permits issued by the US Army Corps
of Engineers (USACE) in compliance with Section 404 of the Clean Water Act of 1976. The
proposed ditch improvements within the Project Area may also utilize federal funding from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Because USACE permits and the use of
federal funding constitute federal actions, the Project Area also falls under the regulations of
Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended. As the
project’s development represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact
potentially significant cultural resources, JCDD6 is required to provide a cultural resources
evaluation to assess the potential of the proposed undertaking to impact significant cultural
resources within the Project Area. At the request of JCDD6, Horizon conducted the cultural
resources survey of the Project Area in compliance with the ACT and Section 106 of the NHPA.
The purpose of the survey was to determine if the development of the Project Area would have
the potential to adversely affect any significant cultural resources designated as or considered
eligible for formal designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) or eligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). The cultural resources survey was performed
under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6899.
The survey of the Project Area resulted in entirely negative findings. No cultural
materials were observed on the surface of the Project Area or within any of the 49 excavated
shovel tests. In general, the Project Area contained silty clay sediments in surface contexts.

HJN 140113 AR

v

Management Summary

These soils would have likely confined any cultural materials to shallow deposits and would not
have facilitated deeply buried deposits.
Based on the negative survey results, it is Horizon’s opinion that construction of the
proposed Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage Improvement Project will have no adverse effect on
significant cultural resources designated as or considered eligible for formal designation as
SALs or eligible for listing on the NRHP. Horizon therefore recommends that JCDD6 be allowed
to proceed with the construction of the proposed project relative to the jurisdiction of the ACT,
the USACE, and Section 106 of the NHPA. However, in the unlikely event that any cultural
materials (including human remains or burial features) are inadvertently discovered at any point
during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance of the Project Area, even in previously
surveyed areas, all work at the location of the discovery should cease immediately, and the
Texas Historical Commission (THC) and USACE should be notified of the discovery.

vi

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 9

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING..................................................................................13
2.1
General Project Area Description .................................................................13
2.2
Physiography and Hydrology........................................................................13
2.3
Geology and Geomorphology.......................................................................16
2.4
Climate .........................................................................................................18
2.5
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................19

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................23
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) ....................................................24
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) ........................................................24
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) .......................................................25
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) ...................................................26
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ......................................................27
3.6
Historic Period (ca. A.D. 1700 to Present) ....................................................27

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................33

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................35

6.0

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ..................................................................39
6.1
Results .........................................................................................................39
6.2
Recommendations .......................................................................................39

7.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................41
APPENDIX A: SHOVEL TEST DATA

HJN 140113 AR

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1-1. Location of Project Area on USGS topographic quadrangle ...................................10
Figure 1-2. Location of Project Area on aerial photograph .......................................................11
Figure 2-1. View of Project Area located north of the Port Arthur Canal (facing east) ...............14
Figure 2-2. General view of Project Area (facing southeast).....................................................14
Figure 2-3. Another view of Project Area (facing southeast) .....................................................15
Figure 2-4. Typical vegetation within Project Area (facing north) ..............................................15
Figure 2-5. Distribution of mapped soils within Project Area .....................................................17
Figure 5.1 Locations of shovel tests within Project Area............................................................36

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 2-1. Summary of mapped soils in Project Area ...............................................................18

viii

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was contracted by Jefferson County
Drainage District No. 6 (JCDD6) to conduct an intensive cultural resources survey of the
proposed 1.5-mile [mi]- (2.4-kilometer [km]-) long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage Improvement
Project in Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas (Project Area; Figures 1-1 and 1-2). The
proposed project would entail acquisition of new right-of-way (ROW) and constructing
approximately 1.5 miles (2.4 km) of new ditch. The proposed ditch ROW measures
approximately 140.0 feet (42.7 meters [m]) in width and is located immediately to the north of an
existing water supply canal ROW. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) for the Project Area totals
25.4 acres. The proposed development is located approximately 0.2 miles (0.3 km) south of the
intersection of Burbank and Washington Boulevard (Blvd.) in Beaumont, Texas.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the JCDD6, a political subdivision of
the State of Texas; as such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code
of Texas (ACT). Additionally, potential impacts to wetland areas that may constitute “waters of
the US” within the Project Area could require the usage of permits issued by the US Army Corps
of Engineers (USACE) in compliance with Section 404 of the Clean Water Act of 1972. The
proposed ditch improvements within the Project Area may also utilize federal funding from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Because USACE permits and the use of
federal funding constitute federal actions, the Project Area also falls under the regulations of
Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended. As the
project’s development represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact
potentially significant cultural resources, JCDD6 is required to provide a cultural resources
evaluation to assess the potential of the proposed undertaking to impact significant cultural
resources within the Project Area. At the request of JCDD6, Horizon conducted the cultural
resources survey of the Project Area in compliance with the ACT and Section 106 of the NHPA.
The purpose of the survey was to determine if the development of the Project Area would have
the potential to adversely affect any significant cultural resources designated as or considered
eligible for formal designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) or eligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). The cultural resources survey was performed
under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6899.

HJN 140113 AR

9

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1-1. Location of Project Area on USGS topographic quadrangle

10

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

Figure 1-2. Location of Project Area on aerial photograph

HJN 140113 AR

11

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

The cultural resources investigations consisted of an archival review, an intensive
cultural resources survey of the Project Area, and the production of a report suitable for review
by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas Historical
Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council
of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.
Jennifer L. Cochran (Principal Investigator) and Briana Smith (Horizon staff archeologist)
conducted the field investigations.
Horizon conducted the survey of the Project Area on 2 June 2014. This entailed
intensive surface inspection and subsurface shovel testing efforts. For linear projects, the
Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of 16
shovel tests per 1.0 mile (1.6 km) per 100.0-foot (30.5-m) width of ROW. As such, a total of 48
shovel tests were necessary within the 1.5-mile- (2.4-km-) long, 140.0-foot- (43.0-m-) wide
Project Area in order to comply with the TSMASS. Horizon exceeded the minimum survey
standards by excavating 49 shovel tests within the boundaries of the Project Area.
The survey of the Project Area resulted in entirely negative findings. No cultural
materials were observed on the surface of the Project Area or within any of the 49 excavated
shovel tests. In general, the Project Area contained silty clay sediments in surface contexts.
These soils would have likely confined any cultural materials to shallow deposits and would not
have facilitated deeply buried deposits.
Based on the negative survey results, it is Horizon’s opinion that the proposed Amelia
Cutoff Relief Drainage Improvement Project will have no adverse effect on significant cultural
resources designated as or considered eligible for formal designation as SALs or eligible for
listing on the NRHP. Horizon therefore recommends that JCDD6 be allowed to proceed with
the construction of the proposed project relative to the jurisdiction of the ACT, the USACE, and
Section 106 of the NHPA. However, in the unlikely event that any cultural materials (including
human remains or burial features) are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction,
use, or ongoing maintenance of the Project Area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work at
the location of the discovery should cease immediately, and the Texas Historical Commission
(THC) and USACE should be notified of the discovery.

12

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

GENERAL PROJECT AREA DESCRIPTION

The overall Project Area consists of 1.5 miles (2.4 km) of new ditch construction in
northern Jefferson County, Texas. The proposed project would entail acquisition of new ROW
and constructing approximately 1.5 miles (2.4 km) of new ditch. The proposed ditch ROW
measures approximately 140.0 feet (42.7 meters [m]) in width and is located immediately to the
north of an existing water supply canal ROW. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) for the Project
Area totals 25.4 acres. The proposed development is located approximately 0.2 miles (0.3 km)
south of the intersection of Burbank and Washington Boulevard (Blvd.) in Beaumont, Texas. It
can be found on the US Geological Survey (USGS) Beaumont West, Texas, 7.5-minute
topographic quadrangle (see Figure 1-1). Overall, the Project Area is densely covered with a
mixture of mature and immature pines, oaks, and dense underbrush, including greenbrier,
Chinese tallow, dewberry, and palmetto palms. As such, surface visibility was poor across most
of the Project Area with the exception of a recently mowed transect that offered an open corridor
(see Figure 1-2). At the time of the survey, portions of the eastern end of the Project Area were
inundated, and shovel testing could not be conducted. Photographs of the Project Area are
provided in Figures 2-1 through 2-4.

2.2

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The Project Area is located in western Beaumont in northern Jefferson County, Texas.
Jefferson County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas, and the Project
Area is located about 27.0 miles (43.5 km) northwest of the Gulf of Mexico shoreline. The Gulf
of Mexico represents a structural basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal
Plain, which extends as far north as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to
the Balcones Escarpment, consists of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of
which are of terrigenous clastic origin, that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its
margins (Abbott 2001). The Beaumont area is underlain by rocks and unconsolidated
sediments that are quite young in a geological sense, ranging from modern to Miocene in age.
These consist predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic bodies arranged in an offlapped
sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine facies making up a
relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities between these
formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that occurred during

HJN 140113 AR

13

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Figure 2-1. View of Project Area located north of the Port Arthur Canal (facing east)

Figure 2-2. General view of Project Area (facing southeast)

14

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

Figure 2-3. Another view of Project Area (facing southeast)

Figure 2-4. Typical vegetation within Project Area (facing north)

HJN 140113 AR

15

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in this fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As a
result of the geometry of basin filling, successively younger rock units crop out in subparallel
bands from the basin margin toward the modern coastline.
The Project Area is situated on a low, coastal flat adjacent to the Port Arthur Canal.
From the Project Area, the Port Arthur Canal flows generally southeastwards for approximately
20.0 miles (32.2 km). The Port Arthur Canal terminates into the Port Arthur Reservoir which
supplies water to industrial facilities and cities in that area. The Port Arthur Reservoir is
surrounded by a network of canals and shipping channels formed by the Intracoastal Waterway,
the Port Arthur Boat Channel, and the Sabine Neches Canal near Sabine Lake, an inlet of the
Gulf of Mexico. Local topography within the Project Area is relatively flat, and elevations within
the Project Area average approximately 12.0 to 24.0 feet (3.6 to 7.3 m) above mean sea level
(amsl) with minimal natural topographic relief. Drainage within the Project Area is to the east
toward Hillebrandt Bayou, predominantly via overland sheet flow.

2.3

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The Project Area is underlain by the Beaumont Formation (Crout et al. 1965; Shelby et
al. 1968). The Beaumont, or Prairie, terrace is the youngest continuous coastwise terrace
fronting the modern Gulf (Abbott 2001). The Beaumont Formation consists of clay, silt, and fine
sand arranged in spatial patterns that reflect the distribution of fluvial (e.g., channel, point bar,
levee, and backswamp) and mudflat/coastal marsh facies (Van Siclen 1985). Sandy deposits
associated with littoral facies are also frequently considered part of the Beaumont. Many
investigators (cf. DuBar et al. 1991; Fisk 1938, 1940) have correlated the Beaumont terrace with
the Sangamon Interglacial (ca. 130 to 75 thousand years ago [kya]), although age estimates
range from Middle Wisconsinan (Alford and Holmes 1985) to 100 to 600 kya (Blum and Price
1994). While debate about the temporal affiliations of and correlations among the deposits that
underlie the major coastline terraces remains active, they are of little direct geoarcheological
relevance because virtually all investigators agree that these deposits considerably predate the
earliest demonstrated dates of human occupation in North America.
The Project Area is situated on 3 specific soil units—Anahuac-Aris complex, 0 to 1%
slopes (AsA); League clay, 0 to 1% slopes (LtA); and Morey-Levac complex, 0 to 1% slopes
(MrA) (Figure 2-5; Table 2-1). All 3 soil types are composed of clayey and loamy fluviomarine
deposits of Pleistocene age.
While aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in deep alluvial
sediments adjacent to major streams in Texas, the relative antiquity of the fluviodeltaic clayey
sediments that constitute the soils of the coastal plain, such as those that comprise the current
Project Area, suggests that any cultural resources would be constrained to the modern ground
surface, rather than in buried contexts, in erosional settings lacking integrity. Intact, buried
archeological deposits may occur within alluvial sediments near major streams; however, no
Holocene-age sediments are mapped within the current Project Area. Historic-era cultural
resources may occur in any physiographic setting, though they are comparatively rare in the
frequently flooded, marshy environs of Southeast Texas.

16

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

Figure 2-5. Distribution of mapped soils within Project Area

HJN 140113 AR

17

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Table 2-1. Summary of mapped soils in Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code
AsA

Soil Name
Anahuac-Aris,
0 to 1% slopes

Description

Typical Profile

Location

Anahuac—Clayey and
loamy sediments on
uplands of Pleistocene
age

0-7 in: Fine sandy loam
7-22 in: Loam
22-54 in: Clay
54-80 in: Loam

Western edge of
Project Area

Aris—Clayey and
loamy sediments on
uplands of Pleistocene
age

0-6 in: Silt loam
6-14 in: Silty clay loam
14-23 in: Silty clay
23-80 in: Clay

LtA

League clay,
0 to 1% slopes

Clayey sediments
derived from the
Beaumont Formation

0-11 in: Clay
11-30 in: Clay
30-36 in: Clay
36-59 in: Clay
59-80 in: Clay

Central portion of
Project Area

MrA

Morey-Levac complex,
0 to 1% slopes

Morey—Loamy and
clayey sediments of
the Beaumont
Formation

0-5 in: Loam
5-9 in: Loam
9-26 in: Clay loam
26-80 in: Clay loam

Eastern edge of
Project Area

Levac—Loamy
fluviomarine deposits
of Late Pleistocene
age

0-5 in: Silt loam
5-18 in: Silty clay loam
18-34 in: Clay
34-52 in: Clay
52-80 in: Silty clay

Source: NRCS 2014
in = Inches
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

2.4

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
While the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway
(1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes
3 separate climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late
Glacial Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present).
Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas
was considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region
was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and
Holloway 1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a
slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous
woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway

18

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

1985). During the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have
been more stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post
oak savannas. The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued
into the mid-Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more
mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and
Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were
probably achieved by 1500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott
2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional zone between the humid southeastern US
and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects the influences of latitude, low elevation, and
proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with the urban heat islands formed by the
tremendous concentrations of asphalt and concrete in the larger cities, such as Houston and
Beaumont, to create a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout
much of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water,
humidity in the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often
exceeds 50% even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high
humidity characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and
a modest diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly
high temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in
January to a high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to
9°C (38 to 47°F) in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average
low temperatures range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range
from 27 to 29°C (75 to 79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The region experiences 2 precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott 2001; Crout et
al. 1965). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of infrequent
cold fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs in the late
summer to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical storms and
hurricanes from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter and early
spring are relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional thunderstorms
that are relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual precipitation
varies from a low of approximately 100 centimeters (cm) (40 inches [in]) to a high of more than
132 cm (52 in). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5 to 8 cm (2 to 3 in) in
March to more than 19 cm (7.5 in) occurring locally on the coast during September. Almost all
of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely rare, occurring in measurable
amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.5

FLORA AND FAUNA

Jefferson County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texan biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahan et al.
(1984) further define 4 broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic

HJN 140113 AR

19

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

province that lies on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie,
(3) coastal gallery forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are
strongly controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the
seasonal water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically
dominated by little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter
environments are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria,
bulrushes, smooth cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush,
saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal
waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained
environments are characterized by such taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum,
gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass, red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort.
A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon,
nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and
many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish
to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs
and woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the
north and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses
are found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver
bluestem, buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian
sunflower, Engelmann daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow
neptunia, snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush,
bluebonnet, ragweed, croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring
in the coastal prairie include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live
oak, elm, hackberry, bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as
the coastal prairie grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland
environment with common stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie
is home to a diverse fauna, including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many
small rodents, amphibians, reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and
pronghorn were also present at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbrier, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,

20

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are
grasses such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest
include white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and
rodents, turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bears were also present at various times in the
past, and a number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger
deciduous trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory
vegetation varies from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and
young trees. Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle,
greenbrier, Virginia creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A
variety of fauna is also present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit,
mink, skunk, various small rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bears were
also present at times in the past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the
transition zone to the coastal prairie environment.

HJN 140113 AR

21

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The Project Area is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21county area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 124.0 miles (200.0 km) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline. Much of the
archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern Great
Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990).
Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These 2 subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 16.0 miles (25.0 km) inland from the coast that covers the area
influenced by Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable
ecological variability characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes,
wetlands, marine coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses
considerable ecological diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney
woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to
denote Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural
characteristics of Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring
regions. For instance, the Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and
Southeast Texas, and Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for
Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time
in Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit
evidence of reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be
associated with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of
subsistence-related activities. Inland sites also tend to contain modest pottery assemblages,
fired clay balls (at some sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal
sites tend to consist of multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain oyster shell tools,
large quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), numerous bone tools, and only a few
lithic artifacts.

HJN 140113 AR

23

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period.
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is
represented by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred endscrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas
are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is
little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian
period (8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far
less pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and
corresponding decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a
diversified resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas,
however, this hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The
appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone
assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural

24

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

stage. Material culture shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in
the application of groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
In Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains.
Many of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and
several new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and
probably the Gary-Kent series.
The Late Archaic period (1,500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is
characterized by Gary, Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos
points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition
developed in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981;
Patterson 1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period
but reached full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as
boatstones and bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang
knives, stingray spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial
practices included the systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre,
and use of locally made grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most
burials are found in extended supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials
are also known. Burial direction is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to
site. Patterson et al. (1993) report that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary
tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area
by about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the
Conroe-Livingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears
to have progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995).
Southeastern Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where
Aten (1983) established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
129 km (80 mi) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal exception of a
few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found on the Gulf
coast west of the Sabine Lake area.

HJN 140113 AR

25

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods
(Aten 1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility
ware throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown
Plain for about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods
before once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety,
Goose Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor
pottery types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway
(Aten 1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte
types are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste
(like Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined
by the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the
latter part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in
Southeast Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the
Late Prehistoric period (Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995;
Wheat 1953). In fact, Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in
Southeast Texas as early as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points
that consisted of marginally retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a
generalized date of adoption of the bow-and-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca.
A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas. In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to
be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba,
Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial sequence for these point types has not been
established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn points appear to predate Perdiz points
throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto
Plain and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek
pottery remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt
Coated pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

26

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue.
Aten (1983) has
reconstructed the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century,
including the Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (possibly Karankawa), and Tonkawa. The
presence of the Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central
Texas in the 17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought
to have occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the
corresponding mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east
of the San Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe
may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic
Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and
Cuney points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified
by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. A.D. 1700 TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas occurred in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez
Cabeza de Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near
Galveston Bay; however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until
after 1700. The first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission
system, as well as the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native
culture and social systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where
the burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as
increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the
time heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous
Indian population was greatly diminished. The Alabama/Coushatta Indians who currently reside
in Southeast Texas are migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early
19th centuries (Newcomb 1961).
The French and Spanish disputed ownership of the future county during the
18th century.1 Spanish claims were based on the 1528 expedition of Álvar Núñez Cabeza de
Vaca, and French involvement began with La Salle in 1685. By 1730, French fur traders had
crossed the lower Sabine to trade with the Orcoquizas on the Trinity River; however, the area

1

The following historical summary of Jefferson County has been adapted from TSHA (2014).

HJN 140113 AR

27

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

that became Jefferson County was rarely visited by EuroAmerican traders because it was
bounded on the east by unfordable rivers and bayous and on the north by the Big Thicket. To
prevent French penetration, the Spanish established the San Agustín de Ahumada Presidio and
Nuestra Señora de la Luz Mission near the mouth of the Trinity in 1756. In 1777, Antonio Gil
Ibarbo conducted an expedition to investigate the English presence in Spanish territory, and, in
1785, José de Evia camped at Sabine Pass and mapped Sabine Lake and the Sabine and
Neches rivers. By 1803, when the US acquired Louisiana, the area of Jefferson County was
under Spanish control as part of the Atascosito District. In conjunction with filibustering efforts
to discourage Spanish shipping after 1816, the area provided a path for slave smuggling
between Louisiana, Point Bolivar, Jefferson County, and the Sabine River until the 1830s. The
pirate Jean Laffite maintained a slave barracks on the Sabine River 16 km (10 mi) north of the
present site of Orange to house black slaves in transit. In 1821, filibustering efforts ceased
when the Treaty of Córdova ended Spanish ownership in the region and made it part of Mexico.
Anglo-American colonization subsequently met both hostility and encouragement from the
Mexican government, as settlement efforts brought new families to the area from 1821 to 1836.
The first settlement within the confines of the present county, established at Tevis Bluff in 1824,
became the City of Beaumont. The area that became Jefferson County was included in the
Mexican Department of Nacogdoches as part of the Liberty Municipality in Lorenzo de Zavala’s
empresario grant of 1831. It later became part of the Jefferson Municipality. The Cow Bayou
settlement in this municipality, organized in 1835 and later known as Old Jefferson, became the
first county seat and the focal point of future growth in the county. Local volunteers took part in
the Texas Revolution, and other residents provided troop support.
Jefferson County, formed in 1836 and organized in 1837, was one of the original
counties in the Republic of Texas. It was named for the municipality that preceded it, which was
in turn named for Thomas Jefferson. The county’s boundaries, as delineated on 21 December
1837, included all of the future Orange County, a part of what later became Hardin County, and
the extreme eastern part of the future Chambers County. The first county seat, Jefferson, or
Old Jefferson, on the east bank of Cow Bayou, was replaced by Beaumont in 1838 and had
disappeared by 1845, when the site of Orange was surveyed. Orange was first called Jefferson
or New Jefferson. In 1836, Claiborne West, a signer of the Texas Declaration of Independence,
served as first postmaster and merchant at Old Jefferson. Another chief town was Sabine Pass,
laid out in 1839 with the backing of Sam Houston and Philip A. Sublett. Early settlers, primarily
from the lower South, were joined by Cajuns in the 1840s and by immigrants from the North and
from Europe in the 1850s. The area became an ethnic conglomerate. The Cajuns settled near
Taylor Bayou, and the Germans settled in the center of the county.
By the 1840s, shingle manufacture and timber exports supplemented a domestic
economy based on spinning, leatherwork, and soap and candle making. Shipbuilding, which
grew from the lumber industry before 1850, took place next to the lumber mills in Sabine Pass
and Beaumont. Steam-driven industry developed in 1846, and the first steam sawmill in
Beaumont was established in 1856. Jefferson County’s land was better suited to livestock
raising than to a cotton-based plantation economy. By 1820, Louisiana cattlemen drove herds
across the Sabine and Neches to graze on Gulf Coast saltgrasses, and a system of roads and
ferries running from east to west across the county was slowly put in place to support movement

28

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

of the herds. In the antebellum period, some cattlemen settled permanently and pursued their
livelihood alongside small farmers. Leather shops and tanneries developed in Beaumont in the
1840s, and shoe shops, saddleries, and exporters of hides and tallow followed in the 1850s.
Cotton-buying and ginning began by 1850 and increased with the arrival of the Eastern Texas
Railroad, though production in 1859 was only 84 bales and not much of the potential agricultural
land had been improved. Stephen L. Smith, the county’s most diversified planter in the 1840s,
raised corn, sweet potatoes, and rice. Early rice agriculture, the forerunner of the county’s
largest farm enterprise, produced 1,000 pounds in 1859. The Texas and New Orleans Railroad
from Houston to Orange and the Eastern Texas Railroad from Sabine Pass to Beaumont were
completed by 1861, but insufficient rail transportation and high freight rates limited antebellum
growth. Sabine Pass became a boomtown, stimulated by the Morgan Lines, which established
operations there before the Civil War. Four firms at Sabine shipped 20,000 bales of cotton
annually, and 300 vessels cleared the Sabine customhouse in 1859. Though the county was
prosperous in the 1850s, and resolution of the (Orange County) Regulator-Moderator War in
Jefferson County courts stabilized growth in that decade, Beaumont had only 4 commission and
forwarding houses, 4 dry-goods stores, 2 groceries, 2 hotels, and a population of 400 by 1858.
During the Civil War, Jefferson County residents voted 256 for and 15 against
secession. The county court voted to garrison a fort at Sabine Pass, Beaumont became a
concentration point for Confederate troops, a cantonment was established at Spindletop
Springs, and the county courthouse served as a hospital. Among the county’s several volunteer
groups, the Sabine Pass Guard was organized at Sabine Pass in April 1861 under the Texas
legislative act of 1858 that authorized the state militia. Beginning in 1862, federal troops burned
cavalry barracks near Sabine Pass, along with a railroad depot, sawmills, a planing mill, a sash
and door factory, and the palatial homes of D.R. Wingate and John Stamps. They also shelled
Sabine City, then suffering an epidemic of yellow fever. The Confederates reoccupied Sabine
Pass in January 1863, and the battle of Sabine Pass in September of that year ended federal
efforts to penetrate the interior via the Sabine. The war caused considerable losses, and farm
acreage and value declined, cotton exports fell, and the number of cattle in the county dropped
from 51,600 in 1862 to 40,000 in 1865.
Recovery from the war was slow. Jefferson County exports in 1867 of cotton, cattle,
beef hides, lumber, cypress shingles, and lumber products, including resin and turpentine,
constituted only about 1/4 of their prewar total. Sugar production between 1860 and 1880 was
limited, and significant agriculture did not develop again until after 1890. By 1876, however, the
county was once again a lumber and shipping center, as loggers used the Neches and Sabine
rivers to float logs to mills at Orange and Beaumont, where mills manufactured 82 million
shingles and 75 million board feet of timber by 1880. Exports, including pine for cross-ties and
bridges, made these towns major lumber centers by 1900. Four canal systems for irrigating rice
were built between 1898 and 1902, including the Port Arthur Rice and Irrigation Company,
McFaddin Canal Company, Jefferson County Irrigation Company (later renamed Beaumont
Irrigation Company), and Treadaway Canal Company (later renamed Neches Canal Company).
By 1904, 50,000 acres (ac) were under cultivation as mule power replaced ox teams.

HJN 140113 AR

29

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

After 1880, rail transportation increased significantly. The Texas and New Orleans (now
the Southern Pacific Transportation Company), built from Houston to Orange in 1860,
abandoned its Orange County track in 1863 and the line in 1867, and then rebuilt in 1876. This
railroad was linked to the Louisiana and Western, and through service was provided to New
Orleans in 1881. By 1881, service had also been reestablished by the East Texas Railway,
which was renamed the Sabine and East Texas and later became part of the Texas and New
Orleans. The Gulf, Beaumont and Kansas City Railway, constructed between 1893 and 1896,
ran at first neither to the Gulf nor to Kansas City, but only from Kirbyville to Beaumont. The Gulf
and Interstate developed in 1895, and the Beaumont, Sour Lake, and Western Railway between
1903 and 1904. Port Arthur, founded in 1895 by Arthur Edward Stilwell, was linked in 1895 by
the Kansas City Southern to Beaumont. Service to Kansas City finally came in 1897, when the
Sabine River bridge was completed. The Sabine-Neches or Port Arthur Ship Canal was
excavated in 1897 and 1898 from Sabine Pass to Port Arthur. It opened in 1899 and was
gradually extended to the mouths of the Neches and Sabine rivers. The first oceangoing vessel
to call at Beaumont and Orange was the Nicaragua, which arrived in 1906. River depths were
increased to around 8 m (25 ft) by 1920, by which time the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway had
crossed the southern part of the county. Interurban service from Nederland to Beaumont and
Port Arthur linked those communities in 1913, and, by 1916, completion of the channel to
Beaumont from Port Arthur and the mouth of the Neches had further increased lumber exports.
Between 1900 and 1910, the population grew from 14,329 to 38,182. A major influx
followed the Spindletop oilfield’s opening in 1901, and the growth in the decade came almost
exclusively from the white population of Hardin, Tyler, Jasper, and Newton counties. Significant
Cajun French movement to Jefferson County began in 1910 when the boll weevil destroyed
cotton crops in parishes adjacent to Lafayette, Louisiana. Also, a small influx of Mexicans that
reached Jefferson County beginning in 1917 and 1918 as refinery workers were drafted in
World War I. By 1920, the county’s population reached 73,120, nearly double the 1910 figure.
Spindletop transformed Beaumont into a major industrial center. Refineries, including
the Texas Company refinery of Joseph S. Cullinan and Arnold Schlaet (1902) and the Gulf Oil
Corporation (now Chevron) refinery were built at Port Arthur, Port Neches, and Beaumont.
During World War I, shipbuilding increased, and the Magnolia Petroleum Company (now
ExxonMobil) refinery on the Neches at Beaumont played an active role as a supplier for the war.
Between 1955 and 1960, the Texaco and Gulf refineries employed 5,000 to 6,000 workers, and,
by World War II, the Gulf refinery was the 14th largest refinery in the world. Farm tenancy,
which increased significantly in Jefferson County in the first decade of the 20th century, declined
briefly, but increased so much during the Great Depression that owners and tenant farmers
achieved almost equal numbers. By 1930, the average farm size had fallen to roughly 250 ac.
In the 1930s, however, despite the hardships experienced in many areas, Jefferson County was
one among several Texas counties that continued to prosper.
The county shipped
29,022,201 tons of materials through Beaumont, Sabine Pass, and Port Arthur in 1934 and in
the next year produced 1,304,495 barrels of crude petroleum, crops valued at $1,866,873, and
livestock valued at $1,511,061. In 1930, the county had 141 manufacturing establishments with
products valued at more than $297 million. In 1938, the county produced clay and shells and
raised 2.2 million bushels of rice on 40,000 ac of irrigated land as well as 1000 bales of cotton,

30

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

corn, other feed crops, figs, and truck crops. Livestock totals included 100,000 beef cattle as
well as dairy cattle, hogs, poultry, sheep, and goats. In foreign and coastal trade, Beaumont
and Port Arthur shipped oil, cotton, lumber, and other products. Industries included oil refining,
ship building, rice milling, food processing, and the manufacture of machinery, chemicals,
garments, and crates. The Rainbow Bridge over the Neches River from Port Arthur to Orange
was completed in 1938; with a vertical clearance of 54 m (176 ft) over the water, it was the
South’s tallest highway bridge.
In the 1940s, 26% of Jefferson County’s farmers were tenant farmers. Because of the
importance of the rice and beef crops, the Texas Rice Improvement Association, Texas A&M
College, and the US Department of Agriculture established an experiment station for the
improvement of rice and pasture cultivation as a joint project at Pine Island. The world’s largest
synthetic rubber plant, Neches Butane Products Company (now Texaco Chemical), was built at
Port Neches in 1942. By 1949, the county had become highly industrialized and urbanized, with
6 oil refineries producing total daily capacities of more than one-half million barrels, 3 rice mills,
11 tank farms, and 14 producing oilfields. New industry arrived as plants were established for
the production of chemicals and petrochemicals. During World War II, the growth of
shipbuilding in the Sabine-Neches Waterway brought in such firms as Bethlehem Steel,
Gulfport, Weaver, Burton, and Jones and Laughlin. In the 1950s, the Spindletop field was still
active, Gulf Oil laid pipelines, oilmen developed a new field at Hillebrandt Bayou, and sulfur
mining began. The nickname applied to Orange, Port Arthur, and Beaumont, the “Golden
Triangle,” symbolized the close relationship that had grown up among the cities. Gulf State
Utilities Company supplied electric power for much of Southeast Texas and southern Louisiana.
In 1956, roughly 26 million tons of materials were shipped from the county’s inland ports,
including rice, cotton, rubber products, steel, sugar, flour, oil, and oil products. In 1960, the
economy continued to be based on significant agricultural production but was dominated by
Beaumont and Port Arthur, which together had become a commercial banking center and major
chemical and petroleum products manufacturer. Port Neches was the site of the Atlantic, Gulf,
and Texaco refineries. By the 1970s, rice and cattle were the chief agricultural products,
soybeans had been introduced, and residents were employed in the petrochemical,
shipbuilding, and rubber industries.
In the 1980s, the county was one of the most densely populated in the state. Ninety-four
percent of its roughly 250,900 residents lived in urban areas. Manufacturing establishments
made products valued at more than $2 billion in a single year, and a total of 5318 business
establishments operated countywide. In the early 1990s, Lamar University and Lamar
University-Port Arthur provided higher education in Jefferson County. A new county jail and a
new state prison, the Mark Stiles Unit, opened, and a new unit of the federal prison system was
under construction. The South Texas State Fair is held annually in October, and duck hunting
and saltwater fishing attract outdoor enthusiasts to the area.

HJN 140113 AR

31

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Archival research conducted via the Internet at the THC’s Texas Archeological Sites
Atlas (Atlas) website indicated the presence of no previously recorded archeological sites or
cemeteries within a 1.0-mile (1.6-km) review radius of the Project Area (THC 2014), while a
review of the National Park Service’s (NPS) NRHP Google Earth map layer indicated the
presence of no historic properties listed on the NRHP within the review radius (NPS 2014).
According to the Atlas, the Project Area has not been previously assessed for cultural
resources.
Prehistoric archeological sites are commonly found in upland areas and on alluvial
terraces near stream/river channels or drainages. Based on the location of the Project Area in
close proximity to Hillebrandt Bayou, it was Horizon’s original opinion, prior to the field efforts,
that there existed a moderate potential for undocumented prehistoric cultural deposits within the
boundaries of the Project Area.
In regard to historic-era resources, no structures are visible within the Project Area on
the USGS Beaumont West, Texas, 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle map (USGS 1994). In
reviewing the Google Earth aerial imagery, no structures are visible within the boundaries of the
Project Area. The lack of any visible historic-era structures within or in proximity to the Project
Area suggests a low potential for historic-era architectural or archeological resources within the
boundaries of the Project Area.

HJN 140113 AR

33

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

A 2-person Horizon archeological field crew completed the intensive pedestrian survey
within the Project Area on 2 June 2014. This entailed intensive surface inspection and
subsurface shovel testing efforts within the Project Area. In addition to pedestrian walkover, the
TSMASS for cultural resources surveys state that, for linear projects, a minimum of
16 subsurface probes per mile of 100.0-foot- (30.5-m-) wide ROW are required unless field
conditions warrant excavation of more probes (e.g., due to the presence of culturally sensitive
areas) or less probes (e.g., due to extensive prior disturbances or cultural low-probability areas).
In the event that a probe yields evidence of subsurface cultural deposits, additional probes may
be necessary to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of the subsurface deposits
associated with the cultural resource. As such, a total of 48 shovel tests were necessary within
the 1.5-mile- (2.4-km-) long, 140.0-foot- (43.0-m-) wide Project Area in order to comply with the
TSMASS. Horizon exceeded the minimum survey standards by excavating 49 shovel tests
within the Project Area. All excavated matrices were screened through 0.25-inch (6.0-millimeter
[mm]) hardware mesh or were trowel-sorted if the dense clay soils prohibited successful
screening.
In general, shovel tests measured approximately 12.0 inches (30.0 cm) in diameter and
were excavated to a target depth of 3.3 feet (1.0 m) below ground surface, to the top of preHolocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable. In practice, shovel tests were
terminated at depths of 3.9 to 13.8 inches (10.0 to 35.0 cm) below surface due to the presence
of pre-Holocene sediments generally composed of olive-gray, grayish-brown, and mottled dark
gray, yellowish-brown, and yellowish-red silty clay. The locations of all shovel tests were
recorded via handheld global positioning system (GPS) units utilizing the Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) coordinate system and the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83). Shovel
test locations are presented in Figure 5-1, and shovel test data are presented in Appendix A.
The TSMASS also require backhoe trenching in stream terraces and other areas with
the potential to contain buried archeological materials at depths below those that shovel tests
are capable of reaching (approximately 3.3 feet [1.0 m] below surface). The Project Area is
located on a clayey, fluviomarine, Pleistocene terrace adjacent to the Port Arthur Canal. Shovel
testing revealed silty clay sediments at the surface, indicating that shovel testing was capable of
penetrating to the bottom of sediments that could contain archeological deposits. As such,
shovel testing is considered to constitute an adequate and effective survey technique for

HJN 140113 AR

35

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5.1 Locations of shovel tests within Project Area

36

140113_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

identifying archeological resources within the Project Area, and mechanical trenching was
consequently not employed as a site-prospecting technique.

HJN 140113 AR

37

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

RESULTS

The survey of the Project Area resulted in entirely negative findings. No cultural
materials were observed on the surface of the Project Area or within any of the 49 excavated
shovel tests. In general, the Project Area contained silty clay sediments in surface contexts.
These soils would have likely confined any cultural materials to shallow deposits and would not
have facilitated deeply buried deposits.

6.2

RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the negative survey results, it is Horizon’s opinion that the proposed Amelia
Cutoff Relief Drainage Improvement Project will have no adverse effect on significant cultural
resources designated as or considered eligible for formal designation as SALs or eligible for
listing on the NRHP. Horizon therefore recommends that JCDD6 be allowed to proceed with
the construction of the proposed project relative to the jurisdiction of the ACT, the USACE, and
Section 106 of the NHPA. However, in the unlikely event that any cultural materials (including
human remains or burial features) are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction,
use, or ongoing maintenance of the Project Area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work at
the location of the discovery should cease immediately, and the THC and USACE should be
notified of the discovery.

HJN 140113 AR

39

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Alford, J.J., and J.C. Holmes
1985
Meander Scars as Evidence of Major Climate Changes in Southeast Louisiana.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 75:395-403.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory,
pp. 72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The
Florida State Museum, Gainesville.

Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Blum, M.D., and D.M. Price
1994
Glacio-Eustatic and Climatic Controls on Quaternary Alluvial Plain Deposition, Texas
Coastal Plain. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies
44:85-92.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V. M. Bryant, Jr., and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.

HJN 140113 AR

41

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Crout, J.D., D.G. Symmank, and G.A. Peterson
1965
Soil Survey of Jefferson County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
DuBar, J.R., T.E. Ewing, E.L. Lundelius, E.G. Otvos, and C.D. Winkler
1991
Quaternary Geology of the Gulf of Mexico Coastal Plain. In The Geology of North
America, Volume K2: Quaternary Non-Glacial Geomorphology, Conterminous
United States, edited by R. B. Morrison, pp. 583-610. Geological Society of America,
Boulder, Colorado.
Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas.
Reports of Investigations, No. 8,
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Fisk, H.N.
1938
Geology of Grant and LaSalle Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 10.
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.
1940

Louisiana

Geology of Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 18. Louisiana
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.

Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.

42

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
McMahan, C.A., R.G. Frye, and K.L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
National Park Service (NPS)
2014
National
Register
of
Historic
Places
online
<http://nrhp.focus.nps.gov/natreghome.do?searchtype=natreghome>.
May 2014.

database.
Accessed 30

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2012
SSURGO Database for Jefferson County, Texas. Natural Resources Conservation
Service, US Department of Agriculture.
2014

Web Soil Survey, <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed 30 May 2014. US Department of Agriculture.

Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:163.

HJN 140113 AR

43

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc.,
Corpus Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330

Shelby, C.A., M.K. McGowen, S. Aranow, W.L. Fisher, L.F. Brown, Jr., J.H. McGowen, C.G.
Groat, and V.E. Barnes
1968
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Beaumont Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin (Revised 1992).
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C.
Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2014
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Restricted Database.
state.tx.us/>. Accessed 30 May 2014.

<http://www.nueces.thc.

Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2014
Jefferson County. The Handbook of Texas Online, <http://www.tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/JJ/hcj5.html>. 30 May 2014.
US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2012
Digital orthophoto quarter-quadrangles, Jefferson County, Texas.
National
Agriculture Imagery Program, Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.

44

140113_arch_survey_report

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

US Geological Survey (USGS)
1994
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Beaumont West, Texas, quadrangle.
Van Siclen, D.C.
1985
Pleistocene Meander-Belt Ridge Patterns in the Vicinity of Houston, Texas.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 35:525-532.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

HJN 140113 AR

45

APPENDIX A:

SHOVEL TEST DATA

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates
ST No.

Easting

1

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JC1

387700

3324936

0-20+

JC2

387656

3324910

0-35+

JC3

387601

3324940

0-30+

JC4

387548

3324910

0-15+

JC5

387504

3324939

0-15+

JC6

387434

3324919

0-25+

JC7

387418

3324952

0-15+

JC8

387366

3324952

0-20
20-30+

JC9

387328

3324998

0-20+

JC10

387278

3324999

0-15+

JC11

387231

3325057

0-15+

JC12

387186

3325047

0-15+

JC13

387135

3325107

0-20+

JC14

387099

3325100

0-25+

HJN 140113 AR

Soils

Mottled very dark gray, dark
yellowish-brown, and yellowish-red
clay
Mottled very dark gray, dark
yellowish-brown, and yellowish-red
clay
Mottled very dark gray, dark
yellowish-brown, and yellowish-red
clay
Mottled very dark gray, dark
yellowish-brown, and yellowish-red
clay
Mottled very dark gray, dark
yellowish-brown, and yellowish-red
clay
Mottled yellowish-brown,
yellowish-red, and grayish-brown
silty clay
Very dark gray clay with oyster
shell inclusions
Mottled very dark gray, dark
yellowish-brown, and yellowish-red
clay
Olive yellow clay
Mottled very dark gray, dark
yellowish-brown, and yellowishbrown clay
Mottled very dark gray, dark
yellowish-brown, and yellowishbrown clay
Mottled very dark gray, dark
yellowish-brown, and yellowishbrown clay
Mottled dark yellowish-brown and
olive yellow clay with oyster shell
inclusions
Mottled dark gray and yellowishbrown clay
Mottled dark gray and yellowishred clay

Artifacts

None

None

None

None

None

None
None

None
None

None

None

None

None
None
None

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

UTM Coordinates

1

ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JC15

387039

3325151

0-15+

JC16

387006

3325152

0-15
15-25+

JC17

386959

3325183

0-20+

JC18

386905

3325161

0-15+

JC19

386852

3325193

0-20+

JC20

386804

3325162

0-30+

JC21

386754

3325183

0-20+

JC22

386703

3325160

0-25+

JC23

386641

3325173

0-20+

BS1

388820

3324596

0-20+

BS2

388778

3324618

0-20+

BS3

388734

3324649

0-25+

BS4

388690

3324665

0-15+

BS5

388650

3324709

0-15+

BS6

388601

3324723

0-10+

BS7
BS8

388560
388506

3324760
3324773

0-30+
0-20
20-25+

BS9

388474

3324805

0-20+

BS10

388426

3324823

0-20+

A-2

Soils

Mottled dark gray and yellowishred clay
Mottled dark gray and yellowishbrown clay with oyster shell
inclusions
Mottled olive brown and yellowishbrown clay
Mottled dark gray and yellowishred clay
Mottled dark gray and yellowishred clay
Mottled dark gray and yellowishred clay
Mottled dark gray and yellowishbrown clay
Mottled dark gray and yellowishbrown clay
Mottled grayish-brown and
yellowish-red clay
Mottled grayish-brown and
yellowish-red clay
Mottled dark olive gray and brown
wet clay
Mottled dark olive gray and brown
wet clay
Mottled dark olive gray and
yellowish-brown wet clay
Mottled very dark grayish-brown
and reddish-brown clay
Mottled very dark grayish-brown
and reddish-brown wet clay
Mottled very dark grayish-brown
and reddish-brown wet clay
Mottled dark grayish-brown and
yellowish-red wet clay
Dark grayish-brown loamy clay
Mottled dark grayish-brown, gray,
and yellowish-red clay
Mottled very dark grayish-brown
and yellowish-red clay
Mottled very dark grayish-brown
and yellowish-red clay

140113_arch_survey_report

Artifacts

None

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 1.5-mile-long Amelia Cutoff Relief Drainage
Improvement Project, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas

UTM Coordinates

1

ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

BS11

388381

3324855

0-25+

BS12

388335

3324875

0-20+

BS13
BS14

388291
388239

3324906
3324905

0-20+
0-15+

BS15

388183

3324914

0-15+

BS16

388128

3324907

0-25+

BS17

388073

3324911

0-10+

BS18
BS19
BS20
BS21
BS22
BS23
BS24

388023
387970
387920
387867
387811
387761
387711

3324904
3324912
3324903
3324910
3324902
3324912
3324903

0-20+
0-10+
0-20+
0-20+
0-20+
0-30+
0-20+

BS25

386525

3325150

0-25+

BS26

386575

3325165

0-20+

Soils

Mottled very dark grayish-brown
and yellowish-red wet clay
Mottled black and reddish-brown
clay
Mottled black and reddish-brown
clay
Very dark grayish-brown clay
Mottled very dark grayish-brown
and yellowish-red clay
Mottled very dark grayish-brown
and yellowish-red clay
Mottled very dark grayish-brown
and yellowish-red clay
Mottled very dark grayish-brown
and reddish-brown clay
Very dark grayish-brown wet clay
Very dark grayish-brown clay
Dark olive gray clay
Dark olive gray clay
Dark olive gray clay
Dark olive gray clay
Mottled very dark grayish-brown
and yellowish-red clay
Mottled very dark grayish-brown
and yellowish-red clay

Artifacts

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 140113 AR

A-3

