An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW,
Humble, Harris County, Texas
By:
Abigail Peyton and Russell K. Brownlow
With contributions by
Jeffery D. Owens

HJN 060212 AR
Texas Antiquities Committee Permit No. 4388

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Schwartz, Page & Harding, L.L.P.
Houston, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

February 2007

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW,
Humble, Harris County, Texas
By:
Abigail Peyton and Russell K. Brownlow
With contributions by
Jeffery D. Owens

Prepared for:
Schwartz, Page & Harding, L.L.P.
1300 Post Oak, Suite 1400
Houston, Texas 77056

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
2600 Dellana Lane, Suite 200
Austin, Texas 78746

Abigail Peyton, MA, RPA, Principal Investigator
HJN 060212 AR

Texas Antiquities Committee Permit No. 4388

February 2007

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Harris County Municipal Utility District Number 278 (MUD 278) is proposing to construct
a 2.6-mile (mi) (4.2-kilometer [km]) water line that will have a 35-foot- (ft) (11.0-meter- [m]) wide
construction easement in northeastern Harris County. The proposed water line will begin at the
northern end of Ralston Road and travel north across Williams Gully running parallel to an
upland man-made drainage ditch and eventually veering west to parallel Ygnacio Road. The
proposed water line will terminate at Atascocita Road. Because the water line will be
constructed by MUD 278 and subsequently operated and maintained by the City of Houston, the
undertaking falls under the regulations of the Texas Antiquities Code. In addition, the crossing
of Williams Gully will also require a Section 404 permit issued by the US Army Corps of
Engineers, thereby triggering Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as
amended. On behalf of MUD 278, Schwartz, Page & Harding, L.L.P., contracted with Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) to conduct a pedestrian survey of the proposed water
line easement. Horizon conducted the survey under Texas Antiquities Committee (TAC) Permit
No. 4388. The purpose of the survey was to determine if any archeological/historical sites were
located within the proposed easement, and, if any existed, to determine their eligibility for formal
designation as State Archeological Landmarks (SALs) and for inclusion in the National Register
of Historic Places (NRHP).
Horizon conducted the cultural resources survey on 26 January 2007. This entailed
intensive surface inspection as well as subsurface shovel testing. The Texas State Minimum
Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of 16 shovel tests per mile for
projects measuring 100 ft (30 m) in width. As the proposed water line easement will measure
only 35 ft (11.0 m) wide, a minimum of 6 shovel tests per mile were required. As such, a total
16 shovel tests were required along the length of the proposed water line easement in order to
comply with the TSMASS. Horizon excavated a total of only 5 shovel tests along the length of
easement, failing to meet the TSMASS for several reasons. Namely, roughly the northern half
of the easement consists of existing road easements that have been heavily impacted by road
construction, drainage ditch excavation, and utility installation. In these areas, only surface
inspection and photo-documentation were conducted. Similarly, extensive areas in the southern
half of the easement have also been heavily impacted by drainage ditch construction, leaving
little to no potential for intact, buried deposits. These areas were also visually inspected and
photo-documented. Finally, the majority of the remaining “undisturbed” portions of the

HJN 060212 AR

iii

Management Summary

easement were covered by standing water, leaving only a few locations where shovel testing
was necessary and/or possible. It is in these areas where the 5 shovel tests were excavated.
The intensive surface inspection and shovel testing regimen resulted in entirely negative
findings. As indicated above, the length of the easement is dominated by areas that have been
heavily disturbed by roadway construction, drainage ditch excavation, and utility installation, or
areas that are low-lying and swampy with standing surface water. Overall, there was generally
a low potential for intact cultural resources along the length of the easement. If any had been
present in the past, they likely would have already been destroyed within the north half of the
easement and within a large portion of the southern half of the easement. Again, the majority of
the undisturbed areas along the easement were low-lying, swampy areas that likely would not
have been targeted for aboriginal occupation.
Based on the survey-level investigations, it is Horizon’s opinion that the construction of
the proposed MUD 278 water line will have no effect on any significant cultural resources.
Horizon recommends that cultural resources clearance be granted for the undertaking.
However, in the unlikely event that any cultural materials (including human remains or burial
features) are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance of the right-of-way (ROW), even in previously surveyed areas, all work should
cease immediately and the Texas Historical Commission (THC) should be notified of the
discovery.

iv

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ..................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................1

2.0

AREA ENVIRONMENT..............................................................................................5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology..........................................................................5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology.......................................................................10
2.3
Climate .........................................................................................................11
2.4
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................12

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................15
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) ....................................................16
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) ........................................................16
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) .......................................................17
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) ...................................................18
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ......................................................19
3.6
Historic Period (ca. 1700 A.D. to Present) ....................................................19

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................25

5.0

METHODOLOGY ....................................................................................................27

6.0

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ..................................................................29
6.1
Results .........................................................................................................29
6.2
Recommendations .......................................................................................29

7.0

REFERENCES CITED.............................................................................................31
APPENDIX A: SHOVEL TEST DATA

HJN 060212 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1. Topographic map of proposed water line easement ....................................................2
Figure 2. Aerial photograph of proposed water line easement....................................................3
Figure 3. Typical view of disturbances within northern half of easement ....................................6
Figure 4. Another view of disturbances within northern half of easement ...................................6
Figure 5. General view of easement through County Rehabilitation Center................................7
Figure 6. View of central portion of easement near existing water plant .....................................7
Figure 7. View of southern portion of easement between artificial drainage ditches ...................8
Figure 8. View of Williams Gulley near southern end of easement .............................................8
Figure 9. Swampy area south of Williams Gulley .......................................................................9
Figure 10. Southern end of the proposed water line easement ..................................................9
Figure 11. Atlas map ................................................................................................................26
Figure 12. Shovel test locations ...............................................................................................28

vi

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Harris County Municipal Utility District 278 (MUD 278) is proposing to construct a 2.6mile (mi) (4.2-kilometer [km]) water line that will have a 35-foot- (ft) (11.0-meter- [m]) wide
construction easement in northeastern Harris County (Figures 1 and 2). The proposed water
line will begin at the northern end of Ralston Road and travel north across Williams Gully
running parallel to an upland man-made drainage ditch and eventually veering west to parallel
Ygnacio Road. The proposed water line will terminate at Atascocita Road. Because the water
line will be constructed by MUD 278 and subsequently operated and maintained by the City of
Houston, the undertaking falls under the regulations of the Texas Antiquities Code. In addition,
the crossing of Williams Gully will also require a Section 404 permit issued by the US Army
Corps of Engineers, thereby triggering Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of
1966, as amended. On behalf of MUD 278, Schwartz, Page & Harding, L.L.P., contracted with
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) to conduct a pedestrian survey of the proposed
water line easement. Horizon conducted the survey under Texas Antiquities Committee (TAC)
Permit No. 4388. The purpose of the survey was to determine if any archeological/historical
sites were located within the proposed easement, and, if any existed, to determine their
eligibility for formal designation as State Archeological Landmarks (SALs) and for inclusion in
the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP).
The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive
pedestrian survey of the right-of-way (ROW), and the production of a report suitable for review
by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas Historical
Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council
of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports. Abigail
Peyton (Horizon staff archeologist) served as the Principal Investigator for the project, while
Jared Wiersema conducted the field investigations.
Horizon conducted the cultural resources survey on 26 January 2007. This entailed
intensive surface inspection as well as subsurface shovel testing. The Texas State Minimum
Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of 16 shovel tests per mile for
projects measuring 100 ft (30 m) in width. As the proposed water line easement will measure
only 35 ft (11.0 m) wide, a minimum of 6 shovel tests per mile were required. As such, a total
16 shovel tests were required along the length of the proposed water line easement in order to
comply with the TSMASS. Horizon excavated a total of only 5 shovel tests along the length of

HJN 060212 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Topographic map of proposed water line easement

2

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

Figure 2. Aerial photograph of proposed water line easement

HJN 060212 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

the easement, failing to meet the TSMASS for several reasons. Namely, roughly the northern
half of the easement consists of existing road easements that have been heavily impacted by
road construction, drainage ditch excavation, and utility installation. In these areas, only surface
inspection and photo-documentation were conducted. Similarly, extensive areas in the southern
half of the easement have also been heavily impacted by drainage ditch construction, leaving
little to no potential for intact, buried deposits. These areas were also visually inspected and
photo-documented. Finally, the majority of the remaining “undisturbed” portions of the
easement were covered by standing water, leaving only a few locations where shovel testing
was necessary and/or possible. It is in these areas where the 5 shovel tests were excavated.
The intensive surface inspection and shovel testing regimen resulted in entirely negative
findings. As indicated above, the length of the easement is dominated by areas that have been
heavily disturbed by roadway construction, drainage ditch excavation, and utility installation, or
areas that are low-lying and swampy with standing surface water. Overall, there was generally
a low potential for intact cultural resources along the length of the easement. If any had been
present in the past, they likely would have already been destroyed within the north half of the
easement and within a large portion of the southern half of the easement. Again, the majority of
the undisturbed areas along the easement were low-lying, swampy areas that likely would not
have been targeted for aboriginal occupation.
Based on the survey-level investigations, it is Horizon’s opinion that the construction of
the proposed MUD 278 water line will have no effect on any significant cultural resources.
Horizon recommends that cultural resources clearance be granted for the undertaking.
However, in the unlikely event that any cultural materials (including human remains or burial
features) are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance of the ROW, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

4

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

2.0 AREA ENVIRONMENT

The proposed 2.6-mi (4.2-km) water line easement is located southeast of Humble in
Harris County, Texas. In general, the northern portion of the proposed water line easement will
parallel existing road ROWs and a series of man-made drainage ditches. The southern portion
of the proposed water line easement will traverse lowland marshy areas associated with
Williams Gully and wooded riparian bottomlands underlain by dark gray sandy loams with the
water table frequently encountered at depths ranging from 20 to 40 centimeters below the
surface (cmbs) (8 to 16 inches below surface [inbs]). Williams Gully, in this region, consists of a
deeply excavated artificial waterway composed of symmetrically sloping banks flanked by
graded terraces that have subsequently succumbed to severe erosion. In some places, erosion
facilitated by frequent recreational vehicle traffic has formed deep incisions in the adjacent
terraces forming an undulating landscape. The majority of the proposed water line easement
will be located in maintained ROWs consisting of short grasses, resulting in a low to moderate
(approximately 20-60%) surface visibility. Surface visibility in the southern portion of the
proposed water line easement was consistently low (approximately 10-20%) due to either high
grasses associated with marshy bottomlands or thick ground cover associated with dense
riparian vegetation. General photographs of the project area are presented in Figures 3 to 10.

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The proposed water line easement is located in northeastern Harris County, Texas,
southeast of Humble, Texas. Harris County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in
southeastern Texas, and the proposed easement is located about 96 km (60 mi) west of Trinity
Bay, an inlet of the Gulf of Mexico formed by the confluence of Buffalo Bayou and the San
Jacinto River between Houston and Baytown, Texas. The Gulf of Mexico represents a
structural basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal Plain, which extends as
far north as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones
Escarpment, consists of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of
terrigenous clastic origin, that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott
2001). The Houston area is underlain by rocks and unconsolidated sediments that are quite
young in a geological sense, ranging from modern to Miocene in age. These consist
predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic bodies arranged in an offlapped sequence, with
interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine facies making up a relatively minor

HJN 060212 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Area Environment

Figure 3. Typical view of disturbances within northern half of easement

Figure 4. Another view of disturbances within northern half of easement

6

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

Figure 5. General view of easement through County Rehabilitation Center

Figure 6. View of central portion of easement near existing water plant

HJN 060212 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Area Environment

Figure 7. View of southern portion of easement between artificial drainage ditches

Figure 8. View of Williams Gulley near southern end of easement

8

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

Figure 9. Swampy area south of Williams Gulley

Figure 10. Southern end of the proposed water line easement

HJN 060212 AR

9

Chapter 2.0: Area Environment

component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities between these formations are
usually interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that occurred during periods of low sea
level. The oldest rocks in this fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As a result of the geometry of
basin filling, successively younger rock units crop out in subparallel bands from the basin
margin toward the modern coastline.
The proposed water line easement traverses Williams Gully, a waterway that forms part
of an independent stream system associated with Buffalo Bayou. Williams Gully flows generally
southeastward into Garners Bayou and Greens Bayou, continuing southwards to its confluence
with Buffalo Bayou approximately 24 km (15.0 mi) southeast of the proposed water line
easement. Buffalo Bayou, in turn, flows eastward and discharges into the Gulf of Mexico.
Elevations along the proposed water line easement range from about 60 to 76 ft (18.2 to 23.1
m) above mean sea level (amsl).

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The proposed water line easement is underlain by the Beaumont Formation (Shelby et
al. 1968). The Beaumont Formation consists of clay, silt, and sand. The proposed easement is
situated on the Aldine-Ozan Association (Wheeler 1976). This association consists of
somewhat poorly drained and poorly drained, very slowly permeable soils.
Specifically, the proposed water line easement is underlain by 4 soil units: Aldine very
fine sandy loam (Am), Bernard clay loam (Bd), Bernard-Edna complex (Be), and Clodine loam
(Cd) (Wheeler 1976).
Aldine very fine sandy loam is a somewhat poorly drained soil found in broad, oblong
and oval, wooded areas (Wheeler 1976). A typical profile of this soil unit consists of a surface
layer of friable, dark grayish-brown very fine sandy loam about 5 in (12.4 cm) thick followed by a
friable grayish-brown very fine sandy loam extending to a depth of 10 in (25.4 cm). The
following layer consist of friable yellowish-brown loam to a depth of 19 in (48.2 cm) underlain by
firm gray clay with yellowish-brown and red mottles to a depth of 30 in (76.2 cm). A firm light
gray clay loam subsequently extends to a depth of 90 in (229.0 cm).
Bernard clay loam is a somewhat poorly drained soil found on broad irregularly shaped
areas. The surface layer consists of a friable very dark gray clay loam to a depth of 6 in (15.2
cm) followed by a firm very dark gray clay to a depth of 54 in (137.1 cm). The layer below
consists of a firm gray clay with distinct yellowish-brown mottles and calcium carbonate
concretions.
The Bernard-Edna complex consists predominately of soils that have been altered or
covered by buildings, urban structures, sidewalks, driveways, or streets. Areas that are not
covered by structures are generally composed of clayey fill material and are typically adjacent to
high traffic areas or larger commercial complexes. A typical profile consists of friable very dark
gray clay loam to a depth of 6 in (15.2 cm) followed by firm very dark gray clay to a depth of 54
in (137.1 cm). The following layer consists of gray clay with distinct yellowish-brown mottles
and calcium carbonate concretions.

10

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

Clodine loam is a nearly level poorly drained soil found on broad, irregular areas
consisting of a friable dark gray loam to a depth of 12 in (30.4 cm). The next layer consists of a
friable gray loam to a depth of 29 in (73.4 cm) followed by a light brownish-gray loam with pitted
calcium carbonate concretions to a depth of 72 in (183.0 cm).

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
While the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway
(1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes
3 separate climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late
Glacial Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present).
Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas
was considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region
was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and
Holloway 1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a
slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous
woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway
1985). During the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have
been more stable. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post
oak savannas. The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued
into the mid-Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more
mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and
Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were
probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern US and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects
the influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with
the urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and concrete to give
the Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout
much of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water,
humidity in the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often
exceeds 50% even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high
humidity characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and
a modest diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly
high temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in
January to a high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to
9°C (38 to 47°F) in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average
low temperatures range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range
from 27 to 29°C (75 to 79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).

HJN 060212 AR

11

Chapter 2.0: Area Environment

The Houston region experiences 2 precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott 2001;
Wheeler 1976). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of
infrequent cold fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs
in the late summer to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical
storms and hurricanes from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter
and early spring are relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional
thunderstorms that are relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual
precipitation varies from a low of approximately 100 cm (40 in) to a high of more than 132 cm
(52 in). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5 to 8 cm (2 to 3 in) in March to
more than 19 cm (7.5 in) occurring locally on the coast during September. Almost all of the
measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely rare, occurring in measurable
amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Harris County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texas biotic province (Blair
1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces
and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some species reach
the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahon et al. (1984) further
define 4 broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic province that lies
on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie, (3) coastal gallery
forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are
strongly controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the
seasonal water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically
dominated by little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter
environments are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria,
bulrushes, smooth cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush,
saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal
waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained
environments are characterized by such taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum,
gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass, red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort.
A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon,
nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and
many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish
to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs
and woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the
north and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses

12

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

are found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver
bluestem, buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian
sunflower, Engelman daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow
neptunia, snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush,
bluebonnet, ragweed, croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring
in the coastal prairie include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live
oak, elm, hackberry, bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as
the coastal prairie grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland
environment with common stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie
is home to a diverse fauna, including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many
small rodents, amphibians, reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and
pronghorn were also present at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbriar, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are
grasses such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest
include white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and
rodents, turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various times in the
past, and a number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger
deciduous trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory
vegetation varies from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and
young trees. Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle,
greenbriar, Virginia creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A
variety of fauna is also present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit,
mink, skunk, various small rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was
also present at times in the past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the
transition zone to the coastal prairie environment.

HJN 060212 AR

13

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The proposed water line easement is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological
Region, a 21-county area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on
the east and measuring about 200 km (124 mi) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline. Much
of the archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern
Great Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990).
Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These 2 subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25 km (16 mi) inland from the coast that covers the area influenced by
Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological variability
characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands, marine
coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable ecological
diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to
denote Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural
characteristics of Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring
regions. For instance, the Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and
Southeast Texas, and Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for
Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time
in Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit
evidence of reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be
associated with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of
subsistence-related activities. Inland sites also tend to contain modest pottery assemblages,
fired clay balls (at some sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal
sites tend to consist of multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain oyster shell tools,
large quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), numerous bone tools, and only a few
lithic artifacts.

HJN 060212 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period (but see Butzer 1988).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is
represented by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred endscrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas
are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is
little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2 periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian
period (8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far
less pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and
corresponding decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a
diversified resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas,
however, this hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The
appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone
assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural

16

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

stage. Material culture shows greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in
the application of groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
In Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains.
Many of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and
several new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and
probably the Gary-Kent series.
The Late Archaic period (1,500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is
characterized by Gary, Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos
points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition
developed in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981;
Patterson 1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period
but reached full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as
boatstones and bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang
knives, stingray spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial
practices included the systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre,
and use of locally made grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most
burials are found in extended supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials
are also known. Burial direction is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to
site. Patterson et al. (1993) report that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary
tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area
by about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the
Conroe-Livingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears
to have progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995).
Southeastern Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where
Aten (1983) established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
129 km (80 mi) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal exception of a
few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found on the Gulf
coast west of the Sabine Lake area.

HJN 060212 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods
(Aten 1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility
ware throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown
Plain for about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods
before once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety,
Goose Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor
pottery types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway
(Aten 1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte
types are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste
(like Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined
by the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the
latter part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in
Southeast Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the
Late Prehistoric period (Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995;
Wheat 1953). In fact, Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in
Southeast Texas as early as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points
that consisted of marginally retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a
generalized date of adoption of the bow-and-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca.
A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas. In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to
be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba,
Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial sequence for these point types has not been
established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn points appear to predate Perdiz points
throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto
Plain and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek
pottery remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt
Coated pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

18

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue.
Aten (1983) has
reconstructed the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century,
including the Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (possibly Karankawa), and Tonkawa. The
presence of the Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central
Texas in the 17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought
to have occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the
corresponding mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east
of the San Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe
may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic
Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and
Cuney points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified
by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1700 A.D. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez
Cabeza de Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near
Galveston Bay; however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until
after 1700. The first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission
system, as well as the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native
culture and social systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where
the burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as
increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the
time heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous
Indian population was greatly diminished. The Alabama/Coushatta Indians who currently reside
in Southeast Texas are migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early
19th centuries (Newcomb 1961).
Although Spain claimed the Texas Gulf Coast, few Europeans visited the future Harris
County between 1528 and 18211. It is possible that de Vaca ascended the San Jacinto River

1

The following history of Harris County, Texas, derives from Bolton (1970), Freund (1954), Gray (1965),
Henson and Ladd (1988), Henson (1986), Jenkins (1973), McComb (1981), Pomeroy (1994), Puryear
and Winfield (1976), Sibley (1968), Taylor (1955), and Woods (1959), as summarized in The Handbook of
Texas Online.

HJN 060212 AR

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

from Galveston Island around 1529 to trade with the woodland Indians, but his adventures failed
to stimulate interest in the Texas coast. A few French traders from Louisiana visited Indians
living on Spring Creek between the 1730s and 1745, but they established no settlements. A
Spanish mission and presidio complex, El Orcoquisac, was maintained near the mouth of the
Trinity from 1756 to 1771 to monitor and oppose the intrusion of foreigners. In 1746, Captain
Joaquín de Orobio y Basterra from La Bahía visited the Orcoquisac villages along Spring Creek
while looking for French traders. He reported the lack of roads or maps and on his return
blazed a trail westward to find the Old San Antonio Road, on which he had traveled to
Nacogdoches on his way to the lower Trinity and San Jacinto rivers. The first Anglo-Americans
to explore Harris County were members of the various filibustering expeditions launched from
New Orleans between 1815 and 1820 to aid the Mexican Republicans rebelling against Spain.
Using Galveston Island and Bolivar Peninsula as a base, the men belonging to the expeditions
and encampments of Louis Michel Aury, Francisco Xavier Mina, Jean Laffite, and James Long
looked around the San Jacinto estuary for future home sites—their expected reward for freeing
Mexico from Spain. Some of these men were among the pioneer settlers arriving by boat from
Louisiana in early 1822, just after the Mexican War of Independence.
Responding to Stephen F. Austin’s advertisements, the families wrongly assumed that
the San Jacinto estuary was part of his empresario grant. Some moved to the Brazos River in
1824, but merchants and boatmen remained to exploit what turned out to be the best
transportation system in Texas and to petition successfully for inclusion in the Austin grant.
Since Galveston Island and the Gulf shore were forbidden to Anglo settlement, Harris County
was the southeastern border of the colony. The pioneers found no Indians living in the future
Harris County. In July 1824, a state land commissioner, the Baron de Bastrop, arrived and
spent 2 months issuing 29 titles to settlers, even though surveys were incomplete. The
pioneers, including Nathaniel Lynch, William Scott, and John R. Harris, chose sites along
Buffalo Bayou, the San Jacinto River, and the San Jacinto estuary. Between 1828 and 1833,
when Austin’s colonization effort virtually ended, 23 more families secured titles elsewhere in
the county, usually along watercourses. In 1826, John R. Harris laid out Harrisburg on his
league where Brays Bayou joined Buffalo Bayou, the head of navigation. He opened a store
and built a saw and grist mill, while his brothers captained vessels between there and New
Orleans and even Tampico.
By 1833, Harrisburg was an established port of entry for immigrants and freight destined
for the upper Brazos River communities of San Felipe and Washington. Moreover, it was the
hub for east-to-west roads. Eastward from Harrisburg in 1830, travelers crossed the San
Jacinto River on Lynch’s Ferry on their way to Anahuac, Liberty, or Nacogdoches. Opposite
Harrisburg, a road paralleled Buffalo Bayou heading northwest to a community on Spring Creek,
then forked for the Brazos villages. A third important road followed the south bank of Brays
Bayou for 24 km (15 mi) to a community on Oyster Creek near the site of present-day Stafford
in Fort Bend County. This area was known as the San Jacinto District from 1824 until 1833,
when it was renamed the Harrisburg District. From 1824 through 1827, Humphrey Jackson was
the alcalde for the San Jacinto District, which stretched from Lynchburg on the San Jacinto
River to the site of present-day Richmond on the west, and from Spring Creek to Clear Creek.
Jackson reported to Stephen F. Austin until 1828, when the newly instituted ayuntamiento at

20

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

San Felipe relieved the empresario and comisarios were named. The final stage of
development under the Mexican system occurred on 30 December 1835, when the General
Council set the boundaries of Harrisburg Municipality.
Harrisburg Municipality was the home of both President David G. Burnet and Vice
President Lorenzo de Zavala of the new Republic of Texas. They were elected by the
delegates at Washington after midnight on 16 March 1836, and the next morning left for
Harrisburg, where water transportation offered an escape if the Mexican army should win. On
25 March, the group reached Harrisburg, where the president conducted business for the next
2 weeks. Burnet and his bride had moved to Lynchburg from New Jersey in 1831 with
equipment for a steam sawmill that he built on the San Jacinto River above Lynch’s Ferry.
Declining to claim a headright, he bought land from Lynch for his home on a small bay below
the ferry. He was not chosen to represent his neighborhood in 1832, 1833, 1835, or 1836
because of his pro-Mexican views. Delegates, torn by rivalries, chose him because he was not
a delegate. Zavala, a refugee from Santa Antonio López de Santa Anna’s wrath, bought a
house on the north side of Buffalo Bayou below Harrisburg in August 1835, and his New Yorkborn second wife and 2 children joined him in December. The republic’s officials evacuated
Harrisburg by steamboat to Lynchburg on 12 April, when word arrived that Santa Anna’s troops
were crossing the Brazos below Richmond. The steamboat Cayuga later took the officials and
their families to Galveston Island. A constant stream of refugees from the upper Brazos
settlements had been crossing Harrisburg Municipality since mid-March en route to the US.
Santa Anna and his advance units reached Harrisburg at midnight on 14 April and, after
a day of looting, set fire to the settlement on 16 April. The general dispatched a cavalry troop to
Morgan’s Point on 16 April that almost captured the Burnet family. The battle of San Jacinto
took place on 20 and 21 April opposite Zavala’s house on widow Peggy McCormick’s farm,
where perhaps 600 dead soldiers remained unburied when neither commander ordered
interment.
Harrisburg County was formed by the First Congress on 22 December 1836. The
lawmakers also named Andrew Briscoe chief justice, and the infant city of Houston the county
seat and national capital. The county encompassed the territory of the old municipality plus
Galveston Island (the mainland was attached to Brazoria County) until May 1838, when its
modern boundaries were established. In December 1839, Congress changed the name to
Harris County in honor of John R. Harris. The county briefly lost its northwest corner in 1841
when Spring Creek residents tried to form a separate county. The first county court, convened
in February 1837, was composed of the chief justice (called the county judge after 1861), the
sheriff, the clerk, and 2 justices of the peace who served as associate justices.
Harrisburg recovered from the Mexican Revolution slowly. By 1853, it had a steam mill
and was the terminus for the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos, and Colorado Railway, which crossed the
county to Stafford’s Point to facilitate the shipment of cotton and sugar. Five other railroads
followed before the Civil War. The Galveston, Houston, and Henderson connected the island to
the mainland, while the Texas and New Orleans constructed tracks along the north side of
Buffalo Bayou to Liberty and Orange, thus enabling Confederate troops from Harris County to
reach the Neches River on their way to Virginia. The Houston and Texas Central ran west from

HJN 060212 AR

21

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

town to Cypress, Hockley, and Hempstead. The Houston Tap and Brazoria linked Houston with
the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos, and Colorado south of town and had a line to Columbia to serve the
Brazoria County sugar plantations.
Early settlers in Harris County were mainly southerners bringing their black slaves.
Besides cultivating field crops, some of the African Americans worked the cattle on the openrange ranches, particularly in the area south of Buffalo Bayou, which remained ranching country
into the early 20th century. By the 1840s, a number of Germans and French had immigrated to
Harris County. Both groups included city-dwelling artisans, merchants, and farmers—some
Catholic, some Protestant. Many of the immigrant agrarians settled north and west of Houston
and established successful truck and dairy farms that drew Europeans through the turn of the
century. Contrary to legend, few Mexican prisoners chose to remain in Harris County when all
were released on 21 April 1837 by President Sam Houston. The 1850 US census revealed no
Mexican-born males of the right age in Harris County or surrounding counties. A few Mexican
families lived in Houston in the 1880s. It was the economic opportunities offered by the
Houston Ship Channel and the railroads, combined with the unsettled political conditions
following the Mexican Revolution, that brought Mexicans to Houston. Most settled in the city
close to their work and the Catholic churches.
While the first settlers lived along the streams, those arriving after the Civil War chose
sites along the railroads that crisscrossed Harris County. By 1890, land developers in the
Midwest had purchased land along the new North Galveston, Houston, and Kansas City
Railroad, which ran east from Houston along the south side of Buffalo Bayou towards Morgan’s
Point and south to the mouth of Clear Creek. They expected to attract other Midwesterners to
raise fruit, berries, and vegetables or just to seek relief from cold winters. Pasadena, Deer Park,
and La Porte were established in 1892, and Seabrook followed in 1900. South Houston,
Genoa, and Webster developed along the Galveston, Houston, and Henderson Railroad after
the 1870s. Around the turn of the century, Japanese were invited to the Webster area to
develop rice farms on the flat prairies and also at a site on a branch line of the Gulf, Colorado,
and Santa Fe Railway south of Houston that became Mykawa. Between 1911 and 1936, the
Galveston-Houston Electric Railway, called the Interurban, ran parallel to the Galveston,
Houston, and Henderson Railroad and provided 30-minute service from Webster to Houston.
In the 1960s, the land east of Webster became the home of the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) Manned Spacecraft Center, renamed the Lyndon B. Johnson
Space Center in 1973. Houston quickly annexed the area. The development changed the rural
aspect of the area when several new towns sprang up along the north shore of Clear Lake, the
largest being Clear Lake City.
Northern Harris County developed similarly. After the Civil War, other railways such as
the Houston and Great Northern, the Trinity and Brazos Valley, the Houston East and West
Texas, and the Burlington-Rock Island entered north Harris County to converge on Houston.
The lumbering and farming interests established small towns such as Spring and Tomball along
the tracks. The population of Humble, near the Houston East and West Texas Railway,
increased with the oil boom at Moonshine Hill in 1905.

22

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

Harris County east of the San Jacinto River remained an agricultural community
focusing on rice culture in the 1890s. Its only commercial developments were small boatyards
at Lynchburg and Goose Creek and a brick factory on Cedar Bayou that mushroomed during
the 1880s to supply a building boom in Galveston. Between 1903 and 1907, oil was discovered
on the eastern shore of the San Jacinto estuary at Goose Creek and Tabbs Bay. Migrant
roughnecks and their families moved to the area and established a temporary boomtown amid
the derricks between 1915 and 1917. The shantytown was replaced in 1917 by Pelly, which
was built on private land above the noisy and dirty oil camp. In 1919, Ross Sterling and his
Humble Oil and Refining Company (now ExxonMobil) built a refinery on the San Jacinto above
the mouth of Goose Creek. The site was bordered by the Humble company town, Baytown, for
workers, and a middle-class enclave, Goose Creek, for executives and others. Pelly and Goose
Creek vied for dominance, and after Humble sold the company houses to the workers beginning
in the late 1920s, the 3 towns consolidated to become the “Tri-Cities” in the 1930s and finally to
be renamed Baytown in 1948. Eastern Harris County also had an electric interurban train, the
Houston-North Shore Railroad, which in 1925 connected the 3 towns to Crosby and ran along
the north side of Buffalo Bayou to downtown Houston.
The development of Harris County as an industrial power began in 1911, when voters
approved the formation of the Harris County Ship Channel Navigation District. Authorized by
Congress and approved by the state legislature, the district could improve the waterway and
manage the waterfront within the county. It immediately issued bonds to widen and deepen the
channel to make the Houston port accessible to oceangoing vessels. In 1914, the US Army
Corps of Engineers finished deepening the existing 80-km- (50-mi-) long channel to 8 m (25 ft)
from the Gulf through Galveston Bay and up the San Jacinto River and Buffalo Bayou to the
district’s turning basin at the Port of Houston. By 1918, petroleum refineries began locating
along Buffalo Bayou and the San Jacinto River, as did various other industries. Since that time,
the channel has been deepened to 15 m (50 ft) and widened to accommodate larger vessels.
The very profitable Harris County Navigation District owns the wharves and warehouses around
the turning basin (about 3.2 km [2.0 mi] above old Harrisburg), the Long Reach docks, and
various other facilities, including a bulk handling plant at Greens Bayou, the terminal railroad,
and the container facility at the Bayport industrial complex below Morgan’s Point. In addition, in
the 1950s, the district joined national and state governments to build the Washburn Tunnel
under Buffalo Bayou from Pasadena to the north side and the Baytown-La Porte tunnel beneath
the San Jacinto River to reduce the number of hazardous automobile ferries. Exports from the
port include rice, wheat, grain sorghums, cotton, caustic soda, cement, and petroleum products.
Imports include crude oil, iron ore, molasses, coffee, gypsum, and automobiles.
Another venture authorized by Harris County voters was the Harris County Domed
Stadium, which was completed in 1965 and has been leased to the Houston Sports Association.
The Astrodome, the first stadium of its kind, was touted as the “Eighth Wonder of the World.”
The county also maintains 2 public hospitals in Houston and, since 1935, has worked to control
flooding through the Harris County Flood Control District.

HJN 060212 AR

23

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Archival research conducted online via the THC’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas
indicated that no archeological sites are located within 1 mile (1.6 km) of the proposed water
line easement. Based on the archival research, a total of 4 cultural resource surveys have been
conducted in close vicinity to the proposed waterline easement. These surveys, conducted by
Horizon, HRA Gray & Pape, and MAC, Inc., resulted in entirely negative findings. While these
previous cultural resource surveys are located adjacent to the currently proposed easement,
none actually overlap any portion of the proposed water line ROW. An excerpt of the THC’s
Atlas map is provided in Figure 11.

HJN 060212 AR

25

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Figure 11. Atlas map

26

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

5.0 METHODOLOGY

Horizon conducted the cultural resources survey on 26 January 2007. This entailed
intensive surface inspection as well as subsurface shovel testing. The Texas State Minimum
Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of 16 shovel tests per mile for
projects measuring 100 ft (30 m) in width. As the proposed water line easement will measure
only 35 ft (11.0 m) wide, a minimum of 6 shovel tests per mile was required. As such, a total 16
shovel tests were required along the length of the proposed water line easement in order to
comply with the TSMASS. Horizon excavated a total of only 5 shovel tests along the length of
easement, failing to meet the TSMASS for several reasons. Namely, roughly the northern half
of the easement consists of existing road easements that have been heavily impacted by road
construction, drainage ditch excavation, and utility installation. In these areas, only surface
inspection and photo-documentation were conducted. Similarly, extensive areas in the southern
half of the easement have also been heavily impacted by drainage ditch construction, leaving
little to no potential for intact, buried deposits. These areas were also visually inspected and
photo-documented. Finally, the majority of the remaining “undisturbed” portions of the
easement was covered by standing water, leaving only a few locations where shovel testing
was necessary and/or possible. It is in these areas where the 5 shovel tests were excavated.
All excavated matrices were screened through 6-millimeter (mm) (1/4-inch) hardware
mesh or trowel-sorted if the deposits were too wet to pass through the screen. Field notes were
maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms, cultural materials observed, etc.
Standardized shovel test forms were completed for each excavated shovel test, and
photographs with a photo log were completed when appropriate. Shovel test location data were
acquired via a handheld Global Positioning System (GPS) unit using the Universal Transverse
Mercatur (UTM) coordinate system and map datum North American Datum (NAD) 27. Shovel
test locations are presented in Figure 12, and shovel test data are provided in Appendix A.

HJN 060212 AR

27

Chapter 5.0: Methodology

Figure 12. Shovel test locations

28

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

6.0 RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

RESULTS

The intensive surface inspection and shovel testing regimen resulted in entirely negative
findings. The length of the easement is dominated by areas that have been heavily disturbed by
roadway construction, drainage ditch excavation, and utility installation, or areas that are lowlying and swampy with standing surface water. Overall, there was generally a low potential for
intact cultural resources along the length of the easement. If any had been present in the past,
they likely would have already been destroyed within the northern half of the easement and
within a large portion of the southern half of the easement. Again, the majority of the
undisturbed areas along the easement were low-lying, swampy areas that likely would not have
been targeted for aboriginal occupation.

6.2

RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the survey-level investigations, it is Horizon’s opinion that the construction of
the proposed MUD 278 water line will have no effect on any significant cultural resources.
Horizon recommends that cultural resources clearance be granted for the undertaking.
However, in the unlikely event that any cultural materials (including human remains or burial
features) are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance of the ROW, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 060212 AR

29

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory,
pp. 72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The
Florida State Museum, Gainesville.

Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bolton, H.E.
1970
Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Butzer, K.W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.

HJN 060212 AR

31

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas.
Reports of Investigations, No. 8,
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Freund, M. (editor and translator)
1954
Gustav Dresel's Houston Journal. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Gray, W.F.
1965
From Virginia to Texas, 1835. Fletcher Young, Houston.
Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Henson, M.S.
1986
History of Baytown. Bay Area Heritage Society, Baytown, Texas.
Henson, M.S., and K. Ladd
1988
Chambers County: A Pictorial History. Donning, Norfolk, Virginia.
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Jenkins, J.H. (editor)
1973
The Papers of the Texas Revolution, 1835-1836, 10 vols. Presidial Press, Austin.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.

32

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas.
Resources, Austin.

Publication LP-192.

American

Texas Department of Water

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
McComb, D.G.
1981
Houston: A History. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
McMahon, C.A., R.G. Frye, and K.L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:163.

Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

HJN 060212 AR

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

33

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Pomeroy, C.D., Jr.
1994
Pasadena: The Early Years Pomerosa Press, Pasadena, Texas.
Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Puryear, P.A., and N. Winfield, Jr.
1976
Sandbars and Sternwheelers: Steam Navigation on the Brazos.
University Press, College Station.

Texas A&M

Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc.,
Corpus Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330

Shelby, C.A., M.K. McGowen, S. Aranow, W.L. Fisher, L.F. Brown, Jr., J.H. McGowen, C.G.
Groat, and V.E. Barnes
1968
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Beaumont Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin (revised 1992).
Sibley, M.M.
1968
The Port of Houston. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C.
Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Taylor, V.H.
1955
The Spanish Archives of the General Land Office of Texas. Lone Star, Austin.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Wheeler, F.F.
1976
Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Woods, H.
1959
Galveston-Houston Electric Railway. Electric Railway Publications, Los Angeles.

34

060212_arch_survey_report.docx

APPENDIX A:

SHOVEL TEST DATA

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed MUD 278 2.6-Mile Water Line ROW

Shovel Test Data for MUD #278 (060212 AR)
Waypoint
#

Shovel
Test #

Easting

Northing

Depth

Soils

Artifacts

JW‐35

JW‐1

284899

3314220

0‐50

Very dark
gray sand

None

JW‐36

JW‐2

284909

3314263

0‐30

Very dark
gray sand

None

JW‐37

JW‐3

284894

3314198

0‐20

Very dark
gray sand

None

JW‐38

JW‐4

284899

3314166

0‐40

Very dark
gray sand

None

JW‐39

JW‐5

284898

3314128

0‐40

Very dark
gray sand

None

HJN 060212 AR

Comments
Some clay content,
water filling shovel
test at 50 cmbs
Some clay content,
water filling shovel
test at 30 cmbs
Some clay content,
water filling shovel
test at 20 cmbs
Some clay content,
water filling shovel
test at 40 cmbs
Some clay content,
water filling shovel
test at 40 cmbs

A-1

