Intensive Cultural Resources Survey
of USACE Jurisdictional Areas on the Proposed
Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract,
Trinity County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

HJN 110031 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Whispering Pines Golf Club
Trinity, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

May 2011

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey
of USACE Jurisdictional Areas on the Proposed
Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract,
Trinity County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Whispering Pines Golf Club
1532 Whispering Pines Drive
Trinity, Texas 75862

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 110032 AR

May 2011

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Whispering Pines Golf Club (WPGC) is proposing to develop an approximately 16hectare (ha) (40-acre [ac]) tract in southwestern Trinity County, Texas, into the proposed
Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course. The proposed golf course would be constructed by the
WPGC on privately owned land, though proposed construction may result in potential impacts to
waterways that may be subject to permitting by the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. As a federal permit may be required for the
proposed action, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended. As the project represents a publicly
sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural resources, the WPGC
was required to provide for a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the project’s Area
of Potential Effect (APE) and to assess the project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural
resources in the APE. In consultation with the USACE, the APE for this project was determined
to consist of approximately 9 ha (23 ac), or roughly 58%, of the overall tract located adjacent to
jurisdictional waterways primarily within the southern portion of the tract.
To meet its responsibilities under the NHPA, WPGC contracted with Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to conduct a cultural resources survey of the proposed
9-ha (23-ac) APE. The purpose of the survey was to determine if any archeological and/or
historical sites are located within the USACE jurisdictional areas, and, if any exist, to determine
their eligibility for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). The cultural
resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive pedestrian survey of the 9ha (23-ac) APE, and the production of a report suitable for review by the State Historic
Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC)
Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council of Texas
Archeologists’ (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.
Horizon conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the APE on April 5, 2011.
Jeffrey D. Owens served as the Principal Investigator for the project. Michael Mudd served as
the field supervisor, and Jared Wiersema served as an archeological field technician during the
field investigations. The purpose of the survey was to locate any cultural resource properties
that potentially would be impacted by the proposed project. The APE was traversed by
Horizon’s archeologists, and a total of 12 backhoe trenches were excavated within the APE,

HJN 110031 AR

iii

Management Summary

thereby meeting the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards requirements for a
project area of this size.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey. Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of USACE jurisdictional
areas documented in this report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected
by the proposed undertaking. No new cultural resources were identified in the remainder of the
project area as a result of intensive survey activities, and no previously documented cultural
resources are present in the vicinity of the project area that would be adversely affected by the
proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.4, Horizon has made a
reasonable and good faith effort to identify historic properties within the APE. As no cultural
resources were identified that meet the criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR
60.4, no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed
undertaking. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in
the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any
point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously
surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the USACE and the THC should be
notified of the discovery.

iv

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ..................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 7
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 9
2.4
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................11

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................13
3.1
Paleoindian Period (ca. 9500 to 7000 B.C.)..................................................13
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 7000 to 200 B.C.) ..........................................................14
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (ca. 200 B.C. to A.D. 800) ..........................................15
3.4
Formative, Early, and Middle Caddoan Periods (ca. A.D. 800 to 1400) ........16
3.5
Late Caddoan Period (ca. A.D. 1400 to 1680) ..............................................17
3.6
Historic Caddoan Period (ca. A.D. 1519 to Present) .....................................18
3.7
Historic Euro-American Period (ca. 1519 to Present) ...................................22

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................27
4.1
Archival Research ........................................................................................27
4.2
Survey Methods ...........................................................................................28

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................33

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................35
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................35
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....36
6.3
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................36
6.4
Management Recommendations ..................................................................37

7.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................39
APPENDIX A: Backhoe Trench Data

HJN 110031 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.

vi

Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map ................................................. 2
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ........................................................... 3
Typical View of Forested Portions of Project Area (Facing East) ...............................29
Overview of Pond in Southern Portion of Project Area (Facing Northwest)................29
Deep Gray Sand Deposits Observed in BT 9 ............................................................30
Locations of Backhoe Trenches in Project Area ........................................................31

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Whispering Pines Golf Club (WPGC) is proposing to develop an approximately 16hectare (ha) (40-acre [ac]) tract in southwestern Trinity County, Texas, into the proposed
Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course (Figures 1 to 2). The proposed golf course would be
constructed by the WPGC on privately owned land, though proposed construction may result in
potential impacts to waterways that may be subject to permitting by the US Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE) under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA). As a federal permit may
be required for the proposed action, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of
the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended. As the project represents
a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural resources, the
WPGC was required to provide for a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the
project’s Area of Potential Effect (APE) and to assess the project’s possible impacts on any
significant cultural resources in the APE. In consultation with the USACE, the APE for this
project was determined to consist of approximately 9 ha (23 ac), or roughly 58%, of the overall
tract located adjacent to jurisdictional waterways primarily within the southern portion of the
tract.
WPGC contracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to conduct a
cultural resources survey of the proposed 9-ha (23-ac) APE. The purpose of the survey was to
determine if any archeological and/or historical sites are located within the USACE jurisdictional
areas, and, if any exist, to determine their eligibility for inclusion in the National Register of
Historic Places (NRHP). The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an
intensive pedestrian survey of the 9-ha (23-ac) APE, and the production of a report suitable for
review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas
Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and
the Council of Texas Archeologists’ (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management
Reports.
Horizon conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the APE on April 5, 2011.
Jeffrey D. Owens served as the Principal Investigator for the project. Michael Mudd served as
the field supervisor, and Jared Wiersema served as an archeological field technician during the
field investigations. The purpose of the survey was to locate any cultural resource properties
that potentially would be impacted by the proposed project. The survey was conducted by
Horizon under subcontract to WPGC.

HJN 110031 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map

2

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

HJN 110031 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

This report presents the results of the cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds
of the project area, respectively. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the survey, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report, and Appendix A presents data collected from backhoe trenches excavated during the
survey.

4

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The proposed project area is located in Trinity County, Texas, and lies within the Coastal
Plains physiographic region (Fenneman 1938:605-630). Environmentally, the Gulf Coastal
Plain is characterized as:
an area where the temperate southeastern woodlands gradually give way to the
grasslands of the plains. It is a land of mixed forests, pine barrens, open savannas, tall
grass prairies, and littoral marshes. Much of the terrain is gently rolling but mountains
(the Ouachitas) and costal flats are to be found in the northern and southern margins of
the region, respectively. A number of perennial rivers and streams cross the area,
ending in the deltas and bays along the…Gulf of Mexico (Story and Guy 1990:2).

Northeastern Texas supports 3 major physiographic communities—the Blackland
Prairie, the Post Oak Savanna (or Oak Woodlands), and the Pineywoods (Diamond et al. 1987).
The Blackland Prairie is a narrow physiographic zone situated between the Edwards Plateau to
the west and the Gulf Coastal Plain to the east. This area consists of low, rolling land that
extends in a narrow band along the eastern edge of the Balcones fault zone from the Red River
Valley in Northeast Texas to the southern edge of the Edwards Plateau. This is an area of low
topographic relief and poor drainage in which water often ponds after rainstorms and streams
flow at very gentle gradients. The Blackland Prairie supports a tall-grass community that
commonly includes such species as little bluestem, yellow Indian grass, big bluestem,
switchgrass, and various forbs (Diamond et al. 1987:209, 211). The distribution of the tall-grass
prairie is closely related to patterns of rainfall and soil character, as the prairie tends to occur in
areas that receive less than 102 centimeters (cm) (40 inches [in]) of rain annually and that have
clayey, calcareous soils (Collins and Bousman 1990:29).
The Post Oak Savanna and Pineywoods support medium-tall to tall broadleaf deciduous
forests, and shortleaf loblolly pines are common in the Pineywoods on upland fine sandy loam
soils with adequate moisture. Small areas of tall-grass prairie may occur in both communities
(cf. Jordan 1981). The Post Oak Savanna is a narrow, southwest-to-northeast-trending
woodland belt that marks a natural transition zone, or ecotone, between the more xeric
Blackland Prairie to the west and the more mesic Pineywoods to the east (Kuchler 1964). The

HJN 110031 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Post Oak Savanna is composed primarily of post oak, blackjack oak, hickory, pecan, and ash
(Kuchler 1964).
The Pineywoods region is composed of 2 distinct forest communities—mixed pinehardwood forest and longleaf pine forest. The proposed project area is situated near the
western margin of the mixed pine-hardwood forest physiographic zone near its interface with
oak woodlands to the west. The mixed pine-hardwood forest is characterized by medium-tall to
tall broadleaf deciduous hardwoods, including a wide variety of oak, elm, hickory, maple,
sweetgum, and other mesic species. In some cases, the presence of pine represents a
subclimax vegetation association. The longleaf pine forest is most common in the southern part
of Northeast Texas, extending south to the coastal prairies of Southeast Texas. Longleaf,
shortleaf, and loblolly pines, as well as a variety of hardwoods such as oak, hickory, beech,
birch, gum, and magnolia, as well as tupelo and bald cypress in swampy floodplain areas, are
constituents of this vegetation region. Within both Pineywoods vegetation communities,
bottomland forests and wetlands are common. These communities are dominated by hardwood
and swamp forests, marsh and bog vegetation, herbs, shrubs, and other plants that tolerate
extended periods of stream overflow. Common trees in these habitats are sweetgum, black
tupelo, elm, green ash, bald cypress, water oak, overcup oak, cottonwood, black willow, and
American hornbeam (Diamond et al. 1987:212). Herbs, shrubs, ferns, cane, wax myrtle,
sassafras, holly, yaupon, cane, and buttonbush occur along the margins of marshes, bogs, and
channel lakes and sloughs.
As a result of moderately high rainfall and extensive aquifers, perennial rivers and
streams are common across most of the Gulf Coastal Plain (Story 1990:8-9). With the
exception of some small coastal streams, 6 major river basins occur in this region—the Brazos,
Neches, Red, Sabine, San Jacinto, and Trinity—all of which flow in a more or less southeasterly
direction and discharge into the Gulf of Mexico. Under current climatic conditions, all of the
larger rivers are reliable sources of surface water, though smaller streams are more variable.
The most dependable are those that receive groundwater discharge and delayed runoff
(Thurmond 1981:29-36). The least reliable are those fed solely by direct runoff. Two other
sources of surface water, lakes and springs, also occur in the area. With the exception of
Caddo Lake (a natural, albeit artificially enlarged, impoundment) on the Cypress River and lakes
on the Red and lower Brazos floodplains, most lakes in the region occur on smaller streams, are
dry at least part of the year, and have minimal subsistence value. Springs are fairly numerous
in the region, and even high-order streams in the region often have sustained water flow
because they are fed by groundwater discharge and aquifers (Story 1990:8-9). Changing land
use practices, farming, and erosion have caused many springs to dry up over the last 150 years
or to have a much reduced flow (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:38).
Trinity County is extensively dissected by creeks and rivers. The project area is situated
within the Trinity River basin. The APE is situated in low, marshy environment framed on the
east by Caney Creek and on the north and south by unnamed tributaries of Caney Creek. The
southern half of the project area, which is coextensive with the APE defined for the current
project, consists of low floodplain setting dotted with several ponds of varying sizes. Drainage is
predominantly to the south and east. Caney Creek, which forms the eastern boundary of the

6

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

project area, flows southward into the Trinity River, and the Trinity River, in turn, flows southsoutheastward to empty into Trinity Bay, part of the Gulf of Mexico, in the vicinity of Baytown,
Texas.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

The project area is situated within the West Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic province
(Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). Sedimentary bedrock formations of limestone and sandstone
laid down during the Cretaceous Period parallel the margins of the ancient, receding coastline of
the Gulf of Mexico and crop out as cuestas or escarpments across the generally southwardly
dip of the modern land surface (Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). Little internal relief over
50 meters (m) (164 feet [ft]) occurs except along the eroded fronts of the cuestas and in the
ironstone hills (Fisher 1965; Godfrey et al. 1973).
Soils in Northeast Texas are divided into 2 broad groups—upland soils and alluvial
valley soils (Godfrey et al. 1973). Upland soils support tall grasses and hardwoods and tend to
form directly on bedrock, except where colluvial deposition has occurred during the Quaternary
Period. These soils vary from moist, acidic soils with a sandy to loamy surface horizon and
clayey subsoil to soils whose basic loamy surface horizons overlie clay-enriched B-horizons.
Bone and shell preservation is common in archeological deposits in the latter soils (Story
1990:9). Mixed hardwood and pine forests occur on the acidic upland soils in Northeast Texas.
Tall-grass prairie occurs on the dark, clayey soils of the Blackland Prairie to the west of the
project area (Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993).
As a region, Northeast Texas exhibits relatively little topographic relief. The bedrock is
exclusively sedimentary and is not very resistant to erosion. Drainage is well developed,
including major river systems that arise both outside of the region (i.e., Red and Trinity) as well
as within it (i.e., Angelina, Attoyac, Cypress, Neches, Sabine, and Sulphur). Much of Northeast
Texas is dominated by fluvial transport systems in which streams tend to meander within their
valleys, locally cutting into the outer banks of bends and depositing sediment packages against
the inner banks of bends (Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). Valley soils are important
archeologically because they often contain stratified cultural deposits, usually in association with
buried, cumulic soils. Point bars, levees, and flood basins are distinctive geomorphic features
that share the common attribute of active aggradation. In theory, archeological sites may be
expected to form in such landforms and, depending on the rates of sedimentation and human
occupation, may develop internal stratification. To date, however, most archeological surveys
conducted along streams in Northeast Texas have documented almost no sites on levees or
point bars (Hsu 1969; Anderson et al. 1974; Bruseth et al. 1977). The low density of recorded
archeological sites in such areas likely results from the low site visibility and difficult survey
conditions. The low number of archeological sites recorded in these drainages is almost
certainly a function of the difficulty of surveying floodplain environments partially covered by
impenetrable swamps (Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993; Perttula 2004:370).
Natural lakes, ponds, and swamps are also common features of Northeast Texas
floodplains, and they typically represent sections of abandoned channels of rivers and streams
that have not been filled by alluvial deposits (Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). Lakes generally

HJN 110031 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

contain some open water, marshes are heavily vegetated (usually with grasses) but do not form
peat, and bogs are waterlogged and spongy areas in which mosses and other decaying
vegetation produce an acidic environment conducive to peat development. Lakes, ponds, and
marshes in Northeast Texas are generally of fresh water and form aerobic, basic
environments—they may contain excellent stratigraphic records and preserved bone, though
they are not conducive to botanical preservation. Bogs, on the other hand, are anaerobic,
acidic, and may have remained permanently saturated over long periods of time. Such
environments are optimal for the preservation of normally perishable artifacts (Chelf 1946) as
well as the entire spectrum of natural organic remains (Bryant 1989). Bog material is suitable
for direct radiocarbon dating, and the 2 pollen cores upon which much of the palynological
record of Northeast Texas is based were obtained from the Boriack and Weakly bogs in Lee
and Leon counties, respectively (Bryant 1969, 1977; Holloway and Bryant 1984; Holloway et al.
1987).
Valley margins in Northeast Texas streams include colluvial slopes and occasional
alluvial fans. Such geomorphic features represent areas of natural deposition that may be well
suited to some kinds of human activity, a combination favoring the formation of stratified
archeological sites (Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). The lower reaches of such features afford
high ground adjacent to flood basin resources, and archeologists commonly find sites in these
settings in Northeast Texas.
Aeolian landscape features pose a somewhat more complicated scenario in Northeast
Texas (Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). These are extensive surficial sand deposits that are
subject to modification by wind at any time that vegetative cover is disrupted. Some indications
of aeolian modification of sand deposits have been noted in and near the region (e.g., Gunn and
Brown 1982; Mandel 1987; Perttula et al. 1986), but the validity of some of these interpretations,
the possible extent of Quaternary aeolian-modified landscapes, and the timing of any increased
aeolian activity are in question.
Geologically, the project area is underlain by Holocene-age alluvium, which consists of
clay, silt, and sand, with abundant organic matter (Barnes 1968). Alluvial structures include
point bars, natural levees, stream channels, and backswamp deposits.
Geomorphologically, the project area is situated on Koury silt loam, 0 to 1% slopes,
frequently flooded (Kp) (NRCS 2011). This soil unit consists of deep silty loam and loam
sediments that form in low-energy floodplain settings and consists of alluvial sediments
deposited during the Holocene era. A typical profile consists of relatively undifferentiated
deposits of loam and silt loam to a depth of 213 centimeters (cm) (84 inches [in]).
Aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in deep sandy sediments in
Northeast Texas, especially in and adjacent to major streams, such as those that characterize
the current project area. As such, the current project’s APE would appear to have moderate to
high potential to contain intact, buried archeological deposits. Historic-age cultural resources
may occur in almost any physiographic setting; however, the low, periodically inundated
floodplain setting of the APE would tend to suggest a decreased potential for historic-age
resources.

8

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

2.3

CLIMATE

The environment in Northeast Texas has not remained the same throughout the
ca. 12,000 years during which humans have lived in the region. Archeological, faunal,
geological, and pollen evidence suggest that significant changes have occurred, and these
changes have major implications for the development and maintenance of human adaptive
strategies in the region (Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). At present, these changes are poorly
understood as only limited evidence of past environments prior to ca. 3,000 years ago has been
obtained (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins and Bousman 1990; Story 1990).
Evidence for climatic change from the late Pleistocene to the present is most often
obtained through studies of pollen sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985). Few pollen studies
have been conducted in Northeast Texas—to date, only a few studies from Buck Creek Marsh
and Jewett Mine have provided interpretable pollen data from this portion of the state (Jacobs
1991; Scott-Cummings 1991), but these are poorly dated or have serious gaps in their records.
Nevertheless, an important series of pollen sites occur in areas surrounding Northeast Texas
(cf. Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). The best dated and most informative pollen sequences come
from Boriack Bog in Lee County and Weakly Bog in Leon County (Bryant 1969, 1977; Holloway
and Bryant 1984; Holloway et al. 1987). The radiocarbon dates from Boriack Bog suggest a
regular accumulation of deposits and indicate that Boriack Bog surface sediments are
approximately 3,000 years old. Bryant (1977) indicates that the bog was drained and the
surface peat was excavated in the 20th century; thus, the surface of the peat was lowered to
sediments of that age. Weakly Bog, by contrast, covers the last 3,000 years or so, and the
bottom samples roughly match the younger portion of Boriack Bog. Thus, Boriack and Weakly
bogs cumulatively provide a general picture of vegetation change throughout most of the late
Pleistocene and Holocene periods for this region of Texas.
Bryant and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for East Texas that
includes 3 separate climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.),
the Late Glacial Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to
present). Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. The limited available evidence suggests
that the region was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods and
that, prior to ca. 10,000 years B.P., it was forested with species that prefer cool, temperate
conditions, including boreal taxa such as spruce (Bryant and Holloway 1985). This late
Pleistocene/early Holocene climate is inferred to have been cooler than today, with increased
precipitation and/or more effective moisture, but with perhaps less seasonal climatic constraints.
The Late Glacial Period was characterized by a slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins
2004), during which the deciduous woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post
oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985).
During the Post-Glacial Period, the environment appears to have been more stable.
During the early Holocene (ca. 10,000 to 7000 B.P.), warmer temperatures prevailed, with less
moisture and presumably a lower density of forest cover. The deciduous forests were replaced
by prairies and post oak savannas. Collins and Bousman (1990) suggest that significant

HJN 110031 AR

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

expanses of grassland were present along the western edge of the Northeast Texas region.
The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic
conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. In the middle Holocene, the period between
ca. 7000 and 4000 B.P., much drier and warmer conditions may have characterized the region’s
climate, possibly resulting in even more widespread grasslands and replacement of forests
along its western edge. The forest cover in Northeast Texas is suspected to have been at its
lowest density during this time period (Collins and Bousman 1990:62).
Following the warm and dry interlude of the middle Holocene, environmental data
suggest that a gradual reforestation of the region continued into the late Holocene (ca.
4000 B.P. to present). Collins and Bousman (1990) suggest that prairie areas were replaced
first by oak savanna, then by oak-hickory forest in the western part of the region and by oakhickory-pine forest in the eastern portions of the region. Bryant and Holloway (1985) suggest
that essentially modern environmental conditions in Northeast Texas were probably achieved by
about 1,500 years ago.
Stable carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen isotope analyses are becoming
increasingly important sources of information about past climatic conditions and changes. A
14,000-year stable isotopic record from the Aubrey Site in the Trinity River Basin in NorthCentral Texas documents changing climatic conditions with wetter (and perhaps slightly cooler)
or more humid climates from ca. 11,000 to 7500 B.P., again between 4000 and 2000 B.P., and
yet again after 1,000 years ago (Humphrey and Ferring 1994; Perttula 2004:371). Conversely,
the Aubrey Site record suggests periods of warmer-than-present climate between 7,500 and
4,000 years ago and between about 2,000 and 1,000 years ago. Interestingly, fossil vertebrate,
pollen, and stable isotope data from Central Texas and the Edwards Plateau tell a somewhat
different story, highlighting 2 dry climatic peaks between ca. 7000 and 3000/2500 B.P. and after
1,000 years ago (Toomey et al. 1993; Perttula 2004:371). The timing and nature of such
climatic changes have major implications regarding the relative position of the prairie-forest
border, the possible presence or absence of bison, and the natural resource potential of the
Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna.
The modern climate of the region is characterized as humid subtropical, with warm,
humid weather from the spring to the fall, and cool, humid weather in the fall and winter. The
climate is influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is
modified by polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring,
summer, and fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental
climate characterized by considerable variations in temperature. Summers are long and warm.
Winters are short and mild and are characterized by short periods of clear, cold, or freezing
weather interspersed with cloudy and rainy periods and clear, pleasant days. Extremely hot or
cold temperatures are rare. Sudden temperature changes are not very common during
summer, but they may occur frequently in winter. Rapid drops in winter temperature are caused
by cold waves or sudden, strong north winds, though freezing weather is uncommon. Average
winter temperatures range between 35 and 50 degrees Fahrenheit (°F), and average summer
temperatures range from 85 to 95°F. Valleys and low divides are often covered with frost on

10

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

early winter mornings, but freezing temperatures are of short duration. The average frost-free
season is 246 days (March 15 to November 16) (Bomar 1983; Mowery 1948:3-5).
The region is well watered—precipitation falls rather uniformly over the area and is fairly
well distributed throughout the year. Normally, it is heaviest in December, March, April, and
May, and lowest in August. Rainfall varies from year to year, but the average is about
45 inches. Torrential rains fall occasionally, especially in winter and spring, and light snows fall
occasionally in winter but melt rapidly. Hailstorms are infrequent but do occur in the vicinity of
the project area (Mowery 1948:3-5). Precipitation generally increases from north to south
across the region and decreases from east to west in a clinal pattern. The wettest counties in
the area (Shelby, Sabine, and San Augustine) receive more than 48 inches of annual
precipitation, while the driest counties (Fannin, Henderson, and Anderson) receive between
36 and 40 inches of precipitation each year. Droughts are not uncommon, and periods of lower
summer precipitation are often accompanied by extended droughts caused by warm continental
Pacific air masses moving across the area from the west.
Dendrochronological analyses of tree rings suggest that numerous wet and dry spells
occurred during the last 1,000 years (Stahle and Cleaveland 1994, 1995). Dry conditions and
the worst droughts occurred in the late A.D. 1200s, in the mid-1400s and 1600s, and then again
in the mid-1700s (Stahle and Cleaveland 1995). Stahle et al. (1985) suggest that the worst
June drought to occur in the past 450 years occurred during the period between A.D. 1549 and
1577. More favorable conditions probably occurred during the intervening years, especially
between ca. A.D. 1390 and 1440, then in the late part of the 16th and early 17th centuries
(Perttula 2004:371). Such climatic perturbations presumably affected the predictability and
success of maize harvests during the Caddoan occupation of the Pineywoods and neighboring
Post Oak Savanna (Perttula 2004:371). Similar fluctuations throughout the Holocene would
also have affected the range, distribution, and abundance of naturally occurring plants and
animals upon which non-agricultural human populations relied.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

The Northeast Texas Archeological Region is situated within the Austroriparian biotic
province (Blair 1950). This province includes the Gulf Coastal Plain from the Atlantic Ocean to
eastern Texas. Its western boundary, which is approximated by a line running north from
western Harris County to western Red River County (Dice 1943), is the western boundary of the
main body of pine and hardwood forests of the eastern Gulf Coastal Plain. In Texas,
Austroriparian vegetation consists of 2 vegetation regions, the long-leaf pine and pine-oak forest
regions. The project area is situated in a forested upland environment within the mixed pinehardwood forest section of the pineywoods vegetation region.
Before the advent of the lumber industry in the 1880s, the area was covered by forests
of immense trees as large as 127 cm (50 in) in diameter with first limbs 18 to 24 m (60 to 80 ft)
above the ground (Handbook 2008). Though these forests have since been destroyed by more
than a century of intensive logging, many areas are now reforested, and much of Trinity County
is dotted with pine and hardwood forests. Forested uplands within the project area generally
consist of a mix of hardwood and pine stands with dense understories composed of trees,

HJN 110031 AR

11

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

shrubs, and vines. These areas are typically dominated by water oak (Quercus nigra), post oak
(Quercus stellata), southern red oak (Quercus falcata), loblolly pine (Pinus taeda), shortleaf pine
(Pinus echinata), sweet gum (Liquidambar styraciflua), winged elm (Ulmus alata), eastern red
cedar (Juniperus virginiana), common persimmon (Diospyros virginiana), American beautyberry
(Callicarpa americana), and blackberry (Rhubus sp.). Upland shrubland consists of small tree
species such as various elms, various oaks, sweet gum, and pine, as well as a variety of shrub
species such as eastern false-willow, sumac (Rhus sp.), Mexican plum (Prunus mexicana), and
rusty black-haw (Viburnum rufidulum). Upland grasslands are dominated by Bermuda grass
(Cynodon dactylon), nettles (Solanum spp.), and yankeeweed (Eupatorium compositifolium).

12

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Northeast Texas Archeological Region, a
subdivision of the THC’s Eastern Planning Region (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993). The cultural
history of Northeast Texas can be subdivided into 9 broad temporal periods, although the
historic period has been differentiated into overlapping Historic Caddoan and Historic EuroAmerican periods to distinguish between the highly divergent historical experiences of the
indigenous Native Americans and Euro-American settlers during the settlement of Texas
(Table 1).

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 9500 TO 7000 B.C.)

The initial human occupation of the New World can be confidently extended back before
10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Lynch 1990; Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft
Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans were present in Eastern North America as
early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al. 1990), while more recent discoveries at
Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for human occupation in South America by
at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer et al. 1997). Most archeologists
presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation in North America during the
Pleistocene glacial period.
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Northeast Texas is represented
by the Paleoindian period (ca. 9500 to 7000 B.C.) (Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). This period
coincided with ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that
witnessed the extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing
Table 1. Chronological Framework for Northeast Texas Archeological Region
Cultural Period

Approximate Dates

Cultural Period

Approximate Dates

Paleoindian
Archaic
Early Ceramic
Formative Caddoan
Early Caddoan

9500 to 7000 B.C.
7000 to 200 B.C.
200 B.C. to A.D. 800
A.D. 800 to 1000
A.D. 1000 to 1200

Middle Caddoan
Late Caddoan
Historic Caddoan
Historic Euro-American

A.D. 1200 to 1400
A.D. 1400 to 1680
A.D. 1690 to 1860
A.D. 1519 to Present

Source: Perttula and Kenmotsu (1993:44, Tab. 2.1.2)

HJN 110031 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

various periods within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often
fluted, lanceolate projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred endscrapers, gravers, and bone foreshafts.
Paleoindian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns are known primarily
through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the exploitation of small animals,
fish, and shellfish during the Paleoindian period. There is little evidence in Northeast Texas for
hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented elsewhere in North America; rather, a
broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been practiced until the Late Prehistoric
period.
The distribution of Paleoindian artifacts within the region suggests that these early
aboriginal occupations were principally situated within the valleys of major stream basins
(Anderson 1996; Thurmond 1990; Perttula 2004:373) as well as in resource-rich areas like the
Ouachita Mountains escarpment to the north (Anderson 1996). Anderson (1996) hypothesizes
that the initial and most intensive Paleoindian settlement of the Southeast (including Northeast
Texas) occurred in the resource-rich valleys of the Mississippi River and its principal tributaries.
From there, Paleoindian groups spread throughout the wooded Southeast and East, with
concentrations at 250- to 400-kilometer (km) (155- to 249-mile [mi]) intervals. The relatively
sparse Paleoindian archeological record, combined with the dispersion of artifacts across many
different landforms and physiographic settings, seems to indicate that Paleoindian groups were
highly mobile, generalized hunters and gatherers rather than specialized hunters of extinct
megafauna (Fields and Tomka 1993), as has been inferred for Paleoindian populations on the
Great Plains.

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 7000 TO 200 B.C.)

Throughout most of North America, the onset of the hypothesized Hypsithermal drying
trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period (ca. 7000 to 200 B.P.) (Perttula and Kenmotsu
1993). In many regions, this climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant reorientation of
lifestyle—the changing climatic conditions and corresponding decrease in the big game
populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified resource base composed of
smaller game and wild plants. In Northeast Texas, however, a generalized hunting and
gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory prior to the advent of large-scale
agricultural systems during the Late Prehistoric.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these
3 subperiods, though other changes in material culture have been noted as well. Johnson
(1962) employs archeological data from the Yarbrough site (41VN6) on the upper Sabine River
to bring chronological order to the diverse Archaic archeological record in Northeast Texas.
Johnson’s (1962) temporal divisions are based on projectile point sequences and on the
introduction of plain ceramics at the end of the Archaic period. More recent refinements of the
projectile point sequence (Story 1990; Thurmond 1990) document straight and expanding-stem

14

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

forms characteristic of the Early and Middle Archaic subperiods and contracting-stem darts
during the Late Archaic and subsequent Early Ceramic periods (Schambach 1982, 1998).

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (CA. 200 B.C. TO A.D. 800)

The Early Ceramic period (ca. 200 B.C. to A.D. 800), also known as the Woodland
period, is characterized in much of Northeast Texas, especially from the Sabine to the Red
rivers, primarily by plain, relatively thick ceramic bowls and flowerpot-shaped jars, double-bitted
axe heads, smaller and thinner versions of Gary dart points, and later in the period by cornernotched arrow points (Thurmond 1990). Early Ceramic sites along the Red River in
southwestern Arkansas and in Northeast Texas have abundant ceramics, though many sites of
this age, especially between the Sulphur and Sabine rivers, do not evince such prevalent use of
ceramics (Perttula 2004:376). This situation suggests regional differences in food processing
technologies and/or dietary habits, and may further highlight differences in the degree of
sedentism among populations across the area (Skibo and Blinman 1999). Lower Mississippi
Valley ceramic styles (e.g., Tchefuncte Stamped, Churupa Punctated, Marksville Incised,
Troyville Stamped, and Marksville Stamped) occur with some regularity at sites in the Sabine,
Sulphur, and Big Cypress basins (Story 1990). These ceramics may provide evidence of
contact and interaction between Trans-Mississippi South and Lower Mississippi Valley
populations, or they may represent the adoption of Lower Mississippi Valley stylistic and
decorative attributes by local potters (Perttula and Bruseth 1995; Schambach 1982, 1998).
The Early Ceramic inhabitants of Northeast Texas were still primarily hunter-gatherers,
though they may have lived in increasingly large groups and/or resided for longer periods of
time at certain sites (Perttula 2004:377). Larger villages and multiple mound centers begin to
be constructed during this period on the major streams (e.g., the Red and Sabine rivers). Some
sites have relatively substantial midden deposits, particularly along the Red River and in the
upper Sulphur River basin (Fields et al. 1997; Schambach 1982), and some evidence for
structures (probably daubed pole and thatch structures), but the degree of settlement
permanence is still less than that seen in the subsequent, long-term, Caddoan settlements of
Northeast Texas (Perttula et al. 1993:99).
On the basis of available paleobotanical information, Early Ceramic groups may have
cultivated squash (McGregor 1996) and used native seeds, tubers, and roots in addition to a
variety of woodland and aquatic animal resources (Webb et al. 1969). The presence of chipped
stone axes and hoe-shaped tools in Early Ceramic occupations suggests that some level of
horticultural activity was occurring, though intensive use of colonizing weedy annuals may
similarly account for the presence of these implements. Bruseth (1998) has suggested that
maize was being cultivated during the latter portions of this period, but stable isotope analyses
of some 25 or more Late Archaic, Fourche Maline, and Formative to Early Caddoan human
remains indicate that maize was not a major part of the diet at this time (Rose et al. 1998).
Early Ceramic period burial mounds have been documented in bluff top and alluvial valley
settings on the Red River in northwestern Louisiana and southwestern Arkansas (Schambach
1982, 1997; Webb 1984) and on the Angelina, Neches, and Sabine rivers in Northeast Texas
(Story 1990). Mortuary ceremonialism included the interment of costly, non-local raw materials

HJN 110031 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

and artifacts, including chert, copper, and Lower Mississippi Valley ceramic vessels, in the burial
mounds. Evidence of mortuary or ritual practices also occurs in non-mound contexts such as
the Hurricane Hill Site, which contained a small cemetery on a prominent hill, and the Mahaffey
Site on the Kiamichi River in southeastern Oklahoma, which had a large cemetery with flexed
and semiflexed burials without grave goods (Perino and Bennett 1978). In the broadest sense,
the establishment of bounded cemeteries is often interpreted as a correlate of increasing
sedentism in the western Gulf Coastal Plain of Northeast Texas (Perttula 2004:378).

3.4

FORMATIVE, EARLY, AND MIDDLE CADDOAN PERIODS (CA. A.D. 800 TO 1400)

The Caddoan archeological record represents the fluorescence of aboriginal complex
societies in northeastern Texas, northwestern Louisiana, southwestern Arkansas, and
southeastern Oklahoma, and generations of archeologists have long been captivated by the
beautifully manufactured ceramics and other material goods, the earthen mounds, the wellpreserved villages and hamlets, and the existence of a paleobotanical record (e.g., Perttula
2004; Swanton 1942). In the Northeast Texas Archeological Region, the timeframe referred to
in many surrounding regions as the Late Prehistoric period is usually subdivided into the
Formative Caddoan (ca. A.D. 800 to 1000), the Early Caddoan (ca. A.D. 1000 to 1200), the
Middle Caddoan (ca. A.D. 1200 to 1400), and the Late Caddoan (ca. A.D. 1400 to 1680) periods
(Perttula 1993a). European contact with Caddoan groups in Northeast Texas began around ca.
A.D. 1540, but it was sporadic until after ca. A.D. 1680 (Perttula 1992), and the Historic
Caddoan period (ca. A.D. 1680 to 1860) therefore covers the period of regular interaction with
Spanish, French, and other Euro-American settlers up to the expulsion of the Caddo peoples
from their homelands and forced removal to Indian Territory in 1859.
In general terms, the Caddo were characterized by
a large population represented by many small settlements scattered within particular
resource areas; a reliance upon horticulture as one of the primary means of subsistence;
differentiated and undifferentiated mound/habitation sites with structurally differentiated
mound classes (producing an apparently hierarchic division of places on the landscape);
differential treatment of the dead reflective of a system of ranking; [and] indications of
long-term cooperation in disposal of the dead by groups represented by some of the
archeological units (Prewitt 1974:76).

Broadly, these basic characteristics of settlement, subsistence, sociopolitical organization, and
mortuary practices are representative of the Caddoan archeological area from ca. A.D. 750 to
1750 and are similar, if not identical, to what constitutes the Mississippian period cultural
traditions of the Mississippi River Valley and Eastern Woodlands of North America (Griffin 1967,
1985; Smith 1990). Despite these similarities, Caddoan archeologists maintain that the
prehistoric and early historic Caddoan tradition developed largely independently of
Mississippian-period chiefdoms elsewhere (Smith 1990).
Formative to Middle Caddoan period groups seem to have been horticulturalists,
cultivating maize and squash along with several kinds of native seeds (Perttula and Bruseth
1983). They also gathered nuts, tubers, and roots and were proficient hunters of deer, fish,
rabbits, raccoon, turkey, squirrel, and turtles. Available paleobotanical and bioarcheological

16

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

evidence from Northeast Texas and elsewhere within the Caddoan area, including stable
carbon isotope analyses of human remains (Rose et al. 1998), suggests that Caddoan groups
became dependent primarily upon maize and other domesticated crops only after about
A.D. 1300. By ca. A.D. 1450, maize comprised more than 50% of the diet (Burnett 1990;
Perttula 1996; Rose et al. 1998), though local variation in dependence upon cultivated plants
has been noted (Cliff 1997; Largent et al. 1997; Perttula 1999).
The most distinctive material culture item of the Caddo populations living in Northeast
Texas was the ceramics they made for cooking, storage, and serving needs (Perttula et al.
1995). The variety of styles and forms of ceramics recovered from the region hint at the range,
temporal span, and geographic extent of prehistoric Caddoan groups across the landscape
(Thurmond 1990). Story (1990:246-247, 277-319) suggests that the earliest ceramics in the
region date between ca. 500 and 100 B.C. and are closely related to the ceramics being
produced in the Lower Mississippi Valley. Between the introduction of ceramics in the region
and the emergence of distinctive Caddoan vessel forms and decorative motifs around A.D. 800,
the local plainware traditions seem to have continued relatively unchanged.
Aside from ceramics, Formative to Middle Caddoan period populations in the
Pineywoods possessed a sophisticated technology based on the use of stone, bone, wood,
shell, and other media for the manufacture of tools, clothing, basketry, ornaments, and other
items (Perttula 1992:15). Well-made corner-notched and rectangular-stemmed arrow points
were common, along with siltstone and greenstone celts, perforators and borers, large Gahagan
bifaces, and a variety of more expedient stone tools, such as unifacial flake scraping and cutting
implements (Perttula 2004:386). Long-stemmed Red River (Hoffman 1967) and cigar-shaped
ceramic pipes, as well as ceramic earspools and figurines, were also manufactured by the
Caddo at this time (Newell and Krieger 1949).
Locally available lithic materials were usually employed for the manufacture of stone
tools, but non-local raw materials and finished goods made from these raw materials were also
obtained through trade (Brown 1983; Perttula 1990). The development and maintenance of
long-distance east-to-west and north-to-south trade networks were notable features of
prehistoric Caddoan tradition. Trade items included bison hides and salt; raw materials such as
copper, stone, and marine shell; and finished objects such as pottery vessels and large
ceremonial bifaces (Brown 1983; Creel 1991; Early 1990; Vehik 1988, 1990). Many of the more
exotic trade items, especially marine shell and copper artifacts, were obtained from areas more
than 186 km (300 mi) away from the Caddoan area (Perttula 1992).

3.5

LATE CADDOAN PERIOD (CA. A.D. 1400 TO 1680)

As currently defined, the Late Caddoan period extends from ca. A.D. 1400 to 1680
(Story 1990). Late Caddoan occupation in Northeast Texas was arguably centered on the
Great Bend area of the Red River, where Late Caddoan archeological sites are included in the
contemporaneous Belcher and Texarkana phases (Schambach 1983). Texarkana phase sites
occur on the Red River northwest of Texarkana to the Arkansas-Oklahoma state line, as well on
the lower Sulphur River (Jelks 1961), while Belcher phase sites are distributed from about
Fulton, Arkansas, to below Shreveport, Louisiana (Kelley 1997; Schambach 1983; Webb 1959).

HJN 110031 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

The McCurtain phase represents another Late Caddoan archeological complex upstream from
the Texarkana phase (Bruseth 1998). Texarkana and Belcher phase sites include large,
permanent settlements with mounds, cemeteries, hamlets, and farmsteads (Perttula 2004:393).
The mound centers were marked by the construction of earthen mounds used as temples, burial
mounds, and/or ceremonial fire mounds, as during earlier Caddoan periods (Kelley 1998; Webb
1959). These settlements were inhabited by sedentary Caddo agricultural communities with
complex societies led by individuals with high status (Story 1990).
Late Caddoan period settlements in the Pineywoods of Northeast Texas have been
termed rural Caddoan community systems (Perttula 1991) because they were distributed along
secondary streams, were widely dispersed, and consisted of functionally equivalent farmsteads
and hamlets. Small mound centers were being constructed by Titus phase and other Late
Caddoan groups up until ca. A.D. 1500, and possibly later, in Northeast Texas, but they lack
evidence of burial mounds or large platforms; rather, these mounds contain buried, burned
structures (Perttula 2004:398). The larger Caddoan towns were distributed along the major
stream valleys, such as the Red, Ouachita, and Little rivers. These communities were
hierarchically arranged, with civic-ceremonial centers at the “top” surrounded by associated
towns of linear but dispersed farmstead compounds with several structures (such as bark- or
brush-covered shelters and storage platforms) (Schambach 1983:7-8), followed by hamlets,
farmsteads, and specialized processing and/or procurement locales, such as salt-making sites
(Early 1993; Gregory 1980:356-357).
Faunal subsistence remains are known from a few sites in Northeast Texas dating to this
time period but have so far received relatively little attention (Perttula 1993a; Thurmond 1990).
Vertebrate species represented in trash middens include deer, turkey, cottontail rabbit,
jackrabbit, squirrel, beaver, turtle, and fish, though deer and turkey appear to have been the
dominant economic species (Perttula et al. 1982; 1993). In general, subsistence evidence
suggests that Pineywoods Caddo practiced a strongly maize-based economy at this time (Fritz
1990:421, 425). Floral evidence from trash midden deposits suggests that maize (Zea mays)
provided a dietary staple, and beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) were also an important food source
(Perttula 2004:4005). Nuts and seeds were gathered but appear to have been of lesser
importance than during earlier time periods (Crane 1982; Perttula and Bruseth 1983; Perttula et
al. 1982).
By early historic times, the Caddoan nation comprised at least 25 separate groups,
bands, or tribes organized into loosely affiliated kin-based groups referred to by European
observers as the Hasinai, Kadohadacho, and Natchitoches confederacies (Perttula 1992). The
Hasinai groups lived in the Angelina and Neches river valleys in East Texas, the Kadohadacho
groups on the Red River in the Great Bend area, and the Natchitoches groups on the Red River
in the vicinity of the French trading post of Natchitoches established in A.D. 1714.

3.6

HISTORIC CADDOAN PERIOD (CA. A.D. 1519 TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico (Weddle 1985). While no
documentary evidence exists for direct contact with Caddoan peoples during these initial forays,

18

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

Europeans were already conducting slave raiding and native resettlement projects along the
Texas coast by 1550 (Bolton 1912). From 1528 to 1534, Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca and
other survivors of the Narváez Florida expedition crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked
along the Texas coast near Galveston Bay (Bandelier 1964). Swanton (1942:29) does not
believe that Cabeza de Vaca actually encountered any Caddoan people during his wanderings,
though his dealings in Native American trade goods between coastal and inland groups suggest
that he might have traveled in the region (Perttula 1992:19). While direct contact between
Cabeza de Vaca and Caddoan peoples cannot be established by historical documentation,
Perttula (1992) argues that diseases such as typhoid and measles carried by the Narváez party
could have been transmitted to Native American groups living elsewhere along the Texas Coast
and then inland to Caddoan groups through aboriginal trade and other contact. Thus, the
Narváez and Cabeza de Vaca exploration may have been an important benchmark for the
initiation of contact between Europeans and Native Americans in the Spanish Borderlands West
(Hester 1989:199; Perttula 1992:19, 1993b) and may have introduced epidemic diseases that
resulted in substantial population declines prior to the inception of more regular contact later in
the 16th century.
In the early 1540s, the Hernando de Soto entrada, led by Luis de Moscoso following the
death of de Soto along the Mississippi River near present-day Memphis, passed into the
Caddoan area, spending several months among the Caddoan groups who lived between the
Ouachita and Trinity rivers (Swanton 1939; Perttula 1992:19). The death of de Soto on the
Mississippi River at the province of Guachoya in the spring of 1542
freed the survivors from continuing upon the original objectives of the expedition. There
was only one thought shared by all: to escape from the whole dreadful adventure. Under
the leadership of Luis de Moscoso, they officially decided it was hopeless to seek the
sea…in fact, the cavaliers were clearly reluctant to take to boats…and instead
determined to march west in the direction of New Spain (Brain 1985:xlv).

Within what is now recognized as the Caddoan archeological area, Moscoso described
the provinces of Naguatex, Nondacao, and Guasco, for example, as groups that had dense
populations in scattered settlements and abundant reserves of maize (Swanton 1939:258-280).
Perttula’s (1992) examination of Moscoso’s travels suggests that his route passed through
settlements of aboriginal Caddoan groups known archeologically as the Late Mid-Ouachita (or
Social Hill), Belcher, Texarkana, Titus, and Frankston phases. Different versions of Moscoso’s
route have been proposed by various researchers (e.g., Hudson 1986; Perttula 1992; Swanton
1939). The basic import of the de Soto-Moscoso expedition in 1542 is that these explorers
documented and described aspects of Caddoan settlement, subsistence strategies, aboriginal
routes of travel and trade, and social organization that are broadly consistent with inferences
that have been made based on the archeological record.
Between 1520 and 1685, various Europeans actually lived in the Caddoan area less
than 1.5 years in total, and it is virtually certain that most Caddoan peoples during this time
never saw a European (Perttula 1992:29). As a result, artifactual evidence of this phase of
European contact is minimal. As Krieger points out:

HJN 110031 AR

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

In any one site, something like twenty beads and two bits of iron may be all that can be
found to represent perhaps a century of contact; and this being true, there must be
scores of sites actually occupied during the same “historic period” from which the
archaeologist cannot recover a single European object (in Davis 1961:120).

The second major phase of European contact in the Caddoan historic period began with
the renewed exploration of the Mississippi Valley following the establishment of the Illinois
colony by the French in the 1670s. The Mississippi River, initially explored by Marquette and
Joliet in 1673 to the mouth of the Arkansas River (Delangez 1946), was fully explored to its
mouth by La Salle. Three years later, another expedition directed by La Salle intended to
colonize the area and link the Gulf Coast with the growing French colonies of Illinois and
Canada. For unknown reasons, this expedition missed the mouth of the Mississippi River and
came ashore on the Texas Gulf Coast at Matagorda Bay (Cox 1922; Gilmore 1986). La Salle
made several trips from Fort St. Louis to explore the region and try to find the Mississippi River,
visiting the Hasinai (or Cenis, in the French transcription) in 1686 before turning back with
several horses purchased from the Hasinai. Another effort was made in 1687 by the survivors
of Fort St. Louis; however, La Salle was murdered by several of the men partway through this
trip, and the remaining party decided to stay on with the Hasinai.
The years between 1685 and 1714 were a time of continual French and Spanish
exploration of the Caddoan area. The threat of French settlement in an area the Spanish
considered to be officially under their hegemony spurred serious Spanish efforts to settle and
missionize the country east of New Mexico and the Rio Grande known to them as the “Kingdom
of the Tejas” (Bolton 1912; Perttula 1992:30). At the same time, the French were determined to
take advantage of the La Salle explorations to extend their claims in the region. Shortly
thereafter, English colonies were established along the South Atlantic Coast that wished to
extend trade routes west to Native American groups living on the Mississippi River and the
Texas Gulf Coast (Coker and Watson 1986; Crane 1929; Usner 1989). European political
relationships, trade and religious objectives, and the larger spheres of influence under the
control of the Spanish, French, and British in the developing world economy all played important
parts in the fate of the Caddo between ca. 1685 and 1800 (Braudel 1984:21-85, 387-429;
Wallerstein 1974; Wolf 1982:129-231). Trade contacts, rumors of settlement, and exploration
by one government were responded to in kind by others as part of the unstable process of
colonization.
The nature and character of sustained European contact has been
comprehensively discussed by many researchers (Bolton 1915, 1987; Cox 1909; Fieldhouse
1966; Galloway 1982; Gibson 1989; Giraud 1957, 1963, 1974a, 1974b; John 1975, 1985;
Surrey 1916; Swagerty 1984; Usner 1987; Wade 1989), and only the broad outlines are
presented below in the interest of summarizing the varying European objectives as they
impacted the Caddo.
From the 1790s, containment of the expanding US east of the Mississippi River
dominated Spain’s concerns in its Texas and Louisiana colonies, and the allegiance of the
various Indian nations of the Provincias Internas, such as the Caddo, Wichita, and Comanche,
was perceived by the Spanish government as a critical factor in controlling the frontier. The
1790s were a period of growth in the American fur trade, and another major growth period in the
industry occurred from 1800 to 1808 (Clayton 1967). Beaver was the primary fur resource in
20

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

the trade from 1790 to 1820. The Kadohadacho and Hasinai participated in the trade from the
outset, and their contributions to the fur trade were considered important parts of the Spanish
and Louisiana economies (Ewers 1969:47-48; Flores 1984; Peake 1954:17-18). Following the
purchase of the Louisiana Territory in 1803, the US moved rapidly to explore the boundaries
and character of its new territory, and the federal government emphasized the establishment of
commercial and political relationships with resident aboriginal groups, including Caddoan tribes.
The Freeman and Custis expedition of 1806 on the Red River followed specific guidelines
regarding interaction with the Indians. This expedition was ultimately abandoned due to
interference from the Spanish related to questions about the boundary between Spanish Texas
and the Louisiana Territory. The US initiated a border war with Spain that resulted in the 1806
Neutral Ground Agreement. Possession of the Red River, as well as the territorial allegiance of
the Kadohadacho, remained unresolved (Flores 1984:287).
As Spanish and American trading ventures evolved through the first 2 decades of the
19th century, the actual settlement of the Red River, its tributaries, and the neutral ground
between Louisiana and Texas began in earnest (Strickland 1937; Haggard 1945). By 1818,
nearly 3,000 settlers from the Midwest and upper South had squatted illegally in Caddo country
along the south side of the Red River from the Great Bend to the Kiamichi River (Lottinville
1980:170-172). Anglo-American settlements increased up to and beyond the time of the Texas
Revolution in 1836 (Strickland 1937:64-238). This settlement expansion was also accompanied
by an influx of aboriginal groups from east of the Mississippi River and from the Arkansas River,
including Choctaw, Cherokee, Delaware, Kickapoo, Quapaw, Shawnee, and Koasati groups
(Anderson 1990; Everett 1990; Ewers 1969; Kniffen et al. 1987; Williams 1964). These groups
exchanged hides, corn, pumpkins, and beans at the trading house in Nacogdoches (Swanton
1942:88) as well as with American government traders at the new agency house at the mouth of
the Sulphur River. As the frontier moved west, Caddoan Indians in Louisiana became more
isolated in the Anglo-American community and were under continual pressure from these
settlers and from the immigrant Indians (Swanton 1942:88; Williams 1964). In Texas,
settlement pressures did not impinge on Caddoan lands until after 1830 (Strickland 1937:318355), though Stephen F. Austin viewed the aboriginal populations of Texas as a hindrance to
the security of settlement (Barker 1925).
Following the death of the Caddo chief Dehahuit in 1833, American pressure in
Louisiana on the new Caddo chiefs led to the ceding of Caddo homelands within the limits of the
US on 1 July 1835 (Swanton 1942:89-92). The Caddo relinquished their lands for $80,000,
agreed to move at their own expense within 1 year of the treaty date, and moved to Texas just
prior to the establishment of the Republic of Texas in 1836. The term Caddo Nation came to be
associated with the Cherokee as well as with the Hasinai, Anadarko, and other related tribes of
East Texas, and the Indians became subject to the repressive measures of successive Republic
of Texas administrations (Neighbours 1973, 1975). By the early 1840s, the Caddo Nation was
composed of remnants of the Kadohadacho, Hasinai, and other once-independent Caddoan
tribes, and it had been essentially pushed out of East Texas along with the other groups who
had signed the Treaty of Peace and Friendship with the Republic of Texas in 1843 (Strickland
1937:355; Swanton 1942:97). In 1846, the Kadohadacho, Hasinai, and Anadarko lived together
in a village of about 150 houses on the Brazos River near the present City of Waco, Texas;

HJN 110031 AR

21

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

shortly thereafter, they moved near the Clear Fork of the Brazos to maintain their distance from
Anglo-American frontier communities. From 1846 to 1854, the US government and the Texas
legislature founded the Texas Indian Reservation on the Brazos River (Neighbours 1957, 1973),
but this reservation lasted only until 1859 due to frictions among white settlers, Indian agents,
and the agglomeration of tribal members. Accordingly, in August 1859, the Caddo Nation, then
about 1,050 people in number, was removed to the Indian Territory and the Wichita agency in
western Oklahoma. Since that time, the history of the Caddo peoples is largely similar to the
overall history of the US.

3.7

HISTORIC EURO-AMERICAN PERIOD (CA. 1519 TO PRESENT)

When the first Europeans explored the region now encompassed by Trinity County, it
was inhabited by various Caddoan and Atakapan Native American groups, but diseases,
especially smallpox, ravaged these agrarian peoples by the time the first Anglo-American
settlers arrived. 1 Various other tribes, including the Alabama, Kickapoo, Tantabogue, and
Coushatta, settled in the area in the 19th century. In 1827, when the area was part of the
Mexican municipality of Nacogdoches, it was granted to Joseph Vehlein, a Mexico City
merchant, by the Mexican government. Vehlein never fulfilled the terms of his contract to settle
200 families in the area, and Mexican authorities later made several other grants to would-be
colonizers, including María Guadalupe de Castro and Pedro José de Caro. The Indian
population controlled the land until after the Texas Revolution, however, and the area seems to
have attracted few, if any, European settlers until the 1840s.
In 1837, the Congress of the Republic of Texas established Houston County, which
included all of the area of present Trinity County. The first recorded permanent white settler
was a Jesse James, who settled on Alabama Creek in 1844, near a large Indian settlement. In
1845, John Gallion moved into the settlement and purchased the Indians’ livestock and
improvements. Though the subsequent fate of the area’s Indian population is unknown, they
seem to have moved to the Indian Territory. The earliest white settlers in the area lived
primarily by hunting, consuming the meat of their prey, and sending pelts to eastern markets for
whatever cash they would bring. On February 11, 1850, the Texas legislature established
Trinity County. In 1854, Sumpter, a small village, was declared county seat, and a small
courthouse and jail were built; that same year, the county’s first post office was established
there. By the late 1850s, Trinity County was a thriving frontier area that profited from the
steamboat traffic on the Trinity River. Though most of the county’s inhabitants supported
themselves through hunting and subsistence agriculture, plantation agriculture was becoming
increasingly important to the local economy. By 1857, a number of wealthy slaveholders,
including C.C. Tallifero, George Reese, and C.O. Wagnon, had moved into the area and
established large plantations on which cotton and corn were grown. A saw and grist mill was
built at Indian Camp Springs in 1857, providing lumber for frame houses and other structures.

1

The following historical summary has been compiled from Bowles (1966), Henseley and Henseley
(1986), Leffler and Long (2008), and Mansell (1941).

22

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

By 1860, there were 4,392 people, including 791 slaves and a free black, living in Trinity
County. Farms covered 63,000 acres in the county, and almost 12,000 acres were classified as
“improved”; that year, 94,834 bushels of corn, 2,945 bales of cotton, and 210 pounds of tobacco
were produced in Trinity County, along with such other crops as potatoes, sweet potatoes, and
beans. Over 10,300 cattle were reported in the county, along with 1,465 sheep. Meanwhile
Sumpter, the county seat, had grown to include 3 hotels, a grocery store, and a saloon. The
Trinity Valley, a weekly newspaper, was being published there.
Though the population of the county was divided over the issue of secession in 1860,
the area strongly supported the Confederacy when the Civil War began. Three companies of
soldiers were raised in the county for the Southern cause, including one unit that became part of
Hood’s Texas Brigade. The number of slaves in the county grew significantly during the conflict,
possibly due to southerners fleeing west with their slaves; according to county tax records, the
county’s slave population increased to 1,227 by 1864. The Trinity County area also became a
haven for Confederate deserters and criminals during the war, and public order broke down.
Some of the county’s most prominent men organized a vigilante committee; J. F. Moore, the
county sheriff, led its operations. Though the vigilantes resorted to summary justice and
lynched a number of men, the county was still in turmoil when the war ended. In 1866, three
companies of Illinois infantry were stationed in Sumpter as occupation troops for
Reconstruction, but the county’s society continued to be turbulent and disorganized in the years
just after the Civil War. The county’s white population harbored a “spirit of resentment” against
the federal troops, and the Ku Klux Klan conducted night rides and other operations intended to
intimidate the newly freed blacks in the area. Meanwhile, local citizens were also harassed by
outlaws such as John Wesley Hardin, who grew up in Trinity County. According to Bowles
(1966), violence and murder were almost commonplace during this time. The county’s
economy was disrupted by the Civil War and its aftermath; the number of acres in farms in the
county dropped from 62,324 in 1860 to only 19,274 by 1870. Corn production and the number
of cattle fell off in the area during the 1860s, and cotton production declined significantly; in
1870, 2,205 bales were produced, 25% fewer than in 1860. While the number of blacks living in
the county rose slightly during the 1860s, the white population declined by 10%. A new town,
Pennington, was established in the northwestern part of the county in 1866; however, by 1870,
the county’s total population had declined to 4,140.
The county’s social and political geography shifted after 1872, when the Great Northern
Railroad extended its tracks into the small village of Trinity, located in the southwestern part of
the county. Almost immediately, people began to move out of Sumpter to Trinity and
Pennington, sometimes taking their homes and other buildings with them. In May 1873, a few
months after the Sumpter courthouse burned with most of the county records, the town of Trinity
became the seat of government for the county. The next year, after another election,
Pennington became the county seat; its courthouse burned in 1876. Meanwhile, in 1873,
former slaves established the small town of Nigton in the northeastern part of the county.
Agriculture in the area revived during the 1870s. By 1880, there were 421 farms, encompassing
159,000 acres, in the county, and 25,000 acres were classified as “improved.” That year, local
farmers devoted 6,802 acres to cotton and produced 2,666 bales; another 9,184 acres were
planted in corn, and 4,048 acres were planted in wheat. The county’s population had also

HJN 110031 AR

23

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

begun to grow again, and, by 1880, there were 4,915 people (3,740 whites and 1,162 blacks)
living in the area. In the early 1880s, after the Sabine branch of the International-Great
Northern Railroad was built through the county, the area’s economy and way of life were
fundamentally changed. Attracted by the area’s spectacular old-growth forests, a number of
lumber operations, including the Trinity Lumber Company (1881), the Thompson-Tucker
Lumber Company (1883), and the J.T. Cameron Lumber Company (1883), rapidly moved into
the area and opened sawmills. A new town, Groveton, appeared around the Trinity Lumber
Company’s mill and grew so quickly that, in 1882, the county’s voters chose to make it the
county seat. New towns subsequently appeared in the county around other mills, as the lumber
companies built houses, churches, schools, and eventually electric plants and waterworks, to
accommodate their workers. By the early 20th century, company towns such as Willard (1909
population: 1,200), Josserand (900), Saron (1,200), and Westville (1,000) were home to the
thousands of workers who cut, hauled, and sawed the area’s timber. Black workers lived in
segregated housing and attended segregated schools, churches, and meeting halls. The
lumber industry also attracted a large number of transient workers, who lived in portable camps
that moved around the forests; as soon as these crews cleared the trees from an area, their
houses would be placed on railroad flatbeds and carried to the next logging site.
While Trinity County’s lumber operations dominated the local economy and drained
labor away from the agricultural sector, farming nevertheless expanded in the county during the
late 19th century. By 1900, there were 1,271 farms, encompassing 323,000 acres, in the area.
Production of corn and cotton, the county’s most important crops, increased steadily during this
period and particularly during the 1890s; by 1900, 15,448 acres in the area were planted in
corn, while 13,704 acres were devoted to cotton. The area’s ranching industry also grew, and,
by 1900, over 20,000 cattle and 5,000 goats were reported in the county. Largely because of
the lumber industry, but also because of this farm expansion, Trinity County’s population grew
to 7,648 by 1890 and to 10,976 by 1900. Lumbering in the county intensified during the early
1900s. Production was prodigious; one mill alone, owned by Thompson-Tucker Lumber, turned
out 100,000 boardfeet of lumber daily in 1909. By that time, however, the county’s old forests
were almost played out. The town of Josserand died in 1909 when its mill closed that year, and
Willard folded up in 1911 for the same reason; Saron died in 1919 and Westville in 1921. By
1928, only the lumber operations in Groveton and Trinity were still operating, and the
companies that owned these mills were reaching into Tyler and Houston counties for their logs.
Only ugly stumps and brush covered much of Trinity County, and the once-thriving sites of
Willard, Josserand, Saron, and Westville were only “waste places covered with brambles.” The
Groveton mill closed at midnight on December 31, 1930, blowing its steam whistle for two hours
to signal the end of an era in the county’s history. Farming had declined in the county during
the lumber boom of the early 1900s; however, as the mill industry began to die, many of its
former workers turned to farming. They were encouraged by Helen Kerr Thompson, the wife of
the president of the defunct Thompson-Tucker mill. In her attempt to revive agriculture in the
area, Mrs. Thompson built chicken houses and filled them with purebred leghorn hens, stocked
a ranch with registered Hereford cattle, and began a diversified farming program that focused
on growing cotton, sugar cane, and various grains. She took on tenant farmers to work some of
her lands. About 100,000 acres of the county were in farms in 1925; however, by 1930,

24

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

farmland in the area had expanded to encompass more than 143,000 acres. During that same
period, the number of farms in the county grew from 1,330 to 1,569. By 1930, almost
25,000 acres in the county were planted in cotton, more than twice the figure for 1920. Many of
the new farmers were tenants; the number of farms in the area operated by tenants grew from
465 in 1920 to 726 by 1930. The expansion of agriculture in the area helps to explain why the
county’s population did not drop after the mills closed. There were 12,768 people living in the
area in 1910, 13,623 in 1920, and 13,637 in 1930.
Despite the agricultural expansion, the closing of the mills and the onset of the Great
Depression severely undermined the local economy. By the early 1930s, a number of people
had already moved out of Groveton, the county seat, and the town had lost some of its finest
buildings to fires. The main railroads in the area stopped running, and the county had almost no
paved roads aside from State Highway 94, which was completed between Groveton and Trinity
in 1929. New Deal projects sponsored by the federal government did much to revive the area
and to prepare it for the future, however. The Civilian Conservation Corps established camps at
Trinity, Apple Springs, and Groveton and hired a number of young men for reforestation work,
road construction, and erosion prevention measures. Sewing rooms were opened in the county
to employ local women, and the Work Projects Administration built a new county jail and
constructed high schools for Apple Springs, Pennington, Saglen, Centerville, and Groveton.
Meanwhile, the Woodlake area became the site of an experimental federal commune under the
Texas Rural Community Project. About 100 houses were built on 3-acre tracts and filled with
families selected from the relief rolls. The Woodlake community also became the base for a
National Youth Administration camp, where as many as 150 young people at a time were
trained in industrial crafts.
The population of the area increased slightly during the 1930s to reach 13,705 by 1940.
Trinity County’s population declined significantly during the 1940s and 1950s as farms
mechanized and consolidated; by 1950, there were only 975 farms in the county, and young
people left to look for new opportunities elsewhere. Thanks to reforestation efforts, however,
the lumber industry eventually revived, and, by the 1960s, there were 2 sawmills operating in
the county. By the 1980s, the area’s timber production exceeded the yields of the timber boom
of the early 1900s, and timber sales provided most of the county’s revenue. Natural gas and oil
were discovered in the county in 1946, but production levels remained low into the 1990s.
About 20,000 barrels of crude were produced in the area in 1960, less than 5,000 barrels in
1974, about 1,800 barrels in 1982, and about 64,000 barrels in 1990. In the 1960s, the Trinity
River was dammed to form Lake Livingston, which immersed part of the county and now
provides recreation for the area’s inhabitants and tourists. The population of the county steadily
increased after the 1960s, reaching 7,628 in 1970, 9,450 in 1980, and 11,445 by 1990.

HJN 110031 AR

25

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the NRHP
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
on the THC’s online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the National Park Service’s (NPS’s) online
National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), and the Texas State Historical Association’s (TSHA) Handbook of Texas Online, as
well as a program of intensive survey of the project area. No cultural resources were
documented as a result of this survey, so the second and third of these goals were not pursued.
The rest of this chapter presents the methodological background for the current investigations
and the specific survey methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey area. Based on this archival research, 1 previously
recorded archeological site, 41TN39, has been documented within a 1.6-kilometer (km) (1.0mile [mi]) radius of the project area. Site 41TN39 is located on the western bank of Caney
Creek about 0.5 km (0.3 mi) south of the project area on a broad alluvial terrace overlooking
Caney Creek. Originally recorded in 1966, the site was described as a series of Late Prehistoric
aboriginal artifact scatters observed on the modern ground surface of several low knolls. No
subsurface investigations were conducted at the time, and the NRHP eligibility and current
condition of the site is unknown. No prior cultural resource surveys have been conducted within
a 1.6-km (1.0-mi) radius of the project area, no portion of the current project’s APE has been

HJN 110031 AR

27

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

previously surveyed for cultural resources, and no known cultural resources occur within the
boundaries of the APE.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

On April 5, 2011, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd, field supervisor, and Jared
Wiersema, field technician, under the direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator,
conducted an intensive survey of the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that
potentially would be impacted by the proposed construction project. The majority of the APE is
forested in pine plantation with smaller areas of native pine and hardwood forest cover, and an
extensive network of 2-track roads have been cut through the forest (Figure 3). Numerous
ponds of varying sizes dot the landscape along the banks of Caney Creek, which forms the
eastern project area boundary, and an unnamed tributary of Caney Creek that forms the
southern project area boundary (Figure 4). Thus, most of the project has experienced moderate
prior impacts from timber harvesting and the creation of the 2-track road network. The margins
of the project area appear to experience frequent flooding and were largely inundated at the
time of the survey.
The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologists, and the modern ground was
thoroughly inspected for evidence of historic and prehistoric cultural resources. As the majority
of the APE was lightly to moderately forested, the modern ground surface was partially
obscured in some areas by pine duff and other organic debris, and ground surface visibility was
typically less than 30%. Where present, erosional gullies and stream cutbanks were examined
for cultural resources, evidence of buried paleosols, and other stratigraphic anomalies that
might be indicative of past cultural activity.
The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) for cultural
resource surveys state that, for block-area surveys, a minimum of 1 subsurface probe (e.g.,
shovel tests, backhoe trenches, auger tests) per 2 acres be excavated within project areas of
the size of the current project’s APE. The density of subsurface probes may be increased in
areas with higher probabilities to contain cultural resources, such as stream terraces, and
decreased in areas with low probabilities for cultural resources, such as heavily disturbed areas
or upland settings with minimal soil cover. As most of the project area was anticipated to
contain deep alluvial packages that shovel testing may not be able to fully penetrate, backhoe
trenching was conducted instead to prospect for buried cultural resources. For the current
project, a minimum of 12 subsurface probes would be required in the approximately 9-ha (23ac) APE. Horizon excavated a total of 12 backhoe trenches within the APE, thereby meeting
the TSMASS requirements (Figures 5 to 6). Backhoe trenches were excavated using a 0.6-m(2.0-ft-) wide bucket. All trenches were approximately 0.6 m (2.0 ft) wide, 3.0 to 4.0 m (9.8 to
13.1 ft) long, and from 1.0 to 1.8 m (3.3 to 5.9 ft) deep. The trenches were excavated by
removing thin layers measuring approximately 0.1 m (0.3 ft) in thickness from across the entire
trench before proceeding downward. Horizon personnel monitored all trench excavations.
Trench walls and floors were carefully monitored during excavation; backfill piles were
thoroughly examined for archeological resources during excavation and random samples of

28

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

Figure 3. Typical View of Forested Portions of Project Area (Facing East)

Figure 4. Overview of Pond in Southern Portion of Project Area (Facing Northwest)

HJN 110031 AR

29

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 5. Deep Gray Sand Deposits Observed in BT 9

backfill were screened through 6.35-millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth; and trench walls
were inspected following excavation for artifacts, distinctive stratigraphic anomalies, and/or soil
discolorations that may be indicative of past cultural activities. Horizon personnel created profile
sketch maps and recorded notes on the stratigraphic character of soil deposits observed in
trench walls, though at no time did any personnel enter into any trench deeper than 1.2 m
(4.0 ft). Appendix A presents the stratigraphy and soil characteristics observed in the
12 backhoe trenches.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken and a photographic
log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and

30

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

Figure 6. Locations of Backhoe Trenches in Project Area

HJN 110031 AR

31

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same
location in which they were found. As no cultural resources were observed during the survey,
the collections policy was not brought into play.

32

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The WPGC is proposing to develop an approximately 16-ha (40-ac) tract in
southwestern Trinity County, Texas, into the proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course.
The proposed golf course would be constructed by the WPGC on privately owned land, though
proposed construction may result in potential impacts to waterways that may be subject to
permitting by the USACE under Section 404 of the CWA. As a federal permit may be required
for the proposed action, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the NHPA
of 1966, as amended. As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the
potential to impact significant cultural resources, the WPGC was required to provide for a
cultural resources inventory and assessment of the project’s APE and to assess the project’s
possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. In consultation with the
USACE, the APE for this project was determined to consist of approximately 9 ha (23 ac), or
roughly 58%, of the overall tract located adjacent to jurisdictional waterways primarily within the
southern portion of the tract.
To meet its responsibilities under the NHPA, WPGC contracted with Horizon to conduct
a cultural resources survey of the proposed 9-ha (23-ac) APE. The purpose of the survey was
to determine if any archeological and/or historical sites are located within the USACE
jurisdictional areas, and, if any exist, to determine their eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP. The
cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive pedestrian survey
of the 9-ha (23-ac) APE, and the production of a report suitable for review by the SHPO in
accordance with the THC’s Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the
CTA’s Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.
Horizon conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the APE on April 5, 2011.
Jeffrey D. Owens served as the Principal Investigator for the project. Michael Mudd served as
the field supervisor, and Jared Wiersema served as an archeological field technician during the
field investigations. The purpose of the survey was to locate any cultural resource properties
that potentially would be impacted by the proposed project. The APE was traversed by
Horizon’s archeologists, and a total of 12 backhoe trenches were excavated within the APE,
thereby meeting the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size.
No cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of
the survey.

HJN 110031 AR

33

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is the determination
of whether or not an archeological site possesses the potential to make a contribution to 1 or
more previously defined research questions. Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey
level are rarely sufficient to contribute in a meaningful manner to such research issues. The
objective is rather to determine which archeological sites could be most profitably investigated
further in pursuance of regional, methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore,
adequate information on site function, context, and chronological placement from archeological
and, if appropriate, historical perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because
research questions vary as a function of geography and temporal period, determination of the
site context and chronological placement of cultural properties is a particularly important
objective during the inventory process.
Ultimately, management decisions regarding archeological properties are a function of
the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs. Archeological
resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of
archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP.

HJN 110031 AR

35

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually eligible for inclusion in the NRHP only under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

6.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologists, the modern ground surface was
thoroughly inspected for cultural resources, and a total of 12 backhoe trenches were excavated
36

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

within the APE, thereby meeting the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size. No
cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of the
survey.

6.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of the project area documented in
this report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed
undertaking. No new cultural resources were identified in the remainder of the project area as a
result of intensive survey activities, and no previously documented cultural resources are
present in the vicinity of the project area that would be adversely affected by the proposed
undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. As no cultural resources were identified that meet
the criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4, no further archeological work is
recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the
proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains
or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and the USACE and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

HJN 110031 AR

37

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Anderson, D.B.
1996
Approaches to Modeling Regional Settlement in the Archaic Period Southeast. In
Archaeology of the Mid-Holocene Southeast, edited by K.E. Sassaman and D.G.
Anderson, pp. 157-176. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.
Anderson, H.A.
1990
The Delaware and Shawnee Indians and the Republic of Texas, 1820-1845.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly 94(2):231-260.
Anderson, K.M., K. Gilmore, O.F. McCormick, III, and R.R. Morenon
1974
Archaeological Investigations at Lake Palestine, Texas.
Contributions in
Anthropology No. 11, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.
Bandelier, F. (translator)
1964
[1904] The Journey of Alvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca and his Companions from
Florida to the Pacific, 1528-1536. New York: Allerton Press.
Barker, E.C.
1925
The Life of Stephen F. Austin, Founder of Texas, 1793-1836: A Chapter in the
Westward Movement of the Anglo-American People. Austin: The University of
Texas Press.
Barnes, V.E.
1968
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Beaumont Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.

HJN 110031 AR

39

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Bolton, H.E.
1912
The Spanish Occupation of Texas, 1519-1690. Southwestern Historical Quarterly
11:249-276.
1915

Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies in Spanish Colonial History and
Administration. Berkeley: University of California Press.

1987

The Hasinais: Southern Caddoans as Seen by the Earliest Europeans. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press.

Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Bowles, F.G.
1966
A History of Trinity County, Texas, 1827 to 1928. Unpublished M.A. thesis,
University of Texas, 1928. Groveton, Texas: Groveton Independent School District.
Brain, J.P.
1985
Introduction: Update of De Soto Studies since the United States De Soto Expedition
Commission Report. In Final Report of the United States De Soto Expedition
Commission, by J.R. Swanton, xi-lxxii.
Classics in Anthropology Series.
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Braudel, F.
1984
Civilization and Capitalism: Fifteenth to Eighteenth Century, Vol. 3, The Perspective
of the World. New York: Harper & Row.
Brown, I.W.
1983
Historic Aboriginal Pottery from the Yazoo Bluffs Region, Mississippi. Southeastern
Archaeological Conference Bulletin 21:1-17.
Bruseth, J.E.
1998
The Development of Caddoan Polities along the Middle Red River Valley of Eastern
Texas and Oklahoma. In The Native History of the Caddo: Their Place in
Southeastern Archaeology and Ethnohistory, edited by T.K. Perttula and J.E.
Bruseth, pp. 47-68. Studies in Archeology No. 30. Austin: Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.
Bruseth, J.E., J.T. Bagot, K.M. Banks, and M.A. McKinley
1977
Archaeological Research at Lake Fork Reservoir: Site Inventory and Assessment.
Research Report No. 87, Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Bryant, V.M., Jr.
1969
Late Full-glacial and Post-glacial Pollen Analysis of Texas Sediments. Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Botany, The University of Texas at Austin.
1977

40

A 16,000 Year Pollen Record of Vegetational Change in Central Texas. Palynology
1:143-155.

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

1989

Botanical Remains in Archaeological Sites. In Interdisciplinary Workshop on the
Physical-Chemical-Biological Processes Affecting Archeological Sites, compiled by
C.C. Mathewson, pp. 85-115. Department of the Army, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Washington.

Bryant, V.M., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late Quaternary North America Sediments, edited by
V.M. Bryant and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-67. Dallas: The American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation.
Burnett, B.A.
1990
The Bioarcheological Synthesis of the Eastern Portion of the Gulf Coastal Plain. In
The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy,
B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard,
pp. 385-418. Research Series No. 38. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.
Chelf, C.
1946
Grooved Clubs from a Peat Bog in Milam County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 17:42-47.
Clayton, J.L.
1967
The Growth and Economic Significance of the American Fur Trade, 1790-1890. In
Aspects of the Fur Trade: Selected Papers of the 1965 North American Fur Trade
Conference, edited by R.W. Fridley and J.D. Holmquist, pp. 62-72. St. Paul:
Minnesota Historical Society.
Cliff, M.B.
1997
The Middle Caddoan Period in the Lower Sulphur River Area. Journal of Northeast
Texas Archaeology 9:9-16.
Coker, W.S., and T.D. Watson
1986
Indian Traders and the Southeast Spanish Borderlands: Panton, Leslie and Co. and
John Forbes and Co. Gainesville: University Presses of Florida.
Collins, M.B.
2004
Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T.K. Perttula, pp.
101-126. College Station: Texas A&M University Press.
Collins, M.B., and C.B. Bousman, with contributions by T.K. Perttula
1990
Historic Context: Quaternary Environments and Archeology in Northeastern Texas.
In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited
by N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 49-67. Cultural Resource Management
Report No. 3, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission.
Austin.
Cox, I.J.
1909

The Significance of the Texas-Louisiana Frontier.
Association Proceedings 3:198-213.

HJN 110031 AR

Mississippi Valley Historical

41

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

1922

The Journeys of René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle. New York: Allerton Book
Company.

Crane, C.J.
1982
Plant Utilization at Spoonbill, an Early Caddo Site in Northeast Texas.
Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology 7:81-97.
Crane, V.W.
1929
The Southern Frontier, 1670-1732. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Creel, D.G.
1991
Bison Hides in Late Prehistoric Exchange in the Southern Plains. American Antiquity
56(1):40-49.
Davis, E.M.
1961
Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Caddoan Archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 31:77-150.
Delangez, J.
1946
The “Récit des Voyages et des Découvertes du Père Jacques Marquette.” MidAmericfa 28:173-194, 211-258.
Diamond, D.D., D.H. Riskind, and S.L. Orzell
1987
A Framework for Plant Community Classification and Conservation in Texas. The
Texas Journal of Science 39:203-221.
Dice, L.R.
1943
The Biotic Provinces of North America. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323.
Early, A.M.
1990
Hardman and Salt Making. In Hardman (3CL418): A Prehistoric Salt Processing
Site, by I. Williams and A.M. Early, pp. 13-1 to 13-31. Project Report No. 642,
Sponsored Research Program. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.
1993

42

Caddoan Saltmakers in the Ouachita Valley: The Hardman Site. Research Series
No. 43. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

Everett, D.
1990
The Texas Cherokee: A People Between Two Fires, 1819-1840.
University of Oklahoma Press.
Ewers, J.C. (editor)
1969
The Indians of Texas in 1830 by Jean Louis Berlandier.
Smithsonian Institution Press.

Norman:

Washington, D.C.:

Fenneman, N.M.
1938
Physiography of the Eastern United States. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company,
Inc.
Fieldhouse, D.K.
1966
The Colonial Empires: A Comparative Survey from the Eighteenth Century. London:
G. Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Fields, R.C., M.E. Blake, and K.W. Kibler
1997
Synthesis of the Prehistoric and Historic Archeology of Cooper Lake, Delta and
Hopkins Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 104. Austin: Prewitt and
Associates, Inc.
Fields, R.C., and S.A. Tomka, with contributions by T.K. Perttula
1993
Historic Context: Hunter-Gatherer Mobility in Northeast Texas, 10,000 – 200 B.C. In
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by
N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 69-96. Cultural Resource Management Report
No. 3, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Fisher, W.L.
1965
Rock and Mineral Resources of East Texas. Report of Investigations No. 54, Bureau
of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Flores, D.L.
1984
Jefferson and Southwestern Exploration: The Freeman and Custis Accounts of the
Red River Expedition of 1806. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Fritz, G.J.
1990
Multiple Pathways to Farming in Precontact Eastern North America. Journal of World
Prehistory 4:387-435.
Galloway, P.K. (editor)
1982
La Salle and His Legacy: Frenchmen and Indians in the Lower Mississippi Valley.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.
Gibson, C.
1989
Spanish Indian Policies. In Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 4, History of
Indian-White Relations, edited by W.E. Washburn, pp. 96-102. Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution Press.

HJN 110031 AR

43

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Gilmore, K.
1986
La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55:6172.
Giraud, M.
1957
Histoire de la Louisiane Française, Vol. 2, Années de Transition, 1715-1717. Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France.
1963

Histoire de la Louisiane Française, Vol. 3, La Système de Law, 1717-1720. Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France.

1974a

Histoire de la Louisiane Française, Vol. 4, La Louisiane Après le Système de Law,
1721-1723. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

1974b

A History of French Louisiana, Vol. 1, The Reign of Louis XIV, 1698-1715. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.

Godfrey, C.L., G.S. McKee, and H. Oakes
1973
General Soil Map of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M
University, and Soil Conservation Service, US Department of Agriculture, College
Station, Texas.
Gregory, H.F.
1980
A Continuity Model for Caddoan Adaptation on the Red River in Louisiana. Louisiana
Archeology 5:347-360.
Griffin, J.B.
1967
Eastern North American Archaeology: A Summary. Science 156:175-191.
1985

Changing Concepts of the Prehistoric Mississippian Cultures of the Eastern United
States. In Alabama and the Borderlands: From Prehistory to Statehood, edited by
R.R. Badger and L.A. Clayton, pp. 40-63. University: University of Alabama Press.

Gunn, J., and D.O. Brown
1982
Eagle Hill: A Late Quaternary Upland Site in Western Louisiana. Special Report
No. 12, Center for Archeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Haggard, J.V.
1945
The Neutral Ground Between Louisiana and Texas, 1806-1821. Louisiana Historical
Quarterly 28:1001-1128.
Handbook of Texas Online
2007
Guadalupe County. The Handbook of Texas Online <http://www.tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/TT/hct9.html>. April 22, 2008.
Henseley, P.B., and J.W. Henseley (eds.)
1986
Trinity County Beginnings. Groveton, Texas. Trinity County Book Committee.

44

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

Hester, T.R.
1989
Texas and Northeastern Mexico: An Overview. In Columbian Consequences, Vol. 1,
Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West, edited
by D.H. Thomas, pp. 191-211. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Hoffman, M.P.
1967
Ceramic Pipe Style Chronology along the Red River Drainage in Southwestern
Arkansas. Arkansas Archeolgist 8(1):4-14.
Holloway, R.G., and V.M. Bryant, Jr.
1984
Picea Glauca Pollen from Late Glacial Deposits in Central Texas. Palynology 8:2132.
Holloway, R.G., L.M. Raab, and R. Stuckenrath
1987
Pollen Analysis of Late-Holocene Sediments from a Central Texas Bog.
Journal of Science 39:71-79.

Texas

Hsu, D.P.
1969
Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Titus County Reservoir, Titus, Camp,
and Franklin Counties. Survey Report No. 4, Texas State Building Commission.
Austin.
Hudson, C.M.
1986
Hernando De Soto in the Caddo Area. Paper presented at the 28th Annual Caddo
Conference, 13 to 15 March, University of Arkansas, Little Rock.
Humphrey, J.D., and C.R. Ferring
1994
Stable Isotopic Evidence for Latest Pleistocene and Holocene Climatic Change in
North-Central Texas. Quaternary Research 41:200-213.
Jacobs, B.F.
1991
Palynology Report on Locality 8 at Lambs Creek and Localities 9 and 13 and
Backhoe Trench 6 at Buffalo Creek. In Excavations at the Bottoms, Rena Branch,
and Moccasin Springs Sites, Jewett Mine Project, Freestone and Leon Counties,
Texas, by R.C. Fields, L.W. Klement, C.B. Bousman, S.A. Tomka, E.F. Gadus, and
M.A. Howard, pp. 363-368. Report of Investigations No. 82, Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. Austin.
Jelks, E.B.
1961
Excavations at Texarkana Reservoir, Sulphur River, Northeastern Texas. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin No. 179, River Basin Survey Papers No. 21.
Washington, D.C.: US Government Printing Office.
John, E.A.H.
1975
Storms Brewed in Other Men’s Worlds. College Station: Texas A&M University
Press.
1985

La Situación y Visión de los Indios de la Frontera Norte de Nueva España (Siglos
XVI-XVIII). América Indigena 45(3):465-483.

HJN 110031 AR

45

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Johnson, L., Jr.
1962
The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a Preliminary Definition
of the LaHarpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 32:141-284.
Jordan, T.G.
1981
Trails to Texas: Southern Roots of Western Cattle Ranching. Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press.
Kelley, D.B.
1997
Two Caddoan Farmsteads in the Red River Valley: The Archeology of the McLelland
and Joe Clark Sites. Research Series No. 51. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological
Survey.
1998

Protohistoric and Historic Caddoan Occupation of the Red River Valley in Northwest
Louisiana. In The Native History of the Caddo: Their Place in Southeastern
Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by T.K. Perttula and J.E. Bruseth, pp. 91-111.
Studies in Archeology No. 30. Austin: Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Kenmotsu, N.A., and T.K. Perttula (editors)
1993
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document. Cultural
Resource Management Report No. 3, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas
Historical Commission. Austin.
Kniffen, F.B., H.F. Gregory, and G.A. Stokes
1987
The Historic Indian Tribes of Louisiana: From 1542 to the Present. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press.
Kuchler, A.W.
1964
Potential Natural Vegetation of the Conterminous United States. Special Publication
No. 36, American Geographical Society. New York.
Largent, F.B., D.L. Beene, M.B. Cliff, and S.M. Hunt
1997
Cultural Resources Testing of Two Sites within the White Oak Creek Wildlife
Management Area (WOCMA), Bowie and Titus Counties, Texas. White Oak Creek
Wildlife Management Area Archaeological Technical Series, Report of Investigations
No. 6. Plano, Texas: Geo-Marine, Inc.
Leffler, J., and C. Long
2008
Trinity County. The Handbook of Texas Online.
handbook/online/articles/TT/hct9.html>.

<http://www.tshaonline.org/

Lottinville, S. (editor)
1980
A Journal of Travels into the Arkansas Territory During the Year 1819, by T. Nuttall.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.

46

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

Mandel, R.D.
1987
Geomorphological Investigations. In Buried in the Bottoms: The Archeology of Lake
Creek Reservoir, Mongomery County, Texas, by L.C. Bement, R.D. Mandel, J.F. de
la Teha, D.K. Utley, and S.A. Turpin. Research Report No. 97, Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Mansell, A.
1941
History of Trinity County. Unpublished M.A. thesis, Sam Houston State Teachers
College.
McGregor, D.E.
1996
Archaeological Investigations at 41HP137. In Archaeological Investigations at
Cooper Lake, Delivery Order Numbers 2, 3, and 4, 1987: Cultural Resource Studies
for Cooper Lake, Hopkins and Delta Counties, Texas, Vol. 1, by D.E. McGregor,
M.M. Green, D.H. Jurney, W.A. Martin, R.W. Moir, and J.W. Saunders, pp. 341-362.
Dallas: Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man,
Southern Methodist University.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stafford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Mowery, I.C.
1948
Soil Survey of Cherokee County, Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Washington, D.C.
Neighbours, K.F.
1957
Chapters from the History of the Texas Indian Reservation. West Texas Historical
Association Year Book 33:3-16.
1973

Indian Exodus:
Publications.

Texas Indian Affairs, 1835-1859.

Quannah:

1975

Robert Simpson Neighbors and the Texas Frontier, 1836-1859.
Press.

Nortex Offset
Waco:

Texian

Newell, H.P., and A.D. Krieger
1949
The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoir No. 5. Washington,
D.C.: Society for American Archaeology.
(NRCS) Natural Resources Conservation Service
2011
Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed May 10, 2011.

HJN 110031 AR

47

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Peake, O.B.
1954
A History of the United States Indian Factory System, 1795-1822. Denver: Sage
Books.
Perino, G., and W.J. Bennett
1978
Archaeological Investigations at the Mahaffey Site, Ch-1, Hugo Reservoir, Choctaw
County, Oklahoma. Idabel: Museum of the Red River.
Perttula, T.K.
1990
Part I: The Development of Agricultural Subsistence, Regional and Diachronic
Variability in Caddoan Subsistence, and Implications for the Caddoan Archaeological
Record, and Part II: Faunal and Paleobotanical Data from the Caddoan Area.
Manuscript on file, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission. Austin.
1991

European Contact and Its Effects on Caddoan Populations between A.D. 1520 and
A.D. 1680. In Columbian Consequences, Vol. 3—A Pan American Perspective,
edited by D.H. Thomas, pp. 501-518. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution
Press.

1992

“The Caddo Nation”: Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives.
University of Texas Press.

1993a

Historic Context: The Development of Agriculture in Northeast Texas before A.D.
1600. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document,
edited by N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 121-146. Cultural Resource
Management Report No. 3, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission. Austin.

1993b

Historic Context: Effects of European Contact on Native and Immigrant Indians in
Northeast Texas, A.D. 1540-1859. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region,
Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 147190. Cultural Resource Management Report No. 3, Department of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission. Austin.

1996

Caddoan Area Archaeology since 1990.
4(4):295-348.

1999

The Hurricane Hill Site (41HP106): The Archaeology of a Late Archaic/Early
Ceramic and Early-Middle Caddoan Settlement in Northeast Texas, 2 Vols. Special
Publication No. 4. Pittsburg and Austin: Friends of Northeast Texas Archaeology.

2004

The Prehistoric and Caddoan Archeology of Northeastern Texas Pineywoods. In
The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T.K. Perttula, pp. 370-407. College Station:
Texas A&M University Press.

Journal of Archaeological Research

Perttula, T.K., and J.E. Bruseth
1983
Early Caddoan Subsistence Strategies, Sabine River Basin, East Texas.
Anthropologist 28(99):9-21.

48

Austin:

110031_arch_survey_report

Plains

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

1995

Trade and Exchange in Eastern Texas, 1100 B.C.-A.D. 800. In Exchange in the
Lower Mississippi Valley and Contiguous Areas in 1100 B.C., edited by J.L. Gibson.
Louisiana Archeology 17:93-121.

Perttula, T.K., C.J. Crane, and J.E. Bruseth
1982
A Consideration of Caddoan Subsistence. Southeastern Archaeology 1(2):89-102.
Perttula, T.K., B.D. Skiles, M.B. Collins, M.C. Trachte, and F. Valdez, Jr.
1986
“This Everlasting Sand Bed”: Cultural Resources Investigations at the Texas Big
Sandy Project, Wood and Upshur Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 52,
Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin, Texas.
Perttula, T.K., R.C. Fields, J.E. Corbin, and N.A. Kenmotsu
1993
Historic Context: The Emergence of Sedentism in the Northeast Texas Archeological
Region, ca. 500 B.C. to A.D. 1000. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region,
Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 97120. Cultural Resource Management Report No. 3, Department of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Perttula, T.K., and N.A. Kenmotsu
1993
Introduction—Section Two: Regional Preservation Plan for Archeological Resources,
Northeast Texas Archeological Region, Eastern Planning Region. In Archeology in
the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N.A.
Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 35-48. Cultural Resource Management Report No.
3, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Perttula, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Rickliss, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.
Prewitt, T.J.
1974
Regional Interaction Networks and the Caddoan Area.
15(2):73-101.

Bulletin of the Texas

Papers in Anthropology

Rose, J.C., M.P. Hoffman, B.A. Burnett, A.M. Harmon, and J.C. Barnes
1998
Skeletal Biology of the Prehistoric Caddo. In The Native History of the Caddo: Their
Place in Southeastern Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by T.K. Perttula and J.E.
Bruseth, pp. 113-126. Studies in Archeology No. 30. Austin: Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Schambach, F.F.
1982
An Outline of Fourche Maline Culture in Southwest Arkansas. In Arkansas
Archeology in Review, edited by N.L. Trubowitz and M.D. Jeter, pp. 132-197.
Research Series No 15. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.
1983

The Archeology of the Great Bend Region in Arkansas. In Contributions to the
Archeology of the Great Bend Region, edited by F.F. Schambach and F. Rackerby,
pp. 1-11. Research Series No. 22. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.

HJN 110031 AR

49

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

1997

The Development of the Burial Mound Tradition in the Caddo Area.
Northeast Texas Archaeology 9:53-72.

Journal of

1998

Pre-Caddoan Cultures in the Trans-Mississippi South: A Beginning Sequence.
Research Series No. 53. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.

Scott-Cummings, L.
1991
Pollen, Phytolith, Macofloral and Charcoal Analysis in the Jewett Mine Project Area,
Texas. In Excavations at the Bottoms, Rena Branch, and Moccasin Springs Sites,
Jewett Mine Project, Freestone and Leon Counties, Texas, by R.C. Fields, L.W.
Klement, C.B. Bousman, S.A. Tomka, E.F. Gadus, and M.A. Howard, pp. 329-362.
Report of Investigations No. 82, Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin.
Skibo, J.M., and E. Blinman
1999
Exploring the Origins of Pottery on the Colorado Plateau. In Pottery and People: A
Dynamic Interaction, edited by J.M. Skibo and G.M. Feinman, pp. 171-183. Salt
Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Smith, B.D. (editor)
1990
The Mississippian Emergence. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Stahle, D.W., and M.C. Cleaveland
1994
Tree-Ring Reconstructed Rainfall over the Southeastern U.S.A. during the Medieval
Warm Period and Little Ice Age. Climatic Change 26:194-212.
1995

Texas Paleoclimatic Data from Daily to Millennial Time Scales. In The Changing
Climate of Texas: Predictability and Implications for the Future, edited by J. Norwine,
J.R. Giardino, G.R. North, and J.B. Valdes, pp. 49-69. College Station: GeoBooks,
College of Geosciences and Maritime Studies, Texas A&M University.

Stahle, D.W., E.R. Cook, and J.W.C. White
1985
Tree-ring Dating of Baldcypress and the Potential for Millenia-Long Chronologies in
the Southeast. American Antiquity 50:796-802.
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain: Volume 1, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D.
Freeman, J.C. Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366.
Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey. Fayetteville.
Story, D.A., and J.A. Guy
1990
Introduction. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain:
Volume 1, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose, D.G.
Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 1-4. Research Series No. 38, Arkansas
Archeological Survey. Fayetteville.
Strickland, R.W.
1937
Anglo-American Activities in Northeastern Texas, 1803-1845.
dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.

50

Unpublished Ph.D.

110031_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

Surrey, N.M.M.
1916
The Commerce of Louisiana During the French Regime, 1699-1763. Columbia
University Studies in History, Economics, and Public Law, Vol. 71. New York:
Columbia University.
Swagerty, W.R.
1984
Spanish-Indian Relations, 1513-1821. In Scholars and the Indian Experience:
Critical Review of Recent Writings in the Social Sciences, edited by W.R. Swagerty,
pp. 36-78. Bloomington: Indiana University Press for the D’Arcy McNicle Center for
the History of the American Indian.
Swanton, J.R.
1939
Final Report of the United States De Soto Expedition Commission. Report prepared
for the US House of Representatives, 76th Congress, 1st Session, Historical
Document No. 71.
1942

Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bulletin
No. 132. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of American Ethnology, US Government
Printing Office.

Thurmond, J.P.
1981
Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin, Northeastern Texas and
Northwestern Louisiana. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
1990

Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin, Northeastern Texas and
Northwestern Louisiana. Studies in Archeology 5, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Toomey, R.S., III, M.D. Blum, and S. Valastro, Jr.
1993
Late Quaternary Climates and Environments of the Edwards Plateau, Texas. Global
and Planatery Change 7:299-320.
(USGS) US Geological Survey
1972
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Chita, Texas, quadrangle.
Usner, D.H.
1987
The Frontier Exchange Economy of the Lower Mississippi Valley in the Eighteenth
Century. William and Mary Quarterly 44:165-192.
1989

Economic Relations in the Southeast until 1783. In Handbook of North American
Indians, Vol. 4, History of Indian-White Relations, edited by W.E. Washburn, pp. 391395. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.

Vehik, S.C.
1988
Late Prehistoric Exchange on the Southern Plains and its Periphery. Midcontinental
Journal of Archaeology 13:41-68.
1990

Late Prehistoric Plains Trade and Economic Specialization. Plains Anthropologist
35(128):125-145.

HJN 110031 AR

51

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Wade, M.
1989
French Indian Policies. In Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 4, History of
Indian-White Relations, edited by W.E. Washburn, pp. 20-28. Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Wallerstein, I.
1974
The Modern World-System. New York: Academic Press.
Webb, C.H.
1959
The Belcher Mound, a Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Memoirs
No. 16. Kenosha, Wisconsin: Society for American Archaeology.
1984

The Bellevue Focus: a Marksville-Troyville Manifestation in Northwestern Louisiana.
Louisiana Archaeology 9:251-274.

Webb, C.H., F.E. Murphey, W.G. Ellis, and H.R. Green
1969
The Resch Site 41HS16, Harrison County, Texas.
Archeological Society 40:3-106.

Bulletin of the Texas

Weddle, R.S.
1985
Spanish Sea: Discovery on the Gulf of Mexico, 1500-1685. College Station: Texas
A&M University Press.
Williams, S.
1964
The Aboriginal Locations of the Kadohadacho and Related Tribes. In Exploration in
Cultural Anthropology, edited by W. Goodenough, pp. 545-570. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Wolf, E.R.
1982
Europe and the People Without History. Berkeley: University of California Press.

52

110031_arch_survey_report

APPENDIX A:

Backhoe Trench Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of USACE Jurisdictional Areas
on the Proposed Whispering Pines Par 3 Golf Course Tract, Trinity County, Texas

Table A-1. Backhoe Trench Summary Data
UTM Coordinates

1

BT No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

1

286572

3426520

0-20

Loose pale brown sandy loam

20-40

Light grayish-brown silty sand

40-60

Light gray silty clay loam

60-80

Gray clay loam

80-100

Dark brown dense clay

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

286949

286493

286496

286634

286684

286579

286503

HJN 110031 AR

3426575

3426693

3426508

3426497

3426413

3426384

3426368

Soils

0-20

Fine very light brown sand

20-40

Light brown silty clay loam

40-60

Brownish-gray silty clay

60-100

Dense dark brown clay

0-15

Loose light brown sand

15-30

Light grayish-brown sandy silt

30-60

Grayish-brown silty clay

60-100

Dense dark grayish-brown clay

0-15

Loose light gray sandy loam

15-40

Grayish-brown silty clay

40-80

Dense dark brown clay

0-15

Loose pale brown sand

15-75

Light grayish-brown loose sandy loam

75-125

Moist grayish-brown sandy loam

125-150

Wet grayish-brown sandy loam
(water table at bottom of trench)

0-10

Loose pale brown sand

10-140

Loose light brown fine sand

140-180

Wet gray sand
(water table at bottom of trench)

0-10

Loose pale brown sand

10-100

Light grayish-brown loose sandy loam

100-140

Moist grayish-brown sandy loam

140-160

Gray sandy clay
(water table at bottom of trench)

0-50

Pale grayish-brown silty loam

50-130

Light grayish-brown clay

130-150

Gray clayey silt
(water table at bottom of trench)

Artifacts
None

None

None

None

None

None

None

None

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Backhoe Trench Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates

1

BT No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

9

286398

3426441

0-10

Pale grayish-brown silty loam

10-40

Pale gray silty clay

40-80

Gray silty clay

80-100

Dense dark gray clay

10

11

12

286346

286284

286385

3426554

3426635

3426505

Soils

0-10

Grayish-brown silty clay

10-50

Dark grayish-brown silty clay

50-100

Dark grayish-brown clay

0-15

Grayish-brown silty clay

15-45

Dark grayish-brown silty clay

45-100

Dark grayish-brown clay

0-10

Grayish-brown silty clay

10-60

Dark grayish-brown silty clay

60-100

Dark grayish-brown clay

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
BT = Backhoe Trench
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

A-2

110031_arch_survey_report

Artifacts
None

None

None

None

