Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project,
Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6091
HJN 110135 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

CP&Y, Inc.
Austin, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

November 2011

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project,
Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

CP&Y, Inc.
10415 Morado Circle, Building 1, Suite 200
Austin, Texas 78759

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 110135 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6091

November 2011

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The City of Carrollton (the City) is proposing to construct 2 pump stations and associated
water discharge pipelines in McInnish Park, a city park located in Carrollton, Dallas County,
Texas, for the McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project. McInnish Park is located off
the west side of President George Bush Turnpike between Sand Lake Road (on the north) and
West Belt Line Road (on the south) in northwestern Dallas County. The proposed Trinity Pump
Station would be situated on an approximately 0.04-hectare (ha) (0.1-acre [ac]) site on the
southeast bank of the Elm Fork of the Trinity River just north of Sandy Lake Road, and the
associated water discharge pipeline right-of-way (ROW) would extend approximately
1,024 meters (m) (3.359 feet [ft]) southeastward along an unnamed driveway, McInnish Park
Road, and Ball Park Way. The proposed Irrigation Pump Station would be constructed on an
approximately 0.04-ha (0.1-ac) site on the southern shore of an artificial pond within the park off
the north side of Ball Park Way, and the associated water discharge pipeline would extend
approximately 506 m (1,660 ft) northwestward along Ball Park Way and McInnish Park Road.
The Area of Potential Effect (APE) therefore consists of the 2 pump station sites, each of which
is situated on an approximately 0.04-ha (0.1-ac) site, and approximately 1,530 m (5,019 ft) of
associated pipeline ROWs that are assumed to measure no more than 15 m (50 ft) in width,
covering a total area of roughly 2.3 ha (5.8 ac).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the City, a political subdivision of the
State of Texas; consequently, the proposed project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities
Code of Texas. In addition, the City may need to apply to the US Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE) for a permit to construct project facilities under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act
(CWA); as such, the project would also fall under the jurisdiction of the National Historic
Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended. As the project represents a publicly sponsored
undertaking with the potential to impact potentially significant cultural resources, the City was
required to provide for a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the APE. To meet its
responsibilities under applicable state laws, the City, through its environmental contractor,
CP&Y, Inc. (CP&Y), has contracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to
secure all applicable clearances for cultural resources.
On November 17, 2011, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd and Jared Wiersema,
under the overall supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural
resource survey of the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be

HJN 110135 AR

iii

Management Summary

impacted by the proposed construction project. The APE was traversed by Horizon‟s
archeologists, the modern ground surface was thoroughly inspected for historic and prehistoric
cultural resources, and a total of 8 shovel tests were excavated within the APE. Thus, the
Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) were met for a project area
this size. The project area is located within McInnish Park, a public park operated by the City,
and prior construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of park facilities have resulted in
relatively extensive impacts to the native landscape. No cultural resources, historic or
prehistoric, were identified within the APE as a result of the survey. The survey was conducted
under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6091.
Based on the negative results of the survey-level investigations documented in this
report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed
undertaking. No new cultural resources were identified in the remainder of the project area as a
result of intensive survey activities, and no evidence of previously documented cultural
resources in the vicinity of the project area were found that would be adversely affected by the
proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. As no cultural resources were identified that meet
the criteria for listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) according to 36 CFR
60.4 or for designation as State Archeological Landmarks (SALs) according to 13 Texas
Administrative Code (TAC) 26, no further archeological work is recommended in connection
with the proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to
proceed. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture are
inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the
project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the
Texas Historical Commission (THC) should be notified of the discovery.

iv

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ..................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 6
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 7
2.4
Flora and Fauna ............................................................................................ 7

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND .................................................................................... 9
3.1
Prehistoric Chronology .................................................................................. 9
3.1.1 PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 6,000 B.C.)......................................... 9
3.1.2 Archaic Period (6,000 B.C. to A.D. 700)............................................10
3.1.3 Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 700 to 1600)........................................11
3.1.4 Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1600 to 1800)...........................................12
3.2
Protohistoric Period ......................................................................................12
3.3
Historic Chronology ......................................................................................12
3.3.1 European Exploration and Colonization (ca. A.D. 1500 to 1821) ......12
3.3.2 The Settlement Period (A.D. 1821 to 1865) ......................................14
3.3.3 Post-Civil War and Modern Development (A.D. 1865 to Present) .....17

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................19
4.1
Archival Research ........................................................................................19
4.2
Survey Methods ...........................................................................................20

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................29

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................31
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................31
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....32
6.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Archeological Landmark ...................33
6.4
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................34
6.5
Management Recommendations ..................................................................34

7.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................35
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Summary Data
HJN 110135 AR

v

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.

Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle .................................... 2
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 3
Locations of Previously Recorded Archeological Sites near Project Area ................21
Proposed Trinity Pump Station Location (Facing NE) ..............................................23
View of Trinity Pipeline ROW along Park Entrance Driveway (Facing SE) ...............23
View of Trinity Pipeline ROW along McInnish Park Road (Facing S) .......................24
Proposed Irrigation Pump Station Location (Facing NE) ..........................................24
View of Irrigation Pipeline ROW along Southern Shore of Pond (Facing W) ............25
View of Irrigation Pipeline ROW along McInnish Park Road (Facing S) ...................25
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated in Project Area ..............................................26

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.

vi

Previously Recorded Archeological Sites within 1.0 Mile of Project Area .................20

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The City of Carrollton (the City) is proposing to construct 2 pump stations and associated
water discharge pipelines in McInnish Park, a city park located in Carrollton, Dallas County,
Texas, for the McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project (Figures 1 and 2). McInnish
Park is located off the west side of President George Bush Turnpike between Sand Lake Road
(on the north) and West Belt Line Road (on the south) in north-central Dallas County. The
proposed Trinity Pump Station would be situated on an approximately 0.04-hectare (ha) (0.1acre [ac]) site on the southeast bank of the Elm Fork of the Trinity River just north of Sandy
Lake Road, and the associated water discharge pipeline right-of-way (ROW) would extend
approximately 1,024 meters (m) (3.359 feet [ft]) southeastward along an unnamed driveway,
McInnish Park Road, and Ball Park Way. The proposed Irrigation Pump Station would be
constructed on an approximately 0.04-ha (0.1-ac) site on the southern shore of an artificial pond
within the park off the north side of Ball Park Way, and the associated water discharge pipeline
would extend approximately 506 m (1,660 ft) northwestward along Ball Park Way and McInnish
Park Road. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) therefore consists of the 2 pump station sites,
each of which is situated on an approximately 0.04-ha (0.1-ac) site, and approximately 1,530 m
(5,019 ft) of associated pipeline ROWs that are assumed to measure no more than 15 m (50 ft)
in width, covering a total area of roughly 2.3 ha (5.8 ac).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the City, a political subdivision of the
State of Texas; consequently, the proposed project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities
Code of Texas. In addition, the City may need to apply to the US Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE) for a permit to construct project facilities under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act
(CWA); as such, the project would also fall under the jurisdiction of the National Historic
Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended. As the project represents a publicly sponsored
undertaking with the potential to impact potentially significant cultural resources, the City was
required to provide for a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the APE. To meet its
responsibilities under applicable state laws, the City, through its environmental contractor,
CP&Y, Inc. (CP&Y), has contracted with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to
secure all applicable clearances for cultural resources.
On November 17, 2011, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd and Jared Wiersema,
under the overall supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural

HJN 110135 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

2

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

HJN 110135 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

resource survey of the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be
impacted by the proposed construction project.
This report presents the results of the cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds
of the project area, respectively. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the survey, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report, and Appendix A presents data collected from shovel tests excavated during the survey.

4

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in north-central Dallas County, Texas, near the northern end
of the Blackland Prairie physiographic province (Arbingast et al. 1973). The Blackland Prairie is
a narrow physiographic zone situated between the Edwards Plateau to the west and the Gulf
Coastal Plain to the east. The Edwards Plateau and Balcones Escarpment are associated with
a great fault system that arcs across Texas to form a distinct boundary between uplands
composed primarily of limestone bedrock and lower plains composed mainly of softer rocks. In
places, this boundary is marked by an abrupt scarp (the Balcones Escarpment) and in others by
a more gradational ramp, but the entire length of this transition zone is a major ecotone in terms
of topography, bedrock, hydrology, soils, vegetation, and animal life.
The Blackland Prairie is a low, rolling land that extends in a narrow band just east and
southeast of the Balcones fault zone from the Red River Valley in northeastern Texas south and
southwest to the southern edge of the Edwards Plateau. This is an area of low relief and poor
drainage where water often ponds after rainstorms. Streams flow at very gentle gradients.
Elevations on the Blackland Prairie are mainly in the range of 120 to 215 m (394 to 705 ft)
above mean sea level (amsl). Deep, calcareous, clayey soil formed in soft bedrock supports
predominantly prairie vegetation broken by small woods and forests. Rock of any kind is scarce
on the Blackland Prairie, and the only chert sources are gravels in the beds of streams that
drain exposures of Edwards limestone to the west.
Hydrologically, the study area is located within the Trinity River watershed on the
floodplain and adjacent terraces on the southeastern bank of the Elm Fork of the Trinity River.
The Elm Fork of the Trinity River flows generally southeastward, discharging into the Trinity
River in southeastern Dallas. The Trinity River, in turn, flows southeastward and eventually
discharges into Trinity Bay of the Gulf of Mexico in Chambers County, Texas.
Physiographically, the project area is situated on the floodplain and adjacent terraces of
the Elm Fork of the Trinity River. The project area is located within McInnish Park, a city park
operated by the City, and prior construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of park facilities
have resulted in relatively extensive impacts to the native landscape. Approximately 60% of the
APE is situated on the Holocene-age floodplain of the Elm Fork of the Trinity River, while the

HJN 110135 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

remaining 40% traverses a broad, low rise in the northwestern corner of McInnish Park that
consists of the remnants of a Pleistocene-age alluvial terrace. Elevations across the APE are
quite flat, averaging approximately 137 m (450 ft) amsl.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Multiple geological formations are associated with the physiographic province in which
the project area is located. In general, the bedrock throughout north-central Texas is composed
of Upper Cretaceous formations that dip slightly to the east and are predominantly composed of
calcareous clay, shale, limestone, and marl, with a small portion of sandstone (Sellards et al.
1932). These geologic units are overlain in some areas by unconsolidated Quaternary alluvial
floodplain and fluviatile terrace deposits. On the surface, these formations weather into a
rounded, gently rolling topography with a few bluff faces exposed in stream valleys where more
resistant strata are present.
Specifically, the project area is situated in a predominantly floodplain environment on
Alluvium and Quaternary deposits, undivided (Qal), which consist of mixed Holocene-age
floodplain deposits of gravel, sand, silt, silty clay, and organic matter, mixed with undivided
Quaternary deposits formed of mixed colluvium and alluvium (Fisher 1972). A broad, low rise in
the northwestern corner of McInnish Park represents the remains of a Pleistocene-age alluvial
terrace mapped as Fluviatile terrace deposits (Qt), which consists of lenses of gravel, sand, silt,
and clay (Fisher 1972). Specifically, the APE is situated on the Trinity-Frio Association, which
consists of deep, nearly level, clayey soils located on floodplains (Coffee et al. 1980). The
predominant soil unit in the APE is Trinity clay, occasionally flooded (72), which underlies
approximately 60% of the project area (Coffee et al. 1980). Trinity soils are deep, somewhat
poorly drained soils that formed in Holocene-age alluvium on floodplains and typically consist of
a deep sequence of dark gray clay extending to a depth of greater than 152 centimeters (cm)
(60 inches [in]). The remaining 40% of the project area is mapped as Arents, loamy, hilly (3),
which consists of the discarded overburden of mining operations that have been left in mounds
and ridges in gravel pits.
While the predominant soils type within the APE, Trinity clay, is an alluvial sediment that
would tend to have at least moderate potential to contain intact archeological deposits, prior
construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of McInnish Park facilities; nearby roads and
highways; and general urban development within and near the APE have resulted in extensive
disturbances to native sediments within the project area. The proposed pipeline ROWs
associated with the proposed undertaking either traverse or follow within the ROWs of Sand
Lake Road, Ball Park Way, and McInnish Park Road, and construction of sporting fields and an
artificial storm water detention pond within McInnish Park have resulted in extensive and deep
impacts that have largely destroyed the integrity of native soils within the project area. Based
on the extent of prior disturbances within the APE, the project area possesses low potential to
contain any intact archeological deposits. Any cultural materials would likely occur on the
modern ground surface in deflated, eroded contexts or buried in secondary deposits that lack
stratigraphic integrity.

6

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
Bryant and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for east-central Texas from
the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial Period
(14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence from the
Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was considerably
cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was more heavily
forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway 1985). The
Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow warming and/or
drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were gradually
replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During the PostGlacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable. The
deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The drying
and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued into the mid-Holocene, at
which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions lasting
from roughly 6,000 to 5,000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate that
modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by 1,500 years
ago.
Dallas County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern climate is
dry and subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The characteristically humid,
subtropical climate is influenced primarily by the tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of
Mexico, but the climate is modified by polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses
predominate throughout spring, summer, and fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in
winter and provide a continental climate characterized by considerable variations in
temperature. The average annual temperature is 18.5°C (65.3°F), and average annual
precipitation is 88.4 centimeters (cm) (34.8 in]).
Maximum rainfall, in the form of
thundershowers, occurs in June and September, and the average growing season is 270 days
long.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

The project area is situated in the southwestern portion of the Texan biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texan province. The project area
traverses the Blackland Prairie, a region of dark, calcareous clays derived from ancient shales
and chalks. The vegetation within the project area consists predominantly of grasslands with
isolated trees and scattered clusters of trees, while the greatest concentrations of trees occur
along drainages.
Dominant floral species include little bluestem, big bluestem, Indian grass, switchgrass,
sideoats grama, hairy grama, tall dropseed, silver bluestem, and Texas wintergrass. Wooded

HJN 110135 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

areas are often restricted to stream courses, primarily consisting of elm and hackberry, while
bois d‟arc is common in lowland areas. Vegetation observed during the survey of the project
area includes post oak, blackjack oak, elm, hackberry, and mesquite trees, and mixed mid-sized
to tall grasses.
The fauna associated with this region are represented by a mixture of species from the
Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, Kansan, Balconian, and Texan biotic provinces.
Common mammalian species include white-tailed deer, opossum, eastern cottontail rabbit,
raccoon, striped skunk, hispid cotton rat, white-footed mouse, nine-banded armadillo, and fox
squirrel. Common bird species include northern bobwhite, eastern meadowlark, mourning dove,
killdeer, field sparrow, red-tailed hawk, turkey vulture, belted kingfisher, and mockingbird.
Reptile and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include six-lined racerunner, rat
snake, eastern hognose snake, Gulf Coast toad, Texas spiny lizard, rough green snake,
copperhead, western diamondback rattlesnake, green treefrog, Blanchard‟s cricket frog,
diamondback water snake, Houston toad, and green anole. Although small herds of bison and
antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early historic periods, these species are
no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

8

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

Compared to other regions of Texas, north-central Texas has been the focus of relatively
little archeological research to date; as such, the culture history of this region has yet to be
systematically defined. Much of the information generated by reservoir investigations has yet to
be synthesized. The following discussion of the prehistory of north-central Texas draws on the
few synthetic and summary sources available, especially those by Prikryl (1990, 1993). Story‟s
(1990) summary of archeology on the East Texas Gulf Coastal Plain also draws on some of the
work done in the upper Trinity basin, and Lynott‟s (1981) discussion of prehistoric adaptations in
the Cross Timbers, Grand Prairie, and North-Central Plains provides connections to an
overview by Hofman et al. (1989) of southern Great Plains archeology.

3.1

PREHISTORIC CHRONOLOGY

3.1.1

PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 6,000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial epoch (but see Butzer 1988).
By approximately 11,000 years ago, PaleoIndian populations were present in northcentral Texas. The PaleoIndian occupation of the Upper Trinity River basin is known primarily
through diagnostic projectile points from surface collections or stratigraphically mixed contexts.
The Field Ranch Site (Jensen 1968) along the upper Elm Fork is a primary example of typical
site contexts. Clovis and Plainview points are commonly found along both Denton and Clear
creeks in the Cross Timbers region. The Lewisville Lake Site (Crook and Harris 1957, 1958,
1961) is the best known PaleoIndian site in the region. While the original radiocarbon dates (ca.
37,000 B.P.) contributed to the significance of the site, more recent work (Stanford 1981) has
resolved the controversy concerning the date of occupation. It appears that the presence of
naturally occurring lignite as either a fuel in the hearths excavated at the site or an inadvertent
inclusion contaminated the radiocarbon samples. Consequently, the usually accepted date of

HJN 110135 AR

9

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

10,000 to 8,000 B.P. for Clovis period occupations is probably a reasonable estimate for the first
human occupation of north-central Texas. Our knowledge of the subsistence and settlement
strategies used by these early occupants is extremely limited. However, recent excavations at
the Aubrey Site (Ferring 1989), a well-preserved Clovis period site in Denton County, indicate
that subsistence efforts did not focus on big game animals alone; rather, the entire range of
prairie and forest species was exploited. Whether this pattern of a more generalized foraging
subsistence system is characteristic of Clovis adaptations in the Eastern Woodlands, and the
focus on now-extinct big game species is more characteristic of a Plains adaptation, remains to
be documented.
While some PaleoIndian sites are known within this region, few have been adequately
examined (Preston 1972, 1974). The Lewisville Lake Site (Crook and Harris 1957; Stanford
1981, 1982), the Murphy Site (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory [TARL] archives), and
the Quince Site (Perttula 1994) are the only sites that have been examined in any detail. The
examination by Story (1990:176-210) of the distribution of finds of PaleoIndian projectile points
has revealed some interesting spatial and chronological trends. Clovis points cluster along the
Red River, within the Upper Trinity River drainage, and in southeastern Texas. Folsom points,
which are probably indicative of a Plains adaptation, are not well represented; rather, Dalton or
Dalton-like points are well represented in the Ouachita Mountains of western Oklahoma and
eastern Arkansas and on the adjacent Gulf Coastal Plain. Story (1990:196) postulates that this
concentration may reflect ecological or territorial factors between 8500 and 7500 B.C. San
Patrice points, which occur within the same time span, are represented but are few in number.
3.1.2

Archaic Period (6,000 B.C. to A.D. 700)

With the end of the Ice Age, the prehistoric residents of north-central Texas began to
develop into localized populations of efficient hunter-gatherers, exploiting localized resource
bases. This period, and the subsistence pattern that characterizes it, has come to be known as
the Archaic. The Archaic represents a long period of time that is characterized by only gradual
and minor changes in subsistence patterns, lithic technology, and projectile point styles. It was
apparently a period of strong cultural stability. Archaic populations are usually characterized as
generalized hunter-gatherers with more limited geographic ranges than preceding PaleoIndian
peoples. There is presently no evidence for the development of local cultigens during the
Archaic period in Texas; this is, however, not the case for the Ozark Highlands and other parts
of the eastern US.
Although Archaic period components have been observed on many sites in the region
(Perttula and Nathan 1989), our knowledge of the Archaic period in the Upper Trinity River
basin has been severely hindered by the lack of data from single-component or stratified sites.
Important exceptions to this situation include the Packard, Bell, Gregory E. Johnson, Beaver,
Lamas Branch, Hill, McKensie, and Mahaffey sites in Oklahoma; the Tankersley Creek, Jake
Martin, and Yarbrough sites in Texas; and the Stark and Old Martin Place sites in Arkansas.
Recent investigations along the West Fork of the Trinity River (Peter and McGregor 1988; Yates
and Ferring 1986) indicate that primary contexts for Early and Middle Archaic sites are found
deeply buried within floodplain alluvium. Artifacts from these periods occur on terrace surfaces,

10

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

but they are frequently mixed with later materials. In fact, the initial treatment of the Archaic
period (Crook and Harris 1952, 1954), which defined the Carrollton and Elam foci, was based
upon materials recovered from such terrace contexts. Consequently, these time-space
constructs are no longer recognized as acceptable for north-central Texas (Peter and McGregor
1988; Prikryl 1987; Yates and Ferring 1986).
Recent investigations at Joe Pool Lake (Peter and McGregor 1988) and at Lake Ray
Roberts (Baird et al. 1982; Bousman and Verrett 1973; Ferring and Yates 1997; Prikryl and
Yates 1987; Skinner and Baird 1979; Yates and Ferring 1986) indicate that the Late Archaic
period is characterized by assemblages left by small bands of foraging hunters and gatherers
who occupied a locality for a limited period of time on a seasonal basis. Deer and numerous
small mammals were the primary food resources. Large pits, known as Willey Focus pits,
appear in the archeological record during the Late Archaic period. The function of these pits is
not entirely clear, although excavation of one such feature at the Sister Grove Creek site in the
East Fork of the Trinity River basin (Lynott 1975) revealed the presence of 13 features within
the pit fill, including two burials (one human and one dog), hearths, and small refuse pits.
Based on these excavations, it was hypothesized that the Sister Grove Creek pit could be
interpreted as the remains of a structure in which the entire community participated in ritual
feasting. The documentation of large pits associated with Late Archaic period sites in the
Richland/Chambers Creek drainage (Bruseth and Martin 1987) further suggests that important
sociopolitical changes may have been occurring during this time period. Unfortunately, the
significance of these pits remains an enigma despite their excellent documentation.
3.1.3

Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 700 to 1600)

The beginning of the Late Prehistoric period in the Upper Trinity River basin is marked
by the appearance of arrow points. The initial date of A.D. 700 for this period is based upon
dated contexts to the west in the Brazos River drainage. Lynott (1977) suggests that the Late
Prehistoric period may be divided into early and late phases. The early phase is characterized
by sand- and grog-tempered ceramics, Scallorn and Alba arrow points, and a continuation of the
foraging subsistence system of the Late Archaic period. The late phase reflects a Southern
Plains influence with the appearance of Nocona Plain ceramics of the Henrietta Focus, various
unstemmed triangular projectile points (e.g., Fresno, Harrell, Washita), and the Perdiz point.
Evidence of horticulture and the procurement of bison also appears in sites of this period (Harris
and Harris 1970; Morris and Morris 1970).
Recent investigations of the Cobb-Pool Site at Joe Pool Lake (Peter and McGregor
1988) have resulted in a reformulation of the Late Prehistoric period. The Cobb-Pool Site
yielded house structures, roasting pits, Alba points, grog-tempered ceramics, and charred corn
cupules. Radiocarbon dates from several features indicate that the site was occupied during
the late 12th or early 13th century. Present evidence suggests that the site does not represent
an intrusive Caddoan occupation; consequently, a significant adaptive change appears to have
occurred during a middle phase of the Late Prehistoric period. It is also likely that ceramics
were not introduced into the region before this time. Whether the Cobb-Pool Site merely
represents a local anomaly or reflects a regional adaptive change remains to be documented.

HJN 110135 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

3.1.4

Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1600 to 1800)

Historical documentation and archeological evidence are very sparse for the
Protohistoric period in the Upper Trinity River basin. Tonkawa, Wichita, Caddo, and Comanche
all are likely to have traversed the area; however, the locations of their sites and detailed
ethnohistoric data are almost nonexistent. Although European trade items (Sollberger 1953)
appear on a limited number of sites, no protohistoric site has been thoroughly investigated, and
characterizations of Native American adaptations during this time period are conjectural at best.
A lack of documentary evidence, together with a lack of interest among ethnologists and
archeologists, has contributed to this situation.

3.2

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD

By the 18th century, immigrant Plains Indian groups had moved into and beyond NorthCentral Texas, and their documentation by traders and explorers marks the start of the
Protohistoric period. Documentary sources suggest that the Apache, Caddo, Comanche,
Delaware, Kickapoo, Kitsai, Tonkawa, Wichita, and Yojaune traversed the region at various
times during the period (Newcomb 1961; Newcomb and Campbell 1982); however,
archeological sites that can be associated definitely with historic groups are few. The Wichita
are known to have moved into Texas from Oklahoma and Kansas in the early 1700s. Sites
attributable to the Wichita have been identified at the edges of north-central Texas. Among
these is the Stansbury site in Hill County, now inundated by Lake Whitney (Stephenson 1970).
Excavations at the site produced burials, house structures, storage pits, and a variety of
aboriginal artifacts, along with European ceramics, glass beads, metal arrow points, and flintlock
musket parts. A cluster of Wichita sites also occurs to the north along the Red River in
Montague County. These sites occur on both the Oklahoma and Texas sides of the river.
Woodall (1967) excavated one of these sites, named the Upper Tucker site, which produced
artifacts and features similar to those discovered at the Stansbury site. Wichita sites both on
the Brazos and Red rivers were situated atop high terraces that overlook the rivers.

3.3

HISTORIC CHRONOLOGY

The historic era of north-central Texas began with the entrance of early European
explorers into the area and can be divided into 3 broad time periods—Spanish and French
exploration and colonization (ca. A.D. 1500 to 1821), settlement (A.D. 1821 to 1865), and postCivil War and modern development (A.D. 1865 to present). This section presents a brief
overview of the history of north-central and eastern Texas and short descriptions of settlements
in the vicinity of the project area.
3.3.1

European Exploration and Colonization (ca. A.D. 1500 to 1821)

The first European in Texas was likely Alvarez de Piñeda, who entered the area in 1519
(Hunt et al. 1992:8). In 1528, Cabeza de Vaca was shipwrecked at or near Galveston Island
and subsequently taken captive by Native Americans living in the area. His captors allowed him
to accompany them on their travels inland, but he recorded very little information about the
country or its inhabitants during his 6-year stay (Richner and Bagot 1978). The first European

12

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

to visit north-central Texas may have been Luis de Moscoso del Alvorado. Leading Hernando
de Soto‟s men after de Soto‟s death at the Mississippi River in 1541, de Moscoso may have
crossed the Trinity River1 along its upper reaches (Reese et al. 1986:154), perhaps passing
through the Pilot Point area (Lebo 1990:61). During the early 1730s, French traders operating
out of New Orleans began entering East Texas. They “procured buffalo and deer skins,”
exchanged firearms and a variety of European trade goods with Native American groups, stole
from the Spanish, and also “captured Apache women and children, horses, [and] mules”
(Richner and Bagot 1978:77). An active trade system was soon established.
The activities of the Spanish and French in East Texas during the ensuing 2 centuries
were prompted by quite different objectives. Spain claimed the area in the late 1500s but did
little to colonize it because East Texas had no precious metals, the commodity that provided the
primary thrust of Spanish colonial activity at that time (Richner and Bagot 1978:77). In contrast
to the Spanish, who sought control of the territories they claimed, the French “were more
interested in trade than territory; they were not much concerned with converting, incorporating,
or pushing the natives off their land” (Fehrenbach 1968:41). The Spanish considered French
trade with the indigenous groups of East Texas to be a security threat, an incursion into a
strategic buffer zone between Spanish and French territory. In 1685, Spain began an effort to
set up missions and gain a secure foothold in that buffer zone. This program of conversion and
assimilation “was founded on the idea that the local people could be converted to Christianity
and thus controlled. The converted Indians could then be used as a buffer to stop the French
encroachment” (Richner and Bagot 1978:77). The impetus for this program was an accidental
landing at Matagorda Bay by the French explorer René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle
(Fehrenbach 1968:39, 47). The Spanish program was neither successful nor long-lasting. Only
2 missions were established, both on the Neches River, and the program was abandoned by
1693 (Richner and Bagot 1978:77).
It was 20 years before another French incursion drew the Spanish back to East Texas.
In 1713, Saint Denis, a Canadian with great powers of persuasion, was sent by the governor of
Louisiana up the Red River to build a fort on land claimed by the Spanish. Thus, Natchitoches
was founded (Fehrenbach 1968:41-42) in present-day Louisiana, territory then claimed by
Spain. Saint Denis believed that the French and Spanish could coexist in the area—that the
presence of the Spanish could actually benefit the French. Although trade with the Spanish
outposts was declared to be technically illegal, such prohibitions were seldom enforced, and
Saint Denis was “hopeful of a much more lucrative business if permanent Spanish garrisons
could be induced to remain in Texas” (Fehrenbach 1968:42). With his encouragement and aid,
4 new mission-forts were set up in Texas, one of which was at Nacogdoches. In the process of
conducting business from Natchitoches with his Spanish father-in-law at Nacogdoches, Saint
Denis helped delimit an unofficial boundary between the Spanish and French claims, with the
Sabine River considered as the eastern limit of the former and the Red River the western extent
of the latter. The good relations came to a quick end in 1721, when the new governor of

1

The river was then called “Daycoa” by some Native American groups, “Arkikosa” by others. It received its European
name in 1690 from the Spanish officer Alonso de Leon, who called it “La Santisima Trinidad, The Most Holy Trinity”
(Reese et al. 1986:153).

HJN 110135 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Coahuila had Saint Denis arrested for trespassing while in the Rio Grande area on business
(Fehrenbach 1968:42-43, 51; Richner and Bagot 1978:78).
The Spanish then developed a much more ambitious, and better funded, plan for
permanent settlement in Texas. According to Fehrenbach, “[a] great semicircle of presidiomissions was planned to stretch up from northern Mexico, generally reaching across the middle
area of Texas on a line from Laredo to the Sabine River” (1968:49). The effort to colonize the
east portion of this semicircle ended in 1719 when the Spanish withdrew, in part because it was
thought that the French were about to attack (Richner and Bagot 1978:78). The Spanish
returned in 1721 when the Marquis de Aquayo led a large military force into the area and
reoccupied the Spanish missions. Spanish decree required that Spanish settlers leave the area
in 1773, but petitions garnered permission to set up a new colony on the Trinity River in 1774.
Nuestra Señora del Pilar de Bucareli may have been established in present-day Madison
County at the intersection of the Camino Real (now State Highway 21) and the Trinity River.
Bucareli was abandoned in 1779, a move largely prompted by the settlers‟ fear of the
Comanches in the area (Richner and Bagot 1978:78-81).
France had ceded Louisiana to Spain in 1762, but it was returned to France at the
beginning of the 19th century, then sold to the US in 1803, making it much easier for Americans
to enter Spanish territory. The danger of incursion then lay not in military campaigns or the
extension of trade networks, but in the gradual encroachment of settlers. According to one
settler:
A carbine and a little maize in a sack are enough for an American to wander about in the
forest alone for a whole month. With his carbine, he kills the wild cattle and deer for food
and defends himself from the savages. The maize dampened serves him in lieu of
bread. With some tree trunks crossed, one above another, in the shape of a square he
raises a house, and even a fort that is impregnable to the savage by building on a story
crosswise above the ground floor. The cold does not affright him. When a family tires of
one location, it moves to another, and there it settles with the same ease (Newton and
Gambrell 1932:53).

To slow the incursion, Spain set up an outpost on the Trinity River a few miles south of
abandoned Bucareli and called it Villa de Santisima Trinidad de Salcedo. There was little
interest in resettlement among those living in central and west Texas, but a few residents,
including 23 immigrants from Louisiana and 14 people from San Antonio, moved to the area in
1805. Between 1811 and 1813, control of the settlement alternated between the Spanish and
the Mexican revolutionaries living in Texas. Then, in 1813, Spanish Captain Augustus Magee
“marched into Salcedo, executed the inhabitants, and destroyed the settlement” (Richner and
Bagot 1978:88).
3.3.2

The Settlement Period (A.D. 1821 to 1865)

The first successful large-scale colonization effort in Texas was initiated in 1821 by
Moses S. Austin, who convinced the Mexican authorities that it would be to their advantage to
let him settle American colonists in the region (Fehrenbach 1968:134-135). Moses Austin died
shortly after winning approval of his plan, but his son continued in the effort and created a

14

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

center of Anglo settlement in central Texas. This helped establish Texas as the new western
frontier (Lebo 1990:61), easing the way for greater immigration to East Texas. Mexico also won
its independence from Spain in 1821, which further improved prospects for settlement of East
Texas since the new Republic of Mexico relaxed immigration and land policies (Reese et al.
1986:154). In addition to the Austins‟ efforts to the south, independent settlers were moving into
the Upper Trinity River basin and establishing new homesteads along the river and its tributaries
(Richner and Bagot 1978:90).
The first skirmishes between Native American groups and the new settlers took place in
the late 1830s or early 1840s, a poorly documented period in the history of the area. One of the
earliest accounts of conflicts involved the Battle of Village Creek. In retribution for reported
attacks on settlers in Titus County, General Edward H. Tarrant led a group of volunteer Texas
Rangers in an attack against a settlement on Village Creek.2 Few specifics are known with any
degree of certainty as many of the accounts rely on personal recollections and were not
recorded until many decades later (Hunt and Peter 1995:10). In the ensuing years, a concerted
effort was made “to disband all the Indians in the upper Trinity” and force them out of the area
permanently (Reese et al. 1986:154).
Texas became an independent nation in 1836, and by 1841 the Republic of Texas could
be described as “independent, proud, and bankrupt” (Connor 1959:1). The leadership of the
Republic saw immigration and the associated transfer and inflation of land values as a way to
ease the financial troubles, which were especially severe during the depression of 1840 to 1841.
In February 1841, the Fifth Congress of the Republic passed legislation that paved the way for
empresario contracts and colonization, an act that some saw as anachronistic (the Spanish had
tried to foster immigration in a similar way), but in hindsight may have been “the most important
single act of the Republic” (Connor 1959:6; Fehrenbach 1968:283-284). A company or
individual that was granted an empresario contract:
…was to receive ten premium sections for each hundred families settled onto the land.
He also had other direct means of income, from surveying, selling cabins, necessities
and charging for transportation costs to colonists he recruited…. The government
reserved alternate sections of 640 acres within the empresario grants, and it was felt that
rapid settlement would allow the Republic to sell these off and make a profit from
immigration at last (Fehrenbach 1968:283-284).

W. S. Peters, through his Texas Emigration and Land Company, was the first
empresario to bring settlers into the area after Texas gained its independence. The original
contract, signed in August 1841 (Connor 1959:36), granted the company the right to settle the
east half of Denton and Cooke counties and a portion of west Grayson County (Lebo 1990:63).
The second contract, signed 3 months later, extended the area southward to encompass parts
of Dallas, Tarrant, Ellis, and Johnson counties (Connor 1959:40). The third contract slightly
extended the east, west, and south boundaries. The fourth and final contract, signed in January
1843, increased the area to be settled by approximately 300%, adding over 10 million acres

2

Tarrant was accompanied by Captain John B. Denton, after whom the city and county were named. Denton was
killed during the attack.

HJN 110135 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

(Connor 1959:37-45, 55; Lebo 1990:63). Under that contract, each head of a family settling in
the Peters Colony area would receive 640 acres and single persons would receive half that
amount (Reese et al. 1986:155). The early Texas newspaper, The Telegraph and Texas
Register, reported in its issue of April 26, 1843, that conditions in the colony were “„wretched in
the extreme,‟ with only 4 or 5 families and 15 or 20 single men in the colony” (Denton RecordChronicle 1843).
Colonists moving to east and north-central Texas in the 1840s tended to settle in areas
adjacent to major Blackland Prairie waterways in the southern portion of the Cross Timbers
(Lebo 1990:62). Because they also tended to settle on the first available land, Grayson, Collin,
and Dallas counties were settled initially; Denton, Tarrant, and Cooke counties followed as
settlement expanded westward. Four out of five Peters Colony recruits were farmers, and they
chose sites adjacent to the bottomland of the Trinity River and its tributaries (Lebo 1990:64).
During the late antebellum period, north-central Texas was the fastest growing region of
the state (Hunt et al. 1997). The upper Trinity was no longer the hinterland it had been only a
few short years previous. Area roads and ferries were developing quickly, and the first bridge
spanning the Trinity River was built in 1854. A stage service operating between Fort Worth and
Yuma was opened in 1856, and several other stage lines were operating by 1858 (Reese et al.
1986:156). Although the land could have produced great quantities of cotton and wheat,
commercial agriculture was of little importance in the area prior to the Civil War. Most settlers
were subsistence farmers whose crops, pigs, and cattle were primarily intended for home
consumption. Industries were generally operated on a seasonal basis by local farmers.
Services available within the area included cotton ginning, grain and flour milling, blacksmithing,
and brick and pottery production (Lebo 1990:65).
Slavery was not an issue of vital importance to the residents of north-central Texas.
Local historian E. F. Bates (1976:95) is of the opinion that, because of slow and sporadic mail,
“we [Denton County residents] were not much concerned about political affairs, as we were not,
and could not be, well posted on current events of the State and nation.” Although in 1860 the
5,000 residents of this county included only about 250 slaves,3 “[s]till, most of the pioneers had
come from southern or border states, and the sympathy of the county went reflexively to the
Secessionists” (Odom and Lowry 1975:5). The Civil War had a devastating effect on the
markets of north-central Texas, and items like coffee and sugar became difficult, and sometimes
impossible, to buy (Hunt et al. 1997). With a large percentage of the area‟s workforce away
fighting in the war, many of the small commercial enterprises and industries were closed due to
a lack of labor. Many farms and ranches were likewise abandoned (Bridges 1978:97; Lebo
1990:66).

3

Although these figures (from Odom and Lowry 1975:5) reflect the situation as derived from research, Bates gives
figures that reflect his own impressions as a resident of the county during that period. He says that there were “not
exceeding eight to ten negro slaves then in the county” (Bates 1976:97) and that “there was not over one soldier in
one hundred from Denton County who owned slaves” (Bates 1976:105).

16

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

3.3.3

Post-Civil War and Modern Development (A.D. 1865 to Present)

In the decade following the end of the war and the return to peace-time endeavors, the
people of north-central Texas witnessed a great many changes—population increased rapidly,
commercial ventures became much more common, and there was an upsurge in urbanization.
Accompanying this growth were increasingly common Native American uprisings.
As
Confederate posts were abandoned and citizens disarmed, the dislocated indigenous groups
made the most of a good opportunity. Federal troops were largely ineffectual in protecting the
Euro-Americans, so “from 1866 to 1873, [the area] experienced its most furious and dangerous
period of Indian Wars” (Lebo 1990:66). Between 1868 and 1886, the area also experienced
increased criminal activities, which some residents of the day attributed to youths who had
learned from the war that “might makes right” and chose to live by that code (Bates 1976:105,
124).
Livestock, particularly cattle, became an increasingly important commodity in northcentral Texas (Lebo 1990:65), but cash crops such as cotton were also gaining in importance.
The railroads expanded through East Texas and into the study area in the 1870s. The number
of lines in north-central and East Texas tripled during the decade, even though development
was slowed slightly by the economic crisis and national panic of 1873 (Fehrenbach 1968:433;
Lebo 1990:66). In spite of national economic problems and the state‟s disastrous debt
(Fehrenbach 1968:433), the area generally experienced a boom during the 1870s. More rural
communities were established, both rural and urban communities grew, and the developing
transportation systems expanded the markets for cash crops and livestock. By 1875, most of
the land suitable for homesteading had been claimed, and settlements could be found over
much of the county. Barbed wire, invented in 1875, arrived in the area in the early 1880s and
offered a practical means of fencing the open range, altering life greatly by fostering livestock
production.
The practice of tenant and share farming was on the rise and, during the 1880s, almost
40% of all Texas farmers were laboring under that system (Green 1977:135). The depression
of the 1890s made matters worse for the small landholder, forcing many either into tenancy or
off farms and into urban areas (Lebo 1990:66). As the turn of the century approached, farmers
began devoting greater acreage to the production of cash crops (Lebo 1990:66). The economy
took a turn for the better, but this, and a greater emphasis on the production of cash crops that
some academic experts thought would allow “laborers and tenants…to climb an „agricultural
ladder‟ to farm ownership” (Green 1977:133) failed to improve the lot of the small farmer.
According to the 1910 census, more than half of the farms in Texas were tenant-operated, and
the Dallas Morning News reported that “nine in ten of the tenants today, probably nineteen out
of twenty, are destined to remain tenants” (Green 1977:137). Higher land values prompted
owners to demand cash in addition to the usual shares paid by tenants, which, “coupled with
exorbitant interest rates, made it almost impossible for the average renter to get ahead” (Lebo
1990:66-67). Tenancy continued to rise until the 1930s, when the Depression and a drop in the
value of cotton as a cash crop caused a decline in the tenant system (Lebo 1990:67; Richner
and Bagot 1978:95).

HJN 110135 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

The rural population over much of Texas fell as World War II approached and farmers
moved into jobs in the growing war- and petroleum-related industries. Small farms gave way to
large-scale agribusiness ventures specializing in grain and beef production. After the end of the
war, only a few small farms continued to operate (Lebo 1990:67; Richner and Bagot 1978:9596). Most of Dallas County has been absorbed by the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex and
currently consists of heavily urbanized environments.

18

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and for
designation as Texas State Archeological Landmarks (SALs)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
on the THC‟s online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (Atlas), the National Park Service‟s (NPS)
online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL), the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas State Historical Association‟s
(TSHA) Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a program of intensive survey of the project area.
No cultural resources were documented as a result of this survey, so the second and third of
these goals were not pursued. The rest of this chapter presents the methodological background
for the current investigations and the specific survey methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey corridor. Archival research conducted on the THC‟s
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas indicated that 4 previously recorded archeological sites—
41DL12, 41DL13, 41DL193, and 41DL194—occur within 1.6 km (1.0 mi) of the APE (Table 1;
Figure 3). Two of the 4 previously recorded sites, 41DL12 and 41DL13, were originally
recorded in 1940 and were described as Caddoan villages or hamlets situated on rolling, sandy
rises of the Elm Fork of the Trinity River floodplain. Site 41DL12, situated on the west bank of
the Elm Fork of the Trinity River, was described as containing “arrowheads, bird points, blade,
flakes and potsherds” that were “collected by local boys,” and the recorder further indicated that

HJN 110135 AR

19

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Table 1. Previously Recorded Archeological Sites within 1.0 Mile of Project Area
Site
No.

USGS
Topo

Cultural
Affiliation

41DL12

Carrollton

Late Prehistoric
(Caddoan)

41DL13

Carrollton

Late Prehistoric
(Caddoan)

41DL193

Carrollton

41DL194

Carrollton

ft
NRHP
TARL
USGS

Site Size

Distance/Direction
from Project Area

Campsite

600 x 150 ft

760 ft Southwest

Unknown

Campsite

1,350 x 600 ft

300 ft Southwest

Unknown

No Information on file

430 ft Southwest

Unknown

No Information on file

250 ft Northwest

Unknown

Site Type

NRHP
Eligibility

Feet
National Register of Historic Places
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
United States Geological Survey

some burned rocks appeared to be present in the center of the site area. Site 41DFL13,
situated on the east bank of the Elm Fork of the Trinity River, was described as containing
“arrowheads, bird points, metate, flakes, [and] several potsherds” that were periodically
collected by local artifact collectors following rain storms. The mapped location of site 41DL13
on the THC‟s Atlas consists of only a single point on the map, though the site form and attached
sketch map indicate the site extended approximately 411 m (1,350 ft) along the eastern bank of
the Elm Fork of the Trinity River; as such, a portion of this site could extend into the proposed
ROW of the Trinity Pump Station and associated pipeline. No site forms for the remaining
2 previously recorded sites, 41DL193 and 41DL194, are on file at TARL or the THC, and no
information about these sites is currently available. Thus, of the 4 previously recorded
archeological sites that occur within 1.6 km (1.0 mi) of the APE, a portion of 1 of the 4 sites
(41DL13) may extend within the APE of the proposed undertaking.
As many as 5 previous cultural resource surveys have been conducted within 1.6 km
(1.0 mi) of the APE. One of the 5 previous surveys was a linear survey presumably conducted
in association with a utility line project that runs more or less along the boundaries of McInnish
Park—this survey crosses the APE of the current project at 1 location. The remaining 4 surveys
consist of large block-area surveys located beyond the boundaries of McInnish Park to the east
and north that appear to be associated with a variety of infrastructure projects. One of the
previous surveys crosses the current project‟s proposed ROW at 1 location, but the majority of
the current project area has not been previously surveyed for cultural resources.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

On November 17, 2011, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd and Jared Wiersema,
under the overall supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural
resource survey of the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be
impacted by the proposed construction project. Field conditions were favorable at the time of
the survey—the autumn sky was clear and visibility was good. The project area is situated in
McInnish Park, a public park operated and maintained by the City; as such, the project area has

20

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

Figure 3. Locations of Previously Recorded Archeological Sites near Project Area

HJN 110135 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

experienced extensive prior disturbance from construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of
park facilities and associated roadways.
McInnish Park is bounded on the north by Sand Lake Road, on the east by President
George Bush Turnpike, and on the west by the Elm Fork of the Trinity River (see Figures 1
and 2). The proposed Trinity Pump Station site is located just north of Sand Lake Road on the
eastern bank of the Trinity River. The proposed pump station site consists of an open, grassy
field, and a small, existing pump house is located adjacent to the site that would presumably be
expanded or replaced by the construction of the new pump station (Figure 4). The proposed
water pipeline ROW associated with the Trinity Pump Station would extend southeastwards
from the pump station site, crossing a grassy park area, and cross Sand Lake Road across the
street from an unnamed driveway that provides park access. The proposed Trinity Pump
Station water line ROW may traverse a portion of a previously recorded archeological site
(41DL13), described as a Caddoan hamlet or village site, just south of Sand Lake Road
(Figure 5; also see Figure 3). The proposed pipeline ROW would continue southeastward
within the existing ROWs of a paved driveway, McInnish Park Road, and Ball Park Way
(Figure 6), terminating at a large, artificial storm water detention pond.
The proposed Irrigation Pump Station site is located on the southern shore of a large,
artificial storm water detention pond just north of the existing ROW of Ball Park Way (Figure 7).
The proposed water pipeline ROW associated with the Irrigation Pump Station would extend
northwestward within the existing ROW of Ball Park Way on the northern side of the pavement
(Figure 8), turning northeastward at the intersection of Ball Park Way and McInnish Park Road
and continuing within the existing ROW of McInnish Park Road (Figure 9), and terminating at a
proposed stub-out location near the southern end of a soccer field.
In general, intensive cultural resource survey activities entail a pedestrian walkover with
surface inspection as well as excavation of subsurface probes, such as shovel tests and/or
backhoe trenches. The APE was traversed on foot by Horizon‟s archeologists in parallel
transects and the modern ground surface and exposed river banks were thoroughly inspected
for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The Texas State Minimum Archeological
Survey Standards (TSMASS) for cultural resource surveys state that, for linear projects, a
minimum of 16 subsurface probes per mile of 100-ft-wide ROW is required unless field
conditions warrant excavation of more probes (e.g., due to the presence of culturally sensitive
areas) or less probes (e.g., due to extensive prior disturbances or cultural low-probability areas).
In the event that a probe yields evidence of subsurface cultural deposits, additional probes may
be necessary to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of the subsurface deposits
associated with the cultural resource. Thus, a minimum of 8 subsurface probes would be
required within the 1,530-m- (5,019-ft-) long by 15-m- (50-ft-) wide proposed pipeline ROWs. As
discussed above, the project area is located within McInnish Park, a public park operated by the
City, and prior construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of park facilities have resulted in
relatively extensive impacts to the native landscape. Horizon excavated a total of 8 shovel tests
during the survey, including 7 shovel tests along the proposed Trinity Pump Station water line
ROW and 1 shovel test within the proposed Irrigation Station water line ROW (Figure 10).
Shovel tests were concentrated toward the northern end of the proposed Trinity Pump Station

22

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

Figure 4. Proposed Trinity Pump Station Location (Facing NE)

Figure 5. View of Trinity Pipeline ROW along Park Entrance Driveway (Facing SE)

HJN 110135 AR

23

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 6. View of Trinity Pipeline ROW along McInnish Park Road (Facing S)

Figure 7. Proposed Irrigation Pump Station Location (Facing NE)

24

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

Figure 8. View of Irrigation Pipeline ROW along Southern Shore of Pond (Facing W)

Figure 9. View of Irrigation Pipeline ROW along McInnish Park Road (Facing S)

HJN 110135 AR

25

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 10. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated in Project Area

26

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

water line ROW, as this portion of the project area potentially coincides with the mapped
location of a previously recorded archeological site (41DL13). Thus, while the shovel tests were
not necessarily evenly distributed across the entire project area, the TSMASS requirements
were exceeded for the overall project area, and shovel testing was concentrated in the portion
of the APE with the highest potential to contain cultural resources (i.e., near the mapped
location of previously recorded archeological site 41DL13).
In general, shovel tests measured approximately 30 cm (12 in) in diameter and were
excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the top of pre-Holocene
deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable, and all sediments were screened through 6.35millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth. In practice, while 1 shovel test was excavated to the
target depth, most shovel tests were terminated at depths of 30 to 50 cm below surface (cmbs)
due to the presence of heavily disturbed soils or dense, gravelly, shrink-swell clay sediments on
and near the modern ground surface. Most sediments observed in shovel tests appeared to
have been disturbed via prior construction and landscaping activities. The Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all shovel tests were determined using hand-held Garmin
ForeTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices based on the North American Datum of
1983 (NAD 83). Specific shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.
In addition to shovel testing, the TSMASS require backhoe trenching in stream terraces
and other areas with the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that
shovel tests are capable of reaching (approximately 80 to 100 cmbs or more in sandy sediments
or 40 to 60 cmbs in clayey sediments). It was determined during the pedestrian survey that
undisturbed Holocene-age alluvial sediments that would require backhoe trenching were not
present within the APE. While Holocene-age clayey alluvial sediments are mapped within the
project area within the floodplain of the Elm Fork of the Trinity River, shovel testing revealed that
all sediments within the project area are heavily disturbed. Consequently, backhoe trenching
was not conducted within the APE during the survey, and the pedestrian walkover with shovel
testing is considered to constitute an adequate survey technique for assessing the potential of
the project area to contain cultural resources.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic
log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker‟s marks) and
non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same
location in which they were found. As no cultural resources were observed during the survey,
the collections policy was not brought into play.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 Code
of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3.

HJN 110135 AR

27

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The City is proposing to construct 2 pump stations and associated water discharge
pipelines in McInnish Park, a city park located in Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas, for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project. McInnish Park is located off the west side
of President George Bush Turnpike between Sand Lake Road (on the north) and West Belt Line
Road (on the south) in north-central Dallas County. The proposed Trinity Pump Station would
be situated on an approximately 0.04-ha (0.1-ac) site on the southeast bank of the Elm Fork of
the Trinity River just north of Sandy Lake Road, and the associated water discharge pipeline
ROW would extend approximately 1,024 m (3.359 ft) southeastward along an unnamed
driveway, McInnish Park Road, and Ball Park Way. The proposed Irrigation Pump Station
would be constructed on an approximately 0.04-ha (0.1-ac) site on the southern shore of an
artificial pond within the park off the north side of Ball Park Way, and the associated water
discharge pipeline would extend approximately 506 m (1,660 ft) northwestward along Ball Park
Way and McInnish Park Road. The APE therefore consists of the 2 pump station sites, each of
which is situated on an approximately 0.04-ha (0.1-ac) site, and approximately 1,530 m
(5,019 ft) of associated pipeline ROWs that are assumed to measure no more than 15 m (50 ft)
in width, covering a total area of roughly 2.3 ha (5.8 ac).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the City, a political subdivision of the
State of Texas; consequently, the proposed project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities
Code of Texas. In addition, the City may need to apply to the USACE for a permit to construct
project facilities under Section 404 of the CWA; as such, the project would also fall under the
jurisdiction of the NHPA of 1966, as amended. As the project represents a publicly sponsored
undertaking with the potential to impact potentially significant cultural resources, the City was
required to provide for a cultural resource inventory and assessment of the APE. To meet its
responsibilities under applicable state laws, the City, through its environmental contractor,
CP&Y, has contracted with Horizon to secure all applicable clearances for cultural resources.
On November 17, 2011, Horizon archeologists Michael Mudd and Jared Wiersema,
under the overall supervision of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural
resource survey of the APE to locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be
impacted by the proposed construction project. The project area is situated in McInnish Park, a
public park operated and maintained by the City; as such, the project area has experienced
extensive prior disturbance from construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of park facilities
and associated roadways. However, a portion of the APE crosses near the mapped location of

HJN 110135 AR

29

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

a previously recorded archeological site (41DL13); thus, the project area was considered to
have at least some potential to contain cultural resources. Horizon excavated 8 shovel tests
during the survey, thereby meeting the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size.
Modern garbage was abundant on the modern ground surface, and modern road
gravels, glass shards, and construction debris were observed in the disturbed sediments that
characterized the shovel tests excavated in the project area. Aside from the modern debris, no
cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were identified as a result of the survey, and no
cultural materials associated with previously recorded archeological site 41DL13 were
encountered.

30

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:



Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.



Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.



Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with
important historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of
Texas, archeological resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the
significance of archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs,
respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory
process.

HJN 110135 AR

31

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

32

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

6.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ARCHEOLOGICAL LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are
located in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any
county, city, or political subdivision of the state are state archeological landmarks and are
eligible for designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
structure as an SAL if it (1) is publicly or privately owned and listed on the NRHP and (2) meets
one of the following 6 eligibility criteria:
A. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad
patterns of our history;
B. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. Is important to a particular cultural or ethnic group;
D. Is the work of a significant architect, master builder, or craftsman;
E. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction,
possesses high aesthetic value, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinctions; or
F. Has yielded or may be likely to yield information important to the understanding of
Texas culture or history.

HJN 110135 AR

33

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The APE was traversed by Horizon‟s archeologist, the modern ground surface was
thoroughly inspected for cultural resources, and a total of 8 shovel tests were excavated during
the survey, thereby meeting the TSMASS for a project area of this size. Aside from modern
garbage and road construction debris, no cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were
identified within the APE as a result of the survey. Furthermore, no cultural materials
associated with previously recorded archeological site 41DL13 were encountered. Originally
recorded in 1940, at which time the recorder noted that local artifact collectors were actively
looting the site after rain storms, it is likely that very little, if anything, remains of this
archeological site after 70+ years of artifact collecting, river bank erosion, construction of parkrelated facilities, and nearby urban development.

6.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. No
new cultural resources were identified in the APE as a result of survey activities, none of the
previously recorded sites in the vicinity of the project area were found to extend into the APE,
and no listed historic properties are present in the vicinity of the project area that would be
adversely affected by the proposed undertaking.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort
to identify historic properties within the APE. As no cultural resources were identified that meet
the criteria for listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as SALs
according to 13 Texas Administrative Code (TAC) 26, no further archeological work is
recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. It is recommended that the
proposed project be cleared to proceed. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains
or burial furniture are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

34

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J. M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Arbingast, S. A., L. Kennamer, R. Ryan, J. Buchanan, W. Hezlep, L. Ellis, T. Jordan, C.
Granger, and C. Zlatkovich
1973
Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.
Baird, L., M. B. Cliff, K. Fimple, J. Garber, K. Hahn, A. Pitchford, J. Renner, V. Scarborough, D.
G. Shaddox, K. Singleton, and S. A. Skinner
1982
Archaeology and History of Lake Ray Roberts, Vol. 2: Construction Area Testing.
Cultural Resources Report No. 82-9. Environmental Consultants, Inc., Dallas, Texas.
Bates, E. F.
1976
History and Reminiscences of Denton County.
Wheeler Printing, Denton, Texas.

Reprint of 1918 edition.

Terrill

Blair, W. F.
1950
Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bousman, C. B., and L. Verrett
1973
An Archaeological Reconnaissance of Aubrey Reservoir. Archaeology Research
Program, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas.
Bridges, C. A.
1978
History of Denton, Texas: From Its Beginning to 1960. Texan Press, Waco.
Bruseth, J. E., and W. A. Martin (editors)
1987
The Bird Point Island and Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and Theoretical
Contributions to North Central Texas Archaeology. Richland Creek Technical Series,
Vol. II. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas,
Texas.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited

HJN 110135 AR

35

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

by V. M. Bryant, Jr., and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70.
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.

American Association of

Butzer, K. W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.
Coffee, D.R., R.H. Hill, and D.D. Ressel
1980
Soil Survey of Dallas County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station.
Collins, M. B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Connor, S. V.
1959
The Peters Colony of Texas: A History and Biographical Sketches of the Early
Settlers. Texas State Historical Association, Austin, Texas.
Crook, W. W., Jr., and R. K. Harris
1952
Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: Carrollton and Elam Foci. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 23:7-38.
1954

Traits of the Trinity Aspect Archaic: Carrollton and Elam Foci. The Record 12(1):216.

1957

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man near Lewisville, Texas, and Associated Faunal
Material. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 28:7-79.

1958

Pleistocene Campsite near Lewisville, Texas. American Antiquity 23:233-246.

1961

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville Site. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 32:327-330.

Denton Record-Chronicle
1843
Solid Families Colonize Area. In Towns and Communities of Denton County, Texas.
Scrapbook compiled by E. Fowler and A. L. Chambers on file at Local History
collection, Denton Public Library, Denton Texas. April 26, 1843.
Dillehay, T. D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol 2. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D. F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.

36

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

Fehrenbach, T. R.
1968
Lone Star: A History of Texas and Texans. Macmillan, New York.
Ferring, C. R.
1989
The Aubrey Clovis Site: A Paleoindian Locality in the Upper Trinity River Basin,
Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:9-11.
Ferring, C. R., and B. C. Yates
1997
Holocene Geoarchaeology and Prehistory of the Ray Roberts Lake Area, North
Central Texas. US Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.
Fisher, W.L.
1972
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Dallas Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Green, J. R.
1977
Tenant Farmer Discontent and Socialist Protest in Texas, 1901-1917. Southwestern
Historical Quarterly 81(2):133-154.
Harris, R. K., and I. M. Harris
1970
A Bison Kill on Dixon‟s Branch, Site 27A2-5, Dallas County, Texas. The Record
27(1):1-2.
Haynes, C. V., Jr., D. J. Donahue, A. J. T. Hull, and T. H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point PaleoIndian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hofman, J.L., R.L. Brooks, J.S. Hays, D.W. Owsley, R.L. Jantz, M.K. Marks, and M.H. Manhein
1989
From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great Plains.
Research Series No. 35. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Hunt, S. M., and D. E. Peter
1995
Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Bowman Springs Road Park, City of
Arlington, Tarrant County, Texas. Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations, No. 91.
Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano, Texas.
Hunt, S. M., D. E. Peter, and F. B. Largent, Jr.
1997
Reconnaissance, Intensive Pedestrian Survey and Geoarcheological Investigations
of the Proposed Cooper Lake Water Transmission Line, Collin, Hunt, and Hopkins
Counties, Texas. Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations, No. 106. Geo-Marine,
Inc., Plano, Texas.
Hunt, S. M., D. Shanabrook, and D. E. Peter
1992
Cultural Resources Investigations at the City of McKinney Solid Waste Disposal Site,
Collin County, Texas. Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations, No. 35. Geo-Marine,
Inc., Plano, Texas.

HJN 110135 AR

37

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Jensen, H. P. Jr.
1968
Report on Excavations at the Field Ranch Site (41CO10), Cooke County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 39:133-146.
Jurney, D. H., F. Winchell, and R. W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas. US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R. L., and L. C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

American

Lebo, S. A.
1990
Historic Background. In Archaeological Survey of the Lewisville Lake Shoreline,
Denton County, Texas, by S. A. Lebo and K. L. Brown, pp. 61-67. Institute of Applied
Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton, Texas. Submitted to the US Army
Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.
Lynch, T. F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Lynott, M. J.
1975
Archaeological Excavations at Lake Lavon 1974. Contributions in Anthropology, No.
16. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas.
1977

A Regional Model for Archaeological Research in Northcentral Texas. Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas,
Texas.

1981

A Model of Prehistoric Adaptation in Northern Texas.
26(92):97-110.

Plains Anthropologist

Meltzer, D. J.
1989
Why Don‟t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D. J., D. K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A. W. Barker, D. F. Dincauze, C. V. Haynes, F. Mena,
L. Nuñez, and D. J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Morris, V., and B. Morris
1970
Excavation of Bison Remains in Northwest Dallas County. The Record 27(1):2-5.

38

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

Newcomb, W.W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Newcomb, W.W., and T.N. Campbell
1982
Southern Plains Ethnohistory: A Reexamination of the Escanjaques, Ahijados, and
Cuitoas. In Pathways to Plains Prehistory: Anthropological Perspectives of Plains
Natives and Their Pasts, edited by D.G. Wyckoff and J.L. Hoffman, pp. 29-43.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Memoir No. 3 and The Cross Timbers Heritage
Association Contributions No. 1, Duncan, Oklahoma.
Newton, W., and H. P. Gambrell
1932
A Social and Political History of Texas. Southwest Press, Dallas.
Odom, E. D., and B. Lowry
1975
A Brief History of Denton County, Texas. Denton County Historical Commission,
Denton.
Pertulla, T. K.
1994
Excavations at the Quince Site (34At-134), Atoka County, Oklahoma. McGee Creek
Archaeological Project Reports of Investigations, Vol. 5, Pt. 2. Institute of Applied
Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.
Pertulla, T. K., and R. Nathan
1989
Cultural Resources Survey of the Natural Gas Pipeline Company of America
Southern Interconnect Pipeline, Lamar, Red River, Franklin, Titus, Morris, and Cass
Counties, Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton.
Peter, D. E., and D. E. McGregor (editors)
1988
Late Holocene Prehistoric of the Mountain Creek Drainage. Joe Pool Lake
Archaeological Project, Vol. 1. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas.
Preston, N. E.
1972
Multiple Paleo Finds in Hunt County, Texas.
Newsletter, October 1972, pp. 6-8.
1974

Missouri Archaeological Society

Waco Sinkers in Association with Paleo-Indian Artifacts. The Record 30(4):4-5.

Prikryl, D. J.
1987
A Synthesis of Prehistory on the Lower Elm Fork of the Trinity River. Unpublished
M.A. thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
1990

Lower Elm Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts and Chronologies
along the Trinity River, North-Central Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Report
37. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

1993

Regional Preservation Plan for Archeological Resources, Prairie-Savanna
Archeological Region: Introduction. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region,

HJN 110135 AR

39

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 191204. Cultural Resource Management Report No. 3. Department of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Prikryl, D. J., and B. C. Yates (editors)
1987
Test Excavations at 41CO141, Ray Roberts Reservoir, Cooke County, Texas.
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.
Reese, N. G., C. A. Pegues, and B. C. Yates
1986
Historical Archaeology. In An Assessment of the Cultural Resources in the Trinity
River Basin, Dallas, Tarrant, and Denton Counties, Texas, edited by B. C. Yates and
C. R. Ferring, pp. 152-182. Institute of Applied Sciences, University of North Texas,
Denton, Texas. Submitted to Alan Plummer and Associates, Inc., Arlington, Texas,
for the US Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.
Richner, J., and J. Bagot (editors)
1978
A Reconnaissance Survey of the Trinity River Basin, 1976-1977. Report No. 113.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas. US
Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932
Stratigraphy. The Geology of Texas, Vol. 1. Bulletin No. 3232. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Skinner, S. A., and L. Baird (editors)
1979
Archaeological Investigations at Lakeview Lake. Research Report No. 118.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas.
Sollberger, J. B.
1953
The Humphrey Site. The Record 11(3):11-14.
Stanford, D.
1981
“Who‟s On First?” Science 81 2(5):91-92.
1982

A Critical Review of Archeological Evidence Relating to the Antiquity of Human
Occupation in the New World. In Plains Indian Studies: A Collection of Essays in
Honor of Waldo R. Wedel, edited by D. H. Ubelaker and H. J. Viola, pp. 202-218.
Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology, No. 30. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Stephenson, R.L.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-277.
Story, D. A.
1990
Culture History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, Vol. 1, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D.
Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366.
Research Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

40

110135_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2008
Digital orthophoto quarter-quadrangle (DOQQ), Carrollton, Texas.
National
Agriculture Imagery Program, Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1981
Carrollton, Texas, 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle map.
Woodall, J.N.
1967
The Upper Tucker Site. In A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory, edited by R.E. Bell, E.B. Jelks, and W.W. Newcomb, pp. 3-14. Final
Report for National Science Foundation Grant No. GS964.
Yates, B. C., and C. R. Ferring (editors)
1986
An Assessment of the Cultural Resources in the Trinity River Basin, Dallas, Tarrant,
and Denton Counties, Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State
University. US Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.

HJN 110135 AR

41

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Summary Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
McInnish Park Water System Improvements Project, Carrollton, Dallas County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates

1

ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

1

692173

3649474

2

692200

3649440

3

692242

3649427

Soils

Artifacts

0-60

Mottled dark brown and black mottled clay
with moderate small road gravels

None

0-30

Grayish-brown gravelly clay loam

None

30-35

Gravelly brown clay

0-30

Grayish-brown gravelly clay loam

30-35

Gravelly brown clay

None

4

692220

3649435

0-50

Mottled dark brown and black mottled clay
with moderate small road gravels

None

5

692291

3649410

0-40

Gravelly very dark brown clay

None

40-50

Gravelly dark brown clay

50+

Dense dark brown clay

6

692264

3649420

0-45

Black clay

None

7

692379

3649288

0-30

Heavily disturbed dark brown loam

None

8

692556

3648824

0-100

Loose light brown sand (artificial fill?)

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 110135 AR

A-1

