Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed San Antonio Water System
E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2,
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8068
HJN 160062.02 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

CP&Y, Inc.
San Antonio, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

July 2017

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Proposed San Antonio Water System
E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2,
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

CP&Y, Inc.
One Countryside Place
12500 San Pedro Avenue, Suite. 450
San Antonio, Texas 78216

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 160062.02 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8068

July 2017

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by the San Antonio Water
System (SAWS), via its engineering contractor, Kimley Horn and Associates (KHA) and its
environmental permitting contractor, CP&Y, Inc. (CP&Y), to conduct a cultural resources inventory
survey and assessment for the proposed E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, in northeastern
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. The proposed undertaking would a combination of
replacement of an existing gravity wastewater pipeline as well as new construction. The
Segment 2 right-of-way (ROW) begins at a hike-and-bike path located within the Salado Creek
Greenway approximately 0.3 kilometer (0.2 mile) southeast of the intersection of Nacogdoches
Road and Salado Creek Drive. From this point, the ROW extends southward within an existing
utility easement that passes through a tennis court and between two residential subdivisions, runs
along the western margin of the Northeast Baptist Hospital complex, and crosses NE Interstate
410 Loop and Salado Creek. The ROW then turns southeastward and runs within the existing Ira
Lee Road ROW along the northern/eastern side of the road to County Road (CR) 368 (a.k.a.
Austin Highway). From this point, the ROW continues southward within the existing ROW of
Holbrook Road, running along the western side of the road, terminating approximately
0.5 kilometer (0.3 mile) northwest of the intersection of Holbrook Road and Rittiman Road. The
ROW extends a total linear distance of 5.1 kilometers (3.2 miles) and ranges in width from
approximately 19.8 to 76.2 meters (65.0 to 250.0 feet), with a typical width of approximately
24.4 meters (80.0 feet). The proposed undertaking would be constrained largely to the existing
ROW of the wastewater line, though some new easements would be required. Overall, the project
area covers an area of 14.1 hectares (34.9 acres).
The proposed project is being sponsored by SAWS, a public utility within the state of
Texas. Consequently, the proposed project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of
Texas (Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). At this time, no federal funding, licenses,
or permits have been identified for the proposed undertaking, though it is possible that portions
of the proposed ROW may require permitting by the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) under
Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA). In this case, any portions of the overall project area
that fall under the federal permit would also fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended. As the project represents a publicly
sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact potentially significant cultural resources, the
project sponsor was required to perform a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the
project area.

HJN 160062.02 AR

v

Management Summary

From June 22 to 23, 2017, Horizon staff archeologist Stephanie Mueller and archeological
technicians Jacob Lyons and Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens,
Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area to
locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Horizon’s archeologists traversed the project area on foot and thoroughly inspected the modern
ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The majority of the project area
consists of the utility easement of the existing wastewater line, and extensive prior impacts from
construction, use, and maintenance of existing roadways, driveways, contractor yards, a tennis
court, parking lots, hike-and-bike trails and trailheads, and various overhead and subsurface utility
lines were observed. Many segments of the existing wastewater line run within the ROWs of
existing roadways that are typically quite narrow, with road shoulders and easements that often
measure only a few feet in width.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of 16 shovel tests per mile for linear project areas
measuring up to 30.5 meters (100.0 feet) in width; as such, 51 shovel tests would be required
within the 5.1-kilometer- (3.2-mile-) long project area. Horizon excavated a total of 68 shovel
tests, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of this length. The pedestrian survey
with shovel testing revealed shallow, heavily disturbed deposits of gravelly clay and clay loam
sediments, and limestone bedrock or decomposing bedrock gravels were encountered in many
shovel tests at depths ranging from 10.0 to 40.0 centimeters (3.9 to 12.2 inches) below surface.
Modern trash and construction debris were abundant throughout the project area, and
sediments observed in most shovel tests were disturbed and contained road base gravels and/or
modern trash. The southern end of the project area, located adjacent to Holbrook Road, passes
within the designated boundaries of a previously recorded prehistoric archeological site,
41BX294, and the Salado Battlefield and Archeological Site National Register Historic District.
Shovel testing within this portion of the project area revealed disturbed sediments mixed with
modern debris, and no cultural resources or intact archeological deposits were observed within
the boundaries of these two known cultural resources. The central portion of the project area,
located adjacent to Ira Lee Road, passes within the boundary of a previously recorded multiplecomponent prehistoric and historic-age archeological site, 41BX474. One shovel test excavated
on site 41BX474 contained several glass shards and a whiteware ceramic sherd of unknown age
(modern or historic-age) and one aboriginal chert flake in surficial, disturbed sediments
immediately adjacent to the Ira Lee Road pavement. Site 41BX474 has been largely destroyed
as a result of ongoing urban development and has been previously determined to be ineligible for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and/or for designation as State
Antiquities Landmarks (SAL). Horizon concurs with the previous significance assessment for site
41BX474. No other cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were observed during the survey.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26. Horizon recommends a finding of “no

vi

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

historic properties affected,” and no further archeological work is recommended in connection
with the proposed undertaking. However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are
protected under the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or
burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery, and the Texas Historical Commission
(THC) should be notified immediately.

HJN 160062.02 AR

vii

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 5
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 6
2.4
Biota.............................................................................................................. 9

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 12,000 to 8,500 years B.P.) ....................................11
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 8,500 to 1,200 years B.P.) .............................................12
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1,200 to 350 years B.P.) ...................................12
3.4
Historic Period (ca. 350 years B.P. to Present) ............................................12

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................19

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................25

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................33

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................35
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................35
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................36
7.3
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................37
7.4
Management Recommendations ..................................................................38

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................39
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 160062.02 AR

ix

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.
Figure 11.
Figure 12.
Figure 13
Figure 14.
Figure 15.
Figure 16.

Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map ............................................... 2
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 3
Distribution of Soil Types Mapped within Project Area .............................................. 7
Locations of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area ...................20
Battle of Salado Plaque Located near Southern End of Project Area .......................23
Hike-and-Bike Path in Southern Portion of Project Area (Facing North) ...................26
Typical View of Holbrook Road Portion of Project Area (Facing South) ...................26
Trailhead in L.B. Tobin Park North of Austin Highway (Facing Southeast) ...............27
Contractor Yard at Holbrook Road and Austin Highway (Facing Southeast) ............27
Typical View of Ira Lee Road Portion of Project Area (Facing Southeast) ................28
Condos Adjacent to Ira Lee Road Portion of Project Area (Facing Northwest) .........28
View of Existing Wastewater Easement North of Loop 410 (Facing Southeast) .......29
Tennis Court within Northern Portion of Project Area (Facing South) .......................29
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area ........................................30
Mapped Location of Site 41BX294 within Project Area (Facing North) .....................34
Mapped Location of Site 41BX474 within Project Area (Facing Southeast) .............34

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.
Table 2.

x

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area ......................................................... 8
Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area ...................21

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by the San Antonio Water
System (SAWS), via its engineering contractor, Kimley Horn and Associates (KHA) and its
environmental permitting contractor, CP&Y, Inc. (CP&Y), to conduct a cultural resources inventory
survey and assessment for the proposed E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, in northeastern
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas (Figures 1 and 2). The proposed undertaking would a
combination of replacement of an existing gravity wastewater pipeline as well as new
construction. The Segment 2 right-of-way (ROW) begins at a hike-and-bike path located within
the Salado Creek Greenway approximately 0.3 kilometer (0.2 mile) southeast of the intersection
of Nacogdoches Road and Salado Creek Drive. From this point, the ROW extends southward
within an existing utility easement that passes through a tennis court between two residential
subdivisions, runs along the western margin of the Northeast Baptist Hospital complex, and
crosses NE Interstate 410 Loop and Salado Creek. The ROW then turns southeastward and runs
within the existing Ira Lee Road ROW along the northern/eastern side of the road to County Road
(CR) 368 (a.k.a. Austin Highway). From this point, the ROW continues southward within the
existing ROW of Holbrook Road, running along the western side of the road, terminating
approximately 0.5 kilometer (0.3 mile) northwest of the intersection of Holbrook Road and
Rittiman Road. The ROW extends a total linear distance of 5.1 kilometers (3.2 miles) and ranges
in width from approximately 19.8 to 76.2 meters (65.0 to 250.0 feet), with a typical width of
approximately 24.4 meters (80.0 feet). The proposed undertaking would be constrained largely
to the existing ROW of the wastewater line, though some new easements would be required.
Overall, the project area covers an area of 14.1 hectares (34.9 acres).
The proposed project is being sponsored by SAWS, a public utility within the state of
Texas. Consequently, the proposed project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of
Texas (Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). At this time, no federal funding, licenses,
or permits have been identified for the proposed undertaking, though it is possible that portions
of the proposed ROW may require permitting by the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) under
Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA). In this case, any portions of the overall project area
that fall under the federal permit would also fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended. As the project represents a publicly
sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact potentially significant cultural resources, the
project sponsor was required to perform a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the
project area.

HJN 160062.02 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map

2

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

HJN 160062.02 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

From June 22 to 23, 2017, Horizon staff archeologist Stephanie Mueller and archeological
technicians Jacob Lyons and Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens,
Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area to
locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive pedestrian
survey of the project area, and the production of a report suitable for review by the State Historic
Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules
of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA)
Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.
Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses cultural resources survey methods.
Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources survey, and Chapter 7.0 presents
cultural resources management recommendations for the project. Chapter 8.0 lists the
references cited in the report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

4

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in northeastern San Antonio in Bexar County in south-central
Texas near the common junction of three significant physiographic provinces—the Edwards
Plateau, the Balcones Canyonlands, and the Gulf Coastal Plain. The Edwards Plateau and
Balcones Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that arcs across Texas to form a
distinct boundary between uplands composed primarily of limestone bedrock and lower plains
composed mostly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary is marked by an abrupt scarp (the
Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational ramp, but the entire length of this
transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography, bedrock, hydrology, soil, vegetation,
and animal life.
The Gulf Coastal Plain, which extends as far north as the Ouachita uplift in southern
Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists of seaward-dipping bodies of
sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin, that reflect the gradual infilling
of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001). The fluviodeltaic sedimentary rocks are arranged in
an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine facies making
up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities between these
formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that occurred during periods
of low sea level. The oldest rocks in this sequence are of Late Cretaceous age.
Hydrologically, the project area is situated within the San Antonio River basin. The project
area is situated on the terraces of Salado Creek. Salado Creek flows generally southwards into
the San Antonio River, which in turn southeastwards across the Gulf Coastal Plain, ultimately
discharging into the Gulf of Mexico southeast of Victoria, Texas. Elevations within the project
area slope down gradually from north to south from approximately 201.2 to 213.4 meters (660.0 to
700.0 feet) above mean sea level (amsl).

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

In general, the bedrock throughout central Texas is composed of Late Cretaceous
formations that dip slightly to the east and are predominantly composed of calcareous clay, shale,
limestone, and marl, with a small portion of sandstone (Barnes 1983). These geologic units are

HJN 160062.02 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

overlain in some areas by unconsolidated Quaternary alluvial floodplain and fluviatile terrace
deposits. On the surface, these formations weather into a rounded, gently rolling topography with
a few bluff faces exposed in stream valleys where more resistant strata are present.
Specifically, the project area is situated on Holocene-age fluviatile terrace deposits (Qt),
which consist of gravel, sand, silt, and clay extending southeastwards from the Edwards Plateau
(Barnes 1983). Stream valleys below the Balcones Escarpment tend to be entrenched and lack
active floodplains, and terrace structures are typically located above flood level along entrenched
streams, resulting in preservation of fluviatile morphology in point bars, oxbows, and abandoned
channel segments. The nearby Edwards Formation is composed of hard, micritic limestone beds,
some of which are chert-bearing. Other beds are extensively burrowed and weathered into
“honeycombed” porous rock. Caverns and sinkholes are known to occur throughout central and
southwestern Texas in the Edwards Formation and Austin Chalk limestones, but they are not
especially common. The nearby Edwards Limestone constitutes one of the largest chert
resources on the Great Plains (Frederick and Ringstaff 1994; Frederick et al. 1994), and
expansive outcrops of Edwards Group chert are often accompanied by extensive aboriginal lithic
scatters created during raw material procurement (or “quarrying”) activities. In the absence of
aggrading depositional environments, such lithic procurement sites are typically restricted to the
deflated modern ground surface, on which the native limestone bedrock is typically exposed over
large areas.
Soils in Bexar County, Texas, formed from the underlying sedimentary formations,
including limestone, chalky limestone, chalk, shaly clay, marly clay, sandy clay, calcareous clay,
sand, and sandstone (Taylor et al. 1991). Alluvial deposits of recent or ancient age occur along
the principal rivers and streams of the county, but soil thickness in upland environments is typically
minimal, and extensive bedrock outcrops are commonly exposed on the modern ground surface.
The project area traverses a mosaic of soil units characteristic of alluvial terrace and
paleoterrace settings in the region (Figure 3; Table 1) (NRCS 2017). These soils are composed
of a mix of vertisols, soils with a high content of shrinking and swelling clay sediments, and
mollisols, base-rich mineral soils that typically have molllic epipedons. Both soil families are
characteristic of grassland and savanna settings. Most of the soil types within the project area
are composed of calcareous clayey, sandy, any loamy alluvium found on Pleistocene-age
terraces, and some historical gravel quarrying activities are indicated by the Pits and Quarries,
1 to 90% slopes (Pt), soil unit off the eastern side of Ira Lee Road north of Austin Highway.
Archeological remains associated with soils of Holocene age possess potential to contain
archeological materials on the modern ground surface and at depth, though the antiquity of most
of the soil units mapped within the project area suggests that any cultural resources would be
present on the modern ground surface or in relatively shallow subsurface contexts. No buried
paleosols are mapped within the project area.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). Bryant
and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas from

6

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 3. Distribution of Soil Types Mapped within Project Area

HJN 160062.02 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Table 1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code

Soil Name

Parent Material

Typical Profile
(inches)

Fr

Loire clay loam,
0 to 2% slopes,
occasionally flooded

Loamy alluvium on floodplains

0-25: Clay loam
25-35: Clay loam
35-56: Loam
56-80: Fine sandy loam

LvA

Lewisville silty clay,
0 to 1% slopes

Calcareous clayey alluvium derived from
mudstone on stream terraces

0-17: Silty clay (Ap)
17-44: Silty clay (Bk1)
44-61: Silty clay (Bk2)

PaB

Patrick soils,
1 to 3% slopes,
rarely flooded

Clayey and sandy alluvium of Quaternary
age derived from mixed sources on
paleoterraces

0-17: Clay loam
17-60: Very gravelly sand

Pt

Pits and Quarries,
1 to 90% slopes

Artificial excavations; may be backfilled
with various fills

0-80: Variable

Tf

Tinn and Frio soils,
0 to 1% slopes,
frequently flooded

Clayey alluvium of Holocene age derived
from mixed sources on floodplains

0-8: Clay
8-65: Clay
65-80: Clay

Source: NRCS 2017
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 years Before Present [B.P.]) through the Late
Glacial period (14,000 to 10,000 years B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 years B.P. to
present). Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in eastcentral Texas was considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that
the region was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant
and Holloway 1985). The Late Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration
and a slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous
woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway
1985). During the Post-Glacial period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been
more stable than during the Late Glacial. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced
by prairies and post oak savannas. The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late
Glacial period continued into the mid-Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief
amelioration to more mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6,000 to 5,000 years B.P. Recent
studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in eastcentral Texas were probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Bexar County is now located within the South-Central Climatic Division. The modern
climate is typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate
is influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified
by polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer, and
fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.

8

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature manifest regional
clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east to west and mean
annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast (Larkin and Bomar
1983:18, 50). Regional temperature ranges from 4 to 36 degrees Celsius (°C) (39 to 96 degrees
Fahrenheit (°F), with an average annual temperature of 18°C (64 F).
Average annual precipitation in the region is approximately 78.7 centimeters
(31.0 inches). Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are
associated with frontal storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with
warm, moist air masses moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The
topographic discontinuity along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf storm
trace and increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall (Baker
1975). Two extreme examples are the excess of 91.4 centimeters (36.0 inches) of rain that fell
within an 18-hour period in the vicinity of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 55.9centimeter (22.0-inch) deluge that fell in less than three hours near O’Harris, Texas in May 1935
(Baker 1975). Lower rainfall amounts are characteristic of winter and late summer. In winter,
frontal storms pass so frequently that there is little time for moisture to increase, and prevailing
upper-level winds from west to east often dominate over meridional flow, meaning that much of
the available moisture is derived from the Pacific rather than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer,
cool fronts rarely penetrate into the region, and rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal
convective storms.

2.4

BIOTA

The project area is located in the Balconian Biotic Province on the southern fringes of the
Edwards Plateau (Blair 1950). The Edwards Plateau and associated Balcones Escarpment is
characterized by a mixture of species from the Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, and
Kansan, Balconian provinces. While three vegetational regions are recognized by Tharp (1939)
within the limits of the Balconian Province, the project area is situated in the oak-cedar region that
corresponds to the dissected southern and eastern part of the Edwards Plateau.
Fifty-seven species of mammals are known from the Balconian Province, though none of
these species are restricted to this province. Common mammalian species include white-tailed
deer, opossum, eastern cottontail rabbit, raccoon, striped skunk, hispid cotton rat, white-footed
mouse, nine-banded armadillo, and fox squirrel. Common bird species include northern bobwhite,
eastern meadowlark, mourning dove, killdeer, field sparrow, red-tailed hawk, turkey vulture, belted
kingfisher, and mockingbird. Reptile and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include
six-lined racerunner, rat snake, eastern hognose snake, Gulf Coast toad, Texas spiny lizard,
rough green snake, copperhead, western diamondback rattlesnake, green tree frog, Blanchard’s
cricket frog, diamondback water snake, Houston toad, and green anole. Although small herds of
bison and antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early historic periods, these
species are no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

HJN 160062.02 AR

9

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located near the southern boundary of Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) Central
Texas Archeological Region. The indigenous human inhabitants of central Texas practiced a
generally nomadic hunting and gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory, and, in contrast to
much of the rest of North America, mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have
changed markedly through time in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 12,000 TO 8,500 YEARS B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists have historically discounted claims of much earlier human
occupation during the Pleistocene glacial period. However, recent investigations of the Buttermilk
Creek Complex in Bell County, Texas, have raised the possibility that a pre-Clovis culture may
have been present in North America as early as 15,500 years ago (Waters et al. 2011).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented by
the PaleoIndian period (12,000 to 8500 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian
bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and
settlement pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Central
Texas are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There
is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is
divided into two periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point styles. These

HJN 160062.02 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

include the Early PaleoIndian period, which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile points
(i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period, which
is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview, Scottsbluff, Meserve, and
Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 8,500 TO 1,200 YEARS B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(8500 to 1200 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Central Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture shows
greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these three
subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as well. Perhaps most markedly,
burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod, continuing into the Late
Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic subperiod. In addition,
the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered to constitute evidence
of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least partially accounts for the
lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1,200 TO 350 YEARS B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 350 B.P.) (Collins 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas, unifacial
arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The Late
Prehistoric period is generally divided into two phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin
phase sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to
suggest that the Austin-phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north, and
lack the ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 YEARS B.P. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when Álvarez
de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de Vaca crossed

12

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

south Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay. However,
European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The first half of
the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as the first
effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native cultures and social systems.
This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site on Galveston Island in Galveston
County, Texas, where burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994),
as well as increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade.
By the time that heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the
indigenous Indian population was greatly diminished.
The first Europeans to explore the Bexar County region came with an expedition in 1691
led by Domingo Terán de los Ríos and Fray Damián Massanet, who evidently reached the San
Antonio River near where the San Juan Capistrano Mission was later founded.1 Nearby, they
found a group of Payaya Indians living on the riverbank. The Indians, as Massanet recorded in
his diary, called the place Yanaguana; he, however, renamed the site San Antonio de Padua to
celebrate the memorial day of St. Anthony—June 13.
The next group of Spanish explorers, an expedition led by two Franciscans, fathers
Antonio de San Buenaventura y Olivares and Isidro Félix de Espinosa, and a military officer,
Pedro de Aguirre, did not reach the area until April 1709. Much impressed by the setting and the
availability of water, they noted that the area might make a promising site for future settlement.
In 1714, Louis Juchereau de St. Denis crossed the region on his way to San Juan Bautista.
Espinosa again visited the site in 1716 on his way to east Texas with the expedition of Domingo
Ramón and this time recommended San Pedro Springs as a mission site. Near that spot, in May
1718, Martín de Alarcón led the expedition that founded San Antonio de Valero Mission and San
Antonio de Béxar (or Béjar) Presidio, named for Viceroy Balthasar Manuel de Zúñiga y Guzmán
Sotomayor y Sarmiento, second son of the duke of Bexar. By the end of the winter of 1718,
numerous Indians of the Jamrame, Payaya, and Pamaya groups had joined the mission. In 1720,
Fray Antonio Margil de Jesús founded the San José y San Miguel de Aguayo Mission a short
distance to the south. Another mission, San Francisco Xavier de Naxara, was established in 1722
but proved unsuccessful and was merged with San Antonio de Valero in 1726. In 1724, the San
Antonio de Valero mission compound, which had originally been located at the site of the presentday Chapel of Miracles south of San Pedro Springs, was moved to Alamo Plaza. In 1731, after
the removal of the missions from east Texas, three additional missions—Nuestra Señora de la
Purísima Concepción de Acuña, San Francisco de la Espada, and San Juan Capistrano—were
founded along the San Antonio River.
During the 1720s, the Spanish population of the area was about 200, including 53 soldiers
and their families and four civilians with their families. On March 9, 1731, 55 Canary Islanders
arrived at Bexar, and the villa of San Fernando de Béxar became the first municipality in the
Spanish province of Texas. The five missions, together with the presidio and the villa of San
Fernando, constituted the most important Spanish concentration in Texas. By the mid-1730s, the

1

The following discussion of Bexar County history is excerpted from TSHA (2017).

HJN 160062.02 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

total population of the area was some 900, including 300 Spanish and 600 Indian converts. An
epidemic in 1738 and 1739 devastated the missions, killing perhaps three-quarters of the Indian
population. At Mission San Antonio de Valero alone, only 182 of 837 Indians who had been
baptized survived. By 1740, however, the missions' populations began to recover. The number
of converts at the five missions reached more than 500, as many of the indigenous Coahuilatecan
peoples living in the region fled to them as a refuge from the Apaches and Comanches.
The missions developed as self-supporting communities, each ringed with farmland
irrigated by a comprehensive system of acequias, or irrigation ditches. Crops included grain,
cotton, flax, beans, sugarcane, and vegetables. Each of the missions also maintained sizable
herds of cattle, sheep, and goats on extensive ranchlands located around Bexar. Governor
Manuel M. de Salcedo described Mission Concepción's ranch in 1809 as comprising some
38 square miles and extending east and northeast from the mission to Cibolo Creek. An inventory
in 1756 recorded that the Concepción ranch had 700 cattle, 1,800 sheep, and large herds of goats
and horses.
Both the missions and the villa of Bexar were subject to sporadic attacks of Apaches and
Comanches; nearly a quarter of the Spanish who died between 1718 and 1731 were reportedly
victims of Apache attacks. A truce was signed with the Apaches in August 1749, but occasional
attacks by Comanches and Apaches continued well into the 19th century.
In 1772, the government offices of Spanish Texas were moved from Los Adaes to Bexar,
and some of the east Texas settlers also moved. Nonetheless, Bexar remained a small frontier
outpost, as Father Juan A. Morfi described in a report of the late 1770s, with "fifty-nine houses of
stone and mud, seventy-nine of wood, all poorly built without a preconceived plan. The whole
town," he continued, "resembles a poor village rather than the capital of a province."
After the secularization of the missions in 1793 and 1794, they gradually became satellite
civilian communities under the authority of the town of Bexar. The mission lands were distributed
to the few remaining Indians and the increasing number of Spanish settlers; most of the better
land nearest the settled areas was controlled by the town's elite, which was made up of the
descendants of the original Canary Islanders and presidial soldiers. The complex network of
irrigation systems that had been operated by the missions was partially abandoned, and, by 1815,
the amount of irrigated farmland had declined markedly.
Despite the downturn brought on by the secularization of the Spanish missions, San
Antonio de Béxar continued to be an overwhelmingly agricultural community. Subsistence
farming was the rule. The largest number of cultivators worked small family plots, though many
farms were also worked by tenant farmers or day laborers. The elite landowners increased the
size of their holdings after the secularization of the missions, and some of the largest ranchers
exported horses and cattle to Coahuila or Louisiana.
During the late colonial period, Bexar continued to serve as the capital of the province of
Texas as well as the main shipping point for supplies headed for Nacogdoches and La Bahía.
Between 1811 and 1813, the city was also the center of revolutionary activity against Spanish
rule. In 1811, a former militia captain, Juan Bautista de Las Casas, following the lead of Miguel

14

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Hidalgo y Costilla in Mexico, mounted an insurrection in Bexar that quickly spread throughout the
province of Texas. Las Casas's band of followers, which included the poorer soldiers and civilians
of the lower social stratum who resented the rule of the Spanish elite, scored early successes,
arresting the governor and his military staff and seizing the property of the most ardent royalists.
On March 1, 1811, however, some of the conservative military officers and clergy supported by
the isleños (aristocratic descendents of the original Canary Island settlers) staged a
counterrevolution. Las Casas was captured in Chihuahua and executed, and his head was salted
and shipped in a box to Bexar for display on Military Plaza in an attempt to dissuade others from
taking up his cause.
After Las Casas's death, the leadership of the insurrectionists fell to Bernardo Gutiérrez
de Lara, who led an army of Mexican revolutionaries and sympathetic Americans from Louisiana
who seized San Antonio in the spring of 1813 and proclaimed Texas an independent state. In
August, however, royalist forces commanded by José Joaquín Arredondo succeeded in routing
the insurrectionists and restoring order. Arredondo's victory was followed by a period of reprisals
that included confiscation, detentions, and executions; in San Antonio alone, loyalists shot
327 supporters of the rebellion.
In the wake of the rebellion, the population of Bexar and the surrounding region fell
markedly and did not begin to grow again until the end of the decade. By 1820, however, Bexar
had some 2,000 inhabitants, with slightly more females (1,021) than males (973); several hundred
more lived on ranches in the outlying countryside. During the 1830s, the population again
increased slightly, although the number of inhabitants in Bexar declined as more town dwellers
moved out to adjoining farms and ranches.
Soon after the first Anglo-American colonists came to Texas in 1821, San Antonio became
the western outpost of settlement. In 1824, Texas and Coahuila were united into one state with
the capital at Saltillo; a Department of Bexar was created with a political chief to have authority
over the Texas portion of the state. During the late 1820s and early 1830s, increasing numbers
of American settlers began moving to San Antonio, though the city remained predominantly
Mexican at the beginning of the Texas Revolution.
In late October 1835, Texas volunteers laid siege to the city, which was garrisoned by the
Mexican army under Martín Perfecto de Cos. On December 10, after fierce hand-to-hand fighting,
it was occupied by Texan forces. San Antonio was retaken by government forces commanded
by Antonio López de Santa Anna during the battle of the Alamo on March 6 of the following year.
After the subsequent defeat of Santa Anna's army in the battle of San Jacinto, the city was
reoccupied by Texan forces, but the area, claimed by both sides, continued to be fought over. In
March 1842, six years after Texas independence, Mexican general Rafael Vásquez briefly
occupied San Antonio, and, in September of the same year, Adrián Woll led another Mexican
invasion force that seized the city.
Because of the uncertainty posed by the frequent invasions, San Antonio and the
surrounding area were largely depopulated. Many settlers fled during the Runaway Scrape of
1836 or during subsequent attacks and did not return in large numbers until after Texas joined

HJN 160062.02 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

the Union. As late as 1844, San Antonio had only some 1,000 residents, 90% of whom were of
Mexican descent.
The newly formed Bexar County covered much of the western edge of settlement in Texas.
During the late Mexican period, Texas had been divided into four departments, with the
department of Bexar stretching from the Rio Grande to the Panhandle and as far west as El Paso.
With the winning of Texas independence, the departments became counties, and on
December 20, 1836, Bexar County was established, with San Antonio as county seat. Since
1860, when the partitioning of Bexar County began, 128 counties have been carved from the
original county.
Despite the steady growth of the population in the late 1840s, fueled by large numbers of
immigrants from the Old South and from Germany, Bexar County was still a sparsely populated
region during the early years of statehood. In 1850, the county had a total population of 5,633,
3,488 of whom lived in San Antonio. The economy, as during the Spanish and Mexican periods,
was still based on ranching and subsistence agriculture. Most of the farms were small; on the
eve of the Civil War only one farm in the county was larger than 404.7 hectares (1,000.0 acres),
and most were smaller than 20.2 hectares (50.0 acres). The main source of revenue for the
county was trade carried on by team trains between San Antonio and Mexico and New Orleans.
A number of German and Anglo immigrants opened mercantile establishments in the city, but
there was little in the way of industry. In 1860, the county had only 28 manufacturing
establishments with 135 employees.
In contrast to many other areas of Texas, slaves played only a minor role in the Bexar
County economy. In 1850, there were only 419 African Americans living in the county, 30 of
whom were free. By 1860, the number of slaves had grown to 1,395, or slightly less than 10% of
the county's total population. Most of the county’s 294 slaveholders owned five or fewer slaves,
and only two owned more than 40.
Bexar County, with its large German population, was a center for antislavery sentiment.
Nevertheless, county residents voted for secession 827 to 709 (54% for, 46% against). On
February 16, 1861, General David E. Twiggs, commander of the federal Department of Texas,
which was headquartered in San Antonio, surrendered all United States forces, arms, and
equipment to a committee of local secessionists backed by a large force of Texas Rangers under
Major Benjamin McCulloch. Although Bexar County escaped the destruction that devastated
other parts of the South, the war years were difficult for the county's citizens, who were forced to
deal with the lack of markets and wild fluctuations in Confederate currency, as well as with
concern for those on the battlefield. With many of the men away fighting, the county and the
surrounding region experienced an upsurge of cattle rustling and other crimes, and a committee
of vigilantes organized "necktie parties" for bandits, cattle thieves, and Union sympathizers.
After the war San Antonio was occupied by Union soldiers, but the county was spared
much of the political violence that consumed other parts of Texas. The war and its aftermath,
however, had a serious effect on the county’s economy. Land prices fell significantly—by as
much as half—and most of the county’s businesses suffered. Many of the county’s farms also
fell idle. The amount of improved farmland declined by more than 60% between 1860 and 1870,

16

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

from 5,543.0 to 2,244.4 hectares (13,697.0 to 5,546.0 acres). With little tax money coming in,
San Antonio and county officials were unable to fund many services. Public sanitation suffered,
and as a result the county had a serious cholera outbreak in 1866.
Except for San Antonio, which continued to be a commercial and military center, the
county remained scantily settled and undeveloped. Most of the population continued to be
concentrated in the San Antonio River valley, with only a few small settlements in the northern,
eastern, and western parts of the county. Economic recovery did not begin until the late 1860s
and early 1870s with the start of the great cattle drives. Because Bexar County was located at
the northern apex of the diamond-shaped area that was the original Texas cattle kingdom, it
became an increasingly important center for the ranching industry. By 1870, the number of beef
cattle in the county reached 55,325, nearly double the figure for 1860. A sharp increase in the
price of wool and the large amount of free range west and south of the city also spurred the
development of sheep ranching, particularly in the decade between 1870 and 1880.
The economic recovery, however, found its most important stimulus with the arrival of the
first railroad, the Galveston, Harrisburg and San Antonio Railway, which reached San Antonio in
February 1877. The completion of the rail link with the coast made the shipment of local products
far easier and helped to fuel a rapid growth in population. The number of inhabitants in the county,
which had grown by less than 2,000 between 1860 and 1870, nearly doubled over the next
decade, increasing from 16,043 in 1870 to 30,470 in 1880. Many of the new residents were recent
immigrants from Europe and Mexico. Of the total population in 1880, 7,912 were foreign-born,
with the largest numbers coming from Mexico (3,498), Germany (2,621), Ireland (471), England
(334), and France (293). After the Civil War, the county’s black population also grew dramatically
as many freed slaves settled in and around San Antonio. By 1880, the number of AfricanAmerican inhabitants had reached 3,867, nearly three times what it had been in 1860.
In 1881, a second railroad, the International-Great Northern, reached the city from the
northeast. The completion of the two railroads not only brought new prosperity, but helped to
change the physical face of the county. Before the 1870s, most visitors had been struck by the
fact that San Antonio and environs, despite relatively large numbers of English, Irish, and
Germans, still more resembled a Mexican community than an American one. The influx of new
settlers and manufactured building products gradually transformed the city and county, altering
its appearance to more closely resemble that of other communities in Texas. The changing
character of Bexar was perhaps most tellingly revealed in 1890, when for the first time the number
of the county's inhabitants born in Germany (4,039) actually outnumbered those who had been
born in Mexico (3,561).
The construction of the railroads also stimulated the establishment or greatly spurred the
growth of numerous new communities, including Macdona, Von Ormy, Cassin, Atascosa, Thelma,
Beckman, Luxello, Converse, and Kirby, though the overwhelming majority of the county's
inhabitants still lived in San Antonio.
The 1880s also saw many new industries. By 1887, San Antonio listed among its
businesses three bookbinderies, four breweries, three carriage factories, four ice factories, three
tanneries, one wool-scouring plant, and an iron foundry. Between 1880 and 1890, employees in

HJN 160062.02 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

manufactures in the county grew from 362 to 2,518. After the turn of the century, the
manufacturing sector continued to show impressive growth. By 1920, the county had
328 factories employing 6,860 persons.
Despite the area’s relatively diversified economy, the depression hit Bexar County hard.
By the mid-1930s, many people were out of work and very glad of the New Deal programs that
gave them work paving streets and building bridges, sewers, and parks. Among the largest
projects of the period were the renovation of La Villita and the San Antonio missions, and the
construction of the Paseo del Rio along the San Antonio River in the center of the city.
Beginning in the second half of the 19th century, San Antonio also developed as an
important military center. The San Antonio Arsenal was opened in 1858, and, in 1878, the city
deeded 36.4 hectares (90.0 acres) to the federal government for what eventually became Fort
Sam Houston. During World War I, Kelly and Brooks fields (which later became Kelly Air Force
Base and Brooks Air Force Base) were established to train pilots, and Camp Bullis and Camp
Travis were opened. At the end of the war, a part of Kelly Field became Duncan Field, and, in
1931, Randolph Field was established as a primary flight training base. During World War II,
Duncan Field was reintegrated with Kelly, and Camp Normoyle, a motor base, was added.
During World War II, Bexar County’s already large military presence grew even more, as
the area’s bases became an important center for the training of army air corps cadets under the
auspices of the San Antonio Aviation Cadet Center. At the height of the war, more than
21,000 civilian war workers were employed at Kelly Field alone. After the war, the presence of
so many military personnel continued to bring changes to the county. Thousands of returning
veterans enrolled in local colleges and universities, and many others, attracted by the area during
their service years, moved to the city. San Antonio also developed into a major retirement center
for military families, drawn by the relatively low cost of living and the access to the two large area
military medical centers, Wilford Hall and Brooke Army Medical Center. Since the end of the
Second World War, the economy of the area has continued to depend heavily on a large federal
payroll from the various military bases and research facilities, and from the large number of retired
military residents.

18

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon performed background archival research on the THC’s
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA) for information on previously recorded cultural
resources sites and historic properties in and near the proposed project area as well as previous
cultural resources investigations conducted in the vicinity of the proposed project area. Based on
this archival research, 25 known archeological sites, two cemeteries, and two historic districts
listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) are located within a 1.6-kilometer (1.0mile) radius of the project area (Figure 4; Table 2) (NPS 2017; THC 2017).
Three of the known cultural resources—41BX294, 41BX474, and the Salado Battlefield
and Archeological Site NRHP historic district—are mapped as falling within the project area.
The southern end of the proposed linear project area, roughly the area between Walzem
Creek on the south and Judivan Drive on the north, falls within the known boundaries of two
previously documented cultural resources—the Salado Battlefield and Archeological Site historic
district and prehistoric archeological site 41BX294. The Salado Battlefield and Archeological Site
is a historic district listed on the NRHP that represents the estimated location of the Battle of
Salado Creek. Fought on September 17 or 18, 1842 (accounts differ), the Battle of Salado Creek
was a decisive engagement between the Texas Rangers, under the command of Colonel Mathew
Caldwell, and an army of Mexican soldiers and Cherokee warriors, under the command of
General Adrián Woll, that resulted in the retreat of Mexican forces toward the Hondo River. The
mapped boundaries of the Salado Battlefield and Archeological Site, as reflected in the delineated
boundaries of the NRHP historic district, were reconstructed based on sketch maps of the
battlefield and are understood to represent an approximation of the extent of the battlefield. A
plaque commemorating the Battle of Salado Creek stands in a small park near the southern end
of the project area (Figure 5). The plaque is engraved with the following narrative:
The Battle of the Salado, decisive in Texas history, was fought here, September 18, 1842.
Col. Mathew Caldwell and Capt. John C. Hays, commanding a force of Texas volunteers,
opposed the Mexican army under General Adrian Woll that had captured San Antonio, and,
with the loss of only one man, checked the last Mexican invasion of Texas and thereby
prevented the capture of Austin, capital of the Republic of Texas (Erected by the State of
Texas 1936).

HJN 160062.02 AR

19

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Figure 4. Locations of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area

20

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Table 2. Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area
Site
No./Name

Site Type

NRHP/SAL
Eligibility
Status1

Distance/Direction
from Project Area

Potential to
be Impacted
by Project?

Archeological Sites
41BX17

Aboriginal burned rock
midden with burials
(Middle to Late Archaic)

Ineligible within
investigated
area

78.0 feet northeast

No

41BX229

Aboriginal burned rock
midden

Undetermined

91.0 feet east

No

41BX271

Aboriginal burned rock
midden with burials
(Middle to Late Archaic)

Determined
ineligible within
surveyed area

120.0 feet east

No

41BX294

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Undetermined

Within project area

Yes

41BX305

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Undetermined

0.4 mile southeast

No

41BX389

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Undetermined

1.0 mile south

No

41BX422

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Recommended
ineligible

0.8 mile southeast

No

41BX473

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Undetermined

120.0 feet west

No

41BX474

Aboriginal campsite
(Late Archaic to Late
Prehistoric)

Determined
ineligible

Within project area

Yes

41BX477

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Undetermined

440.0 feet southeast

No

41BX478

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Undetermined

0.2 mile northeast

No

41BX479

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Undetermined

0.1 mile northeast

No

41BX480

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Undetermined

0.2 mile east

No

41BX481

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Undetermined

0.2 mile east

No

41BX482

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Undetermined

0.2 mile northeast

No

41BX841

Aboriginal campsite
(undetermined prehistoric)

Determined
ineligible within
surveyed area

0.4 miles northeast

No

41BX880

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)/
Historic-age artifact scatter
(undetermined historic)

Recommended
ineligible

0.7 mile southwest

No

HJN 160062.02 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Table 2. Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area (cont.)
Site
No./Name

Site Type

NRHP/SAL
Eligibility
Status1

Distance/Direction
from Project Area

Potential to
be Impacted
by Project?

Undetermined

0.2 mile west

No

Archeological Sites (cont.)
41BX1007

Aboriginal campsite
(Late Prehistoric)

41BX1764

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(Late Prehistoric)

Determined
ineligible

1.0 mile west

No

41BX1765

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(Late Archaic)

Determined
ineligible

20.0 feet west

No

41BX1766

Aboriginal campsite
(undetermined prehistoric)

Determined
ineligible

13.0 feet east

No

41BX1884

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Undetermined

0.3 mile east

No

41BX2041

Aboriginal petroglyph
(undetermined prehistoric);
Possible historic-age wagon
ruts incised in limestone
bedrock
(undetermined historic)

Recommended
ineligible

61.0 feet east

No

41BX2058

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)/
Historic-age artifact scatter
(undetermined historic)

Determined
ineligible

1.0 mile southeast

No

41BX2126

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Recommended
ineligible

0.5 mile west

No

Listed NRHP Historic Properties
Fort Sam
Houston
National
Cemetery

Cemetery

Listed on
NRHP

0.3 mile southwest

No

Salado
Battlefield and
Archeological
Site

Historic-age site of the Battle
of the Salado
(September 18, 1842)

Listed on
NRHP

Within project area

Yes

Cemeteries

22

Agudas Achim
Memorial
Gardens
(BX-C107)

Cemetery

N/A

0.1 mile west

No

Sunset
Memorial
Cemetery
(BX-C028)

Cemetery

N/A

0.5 mile west

No

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

1

Determined eligible/ineligible = Site determined eligible/ineligible by SHPO
Recommended eligible/eligible = Site recommended as eligible/ineligible by site recorder and/or sponsoring
agency but eligibility has not been determined by SHPO
Undetermined = Eligibility not assessed or no information available
NRHP National Register of Historic Places
SAL State Antiquities Landmark
SHPO State Historic Preservation Office

Prehistoric archeological site 41BX294 was originally recorded by T. Hester in 1975 as an
extensive scatter of aboriginal lithic artifacts located on the floodplain and adjacent terrace at the
confluence of Salado and Walzem creeks. The full extent of the site was not evaluated and likely
extended into an area now covered by a residential subdivision. No temporally diagnostic artifacts
were observed, and the depth of archeological deposits was not evaluated. The mapped
boundaries of archeological site 41BX294 fall within the delineated boundaries of the Salado
Battlefield and Archeological Site within the southern end of the project area. The NRHP eligibility
of site 41BX294 has never been assessed and is currently considered to be undetermined.
Site 41BX474 is a multiple-component aboriginal and historic-age archeological site
located on a narrow, steeply sloping paleoterrace between Ira Lee Road and Salado Creek. The
aboriginal component of the site consists of a scatter of lithic debitage, burned rocks, chipped
stone tools, and temporally diagnostic projectile points dating to the Late Archaic and Late
Prehistoric periods. The historic-age component consists of a scatter of historic-age domestic

Figure 5. Battle of Salado Plaque Located near Southern End of Project Area

HJN 160062.02 AR

23

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

debris of unknown age. Originally recorded in 1977 and subsequently reinvestigated on at least
two subsequent occasions in 2007 and 2014, the site has been described as containing a
relatively high density of aboriginal artifacts. However, aboriginal and historic-age cultural
materials are mixed with modern trash in disturbed sediments, and the site has been determined
to be ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP.
An additional seven cultural resources—41BX17, 41BX229, 41BX271, 41BX473,
41BX1765, 41BX1766, and 41BX2041—are mapped as being located in close proximity
(36.6 meters [120.0 feet] or less) to the project area. The rest of the known cultural resources are
located well beyond the boundaries of the project area and would have no potential to experience
any disturbances as a result of the proposed undertaking.
Numerous prior cultural resources surveys have been conducted in the vicinity of the
project area, though only one prior survey covered any portion of the current project area. This
prior linear survey, conducted in 2007 for the proposed Salado Creek Greenway project, followed
the channel of Salado Creek and crossed the current area at three locations (Muñoz 2007).
However, the vast majority of the current project area has not been previously surveyed for
cultural resources.

24

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

From June 22 to 23, 2017, Horizon staff archeologist Stephanie Mueller and archeological
technicians Jacob Lyons and Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens,
Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area to
locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Horizon’s archeologists traversed the project area on foot and thoroughly inspected the modern
ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The majority of the project area
consists of the utility easement of the existing wastewater line, and extensive prior impacts from
construction, use, and maintenance of existing roadways, driveways, contractor yards, a tennis
court, parking lots, hike-and-bike trails and trailheads, and various overhead and subsurface utility
lines were observed. Many segments of the existing wastewater line run within the ROWs of
existing roadways that are typically quite narrow, with road shoulders and easements that often
measure only a few feet in width (Figures 6 to 13).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of 16 shovel tests per mile for linear project areas
measuring up to 30.5 meters (100.0 feet) in width; as such, 51 shovel tests would be required
within the 5.1-kilometer- (3.2-mile-) long project area. Horizon excavated a total of 68 shovel
tests, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of this length (Figure `14). The
pedestrian survey with shovel testing revealed shallow, heavily disturbed deposits of gravelly clay
and clay loam sediments, and limestone bedrock or decomposing bedrock gravels were
encountered in many shovel tests at depths ranging from 10.0 to 40.0 centimeters (3.9 to
12.2 inches) below surface. The Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all shovel
tests were determined using hand-held Garmin ForeTrex global positioning system (GPS) devices
based on North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83). Specific shovel test data are included in
Appendix A.
Modern trash and construction debris was abundant throughout the project area, and
sediments observed in most shovel tests were disturbed and contained road base gravels and/or
modern trash. The linear corridor of the project area passes within the boundaries of three
previously documented cultural resources. The southern end of the project area, located adjacent
to Holbrook Road, passes within the designated boundaries of a previously recorded prehistoric
archeological site, 41BX294, and the Salado Battlefield and Archeological Site National Register
Historic District. The central portion of the project area, located adjacent to Ira Lee Road, passes
within the boundary of a previously recorded multiple-component prehistoric and historic-age

HJN 160062.02 AR

25

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 6. Hike-and-Bike Path in Southern Portion of Project Area (Facing North)

Figure 7. Typical View of Holbrook Road Portion of Project Area (Facing South)

26

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 8. Trailhead in L.B. Tobin Park North of Austin Highway (Facing Southeast)

Figure 9. Contractor Yard at Holbrook Road and Austin Highway (Facing Southeast)

HJN 160062.02 AR

27

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 10. Typical View of Ira Lee Road Portion of Project Area (Facing Southeast)

Figure 11. Condos Adjacent to Ira Lee Road Portion of Project Area (Facing Northwest)

28

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 12. View of Existing Wastewater Easement North of Loop 410 (Facing Southeast)

Figure 13. Tennis Court within Northern Portion of Project Area (Facing South)

HJN 160062.02 AR

29

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 14. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area

30

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

archeological site, 41BX474. Horizon tightened the shovel testing interval from 100.0 meters
(328.0 feet) to 30.0 meters (98.4 feet) within the portions of the current project area that passed
within the previously delineated boundaries of these three cultural sites in order to increase the
chances of encountering cultural resources associated with these three sites.
An additional seven cultural resources—41BX17, 41BX229, 41BX271, 41BX473,
41BX1765, 41BX1766, and 41BX2041—are mapped as being located in close proximity
(36.6 meters [120.0 feet] or less) to the project area. Horizon’s archeologists took extra care
inspecting the portions of the current project area located near the mapped locations of these
previously recorded sites, either excavating extra shovel tests, taking extra time to examine the
modern ground surface, or both.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic log
was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources. Diagnostic
artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and nondiagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were to be
described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location in
which they were found. No cultural resources were collected during the survey.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 Code
of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3.

HJN 160062.02 AR

31

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

From June 22 to 23, 2017, Horizon staff archeologist Stephanie Mueller and archeological
technicians Jacob Lyons and Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens,
Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area to
locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Horizon’s archeologists traversed the project area on foot and thoroughly inspected the modern
ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The majority of the project area
consists of the utility easement of the existing wastewater line, and extensive prior impacts from
construction, use, and maintenance of existing roadways, driveways, contractor yards, a tennis
court, parking lots, hike-and-bike trails and trailheads, and various overhead and subsurface utility
lines were observed. Many segments of the existing wastewater line run within the ROWs of
existing roadways that are typically quite narrow, with road shoulders and easements that often
measure only a few feet in width. In addition, Horizon excavated a total of 68 shovel tests, thereby
exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of this length.
Modern trash and construction debris were abundant throughout the project area, and
sediments observed in most shovel tests were disturbed and contained road base gravels and/or
modern trash. The southern end of the project area, located adjacent to Holbrook Road, passes
within the designated boundaries of a previously recorded prehistoric archeological site,
41BX294, and the Salado Battlefield and Archeological Site National Register Historic District
(Figure 15). Shovel testing within this portion of the project area revealed disturbed sediments
mixed with modern debris, and no cultural resources or intact archeological deposits were
observed within the boundaries of these two known cultural resources. The central portion of the
project area, located adjacent to Ira Lee Road, passes within the boundary of a previously
recorded multiple-component prehistoric and historic-age archeological site, 41BX474
(Figure 16). One shovel test excavated on site 41BX474 contained several glass shards and a
whiteware ceramic sherd of unknown age (modern or historic-age) and one aboriginal chert flake
in surficial, disturbed sediments immediately adjacent to the Ira Lee Road pavement. Site
41BX474 has been largely destroyed as a result of ongoing urban development and has been
previously determined to be ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP and/or for designation as AN SAL.
Horizon concurs with the previous significance assessment for site 41BX474.
No other cultural resources, historic or prehistoric, were observed during the survey.

HJN 160062.02 AR

33

Chapter 6.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 15. Mapped Location of Site 41BX294 within Project Area (Facing North)

Figure 16. Mapped Location of Site 41BX474 within Project Area (Facing Southeast)

34

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:



Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.



Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for designation
as SALs.



Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their SAL
evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or federal
codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological properties are a
function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs, though
historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important historic events
and/or personages. Under the Antiquities Code of Texas, archeological resources are evaluated
according to criteria established to determine the significance of archeological resources for
designation as SALs.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

HJN 160062.02 AR

35

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least on one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

36

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

Horizon’s archeologists traversed the project area and thoroughly inspected the modern
ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. Horizon’s archeologists
traversed the project area on foot and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for
aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources and excavated 51 shovel tests, thereby exceeding
the TSMASS for a project area of this length. The pedestrian survey with shovel testing revealed
typically shallow, heavily disturbed deposits of clay and clay loam sediments, and limestone
bedrock or decomposing bedrock gravels were encountered in many shovel tests at depths
ranging from 10.0 to 40.0 centimeters (3.9 to 12.2 inches) below surface.
Modern trash and construction debris were abundant throughout the project area, and
sediments observed in most shovel tests were disturbed and contained road base gravels and/or
modern trash. The southern end of the project area, located adjacent to Holbrook Road, passes
within the designated boundaries of a previously recorded prehistoric archeological site,
41BX294, and the Salado Battlefield and Archeological Site National Register Historic District.
Shovel testing within this portion of the project area revealed disturbed sediments mixed with
modern debris, and no cultural resources or intact archeological deposits were observed within
the boundaries of these two known cultural resources. The central portion of the project area,
located adjacent to Ira Lee Road, passes within the boundary of a previously recorded multiplecomponent prehistoric and historic-age archeological site, 41BX474. One shovel test excavated
on site 41BX474 contained several glass shards and a whiteware ceramic sherd of unknown age
(modern or historic-age) and one aboriginal chert flake in surficial, disturbed sediments
immediately adjacent to the Ira Lee Road pavement. Site 41BX474 has been largely destroyed
as a result of ongoing urban development and has been previously determined to be ineligible for
inclusion in the NRHP and/or for designation as SAL. Horizon concurs with the previous
significance assessment for site 41BX474. No other cultural resources, historic or prehistoric,
were observed during the survey.

HJN 160062.02 AR

37

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26. Horizon recommends a finding of “no
historic properties affected,” and no further archeological work is recommended in connection
with the proposed undertaking. However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are
protected under the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or
burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery, and the THC should be notified
immediately.

38

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Baker, V.R.
1975
Flood Hazards Along the Balcones Escarpment in Central Texas—Alternative
Approaches to the Recognition, Mapping, and Management. Geological Circular
No. 75-5. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Barnes, V.E.
1983
Geologic Atlas of Texas—San Antonio Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas Water Development Board, Report No. 53,
Austin.

HJN 160062.02 AR

39

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Frederick, C.D, and C. Ringstaff
1994
Lithic Resources at Fort Hood: Further Investigations. In Archeological Investigations
on 571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas, edited by W.N.
Trierweiler. United States Army Fort Hood, Archeological Resource Management
Series, No. 31, pp. 125-181.
Frederick, C.D., M.D. Glascock, H. Neff, and C.M. Stevenson
1994
Evaluation of Chert Patination as a Dating Technique: A Cast Study from Fort Hood,
Texas. US Army Fort Hood, Archeological Resource Management Series, No. 32.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J.T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas. US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.
Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.

40

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Muñoz, C.M.
2007
An Intensive Pedestrian Archeological Survey of the Salado Creek Greenway,
Wetmore Avenue to Eisenhauer Road, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. Phase I:
N.E. Loop 410 to Eisenhauer Road. Technical Report No. 8, Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio. Texas.
National Park Service (NPS)
2016
National Register of Historic Places online database. <http://nrhp.focus.nps.gov>.
Accessed July 10, 2017.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2017
Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed July 10, 2017. US Department of Agriculture.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.

Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in
the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R.A. Ricklis and M.B. Collins,
pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Taylor, F.B., R.B. Hailey, and D.L. Richmond
1991
Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, in cooperation with Texas Agricultural Experiment Station. Washington, D.C.

HJN 160062.02 AR

41

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Tharp, B.C.
1939
The Vegetation of Texas. Texas Academy of Science, Publications in Natural History,
Series 1:i-xvi, 1-74.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2017
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Restricted Database. <https://www.thc.atlas.state.
tx.us/>. Accessed June 22, 2017.
Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2017
Bexar County.
The Handbook of Texas Online <http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/
handbook/online/articles/BB/hcb7.html>. Accessed June 22, 2017.
US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2015
Digital orthophoto, Bexar County, Texas. National Agriculture Imagery Program, Farm
Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1992a 7.5-minute series topographic map, Longhorn, Texas, quadrangle.
1992b

7.5-minute series topographic map, San Antonio East, Texas, quadrangle.

Waters, M.R., S.L. Forman, T.A. Jennings, L.C. Nordt, S.G. Driese, J.M. Feinberg, J.L. Keene, J.
Halligan, A. Lindquist, J. Pierson, C.T. Hallmark, M.B. Collins, and J.E. Wiederhold
2011
The Buttermilk Creek Complex and the Origins of Clovis at the Debra L. Friedkin Site,
Texas. Science 331:1599-1603.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

42

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

APPENDIX A:
Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JL1

556411

3262180

0-30+

Disturbed rocky very dark gray
brown/clay loam

None

JL2

556396

3262209

0-30+

Disturbed rocky very dark gray brown
clay loam

None

JL3

556364

3262271

0-30

Rocky grayish-brown silty clay loam

None

30-40+

Mottled dark orange/yellowish-brown
compact clay with decaying caliche

None

0-20

Gravelly dark grayish-brown sandy
clay loam

None

20+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-20

Gravelly dark grayish-brown sandy
clay loam

None

20+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-30

Gravelly dark grayish-brown sandy
clay loam

None

30+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-15

Gravelly dark grayish-brown sandy
loam

None

15+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-30

Gravelly dark grayish-brown sandy
loam

None

30+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-15

Gravelly dark brown sandy loam

None

15+

Limestone bedrock

None

JL4

JL5

JL6

JL7

JL8

JL9

556357

556326

556291

556261

556231

556217

3262305

3262360

3262417

3262470

3262567

3262666

Soils

Artifacts

JL10

556197

3262765

0-5+

Limestone bedrock

None

JL11

556170

3262870

0-25

Gravelly dark brown sandy loam

None

25-35+

Limestone bedrock

None

JL12

556167

3262980

0-5+

Limestone gravels

None

JL13

556157

3263088

0-5+

Limestone gravels

None

JL14

556132

3263617

0-10+

Disturbed brown sand

None

JL15

556122

3263648

0-40

Dark grayish-brown silty clay loam

None

40+

Very dense grayish-brown hydric clay

None

0-30

Dark gray silty clay loam

None

Very dark grayish-brown hydric clay

None

0-5

Gravelly dark brown sandy loam

None

5+

Limestone gravels

None

JL16

556106

3263690

30-40+
JL17

555764

HJN 160062.02 AR

3264721

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JL18

555801

3264815

0-5

Gravelly dark brown sandy loam

None

5+

Limestone gravels

None

0-5

Compact rocky dark brown sandy
clay loam

None

5+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-15

Compact rocky very dark brown
loamy clay

None

15+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-15

Compact rocky very dark brown
loamy clay

None

15+

Limestone bedrock

None

JL19

JL20

JL21

555368

555375

555327

3265225

3265239

3265129

Soils

Artifacts

JL22

555394

3264955

0-10+

Heavily deflated dark brown rocky
sandy loam

None

JL23

555487

3264900

0-10+

Heavily deflated dark brown rocky
sandy loam

None

JL24

555526

3264875

0-10

Light brown gravelly sandy loam

None

10-25

Dark brown sandy clay loam

None

25-45+

Black gravelly dense loamy clay

None

0-30

Gravelly dark brown sandy clay loam

None

30+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-10

Gravelly dark brown sandy clay loam

None

10+

Limestone bedrock

None

Gravelly dark brown sandy clay loam

None

JL25

JL26

555292

555246

3265358

3265449

JL27

555175

3265937

0-10+

JL28

555229

3266404

0-5

Rocky light grayish-brown sandy
loam

None

5+

Limestone gravels

None

0-30

Rocky dark brown sandy loam

None

30+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-20

Very dark gray brown rocky clay

None

20+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-15

Very dark gray brown rocky clay

None

15+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-20

Very dark gray brown rocky clay

None

20+

Limestone bedrock

None

JL29

JW1

JW2

JW3

A-2

555211

556431

556414

556387

3266442

3262159

3262197

3262247

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
San Antonio Water System E-19 Wastewater Project, Segment 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JW4

556369

3262281

0-20

Very dark gray brown rocky clay

None

20+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-30

Grayish-brown silty clay

None

30+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-20

Brown rocky sand

None

20+

Dark gray rocky clay

None

0-35

Grayish-brown silty clay

None

35+

Limestone bedrock

None

JW5

JW6

JW7

556341

556310

556280

3262330

3262384

3262432

Soils

Artifacts

JW8

556143

3263503

0-5+

Disturbed brown silty loam

None

JW9

556149

3263411

0-10

Disturbed gravels and asphalt

None

10+

Dark brown rocky clay

None

JW10

556136

3263307

0-20+

Dark brown rocky clay

None

JW11

556140

3263558

0-10+

Dark brown rocky clay

None

JW12

556128

3263580

0-30+

Grayish-brown silty clay

None

JW13

556120

3263636

0-80+

Grayish-brown silty clay

None

JW14

556108

3263705

0-40+

Dense black clay

None

JW15

555655

3264775

0-20+

Grayish-brown silty clay

None

JW16

555405

3265234

0-20

Rocky black clay

None

20+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-10

Rocky black clay

None

10+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-10

Rocky black clay

None

10+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-40

Very dark brown rocky clay loam

None

40+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-5

Grayish-brown silty clay

None

5+

Limestone bedrock

None

0-10

Grayish-brown silty clay

None

10+

Limestone bedrock

None

JW17

JW18

JW19

JW20

JW21

555324

555328

555545

555525

555224

3265229

3265025

3264846

3264864

3265521

JW22

555197

3266428

0-5+

Limestone bedrock

None

SM1

556102

3263777

0-10

Dark brown gravelly clay

None

SM2

556105

3263877

0-30

Dark brown gravelly clay

None

HJN 160062.02 AR

A-3

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

SM3

556095

3263996

0-40

Yellowish-brown compact gravelly
clay

None

SM4

556085

3264097

0-10

Compact dark brown gravelly clay

None

SM5

556050

3264195

0-30

Compact dark brown gravelly clay

None

SM6

556006

3264294

0-30

Compact dark brown gravelly clay

None

SM7

555949

3264431

0-15

Compact dark brown gravelly clay

None

SM8

555912

3264542

0-10

Compact dark brown gravelly clay

None

SM9

555864

3264629

0-30

Compact dark brown gravelly clay
with red mottles

None

SM10

555777

3264689

0-10

Dark brown gravelly clay

None

SM11

555688

3264746

0-15

Dark brown gravelly clay

None

SM12

555389

3265242

0-15

Dark gray gravelly clay

None

SM13

555328

3265103

0-45

Dark brown sandy clay with CaCO3
inclusions

None

SM14

555426

3264931

0-35

Dark brown sandy clay loam
(disturbed; adjacent to Ira Lee Road)

35-40

Dark brown gravelly sandy clay

None

Soils

Artifacts

2 clear
glass
shards,
1 brown
chert flake,
1 whiteware
sherd,
1 brown
glass shard

SM15

555218

3265881

0-10

Dark brown gravelly sandy clay

None

SM16

555244

3266321

0-15

Dark brown gravelly sandy clay

None

SM17

555228

3266304

0-5

Dark brown gravelly sandy clay

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
CaCO3 = Calcium carbonate
cmbs = Centimeters below surface0
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

A-4

HESI_160062.02 AR_SAWS_E-19_Wastewater_Permit_8068

