Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant
Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5547
HJN 100015 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

City of Corsicana
Corsicana, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

June 2010

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant
Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

City of Corsicana
200 North 12th Street
Corsicana, Texas 75110

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 South IH 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 100015 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5547

June 2010

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

The City of Corsicana (the City) is proposing to construct a new water treatment facility
on the site of its existing Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant (WTP) located below Lake Halbert
dam approximately 7.2 kilometers (km) (4.5 miles [mi]) southeast of Corsicana, Navarro County,
Texas. The City is proposing to decommission the existing Lake Halbert WTP and construct a
larger and more modern plant on the same site. The City provides treated water to an
estimated population of 63,080 individuals, including all of Navarro County and parts of
neighboring Ellis, Hill, and Limestone counties. The original Lake Halbert WTP, which was
constructed in 1924, has a treatment capacity of 4.0 million gallons per day (mgd). The plant
primarily serves the industrial area located in the eastern part of Corsicana and is connected to
the City’s distribution system via a network of subsurface pipelines. The existing plant has been
modified and expanded numerous times; however, due to the overall age and undersized
capacity of the facility to provide treated water to its service area, the plant needs to be
replaced. The proposed new 16.0-mgd water treatment plant that would be constructed on the
site would be built immediately northwest of and adjacent to the existing 4.0-mgd WTP. The
proposed new facilities would be constructed over a period of time, and the old facilities would
gradually be phased out as the new 16.0-mgd WTP becomes fully operational. In addition to
the proposed facilities that would be constructed on the existing WTP site, some expanded
facilities would be constructed on the adjoining property immediately northeast of the existing
WTP site. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed project therefore consists of the
existing 4.7-hectare (ha) (11.7-acre [ac]) Lake Halbert WTP and a 5.9-ha (14.5-ac) proposed
expansion area located adjacent to the northeastern property boundary of the existing facility,
covering a total area of 10.6 ha (26.2 ac).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the City, a political subdivision of the
state of Texas, on land that is currently owned and operated by the City. In addition, the City
proposes to utilize funding provided by the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB).
Consequently, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. While no
application for federal permits has yet been submitted, it is possible that the proposed
undertaking may require federal permitting by the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) under
Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, in which case the proposed project would also fall under
the jurisdiction of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA). As the project represents a
publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural resources, the
City of Corsicana was required to provide for a cultural resources inventory and assessment of

HJN 100015 AR

iii

Management Summary

the project’s APE and to assess the project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural
resources in the APE. The City of Corsicana subcontracted with Horizon Environmental
Services, Inc. (Horizon), to conduct a cultural resource inventory survey of the APE associated
with the proposed project.
On February 25, 2010, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The survey consisted of a combination of intensive and reconnaissance-level
survey activities. Due to the extent of prior impacts on the existing 4.7-ha (11.7-ac) Lake
Halbert WTP site, Horizon performed a reconnaissance-level survey, consisting of pedestrian
walkover with judgmental shovel testing, of this portion of the overall project area. The 5.9-ha
(14.5-ac) proposed expansion area located on the adjoining property to the northeast of the
existing facility consisted of an open cattle pasture and appeared to be considerably more intact
than the existing facility. The proposed expansion area was intensively surveyed for cultural
resources, consisting of pedestrian walkover with systematic shovel testing. Horizon excavated
a total of 16 shovel tests during the survey, including 13 shovel tests in the proposed expansion
area and 3 shovel tests on the existing WTP facility. While the TSMASS requirements for
shovel testing densities were not met for the 10.6-ha (26.2-ac) project area as a whole, they
were exceeded on the 5.9-ha (14.5-ac) portion of the property that was intensively surveyed.
Within the boundaries of the existing 4.7-ha (11.7-ac) plant facility, numerous buildings,
driveways, parking lots, and pieces of equipment have been installed; the landscape has been
brought to grade; several wash water treatment and recovery lagoons have been excavated,
and the resulting soils have been used to construct a series of linear embankments on the site.
Of the various structures that have been built on the WTP, 2 primary industrial buildings—
including (1) the main wastewater plant building and associated office complex and water
treatment ponds and (2) a small water filter building—are extant that appear to date to the
original construction of the WTP in 1924. While these 2 buildings appear to be original to the
1924 construction of the facility, they have not been assessed for architectural integrity or for
their possible association with events or personages of historic importance. Thus, at the
present time, they are considered to be of unknown eligibility for inclusion in the National
Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and for designation as State Archeological Landmarks
(SALs). All proposed construction on the WTP facility associated with the current action would
occur on adjacent portions of the overall Lake Halbert WTP property northeast and northwest of
the existing plant site on which the historic-age buildings are situated. Aside from gradually
decommissioning the existing industrial buildings on the site, the City currently has no plans to
conduct any construction-related activities on the existing plant site. Thus, the historic-age
building complex on the Lake Halbert WTP site would be avoided during the current proposed
undertaking and would not be impacted as a result of the proposed action.
Aside from the abovementioned buildings, no other historic or prehistoric cultural
resources were observed within the APE, either on the modern ground surface or in any of
16 shovel tests excavated during the survey.

iv

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort to identify
historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were identified that meet the criteria for
listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC
26, and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed
undertaking. In the event that the City of Corsicana proposes any future actions on the Lake
Water WTP facility that would potentially affect the existing historic-age buildings and related
facilities, the City would need to provide for an assessment of the NRHP and SAL eligibility of
the historic-age buildings. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed
as currently designed. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture
are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in
the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the
Texas Historical Commission (THC) and/or USACE, as appropriate, should be notified of the
discovery.

HJN 100015 AR

v

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ..................................................................................... iii

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 6
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 7
2.4
Flora and Fauna ............................................................................................ 8

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND .................................................................................... 9
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 6,000 B.C.) .................................................... 9
3.2
Archaic Period (6,000 B.C. to A.D. 700) .......................................................10
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 700 to 1600) ...................................................11
3.4
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1200 to 1821) ......................................................12
3.5
Historic Period (A.D. 1500 to Present)..........................................................12

4.0

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY ................................................19
4.1
Archival Research ........................................................................................19
4.2
Survey Methods ...........................................................................................20

5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................31

6.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................33
6.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................33
6.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....34
6.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Archeological Landmark ...................35
6.4
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................35
6.5
Management Recommendations ..................................................................36

7.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................37
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 100015 AR

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.
Figure 11.
Figure 12.
Figure 13.
Figure 14.
Figure 15.
Figure 16.

viii

Location of Project Area on Topographic Map .......................................................... 2
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 3
Overview of Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Facility (Facing Southeast) .........22
Overview of Lake Halbert Southwest of Project Area (Facing Southwest) ...............22
Lake Halbert Dam Earthen Berm and Gravel Driveway to Plant (Facing West) .......23
Front Façade of Building A (Facing Southeast)........................................................23
Rear and Side Façades of Building A (Facing West) ...............................................24
Front Façade of Building B (Facing North) ...............................................................24
Rear Façade of Building B, Water Ponds, and Chemical Tanks (Facing East).........25
Covered Machinery Storage Structure (Building C) (Facing North) ..........................25
Shooting Range near Northwest End of Plant Property (Facing Southeast) .............26
Earthen Berm along Northeastern Side of Shooting Range (Facing Southeast) ......26
Cattle Pasture in Proposed Expansion Area (Facing West) .....................................27
View Along Edge of High Ground at Dropoff to Marshy Area (Facing South) ...........27
Marshy Area in Proposed Expansion Area North of Plant (Facing South) ................28
Locations of Shovel Tests in Project Area ................................................................29

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The City of Corsicana (the City) is proposing to construct a new water treatment facility
on the site of its existing Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant (WTP) located below Lake Halbert
dam approximately 7.2 kilometers (km) (4.5 miles [mi]) southeast of Corsicana, Navarro County,
Texas (Figures 1 and 2). The City is proposing to decommission the existing Lake Halbert WTP
and construct a larger and more modern plant on the same site. The City provides treated
water to an estimated population of 63,080 individuals, including all of Navarro County and parts
of neighboring Ellis, Hill, and Limestone counties. The original Lake Halbert WTP, which was
constructed in 1924, has a treatment capacity of 4.0 million gallons per day (mgd). The plant
primarily serves the industrial area located in the eastern part of Corsicana and is connected to
the City’s distribution system via a network of subsurface pipelines. The existing plant has been
modified and expanded numerous times; however, due to the overall age and undersized
capacity of the facility to provide treated water to its service area, the plant needs to be
replaced. The proposed new 16.0-mgd water treatment plant that would be constructed on the
site would be built immediately northwest of and adjacent to the existing 4.0-mgd WTP. The
proposed new facilities would be constructed over a period of time, and the old facilities would
gradually be phased out as the new 16.0-mgd WTP becomes fully operational. In addition to
the proposed facilities that would be constructed on the existing WTP site, some expanded
facilities would be constructed on the adjoining property immediately northeast of the existing
WTP site. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed project therefore consists of the
existing 4.7-hectare (ha) (11.7-acre [ac]) Lake Halbert WTP and a 5.9-ha (14.5-ac) proposed
expansion area located adjacent to the northeastern property boundary of the existing facility,
covering a total area of 10.6 ha (26.2 ac).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the City, a political subdivision of the
state of Texas, on land that is currently owned and operated by the City. In addition, the City
proposes to utilize funding provided by the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB).
Consequently, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas (Natural
Resource Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). While no application for federal permits has yet been
submitted, it is possible that the proposed undertaking may require federal permitting by the US
Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, in which case the
proposed project would also fall under the jurisdiction of the National Historic Preservation Act
(NHPA). As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact
significant cultural resources, the City of Corsicana was required to provide for a cultural

HJN 100015 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on Topographic Map

2

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

HJN 100015 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

resources inventory and assessment of the project’s APE and to assess the project’s possible
impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE. The City of Corsicana subcontracted
with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon), to conduct a cultural resource inventory
survey of the APE associated with the proposed project.
On February 25, 2010, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, a combination
of intensive and reconnaissance-level pedestrian survey of the APE, and the production of a
report suitable for review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with
the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26,
Section 27, and the Council of Texas Archeologists’ (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources
Management Reports. The survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5547.
This report presents the results of this cultural resource survey. Following this
introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and cultural backgrounds,
respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the research objectives, results of
archival research, and cultural resource survey methods implemented during the survey.
Chapter 5.0 presents the results of the cultural resource survey and describes cultural
resources documented during the fieldwork, and Chapter 6.0 presents cultural resource
management recommendations for the project. Chapter 7.0 lists the references cited in the
report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

4

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The Lake Halbert WTP is located below Lake Halbert dam approximately 7.2 km (4.5 mi)
southeast of Corsicana in central Navarro County, Texas. Navarro County is located near the
northern end of the Blackland Prairie physiographic province in north-central Texas (Arbingast
et al. 1973). The Blackland Prairie is a narrow physiographic zone situated between the
Edwards Plateau to the west and the Gulf Coastal Plain to the east. The Edwards Plateau and
Balcones Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that arcs across Texas to form a
distinct boundary between uplands composed primarily of limestone bedrock and lower plains
composed mainly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary is marked by an abrupt scarp (the
Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational ramp, but the entire length of this
transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography, bedrock, hydrology, soils, vegetation,
and animal life.
The Blackland Prairie is a low, rolling land that extends in a narrow band just east and
southeast of the Balcones fault zone from the Red River Valley in northeastern Texas south and
southwest to the southern edge of the Edwards Plateau. This is an area of low relief and poor
drainage where water often ponds after rainstorms. Streams flow at very gentle gradients.
Elevations on the Blackland Prairie are mainly in the range of 120 to 215 m (394 to 705 ft)
above mean sea level (amsl). Deep, calcareous, clayey soil formed in soft bedrock supports
predominantly prairie vegetation broken by small woods and forests. Rock of any kind is scarce
on the Blackland Prairie, and the only chert sources are gravels in the beds of streams that
drain exposures of Edwards limestone to the west.
Hydrologically, the study area is situated within the Trinity River basin. The project area
runs along the western terrace and floodplain of Elm Creek, which flows northeastward to its
confluence with Post Oak Creek approximately 1.0 km (0.6 mi) northeast of the project area.
Post Oak Creek, in turn, flows generally eastward into Chambers Creek, which in turn
eventually discharges into Richland Creek, a tributary of the Trinity River. The Trinity River
flows south-southeastwards across the Gulf Coastal Plain and discharges into the Gulf of
Mexico at Trinity Bay just east of Baytown in Chambers County, Texas.

HJN 100015 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

The Lake Halbert WTP is situated at the southeastern terminus of SE County Road
(CR) 30 just below Lake Halbert Dam. Lake Halbert, a reservoir in the Trinity River basin, is
owned and operated by the city of Corsicana for municipal, industrial, and recreational
purposes. The lake was formed by impounding Elm Creek behind an approximately 1.1-km(0.7-mi-) long earthen dam. Construction of the dam was started in 1920 and completed in
1921, and the Lake Halbert WTP was constructed in 1924. In 1950, the spillway was raised to
an elevation of 112 meters (m) (368 feet [ft]) above mean sea level (amsl). The reservoir
capacity is estimated to be 7,420 acre-feet, with a surface area of 264 ha (650 ac). The
drainage area above the dam is 12 square miles.
The local terrain is naturally flat to rolling and is surfaced by clay and sandy loams that
support water-tolerant hardwoods and grasses. The natural topography on the Lake Halbert
WTP site, however, was substantially modified during the original construction of the facility and
over the years of its operation. Within the boundaries of the existing 4.7-ha (11.7-ac) plant
facility, numerous buildings, driveways, parking lots, and pieces of equipment have been
installed; the landscape has been brought to grade; several wash water treatment and recovery
lagoons have been excavated, and the resulting soils have been used to construct a series of
linear embankments on the site. The proposed 5.9-ha (14.5-ac) expansion area consists
primarily of an open cattle pasture. Physiographically, the existing WTP and most of the
proposed expansion area are situated on a broad alluvial terrace between the floodplains of Elm
Creek to the southeast and Post Oak Creek to the north. The southeastern end of the proposed
expansion area drops down onto the floodplain of Elm Creek, which, in the area immediately
below the dam, consists of a broad, marshy bottomland. Elevations across the APE slope
gradually down toward the southeast, ranging from approximately 114 m (375 ft) amsl at the
plant entrance to 102 m (335 ft) amsl in the marshy Elm Creek floodplain.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Multiple geological formations are associated with the physiographic province in which
the project area is located. In general, the bedrock throughout north-central Texas is composed
of Upper Cretaceous formations that dip slightly to the east and are predominantly composed of
calcareous clay, shale, limestone, and marl, with a small portion of sandstone (Sellards et al.
1932). These geologic units are overlain in some areas by unconsolidated Quaternary alluvial
floodplain and fluviatile terrace deposits. On the surface, these formations weather into a
rounded, gently rolling topography with a few bluff faces exposed in stream valleys where more
resistant strata are present.
Specifically, the project area spans 2 geological units (Fisher 1972). The majority of the
project area is situated on a broad alluvial terrace between Elm Creek to the southeast and Post
Oak Creek to the north. This terrace is part of the Wilcox Group, undivided (EPAwi), a Late
Paleocene formation composed of varying quantities of mudstone, sandstone, lignite, and
ironstone concretions. The southeastern portion of the proposed expansion of the Lake Halbert
WTP drops down onto the floodplain of Elm Creek, which is composed of Holocene-age
alluvium and quaternary deposits (Qal).

6

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

The project area traverses 3 distinct soil units (NRCS 2010). Crockett fine sandy loam,
1 to 3% slopes (CrB), which consists of residuum weathered from Tertiary-age shale, underlies
the highest elevations toward the northwestern end of the project area. Ferris clay, 3 to 8%
slopes (FeD2), which consists of calcareous shale of the Cretaceous-age Eagleford Shale and
Taylor Marl formations, is mapped along the edge of the terrace formation in the approximate
center of the project area. Kaufman clay (Ka), which consists of Holocene-age clayey alluvium
found on circular gilgai on floodplains, underlies the Elm Creek floodplain.
Other things being equal, aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in
terrace and floodplain settings adjacent to prominent streams such as those that characterize
the current project area. The proximity of the project area to the confluence of 2 prominent
streams, Elm and Post Oak creeks, would tend to indicate that the APE has moderate to high
potential to contain aboriginal cultural resources. However, while the clayey alluvium on the
Elm Creek floodplain is mapped as a Holocene-age sediment, the relative antiquity of the
sediments on the terrace formation across most of the project area would tend to suggest that
aboriginal cultural resources would be restricted to surface and near-surface contexts or be
present in erosional settings that would lack integrity. In addition, the extent of prior impacts
associated with construction and maintenance of the Lake Halbert WTP render it highly unlikely
that any intact archeological deposits are present on the existing facility. The proposed
expansion area to the northeast of the existing facility currently consists of an active cattle
pasture and appears to be considerably more intact than the area contained within the existing
WTP’s boundaries. Historic-age cultural resources may occur in any physiographic setting.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995).
Bryant and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for east-central Texas from
the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial Period
(14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence from the
Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was considerably
cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was more heavily
forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway 1985). The
Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow warming and/or
drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were gradually
replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During the PostGlacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable. The
deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The drying
and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued into the mid-Holocene, at
which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions lasting
from roughly 6,000 to 5,000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate that
modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by 1,500 years
ago.

HJN 100015 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Navarro County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern climate
is dry and subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The characteristically
humid, subtropical climate is influenced primarily by the tropical Maritime air masses from the
Gulf of Mexico, but the climate is modified by polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses
predominate throughout spring, summer, and fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in
winter and provide a continental climate characterized by considerable variations in
temperature. The average annual temperature is 18.5°C (65.3°F), and average annual
precipitation is 88.4 centimeters (cm) (34.8 inches [in]) (Hanson and Wheeler 1969). Maximum
rainfall, in the form of thundershowers, occurs in June and September, and the average growing
season is 270 days long.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

The project area is situated in the southwestern portion of the Texan biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texan province. The project area
traverses the Blackland Prairie, a region of dark, calcareous clays derived from ancient shales
and chalks. The vegetation within the project area consists predominantly of grasslands with
isolated trees and scattered clusters of trees, while the greatest concentrations of trees occur
along drainages.
Dominant floral species include little bluestem, big bluestem, Indian grass, switchgrass,
sideoats grama, hairy grama, tall dropseed, silver bluestem, and Texas wintergrass. Wooded
areas are often restricted to stream courses, primarily consisting of elm and hackberry, while
bois d’arc is common in lowland areas. Vegetation observed during the survey of the project
area includes post oak, blackjack oak, elm, hackberry, and mesquite trees, and mixed mid-sized
to tall grasses.
The fauna associated with this region are represented by a mixture of species from the
Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, Kansan, Balconian, and Texan biotic provinces.
Common mammalian species include white-tailed deer, opossum, eastern cottontail rabbit,
raccoon, striped skunk, hispid cotton rat, white-footed mouse, nine-banded armadillo, and fox
squirrel. Common bird species include northern bobwhite, eastern meadowlark, mourning dove,
killdeer, field sparrow, red-tailed hawk, turkey vulture, belted kingfisher, and mockingbird.
Reptile and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include six-lined racerunner, rat
snake, eastern hognose snake, Gulf Coast toad, Texas spiny lizard, rough green snake,
copperhead, western diamondback rattlesnake, green tree frog, Blanchard’s cricket frog,
diamondback water snake, Houston toad, and green anole. Although small herds of bison and
antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early historic periods, these species are
no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

8

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

Compared to other regions of Texas, North-Central Texas has been the focus of
relatively little archeological research to date; as such, the culture history of this region has yet
to be systematically defined. Much of the information generated by the reservoir investigations
has yet to be synthesized. The following discussion of the prehistory of North-Central Texas
draws on the few synthetic and summary sources available, especially those by Prikryl (1990,
1993). Story’s (1990) summary of archeology on the East Texas Gulf Coastal Plain also draws
on some of the work done in the upper Trinity basin, and Lynott’s (1981) discussion of
prehistoric adaptations in the Cross Timbers, Grand Prairie, and North-Central Plains provides
connections to an overview by Hofman et al. (1989) of southern Great Plains archeology.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 6,000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial epoch (but see Butzer 1988).
By approximately 11,000 years ago, PaleoIndian populations were present in northcentral Texas. The PaleoIndian occupation of the Upper Trinity River basin is known primarily
through diagnostic projectile points from surface collections or stratigraphically mixed contexts.
The Field Ranch Site (Jensen 1968) along the upper Elm Fork is a primary example of typical
site contexts. Clovis and Plainview points are commonly found along both Denton and Clear
creeks in the Cross Timbers region. The Lewisville Lake Site (Crook and Harris 1957, 1958,
1961) is the best known PaleoIndian site in the region. While the original radiocarbon dates (ca.
37,000 B.P.) contributed to the significance of the site, more recent work (Stanford 1981) has
resolved the controversy concerning the date of occupation. It appears that the presence of
naturally occurring lignite as either a fuel in the hearths excavated at the site or an inadvertent
inclusion contaminated the radiocarbon samples. Consequently, the usually accepted date of
10,000 to 8,000 B.P. for Clovis period occupations is probably a reasonable estimate for the first
human occupation of north-central Texas. Our knowledge of the subsistence and settlement

HJN 100015 AR

9

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

strategies used by these early occupants is extremely limited. However, recent excavations at
the Aubrey Site (Ferring 1989), a well-preserved Clovis period site in Denton County, indicate
that subsistence efforts did not focus on big game animals alone; rather, the entire range of
prairie and forest species was exploited. Whether this pattern of a more generalized foraging
subsistence system is characteristic of Clovis adaptations in the Eastern Woodlands, and the
focus on now-extinct big game species is more characteristic of a Plains adaptation, remains to
be documented.
While some PaleoIndian sites are known within this region, few have been adequately
examined (Preston 1972, 1974). The Lewisville Lake Site (Crook and Harris 1957; Stanford
1981, 1982), the Murphy Site (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory [TARL] archives), and
the Quince Site (Perttula 1994) are the only sites that have been examined in any detail. The
examination by Story (1990:176-210) of the distribution of finds of PaleoIndian projectile points
has revealed some interesting spatial and chronological trends. Clovis points cluster along the
Red River, within the Upper Trinity River drainage, and in southeastern Texas. Folsom points,
which are probably indicative of a Plains adaptation, are not well represented; rather, Dalton or
Dalton-like points are well represented in the Ouachita Mountains of western Oklahoma and
eastern Arkansas and on the adjacent Gulf Coastal Plain. Story (1990:196) postulates that this
concentration may reflect ecological or territorial factors between 8500 and 7500 B.C. San
Patrice points, which occur within the same time span, are represented but are few in number.

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (6,000 B.C. TO A.D. 700)

With the end of the Ice Age, the prehistoric residents of north-central Texas began to
develop into localized populations of efficient hunter-gatherers, exploiting localized resource
bases. This period, and the subsistence pattern that characterizes it, has come to be known as
the Archaic. The Archaic represents a long period of time that is characterized by only gradual
and minor changes in subsistence patterns, lithic technology, and projectile point styles. It was
apparently a period of strong cultural stability. Archaic populations are usually characterized as
generalized hunter-gatherers with more limited geographic ranges than preceding PaleoIndian
peoples. There is presently no evidence for the development of local cultigens during the
Archaic period in Texas; this is, however, not the case for the Ozark Highlands and other parts
of the eastern United States.
Although Archaic period components have been observed on many sites in the region
(Perttula and Nathan 1989), our knowledge of the Archaic period in the Upper Trinity River
basin has been severely hindered by the lack of data from single-component or stratified sites.
Important exceptions to this situation include the Packard, Bell, Gregory E. Johnson, Beaver,
Lamas Branch, Hill, McKensie, and Mahaffey sites in Oklahoma; the Tankersley Creek, Jake
Martin, and Yarbrough sites in Texas; and the Stark and Old Martin Place sites in Arkansas.
Recent investigations along the West Fork of the Trinity River (Peter and McGregor 1988; Yates
and Ferring 1986) indicate that primary contexts for Early and Middle Archaic sites are found
deeply buried within floodplain alluvium. Artifacts from these periods occur on terrace surfaces,
but they are frequently mixed with later materials. In fact, the initial treatment of the Archaic
period (Crook and Harris 1952, 1954), which defined the Carrollton and Elam foci, was based

10

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

upon materials recovered from such terrace contexts. Consequently, these time-space
constructs are no longer recognized as acceptable for north-central Texas (Peter and McGregor
1988; Prikryl 1987; Yates and Ferring 1986).
Recent investigations at Joe Pool Lake (Peter and McGregor 1988) and at Lake Ray
Roberts (Baird et al. 1982; Bousman and Verrett 1973; Ferring and Yates 1997; Prikryl and
Yates 1987; Skinner and Baird 1979; Yates and Ferring 1986) indicate that the Late Archaic
period is characterized by assemblages left by small bands of foraging hunters and gatherers
who occupied a locality for a limited period of time on a seasonal basis. Deer and numerous
small mammals were the primary food resources. Large pits, known as Willey Focus pits,
appear in the archeological record during the Late Archaic period. The function of these pits is
not entirely clear, although excavation of one such feature at the Sister Grove Creek site in the
East Fork of the Trinity River basin (Lynott 1975) revealed the presence of 13 features within
the pit fill, including 2 burials (one human and one dog), hearths, and small refuse pits. Based
on these excavations, it was hypothesized that the Sister Grove Creek pit could be interpreted
as the remains of a structure in which the entire community participated in ritual feasting. The
documentation of large pits associated with Late Archaic period sites in the Richland/Chambers
Creek drainage (Bruseth and Martin 1987) further suggests that important sociopolitical
changes may have been occurring during this time period. Unfortunately, the significance of
these pits remains an enigma despite their excellent documentation.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 700 TO 1600)

The beginning of the Late Prehistoric period in the Upper Trinity River basin is marked
by the appearance of arrow points. The initial date of A.D. 700 for this period is based upon
dated contexts to the west in the Brazos River drainage. Lynott (1977) suggests that the Late
Prehistoric period may be divided into early and late phases. The early phase is characterized
by sand- and grog-tempered ceramics, Scallorn and Alba arrow points, and a continuation of the
foraging subsistence system of the Late Archaic period. The late phase reflects a Southern
Plains influence with the appearance of Nocona Plain ceramics of the Henrietta Focus, various
unstemmed triangular projectile points (e.g., Fresno, Harrell, Washita), and the Perdiz point.
Evidence of horticulture and the procurement of bison also appears in sites of this period (Harris
and Harris 1970; Morris and Morris 1970).
Recent investigations of the Cobb-Pool Site at Joe Pool Lake (Peter and McGregor
1988) have resulted in a reformulation of the Late Prehistoric period. The Cobb-Pool Site
yielded house structures, roasting pits, Alba points, grog-tempered ceramics, and charred corn
cupules. Radiocarbon dates from several features indicate that the site was occupied during
the late 12th or early 13th century. Present evidence suggests that the site does not represent
an intrusive Caddoan occupation; consequently, a significant adaptive change appears to have
occurred during a middle phase of the Late Prehistoric period. It is also likely that ceramics
were not introduced into the region before this time. Whether the Cobb-Pool Site merely
represents a local anomaly or reflects a regional adaptive change remains to be documented.

HJN 100015 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

3.4

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1200 TO 1821)

Historical documentation and archeological evidence are very sparse for the
Protohistoric period in the Upper Trinity River basin. Tonkawa, Wichita, Caddo, and Comanche
all are likely to have traversed the area; however, the locations of their sites and detailed
ethnohistoric data are almost nonexistent. Although European trade items (Sollberger 1953)
appear on a limited number of sites, no protohistoric site has been thoroughly investigated, and
characterizations of Native American adaptations during this time period are conjectural at best.
A lack of documentary evidence, together with a lack of interest among ethnologists and
archeologists, has contributed to this situation.
By the 18th century, immigrant Plains Indian groups had moved into and beyond NorthCentral Texas, and their documentation by traders and explorers marks the start of the
Protohistoric period. Documentary sources suggest that the Apache, Caddo, Comanche,
Delaware, Kickapoo, Kitsai, Tonkawa, Wichita, and Yojaune traversed the region at various
times during the period (Campbell 1988; Newcomb 1961; Newcomb and Campbell 1982);
however, archeological sites that can be associated definitely with historic groups are few. The
Wichita are known to have moved into Texas from Oklahoma and Kansas in the early 1700s.
Sites attributable to the Wichita have been identified at the edges of North-Central Texas.
Among these is the Stansbury site in Hill County, now inundated by Lake Whitney (Stephenson
1970). Excavations at the site produced burials, house structures, storage pits, and a variety of
aboriginal artifacts, along with European ceramics, glass beads, metal arrow points, and flintlock
musket parts. A cluster of Wichita sites also occurs to the north along the Red River in
Montague County. These sites occur on both the Oklahoma and Texas sides of the river.
Woodall (1967) excavated one of these sites, named the Upper Tucker site, which produced
artifacts and features similar to those discovered at the Stansbury site. Wichita sites both on
the Brazos and Red rivers were situated atop high terraces that overlook the rivers.

3.5

HISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO PRESENT)

The historic era of north-central Texas began with the entrance of early European
explorers into the area and can be divided into 3 broad time periods—Spanish and French
exploration and colonization (ca. A.D. 1500 to 1821), settlement (A.D. 1821 to 1865), and postCivil War and modern development (A.D. 1865 to present). This section presents a brief
overview of the history of north-central and eastern Texas and short descriptions of settlements
in the vicinity of the project area.
The first European in Texas was likely Alvarez de Piñeda, who entered the area in 1519
(Hunt et al. 1992:8). In 1528, Cabeza de Vaca was shipwrecked at or near Galveston Island
and subsequently taken captive by Native Americans living in the area. His captors allowed him
to accompany them on their travels inland, but he recorded very little information about the
country or its inhabitants during his 6-year stay (Richner and Bagot 1978). The first European
to visit north-central Texas may have been Luis de Moscoso del Alvorado. Leading Hernando

12

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

de Soto’s men after de Soto’s death at the Mississippi River in 1541, de Moscoso may have
crossed the Trinity River 1 along its upper reaches (Reese et al. 1986:154), perhaps passing
through the Pilot Point area (Lebo 1990:61). During the early 1730s, French traders operating
out of New Orleans began entering East Texas. They “procured buffalo and deer skins,”
exchanged firearms and a variety of European trade goods with Native American groups, stole
from the Spanish, and also “captured Apache women and children, horses, [and] mules”
(Richner and Bagot 1978:77). An active trade system was soon established.
F

F

The activities of the Spanish and French in East Texas during the ensuing 2 centuries
were prompted by quite different objectives. Spain claimed the area in the late 1500s but did
little to colonize it because East Texas had no precious metals, the commodity that provided the
primary thrust of Spanish colonial activity at that time (Richner and Bagot 1978:77). In contrast
to the Spanish, who sought control of the territories they claimed, the French “were more
interested in trade than territory; they were not much concerned with converting, incorporating,
or pushing the natives off their land” (Fehrenbach 1968:41). The Spanish considered French
trade with the indigenous groups of East Texas to be a security threat, an incursion into a
strategic buffer zone between Spanish and French territory. In 1685, Spain began an effort to
set up missions and gain a secure foothold in that buffer zone. This program of conversion and
assimilation “was founded on the idea that the local people could be converted to Christianity
and thus controlled. The converted Indians could then be used as a buffer to stop the French
encroachment” (Richner and Bagot 1978:77). The impetus for this program was an accidental
landing at Matagorda Bay by the French explorer René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle
(Fehrenbach 1968:39, 47). The Spanish program was neither successful nor long-lasting. Only
2 missions were established, both on the Neches River, and the program was abandoned by
1693 (Richner and Bagot 1978:77).
It was 20 years before another French incursion drew the Spanish back to East Texas.
In 1713, Saint Denis, a Canadian with great powers of persuasion, was sent by the governor of
Louisiana up the Red River to build a fort on land claimed by the Spanish. Thus, Natchitoches
was founded (Fehrenbach 1968:41-42) in present-day Louisiana, territory then claimed by
Spain. Saint Denis believed that the French and Spanish could coexist in the area—that the
presence of the Spanish could actually benefit the French. Although trade with the Spanish
outposts was declared to be technically illegal, such prohibitions were seldom enforced, and
Saint Denis was “hopeful of a much more lucrative business if permanent Spanish garrisons
could be induced to remain in Texas” (Fehrenbach 1968:42). With his encouragement and aid,
4 new mission-forts were set up in Texas, 1 of which was at Nacogdoches. In the process of
conducting business from Natchitoches with his Spanish father-in-law at Nacogdoches, Saint
Denis helped delimit an unofficial boundary between the Spanish and French claims, with the
Sabine River considered as the eastern limit of the former and the Red River the western extent
of the latter. The good relations came to a quick end in 1721, when the new governor of

1

The river was then called “Daycoa” by some Native American groups, “Arkikosa” by others. It received its European
name in 1690 from the Spanish officer Alonso de Leon, who called it “La Santisima Trinidad, The Most Holy Trinity.”
(Reese et al. 1986:153).

HJN 100015 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Coahuila had Saint Denis arrested for trespassing while in the Rio Grande area on business
(Fehrenbach 1968:42-43, 51; Richner and Bagot 1978:78).
The Spanish then developed a much more ambitious, and better funded, plan for
permanent settlement in Texas. According to Fehrenbach, “[a] great semicircle of presidiomissions was planned to stretch up from northern Mexico, generally reaching across the middle
area of Texas on a line from Laredo to the Sabine River” (1968:49). The effort to colonize the
east portion of this semicircle ended in 1719 when the Spanish withdrew, in part because it was
thought that the French were about to attack (Richner and Bagot 1978:78). The Spanish
returned in 1721 when the Marquis de Aquayo led a large military force into the area and
reoccupied the Spanish missions. Spanish decree required that Spanish settlers leave the area
in 1773, but petitions garnered permission to set up a new colony on the Trinity River in 1774.
Nuestra Señora del Pilar de Bucareli may have been established in present-day Madison
County at the intersection of the Camino Real (now State Highway 21) and the Trinity River.
Bucareli was abandoned in 1779, a move largely prompted by the settlers’ fear of the
Comanches in the area (Richner and Bagot 1978:78-81).
France had ceded Louisiana to Spain in 1762, but it was returned to France at the
beginning of the 19th century, then sold to the United States in 1803, making it much easier for
Americans to enter Spanish territory. The danger of incursion then lay not in military campaigns
or the extension of trade networks, but in the gradual encroachment of settlers. According to
one settler:
A carbine and a little maize in a sack are enough for an American to wander about in the
forest alone for a whole month. With his carbine, he kills the wild cattle and deer for food
and defends himself from the savages. The maize dampened serves him in lieu of
bread. With some tree trunks crossed, one above another, in the shape of a square he
raises a house, and even a fort that is impregnable to the savage by building on a story
crosswise above the ground floor. The cold does not affright him. When a family tires of
one location, it moves to another, and there it settles with the same ease (Newton and
Gambrell 1932:53).

To slow the incursion, Spain set up an outpost on the Trinity River a few miles south of
abandoned Bucareli and called it Villa de Santisima Trinidad de Salcedo. There was little
interest in resettlement among those living in central and west Texas, but a few residents,
including 23 immigrants from Louisiana and 14 people from San Antonio, moved to the area in
1805. Between 1811 and 1813, control of the settlement alternated between the Spanish and
the Mexican revolutionaries living in Texas. Then, in 1813, Spanish Captain Augustus Magee
“marched into Salcedo, executed the inhabitants, and destroyed the settlement” (Richner and
Bagot 1978:88).
The first successful large-scale colonization effort in Texas was initiated in 1821 by
Moses S. Austin, who convinced the Mexican authorities that it would be to their advantage to
let him settle American colonists in the region (Fehrenbach 1968:134-135). Moses Austin died
shortly after winning approval of his plan, but his son continued in the effort and created a
center of Anglo settlement in central Texas. This helped establish Texas as the new western
frontier (Lebo 1990:61), easing the way for greater immigration to East Texas. Mexico also won

14

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

its independence from Spain in 1821, which further improved prospects for settlement of East
Texas since the new Republic of Mexico relaxed immigration and land policies (Reese et al.
1986:154). In addition to the Austins’ efforts to the south, independent settlers were moving into
the Upper Trinity River basin and establishing new homesteads along the river and its tributaries
(Richner and Bagot 1978:90).
During the settlement of Texas, the predominant Indian tribes in the Navarro County
area were the Iones, Kickapoos, and Comanches. 2 One of the first Anglo groups to settle in the
area, the families of John, Silas, and Ben Parker, built a fort near the site of present-day
Groesbeck (Limestone County) on the Navasota River in 1833. On May 19, 1836, the fort was
attacked by Kiowa and Comanche Indians, and the settlers were either killed or taken captive.
The first Mexican land grant in the area that became Navarro County was to Thomas J.
Chambers on September 23, 1834. His grant consisted of 35,424 acres located 14 miles east
of the site of present-day Corsicana. Chambers served as surveyor, counselor, and supreme
judge for the Mexican officials and, in 1836, received an empresario contract to bring
800 families to Texas. In 1836, George Washington Hill was sent to the area to be an agent to
the Kickapoo Indians. He built a trading post south of the site of present-day Spring Hill. In
October 1838, a surveying party of about 24 men arrived at the trading post and set their camp
1 mile west. On the morning of October 4, the surveyors were attacked by the Kickapoos. In
what is now called the Battle Creek fight, all but 7 of the surveyors were killed. A rescue party
was sent back to bury the dead, but only bones were found. A mass grave was dug about
1 mile west of the site of present-day Dawson.
F

F

In the spring of 1839, more families moved in and settled around the trading post. Two
growing settlements were Porter’s Bluff and Dresden. All of the legal work for the 2 sites was
conducted at Franklin, the county seat of Robertson County, 125 miles south of Hill’s Trading
Post. People in Porter's Bluff and Dresden felt they needed their own county with a local
authority to handle legal matters. In the spring of 1846, a group led by Edward H. Tarrant, a
Texas Ranger, met at the home of Thomas I. Smith. The men at the meeting drew up a petition
for a new county to be made out of Robertson County, with a temporary county seat to be
located at the home of W. R. Howe. Clinton M. Winkler, a local lawyer, presented the petition to
the state legislature in Austin, and it was approved on April 25, 1846. The new county included
the portion of Robertson County from the east bank of the Brazos River to the northwest corner
of Limestone County, extending to the Trinity River and north to Dallas County. It was named
Navarro County in honor of José Antonio Navarro, a Texas patriot. The county seat remained
at Howe’s home until his death in 1847. On February 8, 1848, a committee headed by Tarrant
voted to set up a permanent county seat at the halfway point between Porter’s Bluff and
Dresden. Rev. Hampton McKinney was already living at the site and later constructed the
McKinney Inn at the location. On February 25, 1848, Thomas Smith donated 100 acres of land
at the McKinney site, and C.C. Taylor was employed to construct a town plot. José Antonio
Navarro chose the name Corsicana in honor of the Isle of Corsica, his father's birthplace. The

2

The following history of Navarro County, Texas, derives from Love (1933), Putnam (1975-1984), and
Taylor (1962), as summarized in TSHA (2010).

HJN 100015 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

town is located 45 miles southeast of Dallas on Interstate Highway 45. Over the next 20 years,
the original Navarro County was divided into the following counties: Limestone in 1846, Ellis in
1847, Tarrant in 1847, part of McLennan in 1850, Hill in 1853, Johnson in 1854, Parker in 1855,
Palo Pinto in 1856, and Hood in 1866.
In 1850, Navarro County had a population of 2,190. Of this number, 1,943 were white
and 247 were black. By the beginning of the Civil War, the population had risen to 5,996, of
which 4,105 were white. In 1861, there were 1,920 slaves in the county, and the residents, on
February 23, 1861, voted for secession by a vote of 213 for and 3 against. More than 60% of
the white males in Navarro County wore the uniform of the Confederacy. The first military
company organized in the county was the Navarro Rifles. The group consisted of 90 men, and
a training camp was set up in Spring Hill on March 6, 1862. In the fall of that year, a second
company was organized, and, in 1863, 3 more were started. The Navarro Rifles left Texas in
1861 and fought with Hood’s Texas Brigade in Virginia. Throughout the Civil War and
continuing through the turn of the century, the county population rose. In 1870, the population
was 8,879, and it increased 244% within the next 10 years to 21,702. By 1900, the population
was 43,374. Private schools were first established in the 1850s. In 1865, a military school was
built in Corsicana, and a female college was established in 1880. The Corsicana public school
system opened in 1880, and the first class graduated in 1884. Growth in Navarro County was
helped greatly in 1871 when the Houston and Texas Central Railway came through. In 1880,
the Southwestern and Cotton Belt railways were added, making it easier for businessmen to
ship their goods to market. Most businesses were in 2 areas—farming and, after 1895, oil. By
1880, there were 2,793 farms valued at $2.2 million in the county. The main crops grown
included cotton, corn, tobacco, peaches, sweet potatoes, and pecans. The number of farms
and their values increased through 1900. Livestock production also increased; cattle, hogs, and
poultry were raised. Oil was discovered in the county in 1894. In 1895, the first railroad tank
car of oil was shipped from Corsicana by the Corsicana Petroleum Oil Company. By 1898,
Corsicana had a refinery that produced 500 barrels a day. Petroleum production would
continue to contribute to the area's economy for more than 100 years, the longest continuous oil
production of any Texas county. Along with agriculture and oil, there were a growing number of
manufacturers in the late 1800s. Manufacturing establishments grew 250% between 1860 and
1900. The number of employees jumped from 20 in 1860 to 655 in 1900.
By 1900, most religious denominations in the county had established their own
churches. The Baptists and Methodists recorded deeds to church property as early as 1851. In
May 1853, 20 members of the Presbyterian Church met. Mr. and Mrs. John Noonan donated
land for a Catholic church in 1870, and, in 1871, the St. John Episcopal Church was organized.
The First Christian Church was formed in 1888, the Church of Christ in 1889, and the first
Jewish synagogue was built in 1900. Newspapers began publishing in the county before the
1900s. The papers include the Prairie Blade in 1859, the Corsicana Times in 1857, the Courier
in 1880, and the Democrat in 1885. The Daily Sun, started on March 2, 1897, was still in
operation in the 1980s.
The county prospered from 1900 to 1930. The population increased from 47,070 in
1900 to 60,507 by 1930. Farm production showed a similar rise; in 1930, 6,513 farms produced

16

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

88,017 bales of cotton. Manufacturing grew also, but began to decline after 1920 when
53 establishments fell to 43 in 1930. Under President Franklin Roosevelt, the Work Projects
Administration built roads through the county in the 1930s. Other works included picnic tables,
a fishing pier, and a boathouse at Lake Halbert. From 1930 to 1970, population and agriculture
decreased. The population declined to 51,308 in 1940 and to a 20th-century low of 31,027 by
1970. The number of farms in the county decreased to 3,158 by 1950 and continued to decline
to 1,796 by 1969. Cotton production dropped from 70,652 bales in 1950 to 6,970 bales in 1969.
Livestock dropped to 1,599 cattle and 1,570 hogs in 1969.
After 1970, Navarro County's population began to rise again; by 1980, there were
35,600 people living in the area. Though the total number of farms decreased to 1,464 in 1982,
the production of cotton increased to 8,477 bales. Cattle increased to 90,596 that year.
Manufacturing, which reached a low of 26 establishments in 1940, had risen steadily since then.
The county business patterns show the most growth in employment from 1953 to 1980 in
construction, wholesale trade, finances, and services. The primary crops grown in the early
1980s were oats, wheat, hay, sorghum, and cotton. Vegetables included potatoes and sweet
potatoes; peaches and pecans were also grown. Livestock included cattle, milk cows, and
hogs. Industries included oil, gas extraction, road construction, meat packing, fruit and
vegetable canning, the manufacture of prepared foods, men’s hats, rubber products, oilfield
machinery, and glass containers. Five railway lines cut through the county, and major roads
included Interstate Highway 45, US Highway 287, and State Highway 75.
The census counted 39,926 people living in Navarro County in 1990 and 45,124 in 2000.
In the latter year, about 66% were Anglo, 17% were black, and 16% were Hispanic. In the early
21st century, a diverse array of manufacturing concerns, agribusinesses, and oilfield operations
was the central element of the area’s economy. In 2002, the county had 1,864 farms and
ranches covering 537,104 acres, 49% of which were devoted to pasture, 42% to crops, and 6%
to woodlands. In that year, local farmers and ranchers earned $37 million; livestock sales
accounted for $25 million of the total. Beef cattle, cotton, hay, grain sorghum, wheat, herbs, and
corn were the chief agricultural products. More than 316,000 barrels of oil and 430,000 cubic
feet of gas-well gas were produced in the county in 2004; by the end of that year, 218 million
barrels of oil had been taken from county lands since 1894.
Corsicana (2000 population, 24,485) is the county’s seat of government and its only
sizeable city. Smaller towns include Kerens (1,681), Blooming Grove (833), Dawson (852),
Frost (648), Mildred (405), Oak Valley (401), and Retreat (339).

HJN 100015 AR

17

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

4.0 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

The cultural resource survey described in this report was undertaken with 3 primary
research goals in mind:
1. To locate and record cultural resources occurring within the designated project area
2. To provide a preliminary assessment of the significance of these resources regarding
their potential for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and for
designation as State Archeological Landmarks (SALs)
3. To make recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL assessments
The first of these goals was accomplished by means of a review of documentation on file
on the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, the
National Park Service’s (NPS) online National Register Information System (NRIS), the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the General Land Office (GLO), and the Texas
State Historical Association’s (TSHA) Handbook of Texas Online, as well as a program of
intensive and reconnaissance-level survey of the project area. Three historic-age industrial
buildings are present on the existing Lake Halbert WTP facility; these structures are discussed
in the following chapter, though their eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP or for designation as
SALs has not been assessed. The rest of this chapter presents the methodological background
for the current investigations and the specific survey methods used in the field.

4.1

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to conducting the archeological fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed existing
archival documentation to acquire information on (1) previous cultural resource investigations
conducted in the vicinity of the project area, and (2) any previously documented cultural
resource properties in or near the survey corridor. Six previously recorded archeological sites
have been documented within approximately 1.6 km (1.0 mi) of the project area (Table 1). One
of these previous sites, 41NV527, consists of a sparse aboriginal lithic scatter, while the
remaining sites date to the early to mid 20th century. The largest of the historic-age sites,
41NV662, broadly encompasses the entire Corsicana Oil Field. Two of the remaining historic
sites, 41NV660 and 41NV684, consist of a historic-age structure and a pile of construction

HJN 100015 AR

19

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Table 1. Summary of Previously Recorded Archeological Sites near Project Area
Site
No.

Cultural
Affiliation

Site Size

NRHP
Eligibility

Reference

41NV527

Unknown prehistoric

Lithic scatter

60 x 80 m

Unknown

TARL site form (1985)

41NV660

Early to mid 20th
century

Historic oil field workers
structure

25 x 15 m

Ineligible

TARL site form (1991)

41NV661

Early to mid 20th
century

Historic farmstead

100 x 75 m

Ineligible

TARL site form (1991)

41NV662

Early to mid 20th
century

Historic oil field (wells,
batteries, sludge pits)

1,500 sq km

Ineligible

TARL site form (1991)

41NV684

Early to mid 20th
century

Brick scatter

20 x 20 m

Ineligible

TARL site form (2006)

41NV685

Mid 20th century

Historic hunting blind

5x5m

Ineligible

TARL site form (2006)

km
m
NRHP
TARL

Site Type

Kilometers
Meters
National Register of Historic Places
Texas Archeological research laboratory

debris, respectively, associated with the historic oil field. One of the historic-age sites,
41NV661, consists of the remains of a historic-age farmstead, and 1 site, 41NV685, consists of
a dilapidated shack with hinged windows that appears to have functioned as a hunting blind.
None of the previously recorded sites are located in the immediate vicinity of the current project
area.
Several previous cultural resource surveys have been conducted in the vicinity of the
project area, including the properties adjoining the current project area to the west and
southwest. The current project area, however, has not been previously surveyed for cultural
resources.

4.2

SURVEY METHODS

On February 25, 2010, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The survey consisted of a combination of intensive and reconnaissance-level
survey activities. Due to the extent of prior impacts on the existing 4.7-ha (11.7-ac) Lake
Halbert WTP site, Horizon performed a reconnaissance-level survey, consisting of pedestrian
walkover with judgmental shovel testing, of this portion of the overall project area. The 5.9-ha
(14.5-ac) proposed expansion area located on the adjoining property to the northeast of the
existing facility consisted of an open cattle pasture and appeared to be considerably more intact
than the existing facility. The proposed expansion area was intensively surveyed for cultural
resources, consisting of pedestrian walkover with systematic shovel testing.

20

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

The landscape within the existing 4.7-ha (11.7-ac) Lake Halbert WTP facility was
substantially modified during the original construction of the facility and over the years of its
operation (Figure 3). The Lake Halbert Dam, which consists of a 1.1-km- (0.7-mi-) long earthen
dam constructed across the Elm Creek floodplain, runs along the southwestern edge of the
WTP facility (Figures 4 to 5). Within the boundaries of the existing 4.7-ha (11.7-ac) plant facility,
numerous buildings, driveways, parking lots, and pieces of equipment have been installed; the
landscape has been brought to grade; several wash water treatment and recovery lagoons have
been excavated, and the resulting soils have been used to construct a series of linear
embankments on the site. Three primary industrial buildings have been constructed on the site,
including a small water filter building (designated herein as “Building A”) (Figures 6 to 7); a large
main office and plant building with adjoining water treatment ponds (designated herein as
“Building B”) (Figures 8 to 9); and a tin-covered machinery storage and parking shed (Figure 10)
(also see Figure 2). At least Buildings A and B, if not also Building C, appear to date to the
original 1924 construction of the WTP facility, though they have since been modified to varying
degrees. Toward the northwestern end of the existing WTP facility, a large, flat basin had been
previously excavated, with the resulting soils used to form an elevated earthen berm along the
northern boundary of the basin, which is currently used by the local police department as a
shooting range (Figures 11 to 12). A large, J-shaped wash water recovery lagoon occupies
most of the southeastern portion of the existing WTP site (see Figure 2). Proposed activities on
the existing WTP site associated with the current undertaking include constructing new
industrial buildings, installing some sediment basins in the location of the current shooting
range, constructing a new clear well just northwest of the current location of Building C (see
Figure 2), and installing necessary appurtenant facilities, such as overhead wiring, on-ground
equipment, and subsurface pipelines and cabling. Reconnaissance-level survey activities
conducted within the boundaries of the existing WTP facility consisted of a pedestrian walkover
with surface inspection, identification and extensive photo-documentation of existing impacts,
and judgmental shovel testing in selected areas to verify the extent of impacts observed during
the surface inspection.
The 5.9-ha (14.5-ac) proposed expansion area consists of the property adjoining the
northeastern boundary of the existing Lake Halbert WTP. At the time of the survey, this area
consisted of an open cattle pasture (Figure 13) that drops off onto the Elm Creek floodplain
(Figure 14). The floodplain area is situated in the easternmost portion of the proposed
expansion area and consists of a broad, marshy lowland that was inundated with shallow pools
of standing water (Figure 15). Proposed activities on this portion of the project area include
construction of new wash water recovery lagoons and associated channels or pipelines.
Intensive survey activities conducted on the proposed WTP expansion tract consisted of
pedestrian walkover with surface inspection and systematic shovel testing.
In general, intensive cultural resource survey activities entail a pedestrian walkover with
surface inspection as well as excavation of subsurface probes, such as shovel tests and/or
backhoe trenches. Reconnaissance-level survey activities consisted of a pedestrian walkover
with surface inspection, identification and photo-documentation of existing impacts, and
judgmental shovel testing conducted in selected areas to verify the extent of impacts identified
during the surface survey. For intensive surveys, the Texas State Minimum Archeological

HJN 100015 AR

21

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 3. Overview of Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Facility (Facing Southeast)

Figure 4. Overview of Lake Halbert Southwest of Project Area (Facing Southwest)

22

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

Figure 5. Lake Halbert Dam Earthen Berm and Gravel Driveway to Plant (Facing West)

Figure 6. Front Façade of Building A (Facing Southeast)

HJN 100015 AR

23

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 7. Rear and Side Façades of Building A (Facing West)

Figure 8. Front Façade of Building B (Facing North)
24

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

Figure 9. Rear Façade of Building B, Water Ponds, and Chemical Tanks (Facing East)

Figure 10. Covered Machinery Storage Structure (Building C) (Facing North)

HJN 100015 AR

25

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 11. Shooting Range near Northwest End of Plant Property (Facing Southeast)

Figure 12. Earthen Berm along Northeastern Side of Shooting Range (Facing Southeast)

26

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

Figure 13. Cattle Pasture in Proposed Expansion Area (Facing West)

Figure 14. View Along Edge of High Ground at Dropoff to Marshy Area (Facing South)

HJN 100015 AR

27

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

Figure 15. Marshy Area in Proposed Expansion Area North of Plant (Facing South)

Survey Standards (TSMASS) for cultural resource surveys state that, for block-area projects, a
minimum of 1 subsurface probe per 2 acres is required in a project area of this size unless field
conditions warrant excavation of more probes (e.g., due to the presence of culturally sensitive
areas) or less probes (e.g., due to extensive prior disturbances or cultural low-probability areas).
In the event that a probe yields evidence of subsurface cultural deposits, additional probes may
be necessary to determine the horizontal and vertical extent of the subsurface deposits
associated with the cultural resource. As intensive survey activities were restricted to the
proposed 5.9-ha (14.5-ac) expansion area, a minimum of 7 subsurface probes would be
required within this portion of the project area. Horizon excavated a total of 16 shovel tests
during the survey, including 13 tests in the proposed 5.9-ha (14.5-ac) expansion area and
3 tests on the existing WTP site, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project
area of this size (Figure 16). In general, shovel tests measured approximately 30 cm (12 in) in
diameter and were excavated to a target depth of 1.0 m (3.3 ft) below ground surface, to the top
of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable, and all sediments were
screened through 6.35-millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth. In practice, all shovel tests
were terminated at depths of 5 to 15 cm below surface (cmbs) due to the presence of dense
clay sediments on and near the modern ground surface. Specific shovel test data are
summarized in Appendix A.
In addition to shovel testing, the TSMASS require backhoe trenching in stream terraces
and other areas with the potential to contain buried cultural materials at depths below those that

28

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

Figure 16. Locations of Shovel Tests in Project Area

HJN 100015 AR

29

Chapter 4.0: Research Objectives and Methodology

shovel tests are capable of reaching (approximately 80 to 100 cmbs or more in sandy sediments
or 40 to 60 cmbs in clayey sediments). It was determined during the pedestrian survey that
deep Holocene-age alluvial sediments that would require backhoe trenching were not present
within the APE. Consequently, backhoe trenching was not conducted within the APE during the
survey, and the pedestrian walkover with shovel testing is considered to constitute an adequate
survey technique for assessing the potential of the project area to contain cultural resources.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic
log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources.
Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and
non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same
location in which they were found. As no collectible cultural resources were observed during the
survey, the collections policy was not brought into play.
The Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all subsurface probes,
including shovel tests and backhoe trenches, were determined using hand-held Garmin
ForeTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices based on the North American Datum of
1983 (NAD 83).
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 Code
of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3. While the TSMASS requirements for subsurface probes
were not met for the project area as a whole, they were exceeded on the portion of the property
that was intensively surveyed.

30

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

The City is proposing to construct a new water treatment facility on the site of its existing
Lake Halbert WTP located below Lake Halbert dam approximately 7.2 km (4.5 mi) southeast of
Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas. The City is proposing to construct a larger and more
modern plant on the same site and ultimately decommission the existing Lake Halbert WTP. In
addition to the proposed facilities that would be constructed on the existing WTP site, some
expanded facilities would be constructed on the adjoining property immediately northeast of the
existing WTP site. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed project therefore consists
of the existing 4.7-ha (11.7-ac) Lake Halbert WTP and a 5.9-ha (14.5-ac) proposed expansion
area located adjacent to the northeastern property boundary of the existing facility, covering a
total area of 10.6 ha (26.2 ac).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the City, a political subdivision of the
state of Texas, on land that is currently owned and operated by the City. In addition, the City
proposes to utilize funding provided by the TWDB. Consequently, the project falls under the
jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. While no application for federal permits has yet
been submitted, it is possible that the proposed undertaking may require federal permitting by
the USACE under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, in which case the proposed project
would also fall under the jurisdiction of the NHPA. As the project represents a publicly
sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact significant cultural resources, the City was
required to provide for a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the project’s APE and
to assess the project’s possible impacts on any significant cultural resources in the APE.
On February 25, 2010, Horizon archeologist Jared Wiersema, under the overall direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed a cultural resources survey of the APE to
locate any cultural resource properties that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. The survey consisted of a combination of intensive and reconnaissance-level
survey activities. Due to the extent of prior impacts on the existing 4.7-ha (11.7-ac) Lake
Halbert WTP site, Horizon performed a reconnaissance-level survey, consisting of pedestrian
walkover with judgmental shovel testing, of this portion of the overall project area. The 5.9-ha
(14.5-ac) proposed expansion area located on the adjoining property to the northeast of the
existing facility consisted of an open cattle pasture and appeared to be considerably more intact
than the existing facility. The proposed expansion area was intensively surveyed for cultural
resources, consisting of pedestrian walkover with systematic shovel testing.

HJN 100015 AR

31

Chapter 5.0: Results of Investigations

Within the boundaries of the existing 4.7-ha (11.7-ac) plant facility, numerous buildings,
driveways, parking lots, and pieces of equipment have been installed; the landscape has been
brought to grade; several wash water treatment and recovery lagoons have been excavated,
and the resulting soils have been used to construct a series of linear embankments on the site.
Of the various structures that have been built on the WTP, 3 primary industrial buildings are
extant, at least 2 of which appear to date to the original construction of the WTP in 1924.
Building A is a small, single-story, gabled water filter building with an open interior that
faces onto the main gravel driveway toward the northwest (see Figures 6 and 7). The building
is a brick structure with entrances on the northwest and southwest facades that can be easily
removed to move large equipment and tanks into and out of the building. The superstructure of
the building appears to be original, though the original tile roof was, according to the current
plant manager, reportedly replaced with a new roof; the front and rear doors have been
replaced with modern glass commercial doors; and the water-processing equipment in and
around the structure is modern. The windows, however, appear to be original.
Building B consists of a complex of 2 adjoining buildings (see Figures 8 and 9). The
smaller building is a small, single-story, gabled brick structure that houses the main offices of
the WTP. The building is a brick structure with its main entrance facing the gravel plant
driveway to the southeast and small equipment loading dock or storage area in the rear. The
larger building, which houses the water treatment plant, is a flat-topped, 2-story brick structure
with a network of sediment filtration lagoons behind it. While the superstructure of both
buildings appears to be original, their original tile roofs have reportedly been replaced, doors
and windows have been replaced, and the water processing equipment in and around the
structures is modern.
Building C is an open-sided equipment storage shed with open sides and a corrugated
tin roof (see Figure 10). The structure may be original to the property, but it does not exhibit any
distinctive architectural characteristics.
While the primary industrial buildings on the existing Lake Halbert WTP appear to be
original to the 1924 construction of the facility, they have been modified to varying degrees. At
The eligibility of these historic-age buildings for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as
SALs has not been assessed; as such, they are currently considered to be of unknown
eligibil9ity.
Aside from the abovementioned buildings, no other historic or prehistoric cultural
resources were observed within the APE, either on the modern ground surface or in any of
16 shovel tests excavated during the survey.

32

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:



Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.



Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.



Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with
important historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of
Texas, archeological resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the
significance of archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs,
respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory
process.

HJN 100015 AR

33

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

6.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant.
This concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures,
districts, or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent
research questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development
and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

34

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

6.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ARCHEOLOGICAL LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are
located in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any
county, city, or political subdivision of the state are state archeological landmarks and are
eligible for designation.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under
Section 26.8 of Part 2 of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may
designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

6.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

The APE was traversed by Horizon’s archeologist, the modern ground surface was
thoroughly inspected for cultural resources, and a total of 16 shovel tests were excavated. The
survey consisted of a combination of intensive and reconnaissance-level survey activities. Due
to the extent of prior impacts on the existing 4.7-ha (11.7-ac) Lake Halbert WTP site, Horizon
performed a reconnaissance-level survey, consisting of pedestrian walkover with judgmental
shovel testing, of this portion of the overall project area. The 5.9-ha (14.5-ac) proposed
expansion area located on the adjoining property to the northeast of the existing facility
consisted of an open cattle pasture and appeared to be considerably more intact than the
existing facility. The proposed expansion area was intensively surveyed for cultural resources,
consisting of pedestrian walkover with systematic shovel testing. While the TSMASS
requirements for shovel testing densities were not met for the 10.6-ha (26.2-ac) project area as

HJN 100015 AR

35

Chapter 6.0: Summary and Recommendations

a whole, they were exceeded on the 5.9-ha (14.5-ac) portion of the property that was intensively
surveyed.
Within the boundaries of the existing 4.7-ha (11.7-ac) plant facility, numerous buildings,
driveways, parking lots, and pieces of equipment have been installed; the landscape has been
brought to grade; several wash water treatment and recovery lagoons have been excavated,
and the resulting soils have been used to construct a series of linear embankments on the site.
Of the various structures that have been built on the WTP, 2 primary industrial buildings—
including (1) the main wastewater plant building and associated office complex and water
treatment ponds and (2) a small water filter building—are extant that appear to date to the
original construction of the WTP in 1924. While these 2 buildings appear to be original to the
1924 construction of the facility, they have not been assessed for architectural integrity or for
their possible association with events or personages of historic importance. Thus, at the
present time, they are considered to be of unknown eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP and for
designation as SALs. All proposed construction on the WTP facility associated with the current
action would occur on adjacent portions of the overall Lake Halbert WTP property northeast and
northwest of the existing plant site on which the historic-age buildings are situated. Aside from
gradually decommissioning the existing industrial buildings on the site, the City currently has no
plans to conduct any construction-related activities on the existing plant site. Thus, the historicage building complex on the Lake Halbert WTP site would be avoided during the current
proposed undertaking and would not be impacted as a result of the proposed action.
Aside from the abovementioned buildings, no other historic or prehistoric cultural
resources were observed within the APE, either on the modern ground surface or in any of
16 shovel tests excavated during the survey.

6.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good faith effort to identify
historic properties within the APE. No cultural resources were identified that meet the criteria for
listing on the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC
26, and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed
undertaking. In the event that the City of Corsicana proposes any future actions on the Lake
Water WTP facility that would potentially affect the existing historic-age buildings and related
facilities, the City would need to provide for an assessment of the NRHP and SAL eligibility of
the historic-age buildings. It is recommended that the proposed project be cleared to proceed
as currently designed. However, in the unlikely event that any human remains or burial furniture
are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in
the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately and the
THC and/or USACE, as appropriate, should be notified of the discovery.

36

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

7.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J. M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Arbingast, S. A., L. Kennamer, R. Ryan, J. Buchanan, W. Hezlep, L. Ellis, T. Jordan, C.
Granger, and C. Zlatkovich
1973
Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.
Baird, L., M. B. Cliff, K. Fimple, J. Garber, K. Hahn, A. Pitchford, J. Renner, V. Scarborough, D.
G. Shaddox, K. Singleton, and S. A. Skinner
1982
Archaeology and History of Lake Ray Roberts, Vol. 2: Construction Area Testing.
Cultural Resources Report No. 82-9. Environmental Consultants, Inc., Dallas, Texas.
Blair, W. F.
1950
Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bousman, C. B., and L. Verrett
1973
An Archaeological Reconnaissance of Aubrey Reservoir. Archaeology Research
Program, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas.
Bruseth, J. E., and W. A. Martin (editors)
1987
The Bird Point Island and Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and Theoretical
Contributions to North Central Texas Archaeology. Richland Creek Technical Series,
Vol. II. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas,
Texas.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V. M. Bryant, Jr., and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Butzer, K. W.
1988
A Marginality Model to Explain Major Spatial and Temporal Gaps in the Old and New
World Pleistocene Settlement Records. Geoarcheology 3:193-203.

HJN 100015 AR

37

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Campbell, T.N.
1988
Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico: Selected Writing of Thomas
Nolan Campbell. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, with the cooperation of
the Department of Anthropology, the College of Liberal Arts, and the Institute of Latin
American Studies, The University of Texas at Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Crook, W. W., Jr., and R. K. Harris
1952
Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: Carrollton and Elam Foci. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 23:7-38.
1954

Traits of the Trinity Aspect Archaic: Carrollton and Elam Foci. The Record 12(1):216.

1957

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man near Lewisville, Texas, and Associated Faunal
Material. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 28:7-79.

1958

Pleistocene Campsite near Lewisville, Texas. American Antiquity 23:233-246.

1961

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville Site. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 32:327-330.

Dillehay, T. D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol 2. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D. F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Fehrenbach, T. R.
1968
Lone Star: A History of Texas and Texans. Macmillan, New York.
Ferring, C. R.
1989
The Aubrey Clovis Site: A Paleoindian Locality in the Upper Trinity River Basin,
Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:9-11.
Ferring, C. R., and B. C. Yates
1997
Holocene Geoarchaeology and Prehistory of the Ray Roberts Lake Area, North
Central Texas. US Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.
Fisher, W.L.
1972
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Dallas Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

38

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

Hanson, A., and F. F. Wheeler
1969
Soil Survey of Collin County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station.
Harris, R. K., and I. M. Harris
1970
A Bison Kill on Dixon’s Branch, Site 27A2-5, Dallas County, Texas. The Record
27(1):1-2.
Haynes, C. V., Jr., D. J. Donahue, A. J. T. Hull, and T. H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point PaleoIndian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hofman, J.L., R.L. Brooks, J.S. Hays, D.W. Owsley, R.L. Jantz, M.K. Marks, and M.H. Manhein
1989
From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great Plains.
Research Series No. 35. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Hunt, S. M., D. Shanabrook, and D. E. Peter
1992
Cultural Resources Investigations at the City of McKinney Solid Waste Disposal Site,
Collin County, Texas. Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations, No. 35. Geo-Marine,
Inc., Plano, Texas.
Jensen, H. P. Jr.
1968
Report on Excavations at the Field Ranch Site (41CO10), Cooke County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 39:133-146.
Jurney, D. H., F. Winchell, and R. W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas. US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R. L., and L. C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country:
Antiquity 53:231-244.

Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility.

American

Lebo, S. A.
1990
Historic Background. In Archaeological Survey of the Lewisville Lake Shoreline,
Denton County, Texas, by S. A. Lebo and K. L. Brown, pp. 61-67. Institute of Applied
Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton, Texas. Submitted to the US Army
Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.
Love, A.C.
1933
History of Navarro County. Dallas: Southwestern.
Lynch, T. F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.

HJN 100015 AR

39

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Lynott, M. J.
1975
Archaeological Excavations at Lake Lavon 1974. Contributions in Anthropology, No.
16. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas.
1977

A Regional Model for Archaeological Research in Northcentral Texas. Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas,
Texas.

1981

A Model of Prehistoric Adaptation in Northern Texas.
26(92):97-110.

Plains Anthropologist

Meltzer, D. J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D. J., D. K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A. W. Barker, D. F. Dincauze, C. V. Haynes, F. Mena,
L. Nuñez, and D. J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Morris, V., and B. Morris
1970
Excavation of Bison Remains in Northwest Dallas County. The Record 27(1):2-5.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2010
Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed March 8, 2010.
Newcomb, W.W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Newcomb, W.W., and T.N. Campbell
1982
Southern Plains Ethnohistory: A Reexamination of the Escanjaques, Ahijados, and
Cuitoas. In Pathways to Plains Prehistory: Anthropological Perspectives of Plains
Natives and Their Pasts, edited by D.G. Wyckoff and J.L. Hoffman, pp. 29-43.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Memoir No. 3 and The Cross Timbers Heritage
Association Contributions No. 1, Duncan, Oklahoma.
Newton, W., and H. P. Gambrell
1932
A Social and Political History of Texas. Southwest Press, Dallas.
Pertulla, T. K.
1994
Excavations at the Quince Site (34At-134), Atoka County, Oklahoma. McGee Creek
Archaeological Project Reports of Investigations, Vol. 5, Pt. 2. Institute of Applied
Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

40

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

Pertulla, T. K., and R. Nathan
1989
Cultural Resources Survey of the Natural Gas Pipeline Company of America
Southern Interconnect Pipeline, Lamar, Red River, Franklin, Titus, Morris, and Cass
Counties, Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton.
Peter, D. E., and D. E. McGregor (editors)
1988
Late Holocene Prehistoric of the Mountain Creek Drainage. Joe Pool Lake
Archaeological Project, Vol. 1. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas.
Preston, N. E.
1972
Multiple Paleo Finds in Hunt County, Texas.
Newsletter, October 1972, pp. 6-8.
1974

Missouri Archaeological Society

Waco Sinkers in Association with Paleo-Indian Artifacts. The Record 30(4):4-5.

Prikryl, D. J.
1987
A Synthesis of Prehistory on the Lower Elm Fork of the Trinity River. Unpublished
M.A. thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
1990

Lower Elm Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts and Chronologies
along the Trinity River, North-Central Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Report
37. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

1993

Regional Preservation Plan for Archeological Resources, Prairie-Savanna
Archeological Region: Introduction. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region,
Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N.A. Kenmotsu and T.K. Perttula, pp. 191204. Cultural Resource Management Report No. 3. Department of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Prikryl, D. J., and B. C. Yates (editors)
1987
Test Excavations at 41CO141, Ray Roberts Reservoir, Cooke County, Texas.
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.
Putman, W. (editor)
1975-84 Navarro County History, 5 vols. Quanah, Texas: Nortex.
Reese, N. G., C. A. Pegues, and B. C. Yates
1986
Historical Archaeology. In An Assessment of the Cultural Resources in the Trinity
River Basin, Dallas, Tarrant, and Denton Counties, Texas, edited by B. C. Yates and
C. R. Ferring, pp. 152-182. Institute of Applied Sciences, University of North Texas,
Denton, Texas. Submitted to Alan Plummer and Associates, Inc., Arlington, Texas,
for the US Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.
Richner, J., and J. Bagot (editors)
1978
A Reconnaissance Survey of the Trinity River Basin, 1976-1977. Report No. 113.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas. US
Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.

HJN 100015 AR

41

Chapter 7.0: References Cited

Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932
Stratigraphy. The Geology of Texas, Vol. 1. Bulletin No. 3232. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Skinner, S. A., and L. Baird (editors)
1979
Archaeological Investigations at Lakeview Lake. Research Report No. 118.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas.
Sollberger, J. B.
1953
The Humphrey Site. The Record 11(3):11-14.
Stanford, D.
1981
“Who’s On First?” Science 81 2(5):91-92.
1982

A Critical Review of Archeological Evidence Relating to the Antiquity of Human
Occupation in the New World. In Plains Indian Studies: A Collection of Essays in
Honor of Waldo R. Wedel, edited by D. H. Ubelaker and H. J. Viola, pp. 202-218.
Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology, No. 30. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Stephenson, R.L.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-277.
Story, D. A.
1990
Culture History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, Vol. 1, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D.
Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366.
Research Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Taylor, A.
1962
History and Photographs of Corsicana and Navarro County. Corsicana, Texas.
Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2010
Navarro County, Texas. The Handbook of Texas Online, Texas State Historical
Association.
<http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/NN/hcn2.html>.
Accessed March 8, 2010.
(USDA) US Department of Agriculture
2008
Digital orthophoto quarter-quadrangle, Corsicana NE, Texas. National Agriculture
Imagery Program, Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
(USGS) US Geological Survey
1972
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Corsicana, Texas, quadrangle.
Woodall, J.N.
1967
The Upper Tucker Site. In A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory, edited by R.E. Bell, E.B. Jelks, and W.W. Newcomb, pp. 3-14. Final
Report for National Science Foundation Grant No. GS964.

42

100015_arch_survey_report

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

Yates, B. C., and C. R. Ferring (editors)
1986
An Assessment of the Cultural Resources in the Trinity River Basin, Dallas, Tarrant,
and Denton Counties, Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State
University. US Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.

HJN 100015 AR

43

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive and Reconnaissance Survey of the
Proposed Lake Halbert Water Treatment Plant Expansion Project, Corsicana, Navarro County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates

1

ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JW-1

744650

3552062

0-10

Rocky grayish-brown clay

None

JW-2

744780

3552127

0-10

Rocky grayish-brown clay

None

JW-3

744833

3552131

0-15

Grayish-brown clay

None

JW-4

744817

3552170

0-15

Grayish-brown clay

None

JW-5

744735

3552217

0-15

Yellow-brown clay

None

JW-6

744708

3552243

0-10

Yellow-brown clay

None

JW-7

744760

3552251

0-10

Grayish-brown clay

None

JW-8

744796

3552245

0-10

Grayish-brown clay

None

JW-9

744853

3552231

0-10

Grayish-brown clay

None

JW-10

744893

3552182

0-10

Grayish-brown clay

None

JW-11

744928

3552191

0-10

Grayish-brown clay

None

JW-12

744981

3552178

0-10

Very dark brown clay

None

JW-13

744907

3552226

0-15

Grayish-brown clay

None

JW-14

744604

3552252

0-10

Very dark brown clay

None

JW-15

744521

3552185

0-15

Very dark brown clay

None

JW-16

744715

3552148

0-5

Gravelly grayish-brown clay

None

Soils

Artifacts

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83)
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 100015 AR

A-1

