City of Austin, Texas
Historic Resources Survey of East Austin
September 2000
Revised December 2000

Survey Report

Prepared by
Hardy·Heck·Moore &Myers, Inc.
Austin, Texas

HIS TOR IC RES OUR CES SUR VEY
OF EAS T AUS TIN

SEPT EMBE R 2000
REVIS ED DECE MBER 2000

SUR VEY REp ORT

PREPA RED FOR:

City of Austin , Texas
Contra ct #M09 93001 67A

PREPA RED By:
Hardy -Heck -Moo re & Myers , Inc.
Austin , Texas

PRINC IPAL AUTH ORS:

Terri Myers, Project Direct or
Richard E. Mitchell, Architectural Historian
Jennifer R. Ross, Architectural Historian
James T. Jones, Researcher

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Acknowledgments .

111

Introduction . . .

1

Survey Methods . . . . . . . .
Overview . . . . . . . .
Previous Survey Results.
Project Area . . .
Field Investigations
Historical Research

3
3
7
11

12
15

Survey Results. . . . . .
Individual Properties
Historic Districts . .
Data Collection and Presentation
Preservation Priority Evaluation.
Analysis of Data and Report Preparation
Survey Materials
Observations

21
21
22
23
24

28
29
30

Recommendations .
Overview ..
Historic Designations
The National Register of Historic Places.
Texas Historical Markers . . . . . . . .
Properties to Consider for Historic Designations.
High Priority Properties . .
Proposed Historic Districts
Conclusions. . . . . . . . . . . .

32
32
36
36
38
39
39
40
49

53

Historic Overview of East Austin Project Area
East Austin Property Types
References . . . . . . . .
Annotated Oral Histories . .

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

89
109
117

PAGE i

Appendices
Historic Resources Inventory
National Register Assessments
Photographic Index
Historic Resources Survey Map
National Register Assessment Map

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE ii

ACKN OWLE DGM ENTS

Hardy· Heck· Moore & Myers, Inc. (HHM &M) appreciates the many
people and
organizations who contributed to the East Austin Historic Resources
Survey. HHM& M
personnel and subconsultants worked closely with Austin Histor y Center
staff to
accomplish the survey goals. Austin History Center Director Biruta
Kearl and Reading
Room staff granted us extraordinary consideration in our efforts to researc
h East Austin's
history. Margaret Schlankey and Grace McElroy helped identify and
collect historic
photographs. Karen Riles' contributions, particularly in conducting oral
histories tailored
to the project, were invaluable. Sharmyn Lilly and the Friends of the
Austin History Center
generously supported our efforts, as well.
This project could not have been accomplished without the work of
Eleanor
Thompson and Eva Lindsey who served as community liaisons, condu
cted oral histories
and historic research, arranged meetings and interviews, and publicized
our efforts.
Researcher Terry Jones conducted archival investigations and co-aut
hored the historic
context. Robert Ryan of Wind rose Data Corpo ration provided mappi
ng services.
We are especially grateful to the residents and former residents of the
project area
who gave generously of their time and memories in an effort to better
understand and
record the history of East Austin and its early residents. Formal intervi
ews were
conducted by the HHM&M project director and preservation liaisons
with Willie Toliver
Jr., Leonard Mann, Buster Hancock, Ora Lee Nobles, lB. Thompson,
Mabel Walker
Newton, Artie Johnson, Barbara Daniels, Roger Taylor and Rev. Isaac
Fontaine. Many
others contributed photographs and other artifacts to the Austin Histor
y Center in
conjunction with this survey. The W.H. Passon Society, a historical
society established to
preserve and record the history of Austin's African American citizens,
provided office and
meeting space along with its encouragement.
Newsp aper articles contributed to community acceptance and suppo
rt and we
appreciate the attention of Austin American Statesman reporters Leah
Quinn and Andy
HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

iii

•

.

Alford, and photographer Vernon Bryant. and NOKOA (the Observer) reporter and
photographer, Akwasi Evans, in publicizing the project. Special thanks are extended to
Dan Niendorff for granting us a tour of his home and an interview with the A llstin

American Statesman.
We are also thankful for the assistance of the City of Austin Historic Preservation
Officer, Barbara Stocklin, Community Development Manager, Greg Smith, and Business
Development Specialist, Jerry Freese, of the Neighborhood Housing and Community
Development Department. Finally, we wish to commend past and present city council
members who recognize the value of Austin's historic resources and who supported this
survey.

•

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE iv

INTRODUCTION

The East Austin Historic Resources Survey is a comprehensive inventory of
buildings, structures, objects and sites built in part of East Austin before 1955. Project
area boundaries follow East 14th Street on the north, Coleto Street on the east,
Pennsylvania/Cotton/San BernardIRosewoodlEast 11 th StreetlNavasota and East 9th
Street on the south, and San Marcos/Curve StreetlIH-35 frontage, on the west. The City
of Austin undertook the project and is solely responsible for its funding and
administration. HardyoHeckoMoore & Myers, Inc. (HHM&M), an Austin-based cultural
resource management firm, conducted the survey in accordance with the guidelines and
standards followed by the Texas Historical Commission (THC), and as set forth by the
Secretary of the Interior. This report summarizes the findings of the survey and offers
recommendations for the preservation of the city's historic resources. It identifies the
properties that are most likely eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) or to receive state and local historic designations. It also recommends
boundaries of potential historic districts on the basis of concentrations of historic
properties that retain their historic character.
The survey identified 496 historic properties estimated to have been built before
1955 within the project area boundaries. Of that total, 105 were determined to be HIGH
preservation priorities, 242 were assigned MEDIUM priorities. The 149 properties
designated as LOW preservation priorities include historic period resources that have been
extensively altered or that are incongruous with the historic character of the area due to a
combination of their age, design or type. Properties with HIGH or MEDIUM priority
status possibly qualify for local, state or federal historic designations, either individually or
as part of group properties such as a historic district. In addition, properties with HIGH
priority assignments are recommended as being eligible for individual listing in the NRHP.
While MEDIUM priority properties may not be individually eligible for listing, they are
considered Contributing elements of potential or designated NRHP districts if they lie
within the boundaries of such districts. Thus, they are considered eligible for listing in the

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 1

NRHP as integral features of identified districts. MEDIUM priority properties are not
eligible for the NRHP if they lie outside the boundaries of historic districts but since they
contribute to the historic character of East Austin they should be regarded as significant
cultural resources worthy of preservation.
This report is intended as a foundation for preservation planning efforts and
Section 106 review in East Austin. It includes a discussion of the survey and research
methods, survey results, and recommendations for future historic designations of
individual properties and historic districts. Finally, a narrative history of East Austin, with
an emphasis on its African American heritage, is included to identify the area's cultural
and developmental context. It contains a discussion of historic trends and demographic
changes and how they affected development and redevelopment in the project area.
Specific commercial districts, residential neighborhoods and individual properties are
highlighted in the narrative. The narrative provides a historic context within which
cultural resources may be evaluated and assessed. It also contains a discussion of historic
property types found within the survey area. The narrative and property types section is
followed by a list of references cited and annotated oral histories undertaken as part of the
project.

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 2

SURVEY METHODS
OVERVIEW

East Austin is ambiguously identified as lying east oflli-35, which bisects the city
from north to south. As Austin expanded to cover most of Travis County in the late 20 111
century, that description has grown to encompass a vast region of the city that stretches
north to Williamson County, and south to Hays County. Historically, East Austin has
been defined simply as that part of Austin lying east of East Avenue, the city's original
townsite boundary, and north of the Colorado River. Northern and eastern boundaries
grew as the city expanded outward from the downtown. At the tum of the century,
though, Nineteenth Street, now Martin Luther King Blvd., was the city's northern
boundary and therefore the limit of "East Austin".
Although it lies outside the original townsite boundaries, East Austin contains
some of the city's oldest intact residential districts. This is due partly because Austin
expanded into its eastern outlots with the arrival of the Houston &Texas Central (H&TC)
Railroad from the east in 1871, an event that spurred commercial development along the
tracks and residential construction in the adjacent blocks. Retention of historic fabric in
East Austin is related to the fact that it has not benefitted as much from successive waves
of economic growth since its initial development as the rest of the city. The result has
been economic neglect but also a high degree of historic architectural fabric. A challenge
for the city of Austin during this current period of phenomenal growth and economic
opportunity will be to help East Austin share in the city's prosperity and at the same time
retain its precious historic resources.
East Austin contains a large number of historic-period resources within the project
area. Commercial buildings primarily front the East 11 th and East 12th Street corridors
and adjacent side street lots, while residential and institutional buildings such as churches
and schools comprise the majority of the remaining resources in the project area. The

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 3

•

greatest loss of historic fabric has occurred along the area's two major commercial
arterials, East II th and East 12th streets, and in the fan-shaped residential neighborhood
that lies between them, west of Navasota Street. Largely intact concentrations of historic
resources lie along East 13 th and East 14th streets, East 9th and E. 10th streets, San
Bernard and New York streets, and the 900 block of Juniper street. Major churches
including Ebenezer Baptist Church (1010 E. 10th), Metropolitan AME Church (1101 E.
10th), and Our Lady of Guadalupe Catholic Church (1206 East 9th), are clustered within a
few blocks of one another on E. 10th and East 9th streets. Other historic African
American congregations maintain churches in the project area including Wesley United
Methodist Church (1164 San Bernard) and Simpson Memorial Baptist Church (1701 East
12th Street). Perhaps the oldest church is a small vernacular church at the northeast
comer ofE. 12th Street and Waller (1201 Waller/I 100 East 12th Street). Originally an
Episcopal and then a Catholic church that served a largely immigrant population of Irish
and German residents in the area in the late-19th and early-20th centuries, it has changed
use and congregations over the years as demographic patterns changed but retains a high
degree of historic character.
No public schools lie within the project area although several neighborhood
churches operate private kindergartens and day care centers. Historically, the area was a
mecca for African Americans seeking higher education. Robertson Hill School, Olive
Street School and Samuel Huston College all lay within the project area boundaries but all
have been demolished. Huston-Tillotson College and Kealing Junior High lie just beyond
the project area boundaries, to the east and south, respectively. During the historic
period, all of these institutions contributed to the development of East Austin as the
largely African American enclave it is today. While little physical evidence of their
existence remains in the project area, their influence is remembered and reflected in the
extant African American community that once supported these institutions.
HHM&M staff who worked on the project included Terri Myers, Project Director
and Historian, David Moore, Survey Director, Associate Historians Sophie Roark and
Laurie Gotcher, Architectural Historians Rick Mitchell and Jennifer Ross, and Research

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 4

•

Assistants Allison Holland and Karen Savic. Eleanor Thompson and Eva Lindsey
participated as community liaisons under subcontract agreement with HHM&M .. James
T. Jones conducted historical research, provided invaluable assistance and co-authored the

historic context for this project. Cartographer Robert Ryan provided mapping services.
In the late spring of2000, fllIM&M Principal and Project Director Terri Myers
coordinated the initial field documentation that was undertaken by staff Architectural
Historians Rick Mitchell and Jennifer Ross. Field documentation consisted of identifying,
photographing and minimally documenting and assigning a preliminary preservation
priority to all pre-1955 properties within the project area boundaries. This date was
chosen because National Register criteria recommends that a resource be at least 50 years
old or older for consideration. The time period was expanded by five years because
survey dates are only approximate and although a building may appear newer, it may have
been built at an earlier date. Also, expanding the time range gives the city greater
flexibility in using the report for planning purposes. Planners will be able to see that while
a building may not be considered for designation in 2000, it may become eligible within a
few years. Adding the five year margin thus provides the city with a tool for planning
efforts beyond this year.
The initial survey identified nearly 500 properties within the project area
boundaries that appear to have been built before 1955. Additional properties were
identified and some multi-resource sites were divided into their separate components for
individual documentation so that the final tally found 496 historic properties in the project
area. Of that number, 105 were given preliminary designations as HIGH preservation
priorities, while 242 were determined to be MEDIUM: preservation priorities. The
remaining 149 historic properties are identified as LOW preservation priorities due to
alterations or incompatible architectural characteristics. Initial priorities assigned in the
field were revised after final field and historical assessments were made. Two detailed
survey maps are included with this report. One shows all documented sites and their
preservation priorities and the other identifies National Register eligibility. Both depict
boundaries of recommended historic districts within the survey area.

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 5

Concurrent with survey efforts, the research team also documented the history of
East Austin, focusing attention on the African American settlement that developed in the
area known as Robertson Hill, north of the French Legation, during Reconstruction. The
Project Director guided research efforts of staff. sub consultants and volunteers. A
literature search was conducted at state and local repositories including The Center for
American History at the University of Texas at Austin, the State Archives and Library, and
the Austin History Center. Private collections included those of the W.H. Passon Society,
an African American historical organization, and the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, an
African American service organization. Primary and secondary source materials from state
and local archives and private collections were used to build a brief historic context for the
area. It is included in this survey report as the Historic Overview of East Austin.
Oral histories and historic photographs were collected from former and current
residents to expand our understanding of the area's development and provide individual
property information. Research on the area as a whole, on individual buildings,
businesses, institutions and families, was collected to expand the historic context and
evaluate individual resources.
Once the field work was completed and a large body of research collected, the
area's cultural resources could be evaluated for both architectural merit and historic
significance within their context. AIl resources were assigned preliminary preservation
priorities in the field based almost entirely on their architectural integrity. With the survey
data gathered, properties could be compared with one another and reevaluated as to their
relative integrity within the project area. Historic associations factored into the evaluation
process primarily in judging properties that had been severely altered or that displayed
little architectural merit. In cases where resources possessed strong historic links to
significant people, trends, or events in the community, such distinctions mitigated the lack
or loss of architectural fabric. Using field data, photographs, and historic documentation,
Terri Myers and Jennifer Ross reassessed each surveyed property, considered their relative
architectural merits and historic associations and assigned final recommendations of
HIGH, MEDIUM and LOW preservation priorities for each surveyed resource. Upon

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 6

completion of the priority assessments, field maps were used plot each resource by address
and priority assessment or National Register eligibility.
Work products include Historic Resources Inventory forms detailing physical
attributes and brief statements of significance for each surveyed property. Photographs
showing at least two elevations of each property were printed. Additional photographs
depicting architectural details or unique features of selected properties were taken and
they are included with the survey materials. Minimal historical information for most
properties is listed on Historical Information Profile cards included with the Inventory
forms. Inventory forms and Historical Information Profile cards and photographs were
placed in separate archival sleeves within a single archival sheet protector for each
property. The individual sheets were placed in binders by address, with numbered streets
preceding named streets in alphabetical order. Upon completion of the field
investigations, the data was compiled and this survey report was prepared. A
comprehensive inventory of surveyed properties, National Register assessments,
photographic contact sheets and two project area maps, one depicting priority
designations and the other identifying NRHP eligibility, are included as appendices in this
report. Three copies of the work products and survey report, along with labeled diskettes
containing the survey report, survey data base, and historical information, are submitted to
the city to complete the project.

•

PREVIOUS SURVEY RESULTS

Prior to initiating the fieldwork, HHM&M staff examined reports from previous
historic resource investigations in the area. This step identified resources that have been
surveyed and revealed the level of documentation recorded for these properties. Although
no previous comprehensive surveys have been undertaken for the entire project area,
several earlier projects included resources within the current survey boundaries.
The first major cultural resources survey that included the current project area is
recorded in East Austin, An Architectural Survey. Sponsored by the Heritage Society of
Austin, the survey and report were completed by Austinites, Architect Joe Freeman and

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 7

..

Historian Martha Doty Freeman, between November 1979 and September 1980.
Essentially a landmark survey, the Freemans were charged with identifying and recording
architecturally significant buildings in an area bounded by Martin Luther King Boulevard
(Nineteenth Street) on the north, Chicon Street on the east, the Colorado River on the
south, and IH-35 (formerly East Avenue) on the west. Despite the limited scope of their
assignment to identify architectural landmarks, the Freemans recognized and documented
many more unassuming properties such as shotgun houses, bungalows and vernacular
buildings. They included properties with unique or rare physical characteristics, clusters
of properties that formed cohesive groupings, and some with stronger historical
associations than architectural merit.
Following the survey, a Multiple Property National Register nomination of the

Historic Resources of East Austin (1985) was prepared that included a number of
individual historic properties and three historic districts: Willow-Spence (NR 1985),
Rainey Street (NR 1985) and Swedish Hill (NR 1985). A single property in the current
project area, 903 East 14th Street, lies within the Swedish Hill Historic District. Several
individual properties in the current project area were listed in the NRHP as a result of that
effort. They are identified as such on their individual survey cards and in the National
Register Assessment inventory.
In 1983 -84, a comprehensive survey of Austin's cultural resources was conducted
by a joint venture of two Austin firms; BelL Klein and Hoffman, Architects and
Restoration Consultants, Inc., and Hardy Heck Moore, Preservation Consultants. The
survey included all of the city of Austin covered by the 1935 Sanborn Fire Insurance maps,

except the area covered by the Freeman survey. The survey team minimally documented
the city's pre-193 5 cultural resources and prepared a series of maps plotting their
locations. Their efforts covered that part of the current project area from Chicon on the
west to Coleto on the east, and East 14th Street on the north to Pennsylvania on the
south.

As part of a series of revitalization and redevelopment projects launched by the
City of Austin in the 1980s and continuing to the present, several environmental and

HISTORIC RESOL'RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 8

•

.

cultural resources investigations involving parts of the current project area have been
completed by different consultants. They include the AnderSOn!Robertson Hill
Architectural Survey alld ArchaeolOgical Reconnaissance, Travis County, Espey Huston

& Associates, Inc. (1993). Espey Huston's survey included many of the properties in the
current project area and contained a number of properties scheduled for demolition by the
Anderson Community Development Corporation.
Following the Espey Houston survey, the Anderson Community Development
Corporation contracted with Hardy Heck Moore & Myers, Inc. (HHM&M) to undertake
selected deed and tax record research for properties within the Espey Houston survey
area. The purpose of the investigation was to determine if any pre-1870s settlement could
be documented within the area slated for redevelopment along East 11 th and East 12th
streets and in the fan-shaped residential area that lies between them. No evidence of
settlement was found in written or legal records and the results were presented to the
Office of the State Archeologist.
Before undertaking the present field investigations, the HHM&M research and
survey team conducted research to identify previously documented historic properties in
the project area. Past surveys of selected historic properties have resulted in the official
recognition of a number of significant sites within the area including national, state and
local landmarks. Federally recognized properties are listed individually or as part of
districts in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). Properties that are
significant for their roles in state history are designated as Recorded Texas Historic
Landmarks (RTHL), for outstanding architectural merit, or commemorated with Texas
State Subject Markers for historical merit. Archeological sites can be designated as State
Archeological Landmarks (SAL). Local landmark status identifies and protects properties
which are of exceptional importance to the history of Austin. Some properties have more
than one designation. A local landmark may also be a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark
and listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
Generally, listing in the National Register of Historic Places confers honor but little
protection against the demolition or alteration of a historic property, unless federal funding

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 9

supports projects like road improvements or urban revitalization that may affect the
property. State designations vary in their ability to protect historic properties. R TIll..
properties are afforded the greatest degree of state oversight and properties with this
designation may not be altered without state review. In most cases, local landmarks enjoy
the greatest degree of protection. They are subject to design and maintenance review by
the Austin Landmark Commission.
Information on National Register properties, Recorded Texas Historic Landmarks
and State Marker sites are on file at the Texas Historical Commission library in Austin.
Files on Austin Landmarks and previous cultural resources surveys are on file with the
City Preservation Officer. A review of these files provided background information for
the current project field investigations and for the historic overview contained in this
report.
Other properties in the project area have been listed in the NRHP in addition to
those nominated as part of the 1985 East Austin Multiple Property nomination. They
include three Moonlight Towers (1200 block of East lIth Street, 1300 block of Coleto,
1700 block of Pennsylvania) (NR 1976) and, most recently, the Victory Grill (NR 1998) at
1104 East lIth Street.
Within the project area, the THC determined that several NRHP eligible historic
districts lay within the project area in 1993. They include the Juniper Street Historic
District, a collection of late-19th and early 20th century houses in the 900 and the north
side of the 1000 blocks of Juniper Street and an adjacent property at 1166 Curve (since
demolished). In 1998, under contract to Anderson Community Development Corporation
(ACnC), Hardy Heck Moore & Myers, Inc., and subconsultants Volz & Associates,
prepared a Stabilization and Relocation plan for four properties within the development
corporation's authority. As part of the ACnC sponsored project, HHM&M began
preparation of a National Register nomination for the Juniper Street Historic District.
When several historic properties within the proposed Juniper Street district were lost to
fire or demolition during the course of the project, Acnc was ordered to stop work. As
a result, the National Register nomination was suspended. Its status remains in question.

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 10

In addition to Juniper Street, the THC determined that properties along San Bernard and
adjacent lots, and the 1100 block of East 10th Street (Metropolitan Historic District) are
also eligible for NRHP listing as historic districts. To date, these three areas are the only
districts officially determined eligible for listing in the NRHP by the THe.
A review of the Freemans' work, along with a search of other Texas Historical
Commission and City of Austin Landmark Commission files, as well as other cultural
resources investigations, showed that a number of sites in the project area are also
commemorated by Texas State Historical Markers (SM) and several others are Recorded
Texas Historic Landmarks (RTHL). Some have received City of Austin Landmark status
and are subject to design review by the Austin Landmark Commission. State Marker sites
include those commemorating former properties such as Samuel Huston College (SM
1996) at East 12th Street and East Avenue and the Stuart Female (SM) at 1212 East 9th
Street.
Designated City of Austin landmarks include a variety of residential, commercial
and institutional properties. They are further noteworthy for the diversity of ethnic and
immigrant owners associated with them. They include the Limerick-Frazier House (810
East 13th Street), Haehnel (Bailetti) Store (1101 East lIth Street), Howson Community
Center (1192 Angelina), the Southgate-Lewis House (1501 East 12th Street) and the
Bailetti-Walker House (1006 Waller). All of these sites, with the exception of Samuel
Huston College, are within the current survey boundaries. The college is included in this
discussion for its proximity to the project area and its influence on African American
settlement there.

PROJECT AREA

The survey area was roughly bounded by East 14th Street on the north, Coleto
Street on the east, an irregular line drawn along Pennsylvania/Cotton/San
BernardIRosewoodlEast II th StreetlNavasota and East 9th Street on the south, and San
Marcos/Curve Street/IH-35 frontage, on the west. Boundaries were selected by the city
of Austin in response to its revitalization programs within this area. Federal regulations

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 11

•

..

require that cultural resources be documented according to the standards and guidelines
set forth by the Secretary of the Interior when federal monies are used in projects that may
affect those resources (Section 106 of the Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended).
Since revitalization programs may involve the alteration, demolition or relocation of
historic cultural resources, such resources must be identified and assessed for their
potential to be listed in the National Register of Historic Places. Because previous
cultural resources survey projects undertaken in the City of Austin are either outdated, did
not include this area, or did not sufficiently document affected properties for Section 106
evaluation, the city selected the present project area boundaries to conform with
applicable federal regulations.

FIELD INVESTIGATIONS

Architectural Historians Rick Mitchell and Jennifer Ross conducted the field
investigations in East Austin for Hardy' Heck' Moore & Myers, Inc. (HHM&M). Intensive
field investigations consisted of identifying, recording, assessing, mapping and
photographing historic period (pre-1955) resources within the defined project area
boundaries. A preliminary reconnaissance overview of the survey area took place on April
20,2000, with Ill-IM&M Project Director Terri Myers, Field Director David Moore, and
Architectural Historians Rick Mitchell and Jennifer Ross attending. The team identified
concentrations of historic buildings and familiarized themselves with the types of
properties in the project area. They discussed project objectives and methodologies and
planned the route of the block-by-block survey.
Other preliminary work included review and reproduction of City of Austin
building footprint maps and Sanborn Fire Insurance Co. maps for use in the field
identification of buildings and structures. Using copies of planning maps provided by the
city, the field crew initially conducted a windshield survey within the project area to
confirm boundaries and determine the kinds of properties located within those boundaries.
This step enabled the HHM&M survey team to verify information and note any changes
that had taken place since the publication of the maps. This field map subsequently served

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 12

•

as a base map for the preparation of the survey area maps included with this report.
Following the windshield survey, the field crew systematically identified and recorded
information for every extant historic resource in the delineated project boundaries.
Mr. Mitchell and Ms. Ross undertook intensive field surveys of the project area

between April 25 and June 2, 2000. This field survey included:
identifying all pre-1956 buildings, structures, and objects within the project
area;
assigning a unique site number to each resource for collection and control. An
inventory of properties correlates the site numbers with street addresses in the
project area.
keying each resource to a City of Austin building footprint map
completing survey forms for each identified resource noting address or other
loeational information, property type, stylistic influences when applicable,
exterior materials, number of stories, estimated construction date, alterations,
and initial preservation priority classification;
photographing each identified pre-1956 resource using 35mm color print film,
with at least two oblique views of each resource. In rare cases, it was possible
to photograph only one view of a resource due to its obscure location or the
owner's objection.

The HHM&M team divided the project area into four north-south regions: East
14th Street south to East 12th Street; East 12th Street south to Olive/CottoniPennsylvania
Street; Olive/Cotton Street south to East 11 th Street; and East 11 th Street south to East
9th Street. Generally, Mr. Mitchell and Ms. Ross first surveyed all resources along eastwest streets in a given region and then surveyed all resources fronting north-south streets.
The team began their survey at the northwest corner of the project area, east oflli-35 at
East 14th Street. The team systematically documented each resource in a block-by-block
pedestrian survey, working from north to south, then east to west, within the region. All
resources fronting or siding onto East 11 th Street and adjacent Juniper Street were
surveyed and photographed near the outset of the project to provide advance planning

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 13

information for the City of Austin's revitalization programs. Project Director Terri Myers
prepared the report for the city with assistance from Rick Mitchell and Jennifer Ross.
A unique site number was assigned to each resource. In cases where more than
one resource occupied an addressed site, each primary resource received a separate site
number but was recorded as addressed with designations "A", "B", "1;1", or "rear" as
appropriate. Significant outbuildings such as garage apartments were recorded separately
from the primary resource and given their own site number. Tool sheds, simple garages
and other minor resources associated with surveyed properties were not individually
documented.
Each resource was plotted on the field maps and noted in the field forms. Site
numbers are keyed to the factual or estimated addresses to help identifY the properties on
the survey map. Surveyors recorded the street address, or block number. Many of the
surveyed properties did not have a visible address, and in such cases, HHM&M staff
referred to the city footprint map or estimated the address as it related to other properties.
Physical information was gathered on site and recorded on field forms. The survey
team noted the property type, approximate date of construction, type and extent of
alterations, historic function, architectural plan type, stylistic influences when applicable,
number of stories, exterior materials, and condition of each resource. The property type
and subtype classifications (e.g. domestic: single family or L-plan, respectively) are used
to identify the historic resource by its original or intended use. For example, a circa 1920
residence recently converted to office or retail space was recorded as a dwelling. In
assigning construction dates, a limited number of buildings had markers stating an exact
date. In most cases, HHM&M staff estimated the date of construction within five-year
increments or used information gained from research to identify the exact date.
An initial preservation priority classification oflllGH, MEDIUM, or LOW was

assigned to each documented building based on several criteria: the surveyor's professional
impression of the property, how well the property maintains its original design and
materials, how the property contributes to or detracts from the historic character of the

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 14

area, and its condition. AIl properties were reevaluated and assessed for historic
significance before final designations were made.
Each surveyed property was photographed with 35 mm color print film. The team
maintained a photo log and recorded roll and frame numbers for each resource. In nearly
all cases, Mr. Mitchell photographed the resources at oblique angles to in order to include
two elevations within a single photograph. Mr. Mitchell took additional photographs of
unique or distinctive details to better illustrate and identify selected properties. AIl
photographic and field data was entered into the HHM&M database software for
organization and analysis.
Throughout the field survey, the HHM&M team met informally with interested
residents. These residents often provided valuable information for possible construction
dates of individual resources, as well as the overall history of the project area. Pertinent
information was given to the Project Director for use in researching individual properties
and in completing the historic context for the project area.

HISTORICAL RESEARCH

Historical research was conducted simultaneously with the field investigations.
The Project Director planned a multi-faceted research design that involved eliciting public
participation, consulting primary and secondary sources, interviewing residents and former
residents of the project area and copying their historic photographs. A Research Team
consisting ofHHM&M staff, independent researchers, community liaisons, volunteers, and
professional staff of the Austin History Center collaborated on the project.
At the outset of the survey, Project Director Terri Myers and Preservation Liaisons
Eleanor Thompson and Eva Lindsey met with Austin History Center staff, including
Director Biruta Keari, Historian Karen Riles, and Photoarchivist Margaret Schlankey, to
establish a mutually beneficial research strategy. Research goals for the East Austin
Survey Project were both general and specific; the project sought to produce a historical
overview of East Austin's development and to collect specific information regarding the
area's extant historical and architecturally significant properties.

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 15

..

Because the survey area contains one of Austin's earliest Reconstruction era
Freedman's settlements, and because much of East Austin has become identified with the
city's Mrican American citizens, project research efforts focused on these topics for the
contextual development. These goals coincide with the Austin History Center's charge to
augment its African American collections and resources. Thus, the Research Team and
Austin History Center staff resolved to share sources and information and reduce
duplication of effort. Historian Karen Riles worked closely with HHM&M staff and their
subconsultants to publicize the project, identifY oral history candidates, conduct
interviews, and organize a Photo Heritage Day to collect and copy historic photographs
associated with African American history.
Interviews collected by the lllIM&M Research team will be archived at the
Austin History Center. Materials and photographs identified in the research process were
brought to the attention of History Center staff for follow-up. The team gathered
information on individual properties, neighborhoods and commercial districts, and studied
the initial settlement, development trends and demographic changes that affected the
physical character of the project area.
Community leaders Eleanor Thompson and Eva Lindsey were hired as
subconsultants to act as liaisons between lllIM&M and area residents. Both are longtime
East Austin residents who have been involved in collecting and preserving local African
CI

American history for many years. Ms. Thompson and Ms. Lindsey helped define research
goals, identifY oral history candidates, publicize the project through local churches and
neighborhood organizations and provided HHM&M staff an entree to community
resources that otherwise would not have been available to them. In addition, they
conducted formal taped interviews with area residents and introduced the Project Director
to many local informants for oral histories. Ms. Thompson also gathered primary and
secondary research for the historic overview and assisted the Project Director in city
directory and Sanborn research. She commented on the historic context and edited the
draft report.

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 16

Resea rcher James T. (Terry) Jones, working as an independent contra
ctor to
HHM&M, identified all known cultural resources reports and publish
ed histories of the
project area. He condu cted specific tax and deed research for a prelim
inary NRHP
assessment of properties on properties in sensitive redevelopment target
areas, particularly
along East 11 th Street and adjacent Juniper Street. Mr. Jones assiste
d the Projec t
Director in accurately locating existing resources on historic maps and
in identifYing early
property owners with individual properties. Finally, he assisted in prepar
ing a draft
historic overvi ew of the project area and is listed as co-author.
HHM& M staff Jennifer Ross, Allison Holland, Karen Savic and Sophie
Roark,
and independent researcher Holly Marshall assisted in gathering histori
cal data for the
survey forms and report. Research crew members began both genera
l and site-specific
research on IDGH priority resources and on properties in areas slated
for imminent
redevelopment, primarily on or adjacent to the East lIth and East 12th
Street commercial
corridors. Jennifer Ross copied and reviewed a series of fire insurance
maps published by
the Sanborn Fire Insurance Company of New York. These maps were
extremely valuable
sources because they document prominent physical characteristics of
the properties. The
map collection at the Library of Congress contains original, unrevised
maps created for the
area in 1900,1 921-2 2 and 1935. Revised maps reflecting changes made
by 1959 were
also on file at the Library of Congress. All applicable maps were copied
in Washington
D.C. and used in the project. Further revisions to the 1959 maps were
made in 1971 and
those final revisions are on microfilm at the Austin History. They were
compared with the
earlier maps throug hout the research process.
Although the later maps presented a broade r covera ge of the projec
t area, the
1900 map depicted some of the earliest resources in the city. These
maps show building
"footprints" which indicate the exterior shapes, construction materials,
number of stories
and functions of the structures, indudi ng ancillary buildings and site
features. This
information helps to document a building'S physical evolution and also
notes street name
and address changes that might otherwise be difficult to determine.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 17

Project Director Terri Myers examined five series of Sanborn maps dating from
the earliest map coverage of the project area, in 1900, through the most recent, completed
in 1971. She checked each property for its appearance in the 1900, 1922, 1935, and 1959
maps and recorded changes from one map to the next. She tracked each propeny in city
directories from their earliest available listings to the end of the historic period (1952 or
1955 depending upon the resource). By comparing city directory listings with Sanborn
maps made in the same year, she was able to determine dates of construction and address
changes for most properties.
In the course of the project, historical information was gathered and recorded on
Historical Information Profile cards included with the survey forms for nearly all historic
period properties surveyed, regardless of priority. Minimal city directory information on
residents and owners in selected years was recorded for as many properties as possible.
Due to address discrepancies and, in some cases, relocation to the project after the end of
the historic period, some properties were impossible to positively identify in city
directories. Research efforts attempted to accomplish the following objectives:

1) Determine the exact or approximate dates of construction
2) Document physical changes through an examination of Sanborn maps and
historic photographs
3) Obtain names of previous owners, occupants or uses from research materials,
interviews and city directories
4) Analyze demographic changes from a mixed ethnic environment to a
predominantly African American one
5) Track the social and economic status of property owners by identifying their
occupations and whether they rented or owned their homes
ffl-IM&M staff and subconsultants Eva Lindsey interviewed past and present East
Austin residents including Willie Hart Toliver Jr., Ora Lee Nobles, Leonard Mann, 1. B.
Thompson, Roger Taylor, Rev. Isaac Fontaine, Mabel Walker Newton and Buster

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 18

Hancock. Telephone interviews were conducted with Barbara Daniels and Artie Johnson.
Mr. Mann met with ID-IM&M staff in the field to physically identify each property in the
East 11 th Street corridor. Austin History Center Historian Karen Riles conducted a series
of taped interviews relevant to this project. Historic Photographs were collected and
copied at a Photo Heritage Day event sponsored by the Austin History Center in
conjunction with this project. The research team also met with City of Austin staff
Barbara Stocklin and Jerry Freese at various times throughout the project to discuss
aspects of the survey and to plan research. All of these meetings were extremely valuable
for identifying and assessing historic properties in East Austin.
One of the most important secondary sources obtained for historical research in
East Austin was the 1907 Metropolitan African Methodist Episcopal (A.M.E.) Church
commemorative booklet commissioned by Rev. C.W. Abington and compiled largely by
historian W.H. Passon. The Historical and Biographical Souvenir and Program

0/ the

25th Anniversary o/Metropolitan A.ME. Church, Austin, Texas 1882-1907 contains
dozens of photographs of African American building in East Austin. Although most are
now gone, a few remain in the project area. The property types, styles and historical
information in the booklet were extremely useful for research.
J. Mason Brewer's work in the 1940s and 1950s and Ada DeBlanc Simond's more
recent books and articles from the 1960s through the 1980s, added immensely to our
knowledge of significant African American families and businesses in Austin throughout
the historic period. Brewer's guide to African American businesses in the 1950s was
particularly useful in identifying and documenting commercial properties on East 11 th and
East 12th streets. Mrs. Simond's work highlighted the occupations and accomplishments
of African Americans, many of whom lived in East Austin at the turn of the century.
The Project Director relied on Martha Freeman's 1980 cultural resources survey of
East Austin for background information and specific histories of specific buildings. She
also referred to Eugene Foster's 1993 AndersonIRobertson Hill Architectural Survey for
Espey, Huston & Associates. It is important to note that the lllIM&M field team did not
use these previous reports and their recommendations until the survey was completed to

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 19

•

avoid bias in assessing preservation priorities and National Register recommendations.
HHM&M staff used both documents to conduct field checks on the status of historic
resources. Sadly, a number of important sites listed by Freeman and Foster have been
demolished or altered beyond recognition since 1980 and 1993 respectively. Nevertheless,
the descriptions and historical information for the remaining properties were immensely
helpful in our present efforts.
The Research Team obtained important information from the Austin History
Center. Other individuals and institutions are thanked for their contributions to this
survey:
•

The Center for American History, University of Texas, Austin

•

The State Library and Archives, Austin, Texas

•

Travis County Courthouse

•

George Washington Carver Library and Museum

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 20

Survev Results
,

INDIVIDUAL PROPERTIES

A total of 496 properties considered to have been built before 1955 were identified
within the project area boundaries, Of that number, 105 were determined to be mGH
preservation priorities due to their exceptional architectural merit, their significant historic
associations, or both, Such properties are recommended as individually eligible for listing
in the NR mGH priority properties include outstanding residential, commercial and
institutional resources throughout the project area, These properties may also qualify for
local, state or federal historic designations either alone or as part of a historic district
When located within eligible historic districts, they are considered Contributing elements
of these districts, Sixty mGH priority sites are found within the boundaries of
recommended NRHP eligible districts, while 45 are scattered elsewhere in the project
area,
In addition to the mGH preservation priority properties, the HHM&M survey
team identified 242 MEDIUM and 149 LOW priority properties for a total of 496
documented historic resources, While the majority of these properties do not individually
qualify for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, MEDIUM priority properties
are Contributing elements within eligible National Register districts and should themselves
be considered eligible in those cases, There are 109 MEDIUM priority properties located
within potential historic districts in the project area, MEDIUM properties outside eligible
districts are not candidates for listing but are valuable resources adding to the area's
overall character, The project area contains 133 MEDIUM priority properties which lie
outside the boundaries of potential historic districts as recommended in this report,
LOW priority properties are not considered eligible for NRHP listing and 149 were
identified throughout the project area, Those located within potential NRHP districts are
considered Noncontributing elements of such districts,

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 21

HISTO RIC DISTR ICTS

The results of the survey show that more than half of the project area's
historic
properties retain sufficient integrity to be considered Contributing elemen
ts of a potential
district. However, extensive alterations of the remaining properties,
loss of building fabric
throug h demolition and neglect, expanses of vacant land between histori
c resources, and
new (post-1 955) construction throughout the region preclude its consid
eration as a single
district. Rather, there are several distinct, cohesive groupings of histori
c properties that
are recommended as potentially eligible for NRHP listing as individual
historic districts
within the project area.
Several relatively intact concentrations of historic-period resources lie
to the north
of East 12th Street, east of Navasota along San Bernard and in a two-bl
ock area of New
York Street, and south of East lIth Street between San Marcos and
Lydia streets. These
potential districts include a diverse collection of residential properties,
small-scale
commercial enterprises and institutional buildings, primarily neighborhood
churches. Most
of the IDGH and MEDI UM properties in the survey area lie within these
proposed
districts. They include some of the oldest and most architecturally signifi
cant of the area's
resources with a few notable exceptions. It is recommended that bound
aries be drawn to
include as many historic properties as possible without compromisin
g the integrity of the
propos ed districts. Proposed districts are outlined on two survey maps
accompanying this
report and discussed in the Historic Districts section of this report. Recom
mended historic
districts are:
•

Juniper Street Historic District: 900 block ofJuni per Street and the
adjacent half-block of900 Olive Street

•

Swedish Hill Extension: 900-1000 blocks of East 13th and 14th streets
including affected properties on Olander, Waller, and Navasota

•

Thirteenth Street: 1200-1400 blocks of Bob Harrison, 1200-1600 blocks
and the south side of the 1700-1800 blocks of East 13 th Street, inclusi
ve of
properties on north-south streets (San Bernard, Angelina, Comal, Conch
o,
Leona, Salina and Chicon) contained within the boundaries (see maps
and
individual assessments).

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 22

•

San Bernard Historic District: 1100 block San Bernard and adjacent
properties on East 12th and Hackberry Streets (see maps and assessments)

•

New York Street: parts of the 1500 and 1600 blocks of New York (see
maps and individual assessments)

•

East 9th and 10th Street (Metropolitan District): 1000-1100 blocks of
East
9th Street, 1100 block of East 10th Street, and inclusive side streets of
Waller, Lydia and San Marcos. (see maps and individual assessments.

DATA COLLE CTION AND PRESE NTATI ON

Field Director and HHM&M Principal David Moore coordinated the encodi
ng and
analysis of field data. Associate Historian Laurie Gotcher entered the
survey information
into a database program as the Architectural Historians collected it in
the field. Field data
consisted of the identification, minimal documentation, and preliminary
assessment of all
apparent pre-1955 properties built within the East Austin project area.
Film was processed
and photographs for each surveyed property were labeled and placed
in individual
archivally stable sheet protectors. Sheets were arranged in address order
by street

address

and placed in three-ring binders. Numbered streets preceded named streets
. Photo index
sheets were produced for the photographic binders. Color "thumbnail"
prints produced
from the negatives serve as contact sheets.
Architectural Historians Jennifer Ross and Rick Mitchell completed survey
cards
created for the project by City of Austin Preservation Officer Barbara
Stocklin and
HHM& M staff These Historic Resources Inventory Forms contain physic
al information,
preservation priority, photo references and brief descriptions for each
property. Project
Director Terri Myers conducted individual city directory and Sanborn
map research for
each surveyed property. HIGH and MEDI UM preservation priorities
were further
investigated through oral histories and secondary sources including works
by local African
American historians W.H. Passon, 1. Mason Brewer and Ada Simond.
This information
was recorded separately on Historical Information Profile cards which
were placed in the
individual property files along with the survey forms and photographs.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 23

•

Each historic property was plotted on a field map of the survey area.
Two maps
were produced: one depicting HIGH, MEDI UM and LOW preservation
priorities and one
depicting National Register (NR) eligibility. Both maps outline recom
mended National
Register historic districts. All IDGH priority sites are depicted as NRHP
eligible, whether
or not they lie within potential NRHP districts. MEDI UM priority proper
ties within
recommended historic districts are also depicted as NRHP eligible and
are shown as
Contributing elements of such districts. LOW priority properties, regard
less of whether
they are in recommended historic districts, are depicted as ineligible for
NRHP listing. If
they lie within an outlined district, they should be considered as Nonco
ntributing features
of such districts. In both maps, properties are identified by address. The
maps are
included as appendices in this report. Larger scale maps were submitted
to the city as
attachments.
Two complete inventories of the surveyed properties are included in
appendices
to this report. One is the master inventory list containing descriptive
information and
preservation priorities. The other depicts NRHP eligibility for each proper
ty_ HIGH
priority and MEDI UM priority properties within recommended histori
c districts are listed
as NRHP eligible. MEDIUM priority properties lying outside recommende
d historic
districts are not considered to be individuaIIy eligible for NRHP listing.
LOW priority
properties are universally designated ineligible for the NRHP.

PRESE RVA nON PRIOR ITY EvALVA nON

After field and research teams completed their investigations, the Projec
t Director
and Architectural Historians reviewed each property and assigned final
preservation
priority ratings base upon current integrity and known historical associa
tions. This
evaluation reflects an assessment of each property's relative significance
and is intended to
provide guidance in planning decisions that may affect East Austin's surviv
ing historic
resources. The priority designations should not be considered static,
but can and should
be changed to reflect the evolving status of properties. As future rehabi
litation efforts

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 24

•

successfully res tore a building's hist
oric architectural integrity, tha t pro
perty's preservation
priority rating should be revised and
updated.
Buildings were placed in the IllG H
category because they contribute sign
ificantly
to local history or broader historical
patterns. They are considered to be
outstanding,
unique or goo d representative examp
les of architecture, engineering or
crafted design.
These buildings remain on their orig
inal sites and have undergone only
minimal alterations
since their construction, or they hav
e been altered in a manner compatible
with the original
design, materials, scale and workm
anship. They are excellent examples
of common local
building forms, architectural styles
or plan-types, and they retain a sign
ificant amount of
their original character and contextua
l integrity. In many cases, they mee
t criteria for
inclusion in the National Register as
individual properties. Iflo cat ed wit
hin a historic
district, they are classified as Contrib
uting elements of the district. They
are considered to
be the most significant resources in
the project area.
Included in the HIGH designation
category are 105 identified resourc
es in the
survey area. They are among the old
est, rarest, or best examples of buildin
g forms or
architectural styles in the Eas t Aus
tin survey area. Some are significant
as excellent local
examples of widely built architectura
l forms popular in the late 19th and
early 20th
centuries. Some are significant bec
ause of their associations with individ
uals who were
important in the development and hist
ory of Austin's African American com
munities.
Many properties are associated wit
h other ethnic groups that made sign
ificant
contributions to the area's developmen
t, particularly in the areas north of
East 12th Street
and south of Eas t 11th Street. Ger
man and Swedish names appear mo
st frequently as
early residents and merchants but Iris
h and Italian names figure prominentl
y, as well. The
Fiegel-Campbell House (1610-161
8 Pennsylvania, German and African
American), the
Carlson-Jar! House (903 East 14th
Street, Swedish), the Limerick-Fraz
ier House (810
East 13th Street, Irish and African
American) and Bailetti House (1006
Waller, Italian) are
stellar examples ofI llG H priority site
s that are associated with all of the
area's major
ethnic groups.

HIS TOR IC RES OU RCE S SUR VEY
OF EAS T AU STI N, TEXAS

PAG E 25

Still, other properties are outstanding examples of relatively rare archite
ctural
forms known to occur only in East Austin. Among the most notew orthy
is the cross
hipped roofL -plan type houses found throughout the project area. Those
at 902 and 904
Juniper Street are excellent examples of the distinctive type and are assess
ed as HIGH
preservation priorities rendering them eligible for the NRHP.
In some cases, buildings that have been altered with major changes in
scale or
materials also have been included in the HIGH catego ry because the
buildings were
associated with individuals or events of exceptional importance to East
Austin 's history.
Examples include the Herman Schieffer House at 1154 Lydia which
has had its porch
altered and original exterior materials obscured by stucco. However,
the building retains
its definitive plan type, form, roof form and pitch and, more importantly,
has strong
historic, developmental and cultural associations with the East Austin
project area. The
Herman Schieffer family established a business on the adjacent lot at
1122-24 East 11 th
Street about 1903, and continued to operat e a grocer y and meat marke
t throug h the
1940s. They redeveloped lots on the east side of Lydia for rental proper
ty and built
several homes for family members on Juniper and Lydia streets. Althou
gh their house is
altered, it is the best example of a property that reflects the Schieffer's
longstanding ties
with the community. In addition, the house served as the office of the
Negro Agricultural
Extension Agency from 1950, shortly after the service was established
for African
Americans in Travis county, to 1960. It was a significant statewide agency
and its
presence in East Austin was considered important to the African Ameri
can community.
The 242 buildings in the survey area designated as 'MEDIUM preser
vation
priorities were identified as contributing moderately to local history or
broade r historical
patterns. They display fewer character-defining architectural elements
than those in the
HIGH category. Although less developed in their architectural treatm
ents than buildings in
the HIGH priority group, the 'MEDIUM category includes buildings
that are
representative of building forms, architectural treatments or plan-types
common in Austin
and other Central Texas cities, and reflective of popular trends. They
are unlikely to meet
eligibility criteria for National Register listing on an individual basis,
but may qualify for a
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 26

state or local designation. However, since little historical information
was gathered on
these properties. more research may be needed before a final assessment
can be made.
Consequently, buildings in the .MEDIUM category may be upgraded
to HIGH if research
reveals important historical associations. When located within a histori
c district, they are
classified as Contributing and are considered eligible for listing in the
NRHP.
The MEDI UM priority category includes those buildings that have been
altered or
deteriorated such as to diminish their architectural integrity. However,
they must retain
sufficient architectural fabric and integrity as to be recognizable to their
period of
significance. This category also includes those historically or architecturall
y significant
buildings which, except for incompatible alterations, would have been
designated HIGH
priorities. An example of modifications that have resulted in reclassificatio
n from the
HIGH to MEDI UM property designation can be found in the Schief
fer Store at 1122-24
East 11 th Street. While the property has significant historic associations
with the historic
commercial development on East 1 I th Street, the exterior materials
and appearance have
been so altered that its value as a representative architectural form has
been compromised.
The designation of an altered historic property as a MEDI UM preser
vation priority
depends on the level, severity and irreversibility of alterations. Theref
ore they should be
evaluated on an individual basis
The 149 buildings in the project area classified as LOW preservation
priorities
generally typifY more recent common local building forms, architectural
styles or plantypes, with no known historical significance. In some cases, they have
been altered so
extensively that they have lost their salient, character-defining archite
ctural features and
are no longer recognizable as historic buildings. Thus, they are design
ated as LOW
priorities for preservation. Buildings in the LOW priority classification
also are examples
of distinctive building forms, architectural styles or plan-types that are
of minor historical
significance or are moderately to severely altered using inappropriate
methods, materials
or scale, or are deteriorated.
Typically, because of lack of historical associations or limited integrity,
such
buildings do not meet the eligibility criteria for National Register listing
on an individual
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 27

•

basis. Although architectural integrity is often a problem for these proper
ties, more
historical research may be required before a final assessment can be made.
When located
in a historic district, the severity of alterations or lack of compatible
character may render
the property a Noncontributing feature of the district. An example of
a severely altered,
but well-maintained building in the LOW category can be seen at 1206
(rear) East 9th
Street. This ca. 1900 building has been so completely altered by the
enclosure of its porch
and front additions that it is unrecognizable to its historic period.
ANALYSIS OF DATA AND REpOR T PREPA RATIO N

When the research phase was completed, the Ms. Myers and Ms. Ross
composed
succinct statements detailing the condition and alterations of surveyed
properties. These
statements summarized the architectural merits and historical data of
each resource. Each
statement was entered into the survey database and appears on the Survey
Data Form or
Historical Information Profile form, as appropriate. A historic name
was derived for as
many of the MEDI UM and HIGH priority sites as could be identified.
In most cases, the
historic name is that of the original owner, or that of the most locally
known occupant
before 1955. However, in some cases, the historic name also includes
a subsequent
family, business or institution with a significant long-term occupancy
or association with
the property.
Surveyors also encountered some difficulty determining the ages of resour
ces due
to successive or extensive alterations, particularly in the oldest areas
of the Project Area.
Sanborn fire insurance maps proved useful to more accurately assess
building age and
changes in the building footprints over the years. In addition, the area's
preponderance of
vernacular building forms challenged the staffs ability to categorize,
date and define
property types. The city's 19th and 20th century historic resources exhibit
a blend of
different vernacular traditions spanning nearly 100 years, from Recon
struction era
properties dating to the 1870s into the Cold War period of the 1950s.
The final step of the project was the preparation of the survey report.
The data
was analyzed by the Project Director. Some properties were reassessed
and assigned
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 28

•

different preservation priorities after they were compa red with the overall
historic building
stock in the East Austin survey area. Information gleaned from oral
histories and
secondary sources indicating that they possessed significant historic
associations raised the
status of some propenies. Discussions of the survey scope, methodology
, data, findings
and recommendations were developed and the historic overvi ew was
edited and finalized.
SURVE Y MATE RIALS

Once the field work and the research were completed, historic and physic
al
descriptive materials were entered into a computerized databa se progra
m. and the survey
materials were processed and finalized. Each identified historic proper
ty received a unique
site number that was used to plot the location of the resour ce on two
Project Area survey
maps. One map depicts properties by preservation priority while the
other depicts
properties as either eligible or ineligible for National Register listing.
Both maps indicate
boundaries of proposed historic districts. They are included in the append
ix.
Survey materials include Historic Resources Inventory forms and Histor
ical
Information Profile forms for each property. Inventory cards were compl
eted for all sites
on forms developed HHM& M staff and the City of Austin Historic Preser
vation Officer.
They are organized in address order beginning with numbered streets
and followed by
named streets in alphabetical order. Each form has descriptive inform
ation and a detailed
section on alterations and their severity. Research data is presented
on the Historic
Resources Inventory forms with additional notes containing basic inform
ation on early
residents and owners, their ethnicity and occupations presented separa
tely on Historical
Information Profile cards. This information was collected for as many
sites as possible.
Discrepancies in addresses over the years. particularly for the oldest
properties, along with
the relocation of some historic properties to the area in more recent
time, made it difficult
to associate every resource with an individual. In those cases, only
the most recent
information was included. Research notes are recorded on Historical
Information Profile
cards and inserted behind the Historic Resources Inventory forms for
each property.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 29

Other work products include mUltiple color 35mm exposures and digital
ly
generated color contact sheets for each surveyed property. Color photog
raphs taken

with

35mm t1lm were processed for all properties regardless of priority assessm
ent. All
photog raphs for an individual property were placed in archival sleeve
s along with its
survey and historical information cards. The archival sheets are organi
zed in seven binder
(see below). Indices to the photog raphed properties are filed at the
front of the binders
and are cross-referenced by site number and address. The photo index
sheets indicate
multiple exposu res for sites photog raphed more than once. Three sets
of color contac t
sheets are provided to the City of Austin as part of the report. Negati
ves that correspond
to the contac t sheets are placed in protective sleeves. Only one set
of negatives is
provided and this set should be properly archived.
Survey, research and photographic materials were placed in individual
archival
sheets divided into upper and lower sleeves. Survey and research inform
ation cards were
placed in the upper sleeve and photographs in the lower sleeve of each
sheet. The
individual sheets were then placed in seven binders organized by proper
ty address. Work
produc ts are presented separately from the survey report in three sets
of seven binders
organized numerically and alphabetically by street address. Three compl
ete sets of survey
materials are presented to the city. Oral history tapes and transcripts,
and historic
photog raphs and other artifacts collected during this project will be
archived at the Austin
History Center. A synopsis of the formal interviews is included in the
References section
of this survey report.

OBSER VATIO NS

Today, the greatest threats to East Austin 's historic resour ces are redeve
lopment
and demolition by neglect. Many of the city's most significant histori
c and architectural
resources have been abandoned and are subject to vandalism and deterio
ration simply
because they are not occupied and maintained. In fact, many of the
project area's most
significant, HIGH priority sites are vacant. Among the most import
ant abandoned city
landmarks and unique architectural resources are properties at 900,
904 and 1002 Juniper
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 30

s

Street, the Detrick-Hamilton House (912 East 11 th Street), the Conno
lly-Y erwood House
(1115 East 12th Street), the Lawsha House (1117 East 12th Street), the
D.R. Woodard
House (1301 East 12th) Street, the Salvatore Bailetti House (1006 Waller
), the Hennan
Schieffer House (1154 Lydia) and Store (1122-1124 East 11th Street)
, and Arnold's
Bakery (1010 E. 11th Street). All of these are recognized as significant
historic
properties, yet they remain abandoned and decrepit. Lesser known but
architecturally
interesting and/or rare properties exist in similar states of neglect throug
hout the project
area.
Equally alanning is the rate at which historic properties are disappearing
in East
Austin. Important historic landmarks, either determined eligible for listing
in the NRHP or
recognized and commemorated by local residents, have been demolished
before efforts
could be made to save them. These include the Charles W. Barnes House
(1105 East 12th
Street), the People 's Business College (1118-1120 East 12th Street) and
two NR.HP
eligible Shotgun houses (1006 and 1008 Juniper Street). Several histori
c properties on
New York Street were razed during the course of the field investigation
s which began in
April 2000.

•

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 31

RECOMMENDATIONS

OVERVIEW

The East Austin Cultural Resources Survey has the potential to serve as the basis
for future historic preservation planning for the area. Its usefulness as a planning tool will
depend upon the City's willingness to support subsequent preservation programs to
manage important historic properties and districts. An important factor in the city's
success will be its ability to enlist public support for these programs. Effective
preservation programs can result in substantial economic and infrastructural benefits for
older neighborhoods and historic commercial districts through heritage tourism, adaptive
use of historic building stock, increased rental and retail potential, and incentives for
capital reinvestment and improvements in the central city. It is crucial that the city
articulate these benefits to its citizens and encourage their participation to implement a
meaningful preservation program.
Less tangible, but equally important goals include resource conservation and a
renewed sense of identity and purpose for the East Austin and its residents. The key to
this effort by the public and private sectors will be to identity, prioritize, and implement
programs to follow this survey. These essential activities include:

Planning & Development
•

Support of the city preservation officer

•

Computerization of the survey data

•

Development and adoption of a preservation plan

•

Adoption of a design manual to serve as a guide for owners oflocal
landmarks or properties lying in designated historic districts

•

Integration of survey information into overall city planning procedures such
as demolition permits or expenditure of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) or Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 32

•

Incentives such as limited property tax abatement for renovation of
designated local landmarks when done in accordance with adopted design
guidelines.

Utilizing State & Federal Programs
•

Investigate participating in the Certified Local Government (CLG) program
through the Texas Historical Commission (THC)

•

Nominate HIGH priority properties to the National Register

•

Nominate eligible districts to the National Register

•

Encourage owners of National Register eligible properties to pursue federal
tax credits for rehabilitation of income-producing (rental or commercial)
properties

•

Obtain THC markers for other historic buildings and sites

•

Investigate rehabilitation funds available through the THC for the
restoration of significant properties.

Research & Education
•

Provide copies of survey data to public and private groups, libraries, and
other repositories

•

Develop materials for promotion of local history and school curriculums,
such as driving tours, slide shows or video tape productions, using existing
survey materials

•

Create a slide show from the survey products for broadcast on the Public
Access channel

•

Continue research and discussion on inventoried properties

All survey materials should be reviewed by local historians and city officials. Any
data to be added or corrected, such as historical information, changes of condition or
preservation priority, should be systematically recorded and incorporated into the survey
materials, database and revised reports. Following the initial corrections or changes, the
original documents should be carefully maintained under archivally stable conditions. An
HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 33

archivist should be consulted to determine the most appropriate way to store, conserve
and reproduce the survey materials. A designated copy of the documents, including the
data file, should be overseen by a specified person or group and used as the "marking
copy" for long-term changes. New information should be dated and identified by source
for future reference.
Research materials should be copied and originals stored in a safe place. The
survey binders contain sleeves that allow for the insertion of additional materials gathered
during subsequent research efforts. This system will allow for supplemental historical
information to be easily integrated with already completed research. This information can
then be easily accessed for National Register, State Historical Marker nominations or local
landmark applications.
Copies or portions of the survey report should be distributed to Austin History
Center, the Carver Museum and Library and possibly the Center for American History,
University of Texas at Austin. Interested history and genealogy groups and individuals
should be able to obtain the survey report for a nominal fee, perhaps the cost of
reproduction.

As soon as possible, survey results should become a part of the city planning
process. For all city programs that affect changes in land use, such as construction or
demolition permits, Community Development Block Grant funded programs, or that affect
the built landscape in any way, the survey sites should be cross-referenced with other city
records. Properties that are included in the survey could be coded on city records as a
method of reviewing permit applications. At the very least, the HIGH and MEDIUM
priority sites should receive an automatic review when changes affecting such properties
are imminent. Since the priority ratings are based principally on the current level of
integrity of documented properties, additional research should be undertaken before any
decision is made regarding the fate of any historic resource. This is particularly important
for MEDIUM priority properties because little is known about the histories of these
buildings.

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 34

Part of the city's preservation plan should include the establishment ofloca
l historic
districts, based on the results of this survey and existing National Regist
er nominations.
Recommended City Landmark properties are those designated as mGH
priorities in the
inventory. Local designations can be accomplished in conjunction with
nominations to the
National Regist er of Historic Places. National Register Historic Distric
t nominations can
serve as the basis for establishing local historic districts with overlay
zoning status. The
Austin Landm ark Commission, using a guidebook based on the Secret
ary of the Interior's
Standards and Guidelines for Historic Preservation, should review all
proposed design
changes, demolitions and new construction within designated local histori
c districts or to
local historic landmarks.
Effective preservation is inclusive rather than exclusive and an effort
should be
made to involve as many residents in the program as possible. The city
is encouraged to
continue the oral history and photo heritage day programs begun in this
project. Ongoing
educational programs can be established to inform citizens about the
importance of
preserving historic architectural resources and about the incentives and
proper procedures
for doing so. The survey photos and research data can be used to create
displays, exhibits
and supplement lectures on the physical development and history of
East Austin. East
Austin 's rich architectural heritage and contributions to the city's history
can be promoted
with brochures, pamphlets and tour directories that could be distributed
at city offices,
restaurants and tourist attractions or inserted in city mailings. Video
and slide
presentations can be prepared using photos and data from the survey
for loan to schools,
civic and service groups or to be presented by a speakers bureau. Select
ed survey
materials should be incorporated into activities celebrating local history
such as on-site
studies of architecture, historical events, important individuals or familie
s, industry,
commerce and other relevant topics and at local or regional celebrations.
Rathe r than an end, this project should be considered the beginning of
an ongoing
effort to catalo g and understand East Austin's invaluable and irreplaceable
historic
properties. Supplemental photographic documentation, architectural
evaluation and
historical research should continue on all surveyed sites. Local histori
ans, students from
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 35

the high school and middle schools and especially Huston-Tillotson Colleg
e, civic
volunteers and members of historical or service groups should be encour
aged to perform
in-depth research such as examination of county records, tax rolls, and
Sanborn maps, as
well as condu cting oral histories and examining local newspaper files.
Owners of historic
properties, previous owners, or their descendants should be made aware
of the survey
results and encou raged to investigate family documents and photographs.
Questionnaires
prepared by the city could be utilized as an information gathering tool.
Historic
photographs from private and public collections should be photoc opied
and added to the
survey files. Updated photographs should be taken of significant sites,
especially if
changes are imminent or demolition is pending. Important unaltered
interiors should be
documented and photographed.
By undertaking these activities, the commitment and investment the
city has
made will be realized. It is important to note that this survey and the
materials produced
from it are intended to be working, non-static documents because the
survey is the city's
primary tool for future cultural resource management.

HISTO RIC DESIG NATIO NS

The Natio nal Register of Historic Places
A primary goal of this investigation was the identification of individual
properties
and historic districts that could be eligible for listing in the National Regist
er of Historic
Places (NRHP). The NRHP is maintained by the National Park Servic
e within the U.S.
Department of the Interior and serves as an official list of the nation's
most significant
historical and cultural properties. The NRHP program is a federal undert
aking and is
administered in all states and territories of the United States. In Texas,
the Texas
Historical Commission is responsible for overseeing the NRHP progra
m, which is separate
from and independent of the Texas State Marke r and Recor ded Texas
Historic Landmarks
programs. The NRHP includes buildings, sites, structures or objects
at least 50 years old
that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship
AND are
important for at least one of the following: associations with significant
events or trends;
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 36

•

association with significant individuals; architectural, artistic or design
merits; or historic
or pre-historic archeology.
Following receipt of this survey report, the City of Austin should consid
er
nominating several historic districts and numerous individual properties
scattered
throughout the project area to the NRHP under the umbrella of the existin
g East Austin
Multiple Prope rty nomination. Although a Multiple-Property NRHP
Nomination has been
prepared for East Austin (Freeman, 1985), it should be supplemented
to include a fully
developed Historic Context that explores themes such as Reconstructi
on-era settlement of
African Americans, the influx of European immigrant groups including
early Swedish,
Irish, Italian and German settlers in the area and the relationship of these
groups to one
another.

An expanded Historic Context will explore the contributions of these groups
to the
development of East lIth and East 12th streets as commercial and enterta
inment
corridors. More specifically, it should discuss the influence of the jazz
and blues clubs on
East 11 th Street. It would also explore demographic changes in the area,
from pockets of
distinctive Mrica n American and immigrant settlements in the mid-to
late-19th century, to
a racially mixed commercial and neighborhood setting in the early 20 th
century, to an
almost exclusively African American neighborhood from the early- to
mid-20th century
and, finally, the advent of Mexicans and Mexican Americans in the area.
The context
should also investigate the impact of desegregation on institutions, particu
larly schools,
and its corresponding effect on the area's cultural resources.
The Prope rty Types section, another important component of the Multip
leProperty nomination, should expand the analysis of architectural trends
and patterns in the
project area. Immigrant, Mrica n American and Hispanic influence on
vernacular building
traditions in the area should be further investigated in the Prope rty Types
section. Please
note that Historic Context and Property Type sections can be supplemente
d in the future.
Moreover, properties other than those currently recommended can and
should be added to
the Multiple-Property Nomination as more research is undertaken and
successful

HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 37

restoration projects are completed. A thorough discussion ofNR HP
criteria and
nomination process is detailed in an appendix.
Properties and districts within the survey area that should be considered
for the
NRHP are discussed in the following section, Properties to Consider for
Historic

Designation. Individual National Register recommendations are listed
in a separate
inventory Nation al Register Assessments. IllGH and MEDI UM preser
vation priorit

ies
identify the individual properties in the current project area that presen
tly appear to be the
strongest candidates for inclusion in the NRHP, either individually (IllGH
priorities) or as
part ofa historic district (IllGH and MEDI UM priorities). Areas with
good
concentrations of HIGH and MEDI UM priority properties are strong
candidates for
historic district designations and boundary recommendations for such
districts follow

the

list of MEDI UM priorities.

Texas Historical Markers
The Texas Historical Commission, besides coordinating National Regist
er efforts
in Texas, also oversees a state marker program whereby medallions are
placed at a site or
on a building that is considered historic. These medallions represent the
Texas Historical
Commission's most visible and widely recognized program and are admin
istered by the
Local History Programs department. The two types of medallions are
1) subject markers
that acknowledge the contributions of a locally important individual, event
or trend in
history or commemorate cemeteries, or 2) Recorded Texas Historic Landm
ark markers
which are placed on buildings and structures that are at least 50 years
old that possess
architectural significance and integrity. More detailed information about
the program can
be obtained from the Texas Historical Commission's Local History Progra
ms department.
It is important to emphasize that the NRHP and State Marker progra
ms are administered
by two different departments, each utilizing their own criteria for evalua
tion.
More research is needed before a definitive list of potential medallion
properties
can be determined, but as a general guide, the most likely candidates for
participation in
the state marker program will come from the HIGH priority individual
properties that
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 38

appear s in the appendix National Register Assessments.

This list is based upon known

historical data associated with the proper ty and/or its presen t condit
ion. As subseq uent
researc h yields more information or if restora tion projec ts recove r
once-l ost archite ctural
significance, additional properties may be consid ered for such design
ation.
The Travis County Historical Comm ission should identify individual
East Austin
area proper ties for State Historical Marke r designations. Several HIGH
priorit y sites may
posses s significant architectural qualities and be eligible for design
ation as Recor ded Texas
Histor ic Landm arks (RTHL ). In some cases, the commission wishes
to comm emora te
gravesites, historic events or locations of former proper ties which
have since been
demolished or moved. In such instances, or where a historic proper
ty no longer retains

its

archite ctural integrity, state subject marke rs (SM) may be approp riate.

PROP ERTIE S TO CONSIDER FOR DESIGNATIONS

Indivi dual Properties: High Priorities
All proper ties classified in the HIGH preser vation priority catego ry
(See Historic
Resources Inventory) are recom mende d for individual listing in the NRHP
. They are
design ated as eligible for listing in the NRHP in the National Regist
er Assessments in the
appendix. Resou rces included as HIGH preser vation priorities in the
Invent ory are
regard ed as notew orthy becaus e of their relative historical and/or archite
ctural
significance. Althou gh some of the structu res design ated as HIGH
priority are altered,
they retain their charac ter and architectural integrity from the period
in which they
achiev ed their significance.
Proper ties considered for historic design ation becaus e of their archite
ctural
significance can either be an outsta nding examp le of a unique or comm
on architectural
style or form, or exhibit particularly notew orthy craftsmanship or design
qualities. These
structu res must retain a high level of integrity. The replacement, remov
al, or coveri ng
over of structu ral or decora tive feature s will diminish a notabl e proper
ty's opport unity for
historic archite ctural designation. Other proper ties may be consid ered
HIGH priorities
becaus e they are associated with significant historic trends or people
. The proper ty must
HISTO RIC RESOtTRCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 39

,

still retain sufficient architectural integrity to be recognizable to their
period of
significance.
The appendices Historic Resources Inventory and Nation al Register
Assessments
following this report contain assessments of each surveyed property.
The inventory
identifies properties by preservation priority (IDGH, MEDI UM and
LOW), while the
assessments recommend properties as eligible or ineligible for listing
in the NRHP. HIGH
priority proper ties and MEDI UM priority properties within historic
districts are
considered the strongest candidates for historic designations at the presen
t time. The
evaluations are based upon known historical associations and/or archite
ctural integrity and
significance. Properties were considered in their curren t condition and
did not take into
consideration planned, anticipated or on-goi ng restora tion projects.
Supplemental
research is also needed before a final determination can be made. Many
of these individual
properties are in areas with a high concentration of relatively intact
historic resources that
are recommended as historic districts in the following section.

Historic Districts
Most historic district designations in Texas are initiated with their listing
in the
NRHP. The process used for the NRHP is often more refined, broade
r in scope, and has
less impact on private ownership than, for instance, local historic zoning
ordinances.
Many cities extract NRHP criteria for their own district legislation and
often add other
binding components, as well as limited tax abatements. It is the recom
mendation of this
report that the city pursue local historic district status for the areas determ
ined eligible for
listing in the NRHP.
State markers for historic areas (usually subject markers) are also placed
in
neighborhoods after they have been listed in the NRHP as historic distric
ts. For this
reason, the proced ures for identifYing state markers is intentionally aligned
with federal
guidelines for the NRHP.
The National Park Service requires that several conditions be met before
a historic
district can be considered for listing in the NRHP. The district must
convey a strong sense
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 40

of the past and possess a high concentration of relatively unaltered histori
c properties
within a well-defined area. At least 50 percent of the total number of
buildings should

be

classified as "Contributing" to the historic character of the district. Moreo
ver, the
boundaries must be determined logically and avoid gerrymandering to
achieve the
required, 50-percent, contributing threshold.
The NRHP defines a "Contributing" property as a building, site, structu
re or object
that "adds to the historic architectural qualities, historic associations,
or archeological
values for which a property is significant because: a) it was present during
the period of
significance and possesses historic integrity reflecting its character at
that time or is
capable of yielding important information about the period, or b) it indepe
ndently meets
the NRHP criteria" (McLelland 1986:42). Thus, they must contribute
to or enhance the
district's ability to evoke a sense of the past, most often to a specific
period of time.
Contributing buildings are at least 50 years old and are either unaltered
or have had
relatively minor and reversible nonhistoric changes.
A proper ty that detracts from the district's historic character is classif
ied as
"Noncontributing" and includes a building, site, structure or object that
"does not add to
the historic architectural qualities, historic associations, or archeologica
l values for which
a property is significant because: a) it was not present during the period
of significance, b)
due to alterations, disturbances, additions, or other changes, it no longer
possesses historic
integrity reflecting its character at that time or is incapable of yieldin
g important
information about that period, or c) it does not independently meet the
NRHP criteria"
(McLelland 1986:42). In other words, properties built less than 50 years
ago or historic
structures that have been changed within the last 50 years to such an
extent that they no
longer resemble their original and/or historic appearance are considered
"Noncontributing. "
After a careful analysis of noteworthy concentrations of historic structu
res, the
East Austin residential areas noted below are recommended for consid
eration as NRHP
historic districts. Maps accompanying this report identify the concen
trations of historic
properties that constitute the following propos ed historic districts:
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 41

•

Juniper Street Historic District: 900 block of Juniper Street and adjacent
half block of900 Olive Street

•

Swedish Hill Extension: 900-1000 blocks of East 13th and 14th streets

•

Thirteenth Street: 1200-1400 blocks of Bob Harrison, 1200-1600 blocks
and the south side of the 1700-1800 blocks of East 13th Street, inclusive of
properties on north-south streets (San Bernard, Angelina, Comal, Concho,
Leona, Salina and Chicon) within the district.

•

San Bernard Historic District: 1100 block San Bernard and adjacent
properties on East 12th and Hackberry Streets

•

New York Street: part of the 1500 and 1600 blocks of New York

•

East 9th and 10th Street (Metropolitan District): 1000-1100 blocks of East
9th Street, 1100 block of East 10th Street, and inclusive side streets
(Waller, Lydia and San Marcos)

Juniper Street Historic District
A large, central section of the project area, between and including East 11 th and
East 12th streets, has suffered extensive loss of historic fabric from demolition and/or
redevelopment. The 900 block of Juniper Street and houses in the adjacent 900 block of
Olive Street constitute the last relatively intact concentration of related historic properties
in what was once a densely-populated, exclusively African American enclave between East
lIth and 12th Streets.
In 1993, the Texas Historical Commission determined that properties in the 900
block and the north side of the 1000 block of Juniper Street, including an adjacent
property at 1166 Curve Street (since demolished), to be eligible for listing in the NRHP as
a historic district. An NRHP nomination was initiated for the district but halted pending
the outcome of a dispute between Anderson Community Development Corporation
(ACnC) and the City of Austin. Since it was determined eligible, five of the fifteen
properties in the potential district have been lost to demolition or fire (906, 1004, 1006

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 42

and 1008 Junipe r and 1166 Curve). Althou gh 1004 Juniper was determ
ined ineligible by
the THC, it would now meet age criteria as a Contributing property.
As a result of these losses, only two historic proper ties remain on the
north side of
the 1000 block ofJuni per, and they are separa ted by three vacant lots.
Thus, it is the
recom menda tion of this report that the 1000 block of Juniper no longer
meets eligibility
for inclusion in the historic district. Howev er, other properties should
be considered for
inclusion in addition to those already determined Contributing to the
district by the THe.
They include houses in the 900 block of Olive Street which is adjace
nt to Junipe r Street
and shares its historic associations with the earliest African American
settlement in the
project area. The house at 902 Olive has been determined individually
eligible for NR by
the THe. The other properties in the block were assessed as MEDI
UM priority
proper ties in this survey, making them Contributing elements of the
district. Therefore, it
is recom mende d that the 900 block of Junipe r Street and the adjace
nt half-block of the
900 block of Olive Street should now consti tute the Juniper-Olive Street
Historic District.
In addition to changes in the propos ed historic district, furthe r researc
h and
reassessment indicates that two proper ties previously determined ineligi
ble for NR listing
should be upgrad ed for their historic and/or architectural significance.
Recen t research
indicates that the house at 1012 Juniper (Eliza Bell House ) is of pivota
l historic
significance to the African American settlement of the area. The house
has been
designated a High preservation priority in this survey and is recom mende
d individually
eligible for NRHP listing. Likewise, the house at 1009 Juniper Street
has been reassessed
as significant for architectural merit and historic associations with the
early development
of this African American Recon structi on Era community and should
also be considered
individually eligible for listing in the NRHP.
Under current conditions, it is the recommendation of this report that
a historic
district still exists in the 900 block ofJuni per Street. Furthermore,
the 900 block of Olive
Street, by virtue of its concentration of related historic properties and
adjacent location,
warran t its inclusion in a joint Juniper-Olive Street Historic District.
Howev er, any further
loss of historic building fabric will threate n the district's integrity. Intenti
ons to move
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE 43

.'

historic buildings into the street's vacant lots from elsewhere in the project area, along
with plans for new construction, further jeopardize the district's status. To protect its
eligibility and that of High priority properties in the 1000 block of Juniper, redevelopment
plans should be closely coordinated with THC staff.

San Bernard Historic District
Architecturally, San Bernard Street contains the finest, most intact properties of
the project area's potential historic districts. In 1993, the THC determined the three block
length of San Bernard Street and several adjacent properties on Hackberry, Cotton and
East Twelfth Street, eligible for listing in the NRHP. Although our survey area did not
include all of the east side of San Bernard, our maps recognize that it should be included
in the potential historic district. It is our recommendation that 1152 to 1198 San Bernard
Street and adjacent properties at 1301 East 12th Street and 1208 Hackberry, is a good
candidate for both local and National Register recognition as a historic district.
It is primarily residential but contains a large, influential church (Wesley Chapel
M.E Church) and a neighborhood store (outside the survey area, approximately 1161 San
Bernard). Two distinct periods of historic construction are represented in the district.
The earliest houses are late 19th/early 20th century L-plan and Modified L-plan dwellings,
some with Classical Revival or Queen Anne ornamentation. They were originally
associated with white residents, primarily German merchants. The second period is
characterized by Craftsman or Tudor influenced bungalows and most of these were built at
a time when African Americans were predominant in the neighborhood. San Bernard is
recognized within the Mrican American community as a neighborhood of professionals
including doctors and teachers. Most of the houses are larger, more substantial dwellings
than those found in concentrations elsewhere in the project area. They share uniform
setback and landscape features. There are few intrusions or vacant lots in the district and
nearly all of the houses are well-maintained.

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 44

Ninth- Ten th Str eet Historic Distric
t (M etro pol itan His tor ic District)
In 1993, the Texas Historical Com
mission detennined tha t the 1100 blo
ck of East
Tenth Str eet constituted a historic
district they termed the Metropolit
an Historic District
for Metropolitan African Methodist
Episcopal Church which lies within
the district.
IllI M& M survey results indicate tha
t the 1000 block of Eas t Ten th Stre
et lacks sufficient
historic fabric for inclusion but tha
t the 1000-1100 blocks of Eas t 9th
Street possess
equally intact, historic properties as
East 10th Street and should be incl
uded in the
Metropolitan Historic District. Wh
ile Ebenezer Baptist Church, which
is individually
eligible for NR, lies within the 100
0 block of East 10th Street, the rem
ainder of the block
includes a variety of new constructio
n and altered historic properties tha
t lack the
architectural characteristics exhibit
ed by houses in located in the 1100
block of East 10th
and in the 1000-1100 block of Eas
t 9th Street.
Properties in the proposed Metropolit
an Historic District include a variety
of late
19th and early 20t h century dwellin
gs, principally L-plan and Modified
L-plan houses with
ornamental wo od porch and window
treatments and early Classical Revival
and/or
Craftsman influenced bungalows. Mo
st pre-date the presence of Metrop
olitan AM .E. and
wer e originally owned by white fam
ilies, many of whom had German surn
ames. With the
construction of Metropolitan AM .E.
Church in 1923 and the adoption ofa
city plan to
relocate Afiican Americans from cen
tral neighborhoods to the Austin's
east side in 1929,
more African Americans moved into
the area. They purchased homes alon
g East 10th and
East 9th streets within a block of Ebe
nezer Baptist and Metropolitan AM
.E. , two of the
city's most influential African Americ
an churches.
Hispanic families moved to the are
a during the early- to mid-20th cen
tury, as well.
Ou r Lady of Guadalupe Catholic Chu
rch, established about 1935 at 901
Lydia
(intersection with Eas t 9th Street)
was both a reflection of Hispanic sett
lement in East
Austin and an attraction to further
Hispanic growth, primarily to the eas
t of Lydia Street.
The present Ou r Lady of Guadalup
e Church was built in 1953 and lies
outside the
proposed Metropolitan Historic Dis
trict.

HIS TO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY

OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 45

Although the south side of Eas t Nin
th is outside the project area, a reco
nnaissance
survey of the street shows that mo
st would be considered Contributin
g elements of a
potential district and thus NR eligible
. Some are already City of Austin
Landmarks and/or
listed in the National Register. The
refore, it is the recommendation of
this report that the
Metropolitan Historic District encom
pass the 1100 block of Eas t 10th
Street, between
Waller and Lydia Streets, the 1000-1
100 blocks of Eas t 9th Str eet betwee
n San Marcos
and Waller Streets, and properties
fronting side streets within the se bou
ndaries. These
areas constitute distinct residential
grouping with historically and archite
cturally related
properties. It should be noted that
similar properties to lie on streets to
the south, outside
the survey area. Further research wo
uld be needed to determine the sou
thern boundaries
of the Metropolitan Historic Distric
t.

Th irte ent h Str eet Historic District
Lar ge numbers of HIG H and ME DIU
M priority properties are scattered
along the
entire lengths of east-west oriented
Eas t 13th, Eas t 14th and Bob Harriso
n streets, and on
the intersecting north-west side stre
ets within the project area. Almost
exclusively
residential, the entire region north
of the more commercial Eas t 12th
Street was analyzed
for its potential as a single historic
district. However, new constructio
n, severely altered
or deteriorated houses and numero
us vacant lots interspersed am ong
the historic
properties present intrusions that inte
rrupt the area's historic compositio
n and detract from
its character. Along East 13th Stre
et, in particular, excellent concentrat
ions of historic
properties -- primarily Craftsman infl
uenced bungalows -- are interrupted
by expanses of
nonhistoric or severely altered proper
ties and vacant lots.
Historic associations present anothe
r impediment to forming a single, coh
esive
district in the area north of East 12t
h Street. Swedish immigrants largely
settled the
western portion of the area, west of
Navasota to East Avenue, now IH35. With some
notable exceptions, Swedes maintai
ned their presence in that are a well
into the mid-20th
century. The eastern stretches of Eas
t 13th, 14th and Bob Harrison stre
ets, east of
Navasota Street and Beth Israel/O
akwood Cemetery, however, we re
occupied almost
HIS TO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY
OF EAS T AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAG E 46

exclusively by African Americans by
the turn of the century and through
out the 20th
century. Therefore, the western sec
tion containing the 900-1000 blocks
of Eas t 13th and
14th streets, is recommended for incl
usion in the existing Swedish Hill His
toric District
while a new district is recommended
for the concentrations of historic pro
perties along
Eas t 13th, Bo b Harrison and related
portions of intersecting north-south
streets. Eas t
14th Street, east of Navasota, is disc
ontinued at Oakwood Cemetery for
several blocks
and its eastern extension (1500-210
0 blocks) does not share the concen
tration and pattern
of residential development apparent
in Eas t 13th Street and Bob Harriso
n. Therefore it is
not included as part of the proposed
Thirteenth Street historic district.
The proposed Thirteenth Street hist
oric district contains goo d concentrat
ions of
largely residential properties that hav
e traditionally been associated with
African American
homeowners and residents. A particu
larly intact section of the proposed
district is found
in the 1500-1600 block of Eas t 13t
h Street, between Angelina and Leo
na streets and
including the 1300 block of Concho
(west side). Good concentrations of
architecturally
and historically related properties are
found on the south side of the 1200
block and on
both sides of the 1300 block of Eas
t 13th Street. Although the analog
ous blocks of Bob
Harrison Street are not as intact as
the 1500-1600 block of Eas t 13th Stre
et, they contain
a high percentage of Contributing bui
ldings and follow the early 20th cen
tury patterns
established on Eas t 13th Street. Wit
h the exception ofa handful of late
-19th century
farmhouses, streets within the propos
ed district appear to have been dev
eloped about the
same time and share similar property
types and residential construction pat
terns such as
uniform set back, lot size, orientation
and landscaping. Together they imp
art a strong
sense of place as an early 20th century
, middle-class African American nei
ghborhood.
The proposed district's southern bou
ndary follows the northern property
lines of
1200-1800 Eas t 12th Street, from Nav
asota to Chicon. The western bounda
ry of the
proposed Thirteenth Street district
follows Navasota Street, a north-sout
h thoroughfare
through the community that historic
ally separated the early Swedish sett
lement to the west
from the somewhat later African Am
erican community that developed to
the east. The
northern boundary follows the alley
behind Bob Harrison Street which
defines Oakwood
HIS TO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY
OF EAST

AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 47

,

Cemetery from Navasota to Comal,
where Bob Harrison ends. From Com
al, the line jog s
sou th to include the both sides of the
1500-1600 blocks of East 13th Stre
et and adjacent
properties fronting Comal, Concho
and Leona streets. Du e to severe inte
grity loss, the
north side of the 1700-1800 blocks
of East 13th Street are excluded from
the proposed
district which ends at Chicon Street.
As discussed earlier, integrity loss
and development
patterns in the analogous blocks of
Eas t 14th Street render it incompat
ible with the rest of
the district and therefore these blocks
are not included.
Although goo d examples of shotgu
n houses, bungalows and other hist
oric
residential properties exist in the blo
cks of Eas t 13th Street further east,
the Thirteenth
Street district loses its cohesiveness
beyond Chicon Street. Vacant lots
and incompatible
intrusions on bot h sides of the street
detract from integrity of the district
east of Chicon
and Chicon Street itself, a busy nor
th-south thoroughfare, forms a phy
sical barrier to
pedestrian traffic between the two
sections. Chicon Street, thus determines
the
easternmost boundary of the propos
ed Thirteenth Historic District.

Swedish Hill His tori c Dis tric t Ext
ension
The north side of the 900-1000 blo
cks of Eas t 14th Street is already liste
d in the
NRHP as par t of the Swedish Hill His
toric District (NR 1985). A single
house on the
south side of the street, 903 East 14th
Street, is included in the listed district
. Survey
results and research indicate that the
boundaries of the Swedish Hill His
toric District
should be extended to include all of
the properties on south side of 900
-1 000 East 14th
Street and the adjacent blocks of Eas
t 13th Street (north and south sides).
While not as
architecturally cohesive as the existing
Swedish Hill Historic District, these
properties
exhibit similar characteristics and sha
re its historic associations with Aus
tin's Swedish
immigrant population.
New Yo rk His tor ic Dis tric t
A distinct, cohesive collection of late
-19th and early 20th century proper
ties exists
along a single, long block (1500-160
0) of Ne w York Street and is recom
mended as
HIS TO RIC RES OU RCE S SURVEY

OF EAS T AU STI N, TEX AS

PAG E 48

eligible for listing in the NRHP. Spe
cifically, the Ne w Yo rk Historic Dis
trict begins in the
middle of the 1500 block (1504) of
Ne w York Street (north side), extend
s through the
1600 block and includes two houses
on the south side of the street, at 160
7 and 1617 Ne w
Yo rk and two houses in adjacent lots
on Leona Street.
Although the boundaries may appear
gerrymandered from the verbal des
cription,
they encompass architecturally and
historically similar properties. The
street is entirely
residential in use but the east end of
New York was completely redevelop
ed in the 1960s,
apparently as a planned unit since the
new houses are contemporaries in
age and design.
Historic houses were removed and
replaced with new brick and frame
Ranch style houses.
Beginning with 1504 Ne w Yo rk on
the north and 1607 Ne w Yo rk on the
south, however,
the remaining houses date from the
1890s through the early 1920s and
have architectural
characteristics associated with Que
en Anne, Classical Revival and Cra
ftsman styles of tha t
period. Mo st retain their architectu
ral fabric and integrity to a high deg
ree and are wellmaintained. In the 1700 block, the
cohesiveness breaks down with onl
y a few related
properties. The eastern boundary,
is therefore recommended as Leo na
Street. Tw o
houses on Leona, one attached to
1612 Ne w York at 1190 Leona, are
included in the
New Yo rk District.
Some of the most prominent early
Mrican American residents of East
Austin lived
on Ne w Yo rk Street by 1907 when
Metropolitan A.M.E. Church publish
ed a booklet on
the history of the church. By 1920,
the street was occupied almost enti
rely of Mrican
Americans and has remained an inta
ct residential mainstay of the commu
nity throughout
the century.

CONCLUSIONS

Bet wee n April 19, 2000 and Septem
ber 19, 2000, the HH M& M survey
and
research teams identified and minima
lly documented 496 historic proper
ties within the
East Austin project area boundaries
. Of those, 105 were designated IllG
H preservation
priorities and 242 were determined
to be of ME DIU M priority. LO W
preservation
priorities wer e assigned to 149 pro
perties throughout the project area
. The 105 IDG H
HIS TO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY

OF EAS T AUSTIN, TEX AS

PAG E 49

priority sites are considered good can
didates for nomination to the NR HP
while all of the
HIG H and ME DIU M priorities wo
uld be considered Contributing elem
ents of designated
historic districts.
The project area in its entirety does
not qualify as a potential historic dist
rict due to
new or incongruous infill constructio
n, loss of historic building sto ck and
severe alteration
of historic resources. However, sev
eral separate potential districts hav
e been identified
during the course of the survey. The
se areas are comprised of related pro
perties that
together form a distinct, coherent gro
uping imbued with a sense of historic
place.
Districts almost always contain a maj
ority of Contributing to Noncontribut
ing elements.
Properties assessed as HIG H and l\1E
DIUM preservation priorities in this
survey generally
qualify as Contributing features wit
hin historic districts. Thus, areas wit
h concentrations
of HIG H and MEDIUM priority pro
perties are goo d candidates for des
ignation as local or
NR HP districts.
Potential districts in the survey area
are identified as the Juniper Street
Historic
District, the San Bernard Historic Dis
trict, New Yo rk Historic District, 9th
and 10th
Street Historic District (Metropolitan
Historic District), and the Thirteenth
Street Historic
District. The Swedish Hill Historic
District has already been listed in the
NRHP but
includes only one property (903 Eas
t 14th Street) on the south side of Eas
t 14th Street. It
is recommended that the district be
extended to include all of the sou th
side of the 9001000 blocks of East 14th and the 900
-1000 blocks of Eas t 13th Street.
Although the THC determined in 199
3 that properties in the 900-1000 blo
ck of
Juniper Street are eligible for listing
as a historic district, loss of historic
fabric since that
assessment and the imminent constru
ction of new properties within the pot
ential district
render its future uncertain. The 100
0 block of Juniper Street, in particu
lar, has suffered
the loss of three of its five historic
properties since 1997. As a result,
it is the
recommendation of this report that
the 1000 block of Juniper is no lon
ger eligible for
inclusion in the proposed historic dist
rict. However, reassessment of ind
ividual properties
in that block indicates that 1012 and
1009 Juniper Street are High preserv
ation priorities
and are eligible for individual listing
in the National Register. In additio
n, the number of
HIS TO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY

OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAG E 50

Medium priority properties in the adj
acent 900 block of Olive Street ind
icates that a
portion of tha t street should be incl
uded in a joint Juniper-Olive Street
Historic District.
Care should be taken to preserve the
remaining historic properties in the
proposed district
to ensure that new construction and
/or relocation of historic properties
into the district are
compatible with its historic charact
er. Likewise, historic properties in
the 1000 block
should be protected and preserved
for their enduring historical and cult
ural value.
mG H and ME DIU M priority sites,
regardless NR eligibility, should be
carefully
evaluated for historic, architectural
and cultural significance when bein
g considered for
demolition, alteration or relocation
from the survey area. Destruction
or removal of
individual character-defining proper
ties such as these diminishes the hist
oric setting of the
entire area. Within the context of pot
ential or designated historic district
s, the loss of a
single Contributing property adverse
ly affects the identity and integrity
of the district.
Their incremental loss can be devasta
ting to a district, resulting in its rem
oval from NRHP
eligibility.
East Austin has already suffered hug
e losses of its historic fabric, particu
larly along
the traditional commercial corridors
on Eas t 11th and Eas t 12th streets
and in the wedge
of residential property that lies betwee
n them. In those areas, which constit
ute the core of
African American settlement in Eas
t Austin, recognizable historic reso
urces are the
exception rather than the rule. Vac
ant lots, derelict and abandoned bui
ldings, and new or
incongruous infill, construction now
define tills significant region to a gre
ater extent than
does its historic fabric.
However, individual historic buildin
gs and potential historic districts still
exist
throughout the entire survey area, eve
n within the most blighted segments.
It is vital that
steps be taken immediately to stabiliz
e these properties and neighborhood
s to prevent their
further deterioration and loss. Identif
ication and assessment of Eas t Austin
's historic
properties and districts is the initial
step in their preservation and revital
ization. Historic
designations and planning programs
should follow this survey to educate
property owners
and residents to the significance and
benefits of preserving their cultural
resources.

HIS TO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY
OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE 51

•

Eas t Austin has many individually hist
oric properties but it also contains
some of
the city 's oldest, relatively intact hist
oric neighborhoods. They have surv
ived largely
because Eas t Austin has not shared
in the city's past economic growth
and corresponding
development and redevelopment. Par
adoxically, as Eas t Austin's historic
significance is
finally being recognized, its value for
redevelopment has increased as the
desire for central
city housing and commercial venues
outstrips available land. Lon g neglect
ed, Eas t Austin
has become the focus of economic
revitalization and redevelopment effo
rts that threaten
to remove or greatly alter the charac
ter of some of its most significant hist
oric properties
and neighborhoods. The city will be
challenged to meet the are a's need
for good,
affordable housing and increased eco
nomic opportunities while stewarding
its
irreplaceable cultural resources. It
is the objective of this survey to iden
tify and prioritize
those resources to further their pre
servation.

HIS TO RIC RES OU RCE S SURVEY
OF EAS T AU STI N, TEX AS

PAG E 52

HIS TO RIC OV ER VIE W OF EA
ST AU ST IN

PR OJ EC T AR EA

Introduction
At the end of the Civil War, the are
a now known as East Austin lay out
side the
city's eastern boundary, drawn alon
g Eas t Avenue, now IH-3S. Only
a few scattered
fannsteads lay in the vicinity of the
project area to the east of the city lim
its. The most
notable of these was the 1. W. and
Lydia Robertson property, formerly
the French
Legation. Alphonse Dubois de Sali
gny, French charge d'affaires to the
Republic of Texas,
had purchased twenty-one acres of
land encompassing Outlot 1, Divisio
n B, from Anson
Jones in 1841. There he built what
must have been one of Austin's fine
st homes, now
known as the French Legation. Sal
igny's "plantation", later sold to Dr.
lW . Robertson,
played a pivotal role in the developm
ent of central Eas t Austin in the late
-19th century.
This is particularly true for African
Americans who purchased property
from Robertson
and his son, George, in the years foll
owing Emancipation.
Although city history primarily recoun
ts the activities of East Austin's wh
ite
residents in the 19th century, African
Americans lived in the region since
its earliest
agricultural settlement. In the ante
bellum period, large slave owners suc
h as Aaron
Burleson established plantations in
the more productive eastern section
of Travis County
where their bondsmen farmed com
and cot ton on the blackland prairie
. Indeed, slaves
were probably responsible for the con
struction of the oldest extant buildin
gs in eastern
Travis County and what is now Eas
t Austin. The J. W. Robertson fam
ily moved to the
French Legation with their slaves in
1848 (HH MM 1997: 15). Doubtless
, the Robertson
slaves did most of the manual labor,
including construction, on the plan
tation.
After the Civil War, Dr. Robertson
fell seriously ill and began selling som
e of his
outlying property to ensure his fam
ily's future. His son George continu
ed to sell property
after his death. Robertson's plantati
on in the Saligny Survey and in adj
acent holdings to
the north, in Outlot 55, became kno
wn as Robertson Hill. Robertson Hill
formed the core
of an early Reconstruction-era enclave
of freed slaves that extended from
Eas t 1ath Street
HIS TO RIC RESOURCES SUR VEY

OF EAS T AU STI N, TEX AS

PAGE
53

..

(then Mulberry) north to Catalpa, south of East 12th Street (College),
and from East
Avenue to about Waller Street. There is no physical evidence, and only
the slightest
anecdotal and recorded indication, of occupancy in the area before 1869
when Dr. Joseph
W. Rober tson sold the first lots in the area later subdivided by his son,
George.
However, descendants of the Bell family who were servants and possib
ly emanc

ipated

slaves on the Rober tson plantation, claimed to have lived on what is
now Juniper Street as
early as 1848, when the Robertsons purchased the former French Legati
on and
surrounding property. Some Robertson family papers record the constr
uction of slave
quarters on the northern part of their estate but the exact location is
not known.
In fact, the first known lot Dr. Rober tson sold out of Outlot 55, Divisio
n B, was to
an Mrica n American, a freedman named Malick Wilson, on December
26, 1869 (HHM M
1997: 17). Tax records show a large increase in the property's value,
from $100 in 1871
to $400 in 1872, an indication that Wilson had built a house on his lot,
possibly the first
one east of East Avenue on Mesquite (East lith Street). Koch's 1873
Bird's Eye View
map of the area shows a dwelling in the vicinity of Wilson's lot which
is in the middle of
the block betwe en Curve and Waller, at approximately 1006 East lith
Street. The house
has since been demolished.
The arrival of railroad in 1871 brought even more people to Austin and
Robertson's son Georg e had the northern part of the family homestead
subdivided for
housing. Land development on the East side primarily occurred along
and near the railroad
lines, particularly along East 5th, 6th and 7th streets, in the early 1870s.
Exceptions were
East 11 th and 12th streets, which were among the first defined roads
in East Austin. They
follow the survey lines of Outlot 55, Division B, the Georg e L. Rober
tson Subdivision.
Although the two roads may not pre-date Robertson's earliest develo
pment efforts, they
were probably cut shortly after 1869, possibly around 1871, when the
arrival of the first
railroad spawned wholesale land speculation and development beyond
Austin's original
townsite boundaries.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

54

In fact, East lIth and 12th streets (then known as Mesquite Street and
College
Avenue, respectively), are among the few roadways shown on Koch's
1873 Bird's Eye
View map that extend beyond the city's original eastern boundaries at
East Avenue, north
of the Robertson family home, the French Legation (between East 7th
and 8th streets).
Koch's map depicts a distinct grouping offairly isolated dwellings cluster
ed around East
lIth Street at that time. Sanborn Fire Insurance maps of the city do not
detail the
Eastside neighborhoods bounded by East lith and 12th streets until
1921, but even the
earliest of these maps clearly delineate the two streets as early as 1884.
As Austin expanded with the railroad and housing lots became scarce
within the
city, much of the Robertson property and other central East Side parcels
were sold for
new construction. The location was ideal. It was close to the city and
the railroad lines
but beyond the noise, dirt and smells of the industrial and commercial
enterprises that were
springing up near the tracks. Although African Americans were among
the first to settle
the area north of the French Legation, immigrant families also moved
to East Austin in
large numbers during the 1870s. Many new homes were built on East
8th, East 9th and
East 10th streets, in an around the former Robertson plantation, in the
1880s and 1890s.
Most of these belonged to white residents, many of whom were of Germa
n descent.
Swedes settled in a close-knit area called Swedish Hill roughly betwe
en East 13th and
East 15th streets, although they also built houses on East 12th Street
and throughout the
area in the 1880s. Several substantial dwellings and stores are attribu
ted to Irish and
Italian residents of the area dating to the as early as the 1870s and early
1880s. German
families moved to East Austin during the late 19th century, particularly
in the 1880s and
1890s. Many became local grocers for the surrounding neighborhood
s.
By 1887, when Koch drew a second Bird's Eye View Map of the City,
the area
north of the French Legation, including the fan-shaped Georg e L. Rober
tson Subdivision
neighborhood nestled between East 11 th and 12th streets, is almost fully
developed.
Among the most noteworthy Eastside features shown on the map are
the historic African
American institutions Ebenezer Baptist Church and Robertson Hill Schoo!
. Both the

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

55

church and school lay in the northe
rn part of the Saligny Survey which
contained the
French Legation. the Robertson fam
ily estate. The Saligny Survey lay
adjacent to and
south of the George L. Robertson Sub
division. Their depiction signifies the
presence of a
large established African American
community in the area by 1887.
By the tum of the century, central Eas
t Austin, west of Navasota, was larg
ely
residential with scattered stores, chu
rches and schools. Although some
streets were
racially mixed, particularly along Eas
t 11 th and East 12th streets, ethnic
enclaves formed
throughout the area. Swedes remaine
d clustered on Swedish Hill while Ger
mans tended
to live east of Navasota, along San
Bernard, and south of East 10th Stre
et. African
Americans almost exclusively occupi
ed the region between Eas t 11th and
East 12th streets
(Juniper, Olive, Catalpa and Myrtle
), the 800-900 blocks of Eas t 11th
Street and the 9001000 blocks of East 10th Street. The
se enclaves represent some of the are
a's earliest
development and the birthplace of man
y of the city's oldest African Americ
an institutions
including churches, schools and lod
ges. Successful businesses had bee
n established
primarily in the 1000-1100 blocks of
Eas t 11th Street but a few existed on
East 12th
Street, particularly between Navaso
ta and Comal. Most of them were
owned and
operated by people of Italian, Irish
and German descent at the tum of
the century.
At the same time, East lIth and 12t
h streets were developing as major
thoroughfares through the neighborh
oods that lay to the east of the city'S
historic
boundaries. A variety of domestic,
commercial and institutional buildin
gs lined the streets.
East 12th Street, though largely occ
upied by white residents at the turn
of the century,
was becoming racially mixed. Sam
uel Huston College for Colored Chi
ldren, as it was then
known, lay on the south side of Eas
t 12th Street, just east of Eas t Avenue
. Due to the
presence of African American institut
ions such as Ebenezer Baptist Church
(Curve and
Catalpa) about 1885, Olive Street Sch
ool (1909) and Samuel Huston Col
lege (1900), the
triangle ofl and wedged between Eas
t lith and 12th streets was fully dev
eloped and
occupied almost exclusively by Afr
ican Americans by the tum of the cen
tury and East 12th
Street demographics would change
in the following two decades. At the
tum of the
HIS TOR IC RESOURCES SURVEY

OF EAS T AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAG E

56

century, however, East 12th Street
remained a predominantly white, bus
iness and
wo rkin g class residential street.
In the 1920s, however, the East 12t
h Street demographic composition
changed.
Austin city officials had begun a pro
gram of "red-lining", a common stra
tegy for racial
seg reg atio n in southern cities, that
resulted in the almost complete seg
regation of African
Americans to the east side of tow n
and whites to the central and wes t
side residential
areas. No tab le exceptions were the
Clarksville and Wheatville neighborh
oods on the city's
we st and northwest sides, respectively
. East Austin, between Eas t 7th and
East 12th
streets, was already largely identifie
d as an African American neighborho
od, with two
significant African American college
s and numerous churches, schools
and businesses.
When the red-lining process began
in earnest in the 1920s, it reinforced
the perception of
the east side as largely African Am
erican, precipitated "white flight" from
the racially
mixed areas, and set the stage for the
further development of the east side
as the exclusive
domain of African Americans and
later, Mexican Americans.
By the end of the 1920s, nearly all
of Eas t 12th Street, from East Ave
nue to the
city limits, was occupied by African
Americans, many of whom owned
their homes.
Formerly white churches and busines
ses along East 12th Street changed
hands. The
demographic evolution of the com
munity can be traced through the cha
nging
congregation of a little church at 100
0 East 12th, now 1100 East 12th Stre
et (also
addressed as 1201 Waller). The chu
rch had served a number of differen
t white
congregations from its construction,
about 1895, through the first decade
s of the 20t h
century. It was organized as St. Ste
phen's Episcopal Church, an adjunc
t to St. David's
Episcopal Church, one of the city's
oldest congregations. Sanborn map
s at the turn of the
century label it as a Roman Catholic
Church but that could have been an
error based on its
identification with a saint. The 190
6 city directory listed it as the "Missi
on of the Go od
Shepherd Episcopal Church". By
1920, church affiliation changed but
the building
continued to serve a white congregat
ion as the "East Austin Presbyterian
Church". A few
years later, however, the 1924 city
directory denoted the renamed "Tw
elfth Street
HIS TO RIC RES OU RCE S SUR VEY
OF EAS T AU STI N, TEXAS

PAG E

57

Christian Church" as a "colored" church. The building was labeled a
"Colored
Presbyterian Church" on the 1935 Sanborn Map of the area and it has
continued to serve
African American congregations throughout the century.
East 12th Street's transformation from a white residential street to a racially
mixed
-- and later, predominately African American -- multi-use residential
and commercial
corridor, may be attributed in large part to the establishment and succes
s of Samuel
Huston College. In the quarter century before the college was establi
shed on the six-acre
campus betwe en East lIth and 12th streets, East 12th Street was settled
and occupied
primarily by whites, many of whom bore German surnames. In 1900,
Samuel Huston
College built a three-story classroom and dormitory complex fronting
onto the south side
of East 12th Street, between East Avenue and Branch. The college consol
idated its
presence on the street with a girls' dormitory on the north side of East
12th Street. The
college's success attracted more African Americans to the area north
of East 12th Street
and they began to buy homes formerly owned by members of other ethnic
groups
including those of Swedish, German and Irish descent, along East 12th,
East 13th and
East 14th streets. Bob Harrison Street, an extension of East 14th Street
beyond
Navasota, developed as an entirely African American residential street
by 1920.
Demographic changes in the early 20th century can be represented by
a single
block along East 12th Street. In 1901, when Michael Connelly (also spelled
Connolly)
built the house at 1115 East 12th Street for his family of six, his immed
iate neighbors were
primarily working-class whites, including several of German descent,
judging from their
surnames -- Schwartz, Shafer and Huebotter. Connelly's house lay across
the street from
the 12th Street Christian (St. Stephen's Church, above). Edwar d Schwa
rtz was a painter,
John W. Shafer was a stone cutter and Michael Connelly was a stone
mason and
bricklayer who also owned the Silver King Saloon at 307 East 6th Street.
Renters and
homeowners alike occupied the houses on these streets.
By the mid-1920s, the community served by Samuel Husto n College
and St.
Peter's M.E. (Methodist Episcopal) Church (at the northwest comer
of Curve and

HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

58

Catalpa), two major east-side Mrica n American institutions, had grown
considerably since
the turn of the century. Mrica n Americans occupied most of the residen
ces from Samuel
Huston College, just east of East Street, through the 1800 block of East
12th Street. Only
a few white families such as the Huebotters (llO5 East 12th) and the
Connelly's remained.
In 1926, the Connellys sold their house to Dr. Charles Yerwood, an
African
American physician. The Connellys were among the last white familie
s to reside on East
12th Street and the sale of their house to the Yerwo ods represents the
completion of the
demographic change for much of East Austin. Although some white
owners continued to
live in their family homes, particularly in the Swedish Hill area, city plannin
g efforts to
remove African Americans to East Austin from the central city, and
a nationwide
intensification of racial prejudice in the 1920s, led to the area's identif
ication as an African
American neighborhood. By the 1930s, many Hispanic families had
also moved into the
area, for many of the same reasons.
By the 1930s, more Mrica n Americans lived in the East Austin projec
t area than
white, non-Hispanic residents. Swedish American families continued
to live in the 9001000 blocks of East 13 th and 14th streets, and a handful of German Ameri
can families
owned houses and businesses in the area, through World War II. Throu
ghout the 1930s
and 1940s, Mexican American families began moving into the areas
south of East 11 th
Street, in the vicinity of Our Lady of Guadalupe Catholic Church, in
greater numbers. By
1950, at the end of the historic period, the East Austin survey area was
largely identified
as a "minority" community populated by Mrica n American and Hispan
ic families. This
identification has remained constant throughout the latter half of the
20th century despite
gentrication trends in recent years. As Austin real estate increases in
value with the
current economic boom and growt h projections, demographic pattern
s in near East Austin
may shift once again to include larger numbers of relatively affluent white
residents who
desire older homes in a central location.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE
59

Early Settle ment of Austin
General Houston became the first elected president of Texas. The Texas
Constitution dictated that he could not succeed himself and the second
election made
Mirabeau Buona parte Lamar president. Using Washington, D.C. as his
model, he favored
a site where a new capital city could be planned and built from scratch
. Coming to the
junctu re of Shoal Creek with the Colorado River on a buffalo hunt in
the fall of 1838,
Lamar and his entourage saw a tiny settlement calling itself Waterloo
(Graham 1938:55).
The village had been incorporated only a year earlier by General Edwar
d Burleson
(Jenkins and Kesselus 1990: 160). The first residents were Jacob Harrel
l and his family,
who had first settled at Hornsby's Bend on the Colorado River (Terre
ll 1910: 113;
Scarbrough 1973: 123). The new President and his ranger escort campe
d at the Harrell
cabin and Lamar was enchanted by the natural beauty of the location
(Malone 1958:7).
He is quoted as saying, This should be the seat offutu re empire" (Terre
ll 1910: 117).
Edwin Waller laid out the plan of the new city, which President Lamar
named after
Stephen F. Austin. Waller based his design on that of Philadelphia, Pennsy
lvania. Its
well-spaced grid of streets ran north from the Colorado River for fifteen
blocks and from
Shoal Creek in the west to Waller Creek in the east. Of course, the city
did not at first
resemble Waller's neat street map. A visitor to the town in the autum
n of 1839 wrote,
"My visit to Austin, in Octob er of 1839, where I found a town very much
in the woods,
with five or six hundred people, in cabins and shanties and camps, I well
remember" (Red
1914:285). Waller supervised the construction of government buildin
gs and the home of
the President. Comanches continued to threaten the safety of Austin
's earliest settlers and
some of Waller's crew were killed and scalped during the course of their
work. Waller
found it necessary to fortify the first capital buildings with a wooden
palisade (Peareson
1900:47).
For many years after the new capital was chosen, doubts persisted about
the
viability of the new town, isolated as it was in the middle of a vast unsettl
ed frontier
dominated by Comanches. Nonetheless, people moved their families
to the new town and

HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

60

•

locally a sense of optimism prevailed. Many believed that as the seat
of government,
Austin would soon become a thriving metropolis (Winkler 1907:220).
Almost a thousand
people moved to Austin in its first year. Early in January of 1840 a census
taken by
Cumberland Presbyterian minister Amos Roark reported on the popula
tion of the new
town and the occupations of its citizens:

Seventy-five families, population eight hundred and fifty-six, of which
seven hundred and eleven were whites and one hundred and forty-five
blacks--five hundred and fifty grown men, sixty-one ladies, one hundre
d
children, seventy-seven of which are large enough to go to school; sevent
ythree professors ofreligion--seventeen Methodists, twelve Presbyterians
,
five Cumberland Presbyterians, eleven Episcopalians, ten Baptists and
ten
Roma n Catholics; two organized churches--one Methodist and one
Presbyterian; two Methodist preachers, one Cumberland Presbyterian
and
one Baptist preacher; one Sabbath school, one week day school, thirtyfive
mechanics, four lawyers, six doctors, six inns, nine stores, nine grocer
ies,
one billiard table, six faro banks, twenty gamblers, two silversmith shops,
two printing offices and two tailor shops (Gray 1872: 11).
Lamar's vision had created Austin, but he bankrupted the Texas treasu
ry with his
building schemes and Indian wars. Houston won the next election and
was again president
of the young Republic. Sam Houston had never favored the location
of Austin as the
"seat of future empire." He removed the government to Houston, but
Austinites
prevented the removal of the archives by force of arms, which may have
saved the town's
future (Baker 1875: 142-143).
Two Mexican raids on San Antonio in 1842 spurred a mass exodus from
Austin.
James Webb wrote to ex-President Lamar, "we have but a small popula
tion now and are
living under great privations" (Webb to Lamar 1843 in Gullick 1928
(I):20). After
Houston's second term the government returned to Austin, where it was
when President
Anson Jones raised the flag of the United States at the Texas capitol
in 1846. In the end,
Mirabeau Lamar's dream ofa capital on the banks of the Colorado came
true. As one of
Texas' first Anglo-American historians wrote, "The location was there
made with a view

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

61

of drawing to the west a population
that would pro tec t the frontier from
the common
enemy, and such was the happy effe
ct" (Yoakum 1855:273). In 1853,1
. D. B. DeBow,
wrote:
The roving tendency of our people
is incident to the peculiar condition
of
their country, and each succeeding
Census will prove it is diminishing.
When the fertile plains of the West
shall have been filled up, and men of
scanty means cannot by a mere cha
nge of location acquire a homestead,
the
inhabitants of each State will becom
e comparatively stationary, and our
countrymen will exhibit that attachm
ent to the homes of their childhood,
the wa nt of which is sometimes cite
d as an unfavorable trait in our nati
onal
character (U.S. Census Bureau 185
3b:15).
Austin remained fairly isolated unti
l the arrival of the railroad in 1871;
however,
the city's future as the seat of govern
ment was assured by a state-wide refe
rendum in
1850. With the question of Austin's
survival as the capital city resolved
at last, the road
net improved substantially during the
1850s. By 1860, Austin was linked
to the state's
major population centers by a system
of established roadways, although trav
el to and from
the capital continued to be an arduou
s undertaking.
The Pre sto n Road stretched from Aus
tin to Preston on the Red River thro
ugh
Georgetown, Waco, and Dallas. Thr
ee roads went from Austin to Gillesp
ie and Mason
Counties. These roads merged at Bra
dy, forming the Upper California Roa
d through EI
Paso, Oth er roads reached from Aus
tin to LaGrange, Bastrop, Brenham.
Hempstead, and
Columbus. The roads were rough
and travel was slow. Stagecoaches
ran from Austin to
LaGrange to Columbus, and from Aus
tin to Brenham, where the train cou
ld be taken to
Houston (Ga ge 1960:436-437).
On the eve of the Civil War, Travis
County was one of the handful of Tex
as
counties to vote against secession.
Unionists were in the minority, how
ever. Texas
entered the fray as a Confederate Sta
te and Sam Houston, who opposed
secession, was
deposed as governor. Fifty thousand
Texans enlisted in the Confederate
army and a
quarter of tho se saw action east of
the Mississippi River (Ramsdell 191
0:22). Plans for a
railroad that would link Austin with
both coasts, funded by millions ofU
. S. dollars, were
HIS TOR IC RESOURCES SUR VEY
OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

62

sacrificed when Texas vot ed for sec
ession in 186 l. Austin's developm
ent was curtailed
for a decade as a result of the war
and the Reconstruction period that
followed; however,
African Americans emerged from the
Civil War as free citizens with a spir
it of hope and
enterprise.
The Ho ust on and Texas Central Rai
lroad came to Austin at the end of
1871. The
initial result was that Austin became
, for a short time, a major rail term
inus, attracting
farmers from the hinterlands who cou
ld now ship cash crops from Austin
to eastern
markets. With the arrival of the rail
road, local monopolies for building
materials and many
oth er elements of Austin's material
culture unraveled as competition from
eastern factories
drove down prices of many goods.
The stores filled with pro duc ts tha t
had previously
been expensive luxury items due to
the difficulty of shipping by wa ter and
then by wagon.
Such fragile items as window glass
could be shipped much more safely
by rail and elegant
houses with expensive furnishings
proliferated as a result. As an aut hor
of the period
wrote:

The greatest needs of the State at the
present time are mo re people, and
improvement along the lines of trav
el. The coarse cookery, and villaino
us
liquor-drinking which one now find
s in remote towns will vanish when
people and manufactures and induce
ments to ease and elegance come in
(King 1874:423).

African Americans in Austin
By 1850, the popUlation of Travis
County had gro wn to 3, l38 . The
county's free
popUlation numbered 2,347, with 791
listed as slaves. Of the free popula
tion, only eleven
were African Americans, one of who
m resided in Austin (U.S. Census Bur
eau
1853a:504). This compared to 397
freedmen in all of Texas (De Bo w 185
4:63).
Statewide, a little more than twenty
-seven percent of the population live
d in bondage in
1850 (De Bow 1854:86). Free African
Americans made up jus t und er two
percent of the
population of Texas. Only Iowa, New
Hampshire and Mississippi had sma
ller percentages
(DeBow 1854:65-66). The largest
identified sub-set of the popUlation
was composed of
HIS TO RIC RES OU RCE S SURVEY
OF EAST AUSTIN, TEX AS

PAG E

63

Europ ean immigrants. In 1850, forty-three percent of all United States
immigrants were
from Ireland and twenty-five percent were from Prussia and other Germa
n states (US.
Census Burea u 1853a: 14).
A handful of people owned the great majority of slaves; there were 57
slave
owners in Travis County (U S. Census Bureau 1850b). By 1860 the
number of slave
owners had increased to 175. Between them, they owned 499 familie
s (US. Census
Burea u 1860b). Only about fifteen percent ofloca l slave owners were
farmers but between
twenty and forty percent of the slaves in Austin spent at least some time
in the fields near
the city. By 1851, as many as half of the slaves in Austin hired themse
lves out, usually
splitting some of their earnings with their owners (Austin City Gazett
e July 9, September
13, 1851). Brick making was a principal occupation for slaves in southw
estern cities in
the 1860s (Lack 1973:3 9,45) and Austin was probably no exception.
Following the Civil War, many former Confederates abandoned their
homes in the
south and moved to Texas which had survived relatively undamaged
from the war. The
state's population increased greatly in the postw ar period and betwee
n 1860 and 1870,
Travis County grew from 8,080 to 13,1}3 residents. The county 's Africa
n American
population increased from 3,149 to 4,647 during the same period. (US.
Census Bureau
1871:94-95). By 1870 Austin's population had risen to 4,428. Of that
number, 3,812
were Anglo-Americans born in the United States. Foreign born residen
ts numbered 616
while 1,615 African Americans lived within the city limits (U.S. Censu
s Bureau
1871:346).
Austin attracted large numbers of Freedmen who sought safety in the
aftermath of
the Civil War. Violence against African Americans in Reconstruction
Texas was harsh in
rural areas away from the protection of federal garrisons. From mid-18
65 through 1866,
authorities in Texas issued more than five hundred indictments for the
murder of blacks by
whites. African Texans were not allowed to sit on juries or to give testim
ony against
whites and no convictions were won in these cases. Many well known
murderers were
not even indicted. Some white men continued their pre-war depredations
on black women

HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

64

•

under their control and the Freedmens' Bureau was swamped with compl
aints of rape, all
of which went unanswered (Smallwood 1981:33).
In 1868, General Reynolds reported to his superiors in Washington that,
"The
murde r of negroes is so common (in Texas] as to render it impossible
to keep accurate
accoun t of them" (Hornsby 1973:409). A Republican newspaper in
Austin that year
lamented the excesses of the Ku Klux Klan in the area. These outrag
es were never
report ed in the Democrats' newspapers, but these examples from a RepUb
lican newspaper
of the period are typical:
We learn through the Houston papers that there has been a fearful
slaughtering of the colored people around Millican, on the fifteenth and
sixteenth. The number killed is variously estimated from fifteen to fifty.
(Daily Austin Republican July 20, 1868).

Crime
Our State continues to be the scene of the foulest crimes that have ever
disgraced any age ... The negroes are being killed at a fearful rate. On
Friday last one freedman was killed in Bastrop County, and on Wedne
sday
two more were murdered. Even loyal Travis men have been visited by
the
Ku Klux Klan, and on Saturday morning last a freedman was foully
murde red within three miles of Austin (Daily Austin Republican Augus
t 17,
1868).

1. Mason Brewer, an African American historian, wrote, "Although the
ex-slave
was now a freedman he was still confronted with problems. One of
the gravest of these
problems was the nightriders organization, composed of white men who
threatened to
harm negro landowners of rich and large tracts ofland if they did not
move out of the
community (Brew er 1940:18). Between the end of the Civil War and
June, 1868,3 73
freedmen were known to have been killed by whites in Texas, where
as freedmen were
known to have killed ten whites in that period (Galloway n.d.:273).
African Americans who moved to Austin in large numbers during Recon
struction
sought educat ion and economic opportunities as well as the protection
of federal troops.
For a time they were a political force in the new Texas government,
but this representation
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

65

would be short-lived. Reconstruction
ended in Texas late in 1873, when
E. J. Davis lost
the governorship to Richard Coke
in a bitter election campaign. Dem
ocrats too k control
of the reins of government in Texas
in early 1874 (Wheeler 1920:56).
A special 1875 Austin census record
ed 3,497 African Americans residin
g in the
city. The census taker admitted tha
t he did not record an estimated 270
0 people whom he
referred to as the "floating or unknow
n population." Bec aus e of the tem
porary nature of
much of the housing constructed by
African Americans in Austin in the
decade following
the Civil War, it is reasonable to assu
me, as did the census taker, that a
large part of that
"floating population" was African Am
erican. But even if tho se 2700 peo
ple are not taken
into account, thirty-four per cent of
the population of Austin in 1875 was
African
American, representing an increase
of jus t over one hundred per cent in
Austin's first thirty
years (Co sta 1875).
Although the United States enjoyed
general prosperity during the period
, the latter
half of the 1880s was a period of dec
line in Austin. A prolonged drough
t plagued the
region and the days of open range
cattle drew to an end (Southwell 194
9:7). The great
blizzard of January, 1886 dealt a cru
shing blow to cattlemen (Wheeler
1991:415-418).
Many local fortunes were lost includi
ng the one amassed by Jesse Driskil
l, whose Driskill
Hotel opened during the Christmas
season in 1886. Despite its difficul
ties, the population
of Austin rose from 11,013 to 14,5
75 from 1880 to 1890 (U.S. Census
Bureau 1890:25).
A dam on the Colorado River was
completed in 1893. Lake McDonald
was to
bring Austin cheap water and electric
al power, but the "gay nineties" end
ed on April 7,
1900. About 11:00 a.m., an elevenfoot tall wall of wa ter swept the dam
away, falling like
an avalanche on the power house and
drowning five workers and three you
ng boys in an
instant. The wall of water continued
downstream to Austin, where it did
considerable
damage. There was no power, no
water, no light. Overnight, Austin
was plunged
backwards a dec ade in its economic
development (Humphrey 1985:153154; Sevcik
1992:235).

HIS TOR IC RESOURCES SURVEY
OF EAST AUSTIN, TEX AS

PAGE

66

Between 1890 and 1900 the popUla
tion of Travis County rose from 36,
322 to
47,386 (U.S. Census Bureau 1904:1
72). The loss of the dam with its wat
er supply and its
hydroelectric power meant tha t the
city had a host of old problems to solv
e all over again.
In 1909, A. P. Wooldridge was elec
ted mayor of Austin. Upon being elec
ted, he
commented that "For a variety of reas
ons, east Austin had not had her sha
re of good
things, not because of discrimination
, but because it jus t happened so" (Au
stin American
Statesman, November 11, 1909).
Most East Austin residents would
have agreed with the
first part of that statement.
In 1915, Wooldridge pushed through
a $750,000 bond package to make
improvements to the city, including
the establishment of Brackenridge
Hospital, but the
sewers and city parks he had promis
ed for East Austin did not materialize
. While the new
city hospital was being built, oth er
Austin landmarks were being closed
down. Guy Town,
the city's infamous forty-year-old red
light district, was suppressed and an
old Austin
tradition was scattered to less conspic
uous and less concentrated locations
around town.
A second dam was begun by a priv
ate firm, but was damaged by floods
in 1915. The
company went bankrupt and the dam
remained something of a glorified wat
erfall until it
was rebuilt as the Tom Miller Dam
at the end of the 1930s (Humphrey
1985:167).
African-Americans still made up a
significant percentage of the farm lab
orers in
Travis County in 1915. In that yea
r, 414 farmers interviewed in southe
rn Travis County
reported hiring a 3,756 laborers of
whom 1,820 were Mrican-Americans
, 1,595 were
either Mexican nationals or Mexica
n-Americans, and 341 were Anglo-Am
ericans (Watkins
1916:130). Many of these people live
d in East Austin and commuted to
the fields in rural
Travis County during the working
seasons (personal communication,
Simon Ybarra, June
1993).
In 1919 Wooldridge stepped down
as mayor. His successors were no mo
re
sympathetic to the desires of Mrica
n Americans than he or his predecess
ors. When the
National Association for the Advanc
ement of Colored People's white sec
retary, John R.
Shilladay, came to Austin that year,
locals including county jud ge David
Pickle and a
HIS TO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY

OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

67

constable, beat him severely in front of the Driskill Hotel where Shillad
ay was staying.
After the beating Shilladay returned to his room, where the mayor provid
ed him with
belated police protection until he could board a train. Judge Pickle said
that they had
given him "a good thrashing on general principles." According to Pickle,
Shilladay's crime
was that he "was advocating the doing away of all Jim Crow laws." Gover
nor Hobby
publicly condoned the attack and no one was arrested (Humphrey 1985:
167).
In 1921 Capital Clan No. 81 was organized in Austin and within a year
it could
boast a membership of 1,500. Five hundred klansmen marched up Congr
ess Avenue to
the capital in 1921 (Humphrey 1985: 174). In November of that year
a Travis County
Grand jury investigating the Austin clan found among its members or
supporters the
County Sheriff, one of his deputies, the Police Commissioner, the Chief
of Police, and one
of his detectives (Kraus 1973: 147). Two weeks after the march down
Congress Avenue,
as many as 6,000 Austinites of all races attended a parade on East Avenu
e to
commemorate the centennial of Mexican independence from Spain (Hump
hrey 1985: 179).
In 1925, Mexicans and Mexican-Americans were concentrated in three
main areas
of Austin. The westernmost of these was bounded by the Colorado River
to the south,
Congress Avenue to the east, Sixth Street to the north, and Rio Grand
e Street to the west.
A second cluster of Hispanic population was found on the east side of
Congress Avenue.
Most people in this second group lived in an area bordered by Fourte
enth Street on the
north, Trinity Street on the west, Sixth Street on the south, and East
Avenue on the east.
The third enclave of Hispanics resided in East Austin (Connell 1925: 1-2).
In 1927 the city of Austin commissioned the Dallas consulting firm of
Koch and
Fowler to develop a city plan for Austin, which for the first time would
include a
comprehensive zoning ordinance and outline other desirable improvement
s to the city.
Their report was published in 1928. Among their recommendations was
a plan to
reinforced patterns of racial segregation in Austin. Though couched
in fairly innocu
language, it is plain that the authors were aiming at nothing short of establi
shing a

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

68

ous

•

permanent black ghetto in East Austin and, to the extent possible by
law, to remove blacks
living in other areas of the city to that area, as this excerpt demonstrates
.
There has been considerable talk in Austin, as well as in other cities, in
regard to the race segregation problem. This problem cannot be solved
legally under any zoning law known to us at present. Practically all
attempts of such have proven unconstitutional. In our studies in Austin
we
have found that the negroes are present in small numbers, in practically
all
sections of the city, excepting the area just east of East Avenue and south
of the City Cemetery. This area seems to be all negro population. It
is our
recommendation that the nearest approach to the solution of the race
segregation problem will be the recommendation of this district as a negro
district; and that all the facilities and conveniences be provided the negroe
s
in this district, as an incentive to draw the negro population to this area.
This will eliminate the necessity of duplication of white and black school
s,
white and black parks, and other duplicate facilities for this area. We
are
recommending that sufficient area be acquired adjoining the negro high
school to provide adequate space for a complete negro play-field in
connection with the negro high school. We further recommend that the
negro schools in this area be provided with ample and adequate play
ground space and facilities similar to the white schools of the city (Koch
and Fowle r 1928).
This plan was accepted by the city council and reprinted in 1957 by the
Austin
Department of Planning as a guide to future development. In 1929, the
city established the
Rosewood A venue Park and Playground for Colored in East Austin in
accordance with
that plan. In 1931 the Mexican Playground and Park was also located
on the east side
(Kraus 1973: 150-54). These were the only city parks where Hispanics
and African
Americans were allowed to recreate.
In the decade that followed the Austin City Plan, public schools for Africa
n
Americans were relocated to the east side of Austin and city utilities
were denied to
African American enclaves elsewhere in the city. Segregation was streng
thened as a
result. By 1940 only one of eight public schools for African Americans
in Austin,
Clarksville Elementary, was not located on the east side of town (Brew
er 1940:38). A
Reconstruction era village settled by freed slaves, Clarksville was a well-e
stablished but
HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

69

somewhat sequestered African American enclave on the city's far west side. Outside the
central city, Clarksville did not attract redevelopment interests until much later in the
century and thus was spared the "slum clearance" and "blight removal" efforts that
occurred elsewhere to the west of East Avenue. Ultimately, East Austin did become the
"negro district," as over the years deed restrictions prevented minorities from buying
property in most other neighborhoods in the city.
When the Great Depression struck the country in the 1930s, African Americans
were still at the bottom of the economic ladder in the United States and nationwide
unemployment hit them harder than anyone else. In Austin, where African Americans
formed eighteen and a half percent of the popUlation, they made up 35.6% of unemployed
workers in 1931-32 and 33.5% of the relief cases in 1935 (Barr 1973:154). By 1940,
twenty percent of the population of Austin was African American: amounting to 20,000
people, almost all of them living in East Austin or Clarksville. Despite economic inequity,
seventy-five percent of Austin's African American families owned their own homes in
1940, according to historian 1. Mason Brewer. Half of them owned cars. African
American salaries averaged eighty dollars per month. (Brewer 1940:67).
Tom Miller was elected mayor in 1933. He is remembered most for the dam that
was named after him. The dam was rebuilt by the newly created Lower Colorado River
Authority on September 1, 1938. Lyndon Johnson's influence was pivotal in the financing
of the project. By March 4, 1940, the new lake was full and Austin once again had
inexpensive power and water. In addition to this, flood control was made much more
likely by the completion of the much larger Mansfield Dam upstream from Lake Austin,
which was completed in 1941. The lake thus created was called Lake Travis and it held a
hundred times more water than Lake Austin. The dam, three times as high as Tom Miller
Dam, generated five times the amount of electricity. Austin's economic future seemed
assured (Humphrey 1985: 194-197).
In the twentieth century other issues besides dam water and power crowded
Austin's cultural landscape and one of these issues was racial intolerance. African

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

70

Americans and Hispanic Americans continued to endure the control
of Austin's white
leadership. This was the case throughout most of Texas so it was a shock
to white
supremacists when a black man was almost elected to the Houst on city
council. As a
result of that close call, Austin changed its city council representation
from districts to an
at-large basis, which guaranteed control of all seats by the white majori
ty, in 1951 (Barr
1973: 182). After two black men were elected to the Austin city counci
l in the 1880s, no
other African American served in that body until the 1970s.
Inequities characterized educational opportunities for African Ameri
cans in Austin,
as well. The University of Texas remained closed to African Americans
for half of the
twentieth century. One of the first black students to enroll there, in the
summer of 1950,
was Edna Humphries Rhambo, a descendant of one of the early residen
ts of the project
area, Perry C. Rhambo (Daily Texan August 26, 1987; On Campus Septem
ber 7, 1987;
U. T. News August 20, 1987).

Africa n Ameri can Busin essme n in Austin During Reconstruction
While most African Americans were restricted to menial jobs in early
Austin, there
were some who became entrepreneurs. The 1872 Austin city directory
lists E. H.
Carrington's store at the corner of Pecan (6th) and Red River Street s
(Gray and Moore
1872:37). In addition to fresh and canned foods, the Carringtons sold
clothes, hardware,
and farm supplies. Behind the store, Edward's brother, Albert ran an
ice house and
blacksmith shop. In 1883, Albert Carrington ran for the city council
and became the
alderman representing the Seventh Ward. He was defeated when he
ran again in 1885
(Austin Daily Statesman February 16, 1979). It would be almost a centur
y before another
African American would sit on the city council.
Gabriel Holder had a grocery store on Red River Street between Seven
th and
Eighth streets. African American blacksmiths who ran their own shops
in Austin includ

ed

Peter Bratto n and John Hemphill who had a shop on Colorado Street
between Third and
Fourth streets. John Hughes operated a smithy on Guadalupe Street
between Eighteenth

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

71

and Ninete enth and lived next door. Allen Mitchell was on the southw
est comer of Fifth
and Colora do Streets. J. Pollard was on Fourte enth Street betwee
n Red River and Sabine.
Louis Ranso n had a shop in block 138. William. E. Risher and his
sons were blacksmiths
for decade s in Austin. Risher's shop was on Sixth Street betwee n
Sabine and East Avenu e
and he lived on Seventh Street near East Avenue.
Africa n Americans who owned barber shops in Austin in 1872 includ
ed Buckn er
and Robin son on Sixth Street betwe en Colora do and Congr ess, Thoma
s Hanco ck, on
Colora do Street betwee n Seven th and Eighth , Harry Hawki ns on Colora
do betwe en Sixth
and Seven th, John Holland on Sixth Street betwee n Colora do and
Congr ess Avenue,
Duke Mitchell in Dohm e's building at the comer of Ninth and Colora
do, Ed Wilker son on
Brazo s Street betwee n Fourte enth and Fifteenth, and Milton Wallac
e on Sixth Street
betwe en Congr ess and Brazos . Wallac e lived on East Avenue.
African-American cobble rs includ ed R. Johnso n, William Keys who
had a shop on
Red River betwee n Seven th and Eighth, Henry Madis on on Sixth
Street betwee n
Colora do and Congress, Tom Plumb er on Thirte enth Street betwee
n Red River and
Sabine, and H. B. Willis on Sixth Street betwee n Congr ess and Brazos
. Willis lived in
Wheatsville, anothe r Recon structi on era Freedm ans village, on Thirte
enth Street betwee n
Nuece s and San Antonio.
Stonem asons included the Mason family, who develo ped Mason town
during
Recon structi on, Charles Madis on who lived on the corner of Fourte
enth and Neche s
Streets , and Dowel l Phillips on Colora do Street betwee n Seven teenth
and Eighte enth
Streets . 1. W. Gray was a confec tioner on Colora do Street betwee
n Fifth and Sixth.
Claibo rne Lewis was a poultr y and vegeta ble peddle r at the southe
ast comer of Eighth
and Sabine Streets. Joe Carter owned a restau rant on Sixth Street
betwe en Colora do and
Congr ess Avenue. Harrison & Carrut hers made wagon s on Sixtee
nth Street betwee n
Guada lupe and Lavaca Streets. Alex Hamil ton was a well digger who
lived on Fifteenth
Street betwee n Trinity and Neche s (Gray and Moore 1872).

HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

72

Early Africa n Ameri can Neighborhoods in Austin
During the era of slavery in Austin (1839-1865), tiny one and two room
dwellings
were built close to the alleys behind many properties as residences for
household slaves.
After Emancipation this housing pattern persisted as many Freedmen
continuing to live in
these dwellings and work as domestic servants for the Anglo American
families who lived
in the main houses on these properties (Mana ster 1986:55).
Although this arrangement would continue into the early twentieth centur
y, it was
not long before many of Austin's African Americans began to buy proper
ty of their own.
They were might be able to reside as domestics in shacks behind Anglo
houses in the
center of the city, or rent or own a modest house along flood-prone
Waller or Shoal
Creek, but they could not buy property in many of areas of the city.
At first, this was by
mutual agreement of white land owners; later it was codified by the introdu
ction of
restrictive deed covenants.
For example, by 1895 more than fifty homes had been built in Hyde Park,
a new,
suburban development on the city's north side (Humphrey 1985: 144-14
5). The developer,
M. M. Shipe, ran ads in the local press that featured lots for one to two
hundred dollars
that could be financed with payments as low as two dollars per month
. Shipe reminded
everyone in print that "it is striclly [sic.] for white people" (Daily Tribun
e 29 April 1898).
This restrictive situation led to the establishment of distinctive black
neighborhoods, beginning during Reconstruction. In 1868 an Africa
n American
newsp aper published in Austin urged African Americans to purchase
property and build
their own homes (Weekly Free Man's Press, August 1, 1868). Early
African American
neighborhoods in Austin included Masontown, Wheatsville, Clarksville,
and Robertson
Hill, also called Pleasant Hill.
The development of Masontown, the first African American subdivision
in Austin,
was begun in 1867 by Rayford and Sam Mason Ir. Their father, Sam
Mason Sr., owned
his own house at the southwest corner of Trinity and First Streets as early as
1867
(Harrison 1867). They were a family of stonemasons. Masontown was
bounded by

HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

73

Chicon Street, Waller Creek, East Sixth Street and the East Third Street
(Manaster
1986:90).
Wheatsville, sometimes called Wheatville, lay in the area of Austin now
called
West Campus. The neighborhood was named after James Wheat, who
bought land a mile
northwest of the capitol in 1869. Wheatsville was bordered by Twent
y-Fourth and
Twenty-Sixth Streets, Shoal Creek, and Rio Grande Street (Hump hrey
1987:70). It was
there that Jacob Fontaine opened Austin's first black grocer y store and
where he published
an early black newspaper, the Gold Dollar (Fontaine 1983 :56-59). This
Mrican American
neighborhood succumbed to real estate development pressures associ
ated with the evergrowing University of Texas and no longer exists. Today most of the
area is rental
property and the majority of residents are students.
Clarksville, on early Austin's west side, got its start when ex-Go vernor
Pease gave
land west of Shoal Creek to his ex-slaves. Charles Clark, for whom
the neighborhood was
named, built his house on what is now West 10th Street in 1871 (Hump
hrey 1985: 12). At
the time that Clark constructed his cabin there, much of what would
become Clarksville
was a tangle of cane breaks and juniper. It developed into a black comm
unity that has
endured for a century in spite of serious pressure to redevelop the area
into a wealthy
Anglo neighborhood.
Little is known or written about the early Mrica n American residential
settlement
on Robertson Hill, in the area between East 10th Street and East 12th
Street, east of East
Avenue. The property was part of the J.W. Robertson estate and is associ
ated with the
Robertson home known as the French Legation.

Early Africa n American Churches in Austin
African American churches were established in Austin soon after Emanc
ipation.
As early as 1864, a few Mrica n American Baptists met in a barber shop.
Their pastor was
Jacob Fontaine. In 1867, Fontaine founded the First Baptist Churc h
(colored) at the
corner of West Ninth Street and Guadalupe, where the Austin Histor
y Center is now

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

74

housed in the old Austin Public Library building (Austin American Statesm
an, February
13, 1984). That same year Fontaine convened the first meeting of the
St. John Missionary
Baptist Association under the branches of Treaty Oak, and went on to
found the Sweet
Home Baptist Church in Clarksville in 1877, the New Hope Baptist Church
in Wheatsville
in 1887 (Daily Texan, February 16, 1989), as well as many rural church
es in Travis and
adjacent counties ..
Metropolitan A. M. E. Church was formed in the home of Mrs. Tempi
e
Washington on Seventh Street. They held their first services at Smith'
s Opera House.
The first pastor was Frank Green (Brew er 1950: 18). The congregation
built a church on
Ninth Street, just west of the First Baptist Church (Koch 1887). The
Wesley Chapel M.
E. Church was founded on March 4, 1866, in the basement ofthe Tenth
Street A. M. E.
Church South, an Anglo church. African American workers erected a
limestone edifice
measuring 40 by 60 feet. Later, this building was sold to the Austin Schoo
l Board and the
congregation built a larger church (Brewer 1940:35).
The Ebenezer (Third) Baptist Church was organized in 1875 in the home
of Mrs.
Eliza Hawkins, on the comer of Ninth and Colorado Streets. It was called
this because it
was the house of worship for the third Baptist congregation organized
in Austin. Brewer
lists seven charter members, Eliza Hawkins, Robert Burditt, Isabella Johnso
n, Martha
Pollard, Martha Carrington, Maggie Buckner, and Betsy Johnson (Brew
er 1940:35).
Craig lists the above as well as Queen Shaw, Ellen Johnson, Martha Eglest
on, Louanna
Harrison, Lucy Jackson, John Saunders, Betsy Madison, Margaret Pollard
, Henrietta
Willis, Elizabeth Glasgow, Nelly Brewster, and John Spence (Craig 1976:2
).
Shortly after the church was organized, the congregation held services
in a small
house at the comer of Catalpa and Curve Streets in East Austin. Preach
ing there were the
Reverends E. S. Com and C. Ward. From 1876 until 1884, the pastor
of the church was
the Reverend Andrew Herbert. In 1884, the pastor was Chester Ander
son. On November
10, 1885, a new brick church was completed on the northeast comer of
East 10th and San
Marcos Streets, behind the Robertson Hill School which fronted onto
East II th Street.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

75

The old church site on Catalpa and Curve was sold to a Methodist congre
gation. From
1886 until 1889, the pastor was Reverend C. P. Hughes, who was succee
ded by the
Reverend AW. Moss, pastor through 189l. In 1892, the church buildin
g was renovated
at a cost of 1,300 dollars. The church also got a new pastor, Reverend
Lewis L.
Campbell, who would serve for thirty-five years (Craig 1976:2-3). A
new sanctuary was
built in 1953.

Early Africa n American Schools in Austin
African Americans in Austin began educating themselves immediately
after
emancipation. As early as October, 1865, the local press was scoffin
g at the opening

of a

Sunday School for African American children in Austin's Third Ward
(Southern
Intelligencer, October 26, 1865). On November 6, 1867 this ad appear
ed in a local
newspaper, the Daily Austin Republican:

Wanted: A Teacher to take charge of a Republican School.
H. C. Hunt, Treasurer
School Committee, Austin
Joseph Welch, the superintendent of the Freedmen's Bureau in Texas,
wrote at the
end of 1868 that a new school had been recently constructed in Austin
on a lot donated by
the city council (Hornsby 1973 :409). This article about the dedication
of the school
appeared in the local Republican newspaper a year before Welch wrote
his report:
The first negro school was built by voluntary contributions of the colore
d
people. Lead by the Post Band (playing our animated march) over a
hundred children of both sexes marched down the avenue to take
possession of the new school house .. .!t is to the credit of the colored
citizens of our town that they have, unaided, built the third school-house
erected within its limits (Daily Austin Republican, November 6, 1867).
An Austin newspaper noted the colored school examinations in the summ
er of
1869 (Austin Record, July 2, 1869). The school was being taught by a
single Anglo
HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

76

teacher, Miss Evans, in 1871. This may have been the woman listed in
the 1872 city
directory as Mrs. S. 1. Evans, who lived on Third Street between San
Antonio and
Guadalupe (Gray and Moore 1872:48). A local newspaper noted the
end of the Spring
semester in 1871:
The Colored School - The closing exercises of Miss Evans' school, at
the
Hall of Representatives last Friday night, resulted to the entire satisfaction
of all concerned, and reflected great credit upon teacher and pupils (Daily
State Journal, July 2, 1871).
The 1872 city directory lists among Austin's public schools, the Boy's
school
(colored), P. William Kramer, principal, and the Girl's school (colored),
Fred Rogers,
Principal, Miss Julie O'Connor, Assistant. The location of the residences
of Rogers and
O'Connor are not listed in the directory. Kramer boarded with Mrs. Lucy
Bishop on East
Eighth Street between Neches and Red River (Gray and Moore 1872:
19, 69).
This school remained in operation until some time after 1877, when, accord
ing to
historian Mary Starr Barkley, the Travis County Court forced Austin
Schools to use
excess money from the building fund of District Six (North Austin) to
build two schools
for African Americans. The schools were constructed in Wheatsville
and on Robertson
Hill (Barkley 1968: 175). The Seventh Ward Public School was in the
Third Baptist
(Ebenezer) Church building at the corner of Curve and Catalpa no later
than 1883
(Edwards & Churches 1883:37). From the beginning, the church and
school were closely
associated. When the church moved to its new sanctuary on Block 8,
present East 10th
Street, the school was moved into a new building behind it on East 11
th Street. Both are
evident on Koch' s 1887 Birds Eye View Map of Austin.
Robertson Hill Public School, which later became Austin's first high school
for
African Americans, opened for classes by 1884. The school stood at the
southeast corner
of East 11 th and San Marcos Streets, behind the Ebenezer Third Baptis
t Church (Koch
1887; Barkley 1968: 182). An Austin Public Schools report published
in 1954 stated that
"the first location of a school for Negro children in East Austin was on
San Marcos and
11th Streets. A part of the original building is still standing. This school
was known as
HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

77

•

the Robinson [sic] Hill School and was established in 1884" (Austin Public
Schools 1954
Volume II:7). Tax records indicate that the school owned Lots 1-5 of
Block 8 by 1885
(Austin City Lot Register 1885: 130). This description of the Robertson
Hill School by
superintendent of Austin Public Schools A. P. Wooldridge was publish
ed in the Austin
Daily Statesman in 1887:

Our Public Schools: Their Condition and Their Wants
I said in my former article that the state of the colored schools "was a
condition rather than a progress." This is in part an exact truth, for while
we have a frame building on Robinson Hill neatly furnished, the house
is
not painted on the interior, and the grounds are unfenced; this is the only
colored school building in really good condition .......... Exactly the same
state of affairs (children crowded onto backless benches) exists in Miss
Beaulah Gibbs room on Robertson Hill. In these rooms the children are
rather packed or penned than seated, to the great detriment of heath as
well
as manners ................................. A. P. Woolridge (Austin Daily Statesm
an,
June 2, 1887).
In 1896, the school had an enrollment of84 students. By 1904, this numbe
r had
risen to 177 (Brewer 1940:33). According to Barkley, the school operat
ed at its lith
Street location until 1909, but a Sanborn Fire Insurance map drawn in
1900 labels the
building "old and vacant" (Sanborn 1900). Another source suggests that
the school was
moved to its new location on the northwest comer of Curve and Olive
Streets,
immediately south of the former Third Baptist Church site at Curve and
Catalpa, in 1907.
It also states that was the year that the name of the school was change
d to Anderson High
School, in honor of Texas educator E.C. Anderson, brother of the princip
al, L.c.
Anderson (Delta Sigma Theta Sorority 1972:22). The building includ
ed secondary only
until 1913, when a separate high school was constructed on the presen
t Kealing Junior
High School site. Afterward, the school was known as Olive Street Schoo
l and it served
the East Austin African American neighborhood for nearly four decade
s. The school
burned in 1947 (Austin Public Schools 1954, Volume II:7). The site
is now a
neighborhood park known as Lott Park.
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE
78

African Americans from throughout
the state were drawn to Austin for
its higher
education opportunities in the period
following the Civil War. The Tillotso
n Institute had
its beginnings in 1875. According
to Shackles, itA small school taught
by Mrs. Garland
had been partially sustained by the
American Missionary Association in
Austin, which
proved to be a stepping-stone to the
Institution" (Shackles 1973 :3). Aft
er the Civil War,
Reverend George Jeffrey Tillotson
of the American Missionary Associ
ation of
Congregational Churches determine
d to organize a school of higher edu
cation for African
Americans in the capital of Texas.
Tillotson was a pastor in Connecticu
t and his friend
and colleague, Reverend William E.
Brooks, who had been pas tor of the
Congregational
Church in Westhaven, Connecticut,
was the first president of the colleg
e Williams
1997:285).
Tillotson purchased land east of the
State Cemetery and planned the cam
pus of
what would be the first African Am
erican College in the southwest, the
Tillotson
Collegiate and Normal Institute. Till
otson Institute opened its doo rs in
1881. The first
faculty and staf f were Anglos like Mrs
. Elizabeth Garland. Later many Mr
ican American
teachers taught there. Some of them
, like Mattie Durden, were graduates
of the Institute
(Shackles 1973 :20). Mattie Durden
, a native of Refugio, was the first
student to receive a
college degree from the Institute. Aft
er teaching at the school for eight yea
rs, Mrs.
Durden taught home economics at
Anderson High School for more tha
n twenty years
(Brewer 1940:56).
Elizabeth Garland was born in Wales
in 1840 (U.S. Census Bureau 1880).
Mrs.
Garland's School for Colored Childre
n, at the Mrican Methodist Episcopal
(AME)
Church, was in existence by June 29,
1878, when her students gave a pub
lic exhibition of
their work (Daily Democratic Statesm
an, June 30, 1878). In 1880 she was
taking
donations to furnish the student hou
sing at the Tillotson Institute, where
she later taught
grammar (Daily Democratic Statesm
an, September 15, 1880, February
14, 1882).
Elizabeth Garland was a school prin
cipal at the First Ward Primary Pub
lic School by 1885
(Morrison & Fourmy 1885: 110).

HIS TOR IC RES OU RCE S SUR VEY
OF EAS T AU STI N, TEX AS

PAG E

79

C. T. Garland was a native of Ne
w Hampshire (U.S. Census Bureau
1880). He

addressed a crowd of3 000 people
at the 1878 Juneteenth celebration
at Wheeler's Grove
and Governor Davis shared the pod
ium with him that day. The newspa
per referred to him
as Judge Garland (Daily Democratic
Statesman, June 20, 1878). Betwee
n the years 1883
and 1895, C. T. Garland was an atto
rney and U.S. commissioner. The
couple lived at
1609 Eas t 9th Street in the Blackshea
r neighborhood near the Tillotsen Ins
titute until C.
T. Gar lan d's death in 1895 (Morrison
& Fourmy 1895:145).
The Institute was a success and 250
students, mostly from the Austin area
,
enrolled the first year. New buildin
gs appeared on the campus regularly.
Allen Hall was
completed in 1881, Beard Hall in 189
4, Evans Industrial Hall in 1912, and
the
Administration Building in 1914. At
first, the school had to teach its stud
ents the
elementary skills of reading, writing
, and arithmetic, as Mrican Americ
ans were prohibited
from obtaining an education under
slavery. By 1888, the school was offe
ring a four year
college course. It was accredited as
a junior college in 1925 by the Tex
as Department of
Education and in 1926, the school
briefly became a women's college.
The high school at
the Institute was closed in 1930 and
the school's accreditation was upgrad
ed to senior
college level. The school became coeducational again in 1935. In 1952
the school
merged with Samuel Huston College
to become Huston-Tillotsen Colleg
e (Williams
1997:287-88).
Samuel Huston College was founde
d in Dallas Texas in 1876 in the bas
ement of
the Saint Paul Methodist Episcopal
Church, although it would not be kno
wn by that name
until 1883. The Reverend George
W. Richardson was its first preside
nt. The church and
school were burned down that year
by white supremacists. In 1878, the
school moved to
the more tolerant city of Austin and
opened in the Wesley Chapel Metho
dist Episcopal
Church. The college struggled for
a long time, but in 1883 Samuel Hu
ston of Marengo,
Iowa, gave the school $9,000 and six
acres were purchased adjacent to Eas
t Avenue in
Austin. The school was renamed for
its benefactor. By 1906 it boasted
an enrollment of
517 (Williams 1997:300-308). In 195
2, the school merged with Tillotson
Institute.
HIS TO RIC RES OU RCE S SUR VEY

OF EAS T AU STI N, TEXAS

PAG E

80

•

The Samuel Huston College campus, sited between East 11th Street
and East 12th
Street east of East Avenue, was a major attraction for African Ameri
can residential
development in the East Austin after the turn of the 20 th Century. Many
of its early
teachers owned houses in the 800 and 900 blocks of East 11 th Street,
a strip known

as

Faculty Row. Others bought houses built by Swedish and Irish immig
rants on East 12th,
East Thirteenth and East Fourteenth Streets, immediately north of the
main building.
Samuel Husto n's development and success, along with the presence
of the Robertson Hill
and Olive Street schools, as well as the establishment of major church
es, spurred the
popularity and growt h of East Austin for African Americans.

Robertson Hill and the Settlement of East Austin
The residential development of Robertson Hill and the surrounding area
popularly
known as East Austin began during Reconstruction in the late 1860s.
This settlement
resulted in the establishment of an area which is primarily African Ameri
can in its ethnic
and cultural traditions; however, East Austin has never been completely
African-American
in its racial make-up. Many Swedes and Germans once lived in there,
as well as other
Europ ean immigrants such as Irish and Italians. There has always been
a Hispanic
presence in the area as well, primarily to the south East 11 th Street.
In the latter twentieth century the explosive growt h of the University
of Texas
destroyed entire residential neighborhoods on East Austin's western
edge and increasing
numbers of studen ts rented houses in East Austin, a process which contin
ues today. As
real estate prices have soared, many Anglo families have bought houses
there and this,
combined with a steady influx of Hispanic residents beginning in the
early twentieth
century during the Mexican Revolution, has altered the racial make-up
of old East Austin.
Today it is probably closer demographically to the kind of integrated
community that it
was in its early developmental years than it has been since the self-co
nscious move toward
neighborhood segregation that began in earnest in the late 1920s.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

81

•

During Reconstruction, as Wheatsville and Clarksville were developing
on Austin's
west side, Masontown and Robertson Hill were being established on the
city's east side.
The settlement of Robertson Hill began with a French diplomatic missio
n to the Republic
of Texas. On September 15, 1840, French charge d' affairs Alphonse
Dubois De Saligny
purchased just over twenty-one acres ofland on a hill east of Waller Creek,
a short
distance east of the town of Austin. Today that parcel is bordered by
Interstate 35, San
Marcos, Seventh and lIth Streets (Travis County Deed Book Q:561-64).
There Saligny built the house known as the French Legation, which still
stands
today. Saligny's brief stay and his involvement in the "Pig War," which
may have cost the
Republic of Texas a French loan, have been well documented (Barke r
1971). After
Saligny left town some of his staff continued to live there for a short time.
When William
Bollaert came through Austin in 1843, he noted that the legation was
abandoned, its doors
open and its wooden shutters broken (Bollaert 195-96).
Dr. Joseph W. Robertson bought the French Legation in 1848 and the
hill on
which it was located became known as Robertson Hill (Hafertepe 1989:2
6). Robenson
first came to Texas in 1836. He moved his family to Austin in 1840 and
opened a drug
store on Congress Avenue. His wife Ann and his daughter Elizabeth
died in 1841, leaving
him with only his son, Jack. In 1842 he married Lydia Lee, the daugh
ter of Judge Joseph
Lee. The couple had ten children (Hafertepe 1989:24-25). In 1843 and
1844, Robenson
was the mayor of Austin (Brown 1902 Chapter 1 I: 17).
Joseph Robertson began to sell lots and larger parcels on in 1869. After
he died of
tuberculosis in August, 1870, more of the family'S East Austin property
was sold by his
wife, Lydia, and his son, George (Travis County Deed Records Index)
. George
Robertson opened a grocery and feed store at the northeast comer of
East Avenue and
Seventh Street by 1872, just after the arrival of the H&TC Railroad ensure
d the area's
commercial future. He also had a wagon yard there (Gray & Moore 1872:)
. A clerk, H.
Grooms Lee, who lived on the propeny, would later become Austin's
city marshal
(Morrison & Fourmy 1885:80). This store was one of the earliest in East
Austin.

HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

82

The Roben sons sold individual lots as well as larger parcels which were
then
subdivided by their new owners. Both white and African Americans
purchased propen

y in

the area between East II th Street and East 12th Street. Whites tended
to buy parcels on
speculation and remained absentee property owners while African Ameri
cans generally
purchased lots for resale to other African Americans as homesites. They
typically bought
parcels of an acre or two and subdivided them for sale to family or friends
, particularly
fellow church members, keeping a building lot for construction of their
own home
(HHM &M 1998).
Disaster may have encouraged African American settlement in Rober
tson Hill in
the 1870s. Many African Americans moved to Austin from rural areas
looking for
opport unity and protection during this period and some bought residen
tial lots on
Robertson Hill. Disaster may have been an impetus to African Ameri
can settlement in
Robertson Hill, as well. A large number of African Americans lived along
the banks of
Waller Creek at the southeast end of downtown Austin and a major flood
in 1869 left
many of these residents homeless (Austin Record, July 9, 1869). Rober
tson Hill was high
above the flood plain and must have looked very attractive to black residen
ts who had lost
their homes and possessions to the waters of Waller Creek and the Colora
do River.
The first lot in Robertson Hill sold to Malick Wilson, an African Ameri
can, in
December 1869, a few months after the flood. Wilson's property lay
in the 1000 block of
East II th and is now a vacant lot. Dozens of other lot sales followed
in the early 1870s.
The arrival of the H&TC Railroad in 1871 further spurred growth in
the area, both to
homeowners and speculators, both white and black. One of the earlies
t African American
landowners on Robertson Hill was Eliza Bell who obtained a parcel of
property from her
employers, the Robertsons, and built a two-room house on the site.
She sold surrounding
parcels to other African Americans. Her house, modified to its presen
t L-plan
configuration in the I950s, still stands at 1012 Juniper Street (Johnson
interview, 2000).
East Austin was depicted on Augustus Koch's first birds' eye view of
Austin,
published in 1873. Koch portrayed most of the area east of East Avenu
e as a dense

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

83

junipe r thicket with a few scattered residences along its western fringes
. The French
Legation was there as well as small clusters of modest houses to the
north in the
neighborhood that today lies between East 9th and East 12th Streets
and between
Interst ate 35 and Waller Streets. There were also houses in Masontown
to the south
(Koch 1873). Over the next fourteen years this residential core expand
ed, merging with
Mason town and other neighborhoods to the south, extending to Husto
n Tillotson Colleg

e

to the east, and reaching north to a point southeast of the University
of Texas (Koch
1887).
The establishment of the Tillotson Institute and Samuel Huston Colleg
e marked a
renaissance on Austin's east side. By the early twentieth century, these
two colleges,
operating in close proximity to one another, gave East Austin an edge
over similar ethnic
neighborhoods in the Texas. At a time when public universities were
for restricted to
whites, East Austin was an educational haven for African American
families. African
American children living in East Austin had neighborhood elementary
schools, a public
high school and two colleges in their midst at the turn of the century.
Some rural families
boarded their children in the houses of East Austin families so they could
have the benefit
of a high school education.

East Austin Businesses
One of the most important twentieth century developments in East Austin
has been
the establishment of a largely African American business district there.
By the early
1880s, there was a mixture of homes, businesses, and public buildings
along East II th
Street and it soon developed into the commercial heart of East Austin
. The first
businesses along the street on Robertson Hill were three corner grocer
ies opened in the
1880s. They were owned and operated, not by African Americans, but
by Europ ean
immigrants.
As early as 1881, John Cherico from New Orleans owned a grocer y
store and
residence at 1100 East II th Street. By 1883, his widow, Catherine,
known as Kate,

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

84

owned the store, advertising dry goo
ds, groceries and country produce.
Living with her
and working as a clerk in the store
in 1885 was her son, Felix. By 188
7, Felix owned the
store and John Cherico Jr. was a cler
k there (Morrison & Fourmy 1881:6
6; 1885:85;
1887:88; Edw ard s & Churches 188
3:61). Across 11th Street from the
Robertson Hill
School was Patrick McNamara's gro
cery and dry goo ds store, opened by
1883. The
McNamaras, an Irish family, lived
next doo r to their business (Edwar
ds & Churches
1883). A late r addition to the building
, heavily altered, still stands at 100
2 E. lith Street.
By 1883, Italian immigrant Salvatore
Bailetti ow ned a sto re at 1001 Eas
t 11th
Street (1101), advertising groceries,
beer and firearms for sale. Having
tried his hand
earlier with a grocery store at Nue
ces and 10th Streets in 1879 and ope
rating a lunch
room on the wes t side of Congress
Avenue in 1881, he bought a two lots
from George
Robertson on May 12, 1881. Bailett
i and his family lived in the same bui
lding at first, but
by 1885, he had built a house on Wa
ller Street (1006 Waller) across from
the store
(Morrison & Fourmy 1879:41; 188
1:50; 1885:65; Edw ard s & Church
es 1883:47).
In 1893, Simon and Hattie Chiappero
lived with the Bailettis. Simon ten
ded bar
for Salvatore at the store and Hattie
was a dressmaker. In 1895, Bailett
i sold his store to
German immigrant Carl Haehnel and
opened The Orient Saloon at 701 Con
gress Avenue.
Having advertised himself as a win
e manufacturer in earlier directories,
Salvatore was now
an agent for the Italian Swiss Agricul
tural Colony in Asti, Sonoma County
, California,
producers of Italian-Swiss Colony
brand wines and brandies. Chiappero
opened his own
grocery sto re at 301 West Sixth Stre
et that year, but still lived in the neig
hborhood, at
1210 Eas t 10th Street. The Bailett
is continued to live at 1006 Waller
Street into the
twentieth century. Salvatore's wid
ow, Cora, continued to live in the
house after his death
and still ow ned the property in 190
3 (Morrison & Fourmy 1887:65; 188
9:64; 1891;73;
1893:113; 1895:81; 1898:75; 1900:5
1; Austin City Lot Register 1903:1
91). On the north
side of the street, Richard Arnold ope
ned a German bakery across the stre
et by 1891.
At the same time Italian and German
immigrants owned and operated com
mercial
enterprises on East II th Street, Afr
ican American institutions were esta
blished on the
HIS TOR IC RES OU RCE S SURVEY
OF EAS T AU

STI N, TEX AS

PAG E

85

same street. In 1884, the Robertson Hill School opened near the southeast corner of East
11 th and San Marcos Streets and the new Ebenezer Baptist Church stood behind it on
10th Street. By 1891 the Wisemen's Hall, an African American fraternal lodge, was
located east of the school on the same block, across from Arnold's Bakery. A newer
building erected in 1949 still occupies the site today.
In 1905 all three of the corner stores opened in the 1880s, as well as the Arnold
Bakery, were still in operation. Both the McNamara store and the Arnold Bakery were
was still owned by those families, but Carl Haehnel owned the Bailetti Store and his family
would operate a store at that location into the 1950s. Louis Courreges owned the Cherico
Store. Reflecting the city's expansion to the east, by 1905 three new business had opened
in the 1100 block of East lith Street, including Louis Scott's saloon, Herman Schieffer's
Meat Market, and A. 1. Raifs grocery and saloon. None of these businesses were
"

operated by African Americans (Stephenson 1905: 51).
Herman Schieffer owned a meat market and grocery at present 1122-1124 East
11 th Street by the turn of the century. Schieffer built a home behind his store at present
1154 Lydia (formerly addressed as 1106 and 1105 Lydia) about the same time. Later, he
purchased the land across the street that had been occupied by the Children's Home for
Orphans until 1921 and built several bungalows as rental property.
East Austin was thriving after the end of World War I. In the 1920s and 193 Os,
scores of bungalows were built within the project area. Some were modest in scale and
others were impressive. City water service came to East Austin between 1895 and 1902,
but other city services lagged behind. Sewerage service came to most of the area by 1931.
This service was not extended to Wheatsville and Clarksville on the west side until much
later, another indication that the 1928 city plan was in full effect, denying city basic
services to black neighborhoods outside of East Austin (Kraus 1973: 150). There were
many businesses along Sixth and 11 th Streets and small corner stores scattered throughout
the area. Most of these businesses were still owned by Anglos and more recent European
immigrants, but some were owned by African Americans.

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

86

On East 11 th Street in 1922, the Succetti brothers owned the McNamara
Store,
McNamara having sold it to Isaac Charles in 1910. The Bailetti Store
was still owned by
the Haehnel family and the Cherico store was now the 1. T. Cagle Grocer
y. Richard
Arnold still operated his bakery and Herman Schieffer his meat marke
t, but the saloons
were gone. The orphanage located in the 1200 block of East lIth betwee
n Lydia and
Navasota Streets was designated for black children in 1922. The white
orphanage had
moved to a new building on East 38 th Street, in Hyde Park, the previo
us year and the old
building transferred for use as an African
During the 1920s and 1930s, more African Americans opened busine
sses in East
Austin. As automobiles became common, service stations and autom
otive repair shops
appeared. Murray Owens opened the Owens Garage on Bob Harrison
Street in 1926
(Brewer 1950:23). Franklin's Barber Shop opened in 1932 at 1014 East
11th Street, in a
small shop next door to the old bakery. By 1935,1. C. Stark operated
a service station
and grocery store at 1201 East lIth Street (Morrison & Fourmy 1935:6
17).
In 1936 African American businesses in Austin included five tire shops,

nine
tailors, a creamery, two furniture repair shops, two boarding houses,
two meat markets, a
beauty college, six service stations, Mosby and Lott's Lumberyard, two
blacksmiths,
sixteen cafes, seventeen grocery stores, a fish market, a theater, three
drug stores, a print
shop, three funeral homes, three shoe shops, seven garages, eight wood
yards, three
vegetable stands, ten beauty shops, a loan agency, and a hotel. In additio
n to African
American school teachers, there were three physicians, ten insurance
agents, two real
estate agents, two policemen, and two mail carriers. In 1939, Theod ore
and Jewel
Youngblood opened Jewel's Lunch Room (Brewer 1940:58, 63,75 ).
By the early 1950s, African American businesses had proliferated in the
area. On
East lith Street, now decidedly commercial in nature, was Fowler Electri
c Company,
owned by the first licensed African American electrician in Austin. The
Street
Construction Company was there, as well as a coin laundry, the Moder
n Radio
Laboratory, the Modern Building and Design Company, the Hollins Shoe
Hospital, L. S.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

87

Stewart's service station, Ross's Photog raphy Studio, and C. H. Gaut's
grocery store.
There was the 11 th Street Tavern, Harold Gregg's Recreation Club,
the East Side
Cleaners and the Montgomery-Robinson Cleaners, the Harlem Cab Compa
ny and the

11 th

Street Cab Company.
Johnny Holmes and his wife operat ed the Victory Cafe, a popular restaur
ant and
nightclub. There was the Southern Dinette, owned by Jimmie Owens
, Deacon Jones's
Barbecue, owned by Walter Jones, and the Holiday Inn Restaurant, owned
by F. G. Cain.
Other restau rants included the East Austin Sandwich Shop, the 11 th
Street Cafe, the
Steamboat Inn, the Hot Shot Inn, the Black Cat Drive In, the Burge r
Cafe No.2, and
Carlin's Place. The Hillside Drug Store, owned by U. S. Young, advert
ised itself as
"Austin's only Negro prescription drug store." Barbe r shops included
Franklin's,
Everybody's, and the Southern. Jewell's Parisienne Beauty Shop, owned
by Jewell
Warren, as well as Florence's Rainbow, Josephine Edmondson's, and
the Hilltop (Brewer
1950:21-23; Morrison & Fourmy 1952:783), operat ed during this period
as well.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

88

•

EAST AUST IN PROP ERTY TYPE S
The Historic Resources Survey of East Austin identified a wide range
of building
styles, types, and forms, all of which reflect the area's rich and colorfu
l history. In order to
facilitate the evaluation and assessment of such a wide variety of proper
ties, these
resources, based on their original and/or current function, were groupe
d into categories or
broad proper ty types. These property types include: Domestic; Religi
ous; Commercial;
Civic; Landscaping; Infrastructure; Commemorative; and Recreational.

DOME STIC BUILDINGS

The vast majority of buildings found in the project area are single-or
multiplefamily residences dating from the 1870s to the end of the survey period
in the 1950s.
These buildings cover a wide variety of forms, styles, and degrees of
sophistication,
reflecting both the range of socioeconomic backgrounds in the projec
t area and the
changes over 150 years of building evolution. To further aid in the review
and analysis of
these resources, they have been divided into several subtypes based upon
their plan.

.

Linea r Plans
One-Room
The simplest house SUbtype is the single-pen or one-ro om house. As
a unit, it
forms the basis for many of the other, more complex plan types. at its
most basic level, the
one-room dwelling is a rectangular- or square-plan building, one story
in height, usually
with a side facing gable roofline. The main entry is usually centered in
the middle of the
long side of the building, with a chimney, if present, at the end of the
gable. Windows, if
present, were few in number and small in size. This simple plan is most
closely associated
with very early settiement of the region, reflecting the residents' lower
economic status
and lack of available resources. As an initial building type, one-room
houses were usually

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

89

constructed using locally available materials. In Texas, log construction was common,
particularly in east and north Texas. Examples using native stone or other local materials
were built in western, central. and southern parts of the state.
In the project area. there is one example of the one-room subtype (1706 E. 12th
Street, rear). This dwelling is a wood-frame, side-gabled dwelling with a central door and
fixed 4-light windows. Exteriors are clad with wood siding. The house has been severely
altered with the addition of a shed-roof side extension. The building was constructed c.
1940 and most likely functioned as a rental property to the rear of the larger dwelling at
1706 E. 12th Street. Currently the building is used as a storage space.

Two-Room
The hall-and-parlor or two-room house was a dominant type of folk housing
.'

across the Southern United States during the second halfofthe 19th century. Construction
of the type remained common through the first two decades of the 20 th century. The
form's name is derived from its linear plan, two rooms wide and one room deep.
Typically, the two rooms are of unequal size, with the larger room originally serving as the
public space for gatherings and meals, and the smaller room reserved for sleeping quarters.
The roofis side-gabled. If a chimney is present, it is located centrally or at one or both
gable ends. The primary entry door may be slightly asymmetrical, entering into the larger
public room. Common variations include prominent front porches and rear gabled-roof or
shed-roof extensions that provide additional space. A common subtype of the hall-andparlor is the "Cumberland" house, with two front entries each entering a separate room.
The hall-and-parlor houses found in the project area reflect the type's defining
features. These houses all follow a linear, rectangular plan with a side-gabled (1801 E.
13th Street) or hipped roof (813 E. 13th Street). The houses have a single asymmetrical
entry or fall into the Cumberland-plan dual-entry subtype (1201 Short Hackberry). Most
examples have full-width or prominent partial-width shed-roof porches extending across
the front elevation of the house. With one exception ornamentation and decoration is

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

90

nonexistent. The exception, 900 Juniper, displays Queen Anne inspired detailing such as
turned porch posts and decorative wood brackets.
The hall-and-parlor house, as originally built, offered little room for its residents.
Additions and alterations are therefore quite common. These additions may have been
constructed to accommodate additional family members, or may have been built when an
increase in personal wealth allowed for the expansion. Rear additions dating to the early
and mid-20'h century are found on the majority of two-room dwellings in the project area.
Finish materials vary from house to house. Original board-and-batten or bevel-wood
siding is found on some examples (905 Olive, 1306 Chicon ), while cement-asbestos
shingle siding, brick veneer, or vinyl siding covers other houses. Roofing materials, doors,
and windows follow a similar pattern.

Center Passage
Another common type of folk housing in 191h century Texas was the centerpassage type. Like the hall-and-parlor, the center-passage house follows a linear,
rectangular plan, usually with a side-gabled roof, full-width shed-roof porch, and gableend chimneys. The center-passage house, however, inserts a central hallway between the
two primary rooms, affording additional privacy between the public and private rooms of
the house. The entry door is therefore symmetrically placed on the center-passage house,
rather than the typical asymmetrical door placement on the hall-and-parlor. Usually the
center-passage house is made offrame construction, although masonry examples are not
uncommon.
There are a number of center-passage dwellings dispersed throughout the project
area. These dwellings follow a rectangular plan and all have side-gabled roofs. Primary
facades are typically symmetrical with full- or partial-width, shed-roof porches (907 E.
13th Street, 901 E. 12th Street). Due to the limited amount of space the center passage
offers, shed-roof rear additions are prevalent throughout the project area. Exterior

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

91

cladding ranges from original bevel-wood or board-and-batten siding to later synthetic
siding materials including aluminum, asbestos shingles and vinyl.

I-House
Basically, the I-house is a two-story counterpart of the center-passage subtype.
The type was most commonly constructed in the midwestern United States, but is
occasionally found in Texas. Like the center-passage type, the I-house typically has a
linear plan, symmetrical entry, central hallway, and gable end chimneys. The I-house, with
its two stories of height and grander appearance than other folk housing types, often
indicated the wealth or standing of its residents.
The project area contains only one example of an I-house (810 E. 13th). This
house follows the prototypical I-house plan, with a two-story linear plan, bevel wood
siding, and brick gable-end chimney. A full-width two-story, Classically inspired gallery
offers a typically Southern addition to a midwestern house type. This dwelling, much like
the one story center-passage and two-room subtypes, has a rear shed-roof addition. This
addition is two stories in height and one room deep with a lower, one-story addition
attached to its rear.

Shotgun House
Although there is much debate as to the exact origins of this plan subtype's name,
it is generally believed that the shotgun house plan originated from a traditional Mrican
house form transported to the Caribbean by African slaves. In the early

** * this form first

appeared in the US in the Southern river deltas. This simple folk plan was constructed in
Texas between the late 19 th century through the 1940s and is generally associated with
African-American urban areas. In plan, the shotgun is similar to the two-room and centerpassage subtypes in that it follows a linear, rectangular, one-story profile. The shotgun,
however, is always a single room in width and varies from two to four rooms in depth.
The roof is almost always front-gabled and chimneys, if present, are centrally located.

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

92

There are a total of nine shotgun houses in the project area. These dwellings
generally follow the typical rectangular one room wide, three-to four-room deep shotgun
house plan (1208 Angelina). Porches, if present, are partial or full width with shed or
gabled roofs. All roofs, with one exception, are front-gabled. The exception, 1903 E. l3 th ,
has a hipped roof. Most have board-and batten wood siding, although asbestos shingles
and vinyl siding are also present. The most common alteration is the addition of a rear
shed-roof wing.

Irregular Plans
During the last quarter of the 19 th century, house forms in Texas began to depart
from the symmetry and regularity of rectangular and square folk plans. The Victorian-era
desire for irregular and "picturesque" forms, combined with advancing balloon-frame
construction techniques, allowed for a variety of irregular house shapes. Common devices
to achieve asymmetry included placement of projecting wings at one or more ends of the
house, to break the flat plane of the main facade. Rooflines became more complex, as
intersecting gables were used to accommodate the main mass of the house and the various
projecting wings.
The irregular-plan house often allowed for greater space than was possible with a
linear plan, with extra rooms and porch frontage from the projecting wings. The irregularplan house, with little or no ornamentation, could be adapted from use by tenant or small
landowning farmers. On the other hand, the form and style of the irregular-plan house
could be elaborated to the level of a Victorian mansion, with substantial detailing and
sophistication.

L-plan
The L-plan is derived by adding an offset front-facing gable to the basic sidegabled center-passage house type. The two intersecting gables form an ell, with the offset
gabled wing extending forward. The off-center front-facing gable may continue towards

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

93

•

the rear of the building as well. A
she d-r oof porch often extends across
one or both sides
of the ell. The L-plan is usually one
or one-and-one-half stories in heig
ht. The primary
doo r is typically located at the cen
ter of the side gable, with entry into
a central hall.
Original use of interior spaces mir
rored that of the center-passage, wit
h the
projecting front roo m usually acting
as the most important public space,
connected to the
kitchen or dining area. Sleeping area
s wer e usually located on the opp osi
te side of the
central hall. Con stru ctio n of L-plan
houses remained pop ula r into the
early decades of the
th
20 century, particularly in rural
areas. Typically, L-plan houses are
of wood-frame
con stru ctio n with wo od siding. Alt
hough some L-plan houses may lack
any stylistic
th
detailing, many 19 -century examp
les feature elaborate Victorian orn
amentation along
porches and gable ends.
The re are a number of extant L-plan
houses in the project are a with esti
mated
con stru ctio n dates ranging from 189
0 to 1935. They are generally one -sto
ry examples,
with steeply pitched intersecting-ga
bled roofs. In ord er to provide for
ext ra interior space,
many have rea r gab led -ro of extens
ions or lower, she d-r oof rear additio
ns. Tho ugh the vast
majority of these resources lack dec
orative detailing, several examples
display QueenAnne stylistic elements such as cha
mfered porch posts, decorative spin
dlework, jigsawn
porch column brackets, and /or turn
ed- wo od porch columns and balsutr
ades. Others
feature Classical Revival elements
such as eave returns and classical
column por ch
supports. Ext erio r cladding ranges
from ordinal bevel or board-and bat
ten siding to later
materials such as synthetic siding and
brick veneer,
An interesting variation of this sub
type within the project are a is the
hip ped -roo f
L-plan. Tho ugh these dwellings disp
lay the same floor plan as the gabled
roo f L-plan, they
differ in tha t their roo f is either cro
ss hipped (2100 E. 12th) or hipped
with a front-gabled
wing (1208 Sho rt Hackberry) rath
er than cross gabled. As is the cas e
with the crossgabled L-plans, a number hip ped -ro
ofL -pla ns display modest Qu een Ann
e or Classical
Revival (117 I 112 San Bernard) infl
uences. The majority retain their orig
inal wo od boardand-batten or beveled-wood exterio
r cladding.

HIS TOR IC RES OU RCE S SURVEY
OF EAS T AU STI N, TEX AS

PAG E

94

Modif ied L-plan (Hipped-with-Cross-Gahles)
The modified L-plan is an elaboration of the cross-gabled L-plan form.
The
modified L-plan adds an enlarged central section to the house form,
covered by a steeply
pitched hipped roof. The lower intersecting gables, typical of the L-plan
, extend from this
main hipped roofline. This typical roofline provides another common
name for this form:
"hipped-with-cross-gable". Popula r between about 1890 and 1910, the
modified L-plan
type continued the popular trend toward s asymmetrical form. Even more
so than the
simple L-plan, the modified L-plan could vary in ornateness, ranging
from a simple onestory example lacking stylistic influences to an ornate two-st ory mansio
n with abundant
frills and details. Often, the more ornate modified L-plan houses are
associated with the
Queen Anne style. The irregular roofline and overall asymmetry of the
plan lent itself to
features such as circular comer towers, cutaway bay windows, jigsaw
n spindlework
detailing, prominent dormers, and decorative shinglework in the gable
ends. This
exuberance was most pronounced in the earlier examples of the type,
constr ucted prior to
th
1900. The early 20 -century modified L-plan houses often follow
"free classic" Queen
Anne styling, with classically-influenced detailing such as Doric or Tuscan
porch columns
and a more centered primary entry door flanked by a transom and sidelig
hts.
One of the finest modified L-plan houses in the project area fall within
the latter
catego ry of the type, displaying relatively restrained ornamentation and
limited asymmetry
in overall form. With its hipped-with-cross-gables roof, 1119 E. I11h
falls within the
modified L-plan type. This c. 1910 house incorporates free classic Queen
Anne stylistic
elements, such as Doric column porch supports, a centered entry door
flanked by a
transom and sidelights, and pent roofs and decorative shingles in gable
ends. Although this
house shows noteworthy decorative detailing, its overall asymmetry
is limited by its
centrally located entry door, inset partial-width porch, and lack of wings
projecting past
the main facade.
1170 San Bernard is a good example of the prototypical form
of the modified L-

plan, with its central hipped roof and intersecting gables that project
from the main

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

95

building mass. The house also features a wrapa round porch across the
modified ell, turned
wood porch posts and balustrade. and decorative jigsawn brackets.

Other Irregular Plans (T-Plan, U-Plall)
The L-plan and Modified L-plan were the two most notable irregular-plan
residential types found in Texas. However, the use of balloon framing
and pre-cut lumber
allowed for a wide variety of irregular floor plans and roof shapes. Conse
quently, a
number of less common irregular-plan variants were constructed in the
late 1800s, with a
few examples still extant in the project area. The T-plan (I 154 Lydia
and 1600-10
Pennsylvania) basically follows the L-plan, with intersecting gables meetin
g at one end of
the house. With the T-plan, though, the front-facing gable generally contin
ues past the
gable intersection to the rear of the house. In some cases, the side-fa
cing gable also
projects slightly past the intersection to form a more cross-axial plan.
The U-plan (1192
San Berna rd) consists of a main side gable with two projecting front
gables, one on each
end of the house. A porch often extends between these front-facing gables
. When these
front-facing gables continue towards the rear of the house, an H-plan
(11 07 Myrtle) can
th
be identified. Like the other late 19 -century house types in the projec
t area, the irregularplan variants in the project area feature a wide range of ornamentatio
n.

Massed Plans
By the 1910s, residential buildings were moving away from the asymm
etrical plans
favored for the previous three decades. The renewed use of classically
inspired detailing
on otherwise irregular house forms during the 1890s and 1900s may
have marked the start
of this trend. In addition, houses began to show more symmetry in plan
after 1900. The
typical massed-plan house gave even more usable interior space and
porch space to its
residents.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

96

Pyramidal/Hipped Cottage (One-S
tory Pyramidal)
The Pyramidal or Hipped Cottage
is a one- or one-and-one-half-story
vernacular
house type that stylistically anticipa
tes the bungalows that succeeded it.
Generally
associated with the South, these dwe
llings were built in rural settings, in
small towns, and
in large cities between 1900 and 192
5. The square or nearly square-pla
n gives the house
has a distinctly boxy appearance. The
typical PyramidaVHipped Cot tag e
contains four
unequally sized rooms that, like the
bungalow, connect directly to each
other without
hallways. A wo od frame wall and roo
f structure rests on a pier-and-beam
foundation.
Weatherboard siding is the most com
monly used exterior material. Win
dows are typically
coupled double-hung units, with a
one-over-one light sash configurati
on. A porch leads to
the entry on the principal facade. The
porch is typically sheltered by the mai
n roo f but may
have an independent roo f Orname
ntation on the PyramidallHipped Cot
tage is limited to
the porch sup por ts and railing, whi
ch are often Classically inspired. The
pyramidal roof,
which gives the style its name, is stee
ply pitched, with boxed eaves. Hip
ped or gabled roo f
dormers and chimneys are also imp
ortant character-defining features of
the style.
All PyramidaVHipped Cottages in
the project area square or nearly squ
are in plan,
of wo od- fram e construction, with
a pier-and-beam foundation. Por ch
variations include
partial-width inset porches (1188 Col
eto) and full-width porches (19 07
New York
Avenue). Detailing ranges from clas
sically inspired columns (11 80 Nav
asota), to box
columns (19 09 New York), to Eas
tlake (16 04 Ne w York) and Queen
Anne ornamentation
(15 06 New York). Ext erio r clad
ding varies and included synthetic
siding, wood board-and
batten and wea the rbo ard siding, and
stone veneer Composition shingles
, and corrugated
metal panels have replaced wo od shin
gles as the roofing material of choice.
A common
alteration to the PyramidallHipped
Cottage is a rear addition, either she
d-roofed or
integrated into the original roofline
or a she d-r oof side addition.

HIS TO RIC RES OU RCE S SURVEY
OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAG E

97

Two-Story Pyramidal/Hipped House

.'

The two -sto ry Pyramidal Ho use is
contemporaneous with, and shares
many
character-defining features with the
Pyramidal Cottage. Two stories in
height, the TwoSto ry Pyramidal/Hipped House has
a rectangular plan with a moderate
or steeply pitched
pyramidal or nearly pyramidal hipped
roo f Tw o-S tory PyramidaIs with a
symmetrical
square plan are also known as Fou
r-S qua re houses. Hipped roo f dorme
rs are a
characteristic feature of this type. Con
struction is wo od frame, resting on
a pier-and-beam
foundation. Ext erio r walls are typical
ly covered with weatherboard siding,
although
stucco. wo od shingles, or face bric
k were also used. Typical fenestratio
n consists of oneover-one-light wo od sash, double-hu
ng windows arranged singly, or in
groups. The main
entry is usually offset to one corner
of the front facade. Independently
roofed porches
usually extend the full width of the
principal facades. The hipped roo f
is generally simple
in design, relying on dormers and chim
neys for interest. Composition shin
gles, corrugated
or crimped sheet metal, and cement
-asbestos shingles are common roo
fing replacements
for the original wo od shingles. Det
ailing is sometimes classically insp
ired, with the Doric
ord er often used for porch supports.
The overall form and roofline of Tw
o-S tory
Pyramidals, particularly the Four-S
quare subtype, lend themselves wel
l to modest
application of Prairie Style detailin
g. Typical Prairie Style features fou
nd on even
vernacular examples include low-pit
ched hipped roofs, overhanging eav
es, full-width
porches. and hip ped -ro of dormers.
However, most vernacular Tw o-S tory
Pyramidals lack
the ribboned windows, geometric pat
terning and heavy horizontal emphas
is that typifies
true high-style Prairie Style architec
ture.
Three Tw o-S tory Pyramidal houses
(1204-C Salina, 1618 Pennsylvania,
1706 E.
12th) are found in the project area.
All have a basically rectangular foo
tprint, although
1706 E. 12th appears to have a substan
tial alterations that disguise its bas
ic proportions.
Each has a nearly pyramidal hipped
roof, although all lack the characterdefining roo f
dormers and chimneys. 1618 Pennsy
lvania and 1706 E. 121h have porche
s that extend the
full width of the main facade. How
ever, 1706 E. 121h'S porch has been
completely
HIS TOR IC RES OU RCE S SURVEY
OF EAS T AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAG E

98

enclosed. Ext erio r cladding include
s wo od weatherboard siding, stucco
finish, brick
veneer, and beveled wood siding.
Windows on all examples are one-ov
er-one-light
double-hung.

20 TH-Ce ntu ry Pop ula r Ho use Typ
es
Bungalow
The bungalow represents the most
common house type of the early 20 th
-century
hou se types. The bungalow first gain
ed acceptance in California betwee
n 1900 and 1910,
and quickly reached a peak of pop
ularity throughout the United States
between 1910 and
1930. The "bungalow" was used by
many writers and designers of the
age to describe any
small dwelling with infinite variations
in form and style, making it a vague
and confusing
term. As a general building type, bun
galows are usually one story in heig
ht with lowpitched roofs, broad overhanging eav
es, and prominent porches. Bungal
ow roo f forms
vary considerably. Front-gabled and
cross-gabled examples predominated
during the
1910s and 1920s, particularly in the
Sou th and Southwest United States.
Side-gabled
bungalows became more common
in the late 1920s and 1930s. Hipped
roofs wer e also
occasionally applied to the bungalow
type.
The interior of the bungalow marked
a major shift in roo m placement and
spatial
arrangements. Mo st commonly, the
bungalow was billed as a comfortabl
e middle-class
dwelling with a modern appearanc
e and efficient layout. In response
to improving
technology and a new "informality"
of living in the home, bungalows ofte
n had smaller
kitchens and a combined living and
dining area. Hallway space was kep
t at a minimum,
with rooms opening directly from
one to another. The defined public
parlor vanished as a
separate room. Typically, the bungal
ow had two rows of rooms running
from the front of
the house to the back, with a substan
tial front porch that could be used
for entertaining or
leisure time.
The bungalow is often associated wit
h the Craftsman style, with its exp
osed rafter
tails, decorative eave brackets, and
battered porch columns and piers.
Ironically, the
HIS TO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY
OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAG E

99

Craftsman style had its roots in the Arts and Crafts Movement, which
championed the use
of handcrafts in interior and exterior decoration. However, the bunga
low was well suited
for large-scale mass production. Buyers could order house plans and
drawings from mailorder catalogs and journals. while some companies offered fully pre-cu
t house kits that
could be delivered to the closest railway stop to the house site. Althou
gh the majority of
styled bungalows followed Craftsman influences, a variety of other styles
and decorative
elements could be attached to the general bungalow form. Some bunga
lows employed
Prairie Style or even Classical influences, while many later bungalows
incorporated
various attributes of the Period Revival styles, such as Tudor Reviva
l and Spanish Colonial
Revival, and Mission Revival. By the late 1920s and 1930s, fewer bunga
lows received the
typical Craftsman decorative ornamentation, and the previously promin
ent porches began
to lose importance in the overall plan. Entries began to be centered on
the long side of the
side-gabled bungalow, giving a more symmetrical and classically oriente
d appearance. The
use of Classical or Colonial Revival details was revived, while the overal
l open-plan
bungalow interior was incorporated into succeeding building types and
styles.
The infinitely malleable bungalow could be adapte d to a variety of sizes

and
complexities, to fit nearly any budget or stylistic desire. Many bungal
ows. particularly
t~ose locate d in rural areas or associated with less-af
fluent residents, had few decorative
or stylistic influences beyond the overall form of the house. In some
cases. older
Victorian-era farmhouses received a renovation with Craftsman decora
tive elements. to
more closely resemble the typical "modern" bungalow
The project area reflects the variety of bunga low forms and styles. The
majority of
the area's bungalows have front-gabled rooflines (1904 Pennsylvania)
, with more complex
examples having intersecting gabled roofs (1206 Salina, 1308 Navas
ota) and clipped
"jerkinhead" gables (1509 and 1505 E. 13 th). A number of side-gabled
bungalows (2103 E.
12th, 1005 E. 14th) are also present. An early hipped or pyramidal roof
bungalow form
(1002 Juniper) is also present in large numbers throug hout the projec
t area. This form,

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

100

which most likely represents a tran
sition from the four-room hipped and
pyramidal roo f
cottages to the bungalow plan.
Nearly all bungalows with unaltered
exterior finishes have wo od weathe
rboard
siding, although wo od board-and batt
en siding is also present. Mo st of the
identified
bungalows either lack stylistic orname
ntation beyond the overall formal infl
uence, or have
only modest Craftsman detailing. Com
mon Craftsman-style details observ
ed on many of
these bungalows include projecting
partial-width front-gabled porches,
exposed rafter
tails, and triangular eave brackets.
1106 Myrtle and 1201E.12th provid
e goo d examples of
the typical simple front-gabled bun
galows with limited Craftsman infl
uences. In some
cases (1205 E. 12th, 903 E. 12th),
battered wo od columns or brick pier
s are present as
porch supports. 1900 Pennsylvania
and 1206 Bob Harrison are examp
les of a more
vernacular front-gabled bungalow
with little or no Craftsman stylistic
influences. Much
like the pyramidal and hipped roo f
cottage, the pyramidal and hipped
roo f bungalow tends
to display a Classical influence whe
n decoration is present. These influen
ces are usually
limited to Classical box column por
ch supports. Where present, original
windows are
generally one-over-one-light wood-sa
sh.
Typical unstyled or Craftsman-styl
e examples comprise most bungalo
ws in the
project area. However, a number of
Bungalows are distinguished as mo
re ornate or unique
examples of the type. 903 E. 14th
is likely the finest example of a Cra
ftsman-influenced
bungalow in the project area. The
building is highlighted by its comple
x cross-gabled main
house mass, with full-width front-ga
bled porch with battered wo od box
columns on brick
piers.
The project area contains one gabled
-roof bungalow tha t has some Classic
al
Revival influences (1607 New Yor
k). This c. 1920 bungalow, with its
front-gabled main
mass and lower front-gabled, partial
width porch, follows the typical Cra
ftsmaninfluenced, front-gabled bungalow
form. However, decorative details
such as box column
porch supports and a front facade entr
y flanked by sidelights and a transom
give this

HIS TO RIC RES OU RCE S SURVEY
OF EAST AUSTIN, TEX AS

PAG E

101

•

bunga low a unique Classical flavor. Tudor Revival influenced bunga
lows (806 112 E. 121h,
1108 Olive) are also present.
As with the other pre-W orld War II residential housing types, alterat
ions and
modifications are evident on a majority of the bungalows in the projec
t area. Many
bunga lows still feature a range of Craftsman details, but have suffere
d major
modifications, such as installation of non-original exterio r siding, porch
suppor ts,
windows, eave enclosures, or porch enclosures. Additions to the origina
l gabled form are
also presen t in some cases.

Inter-War Rectangular Minim al Traditional/Ranch

·.

Following the Great Depre ssion and World War II, new housing constr
uction
boome d as a result of years of pent-up demand, newfound econom ic
prosperity, and
legislation that favored new construction. The bulk of this residential
constr uction took
place on the peripheries of cities such as Austin and San Antonio. Howev
er, new houses
were also constr ucted in rural areas, even as these regions were losing
popula tion through
agricultural modernization.
The bulk of houses built in the major housing boom of the late 1940s
and 1950s, as
well as those constr ucted just prior to World War II as the Depre ssion
waned, magnified
the architectural trends noted in later Bunga low houses. Many houses
, particularly those
built after World War II, were quite simple in both form and style.
Reaso ns for this
simplicity included: increasing standardization and prefabrication in
building materials; a
desire for inexpensive and quickly built housing; and the trends toward
s reduced
ornam entatio n and eclecticism in architecture. House s tended to have
lower- pitche d sidegabled rooflines, sometimes with an equally low-pitched front-gabled
wing. Particularly
after 1950, autom obile garage s were attach ed as an integral part of
the house. The porch
contin ued to wane in importance, often relegated to a small overha
ng at the main entry.
Decor ation was increasingly restrained and often reflected a more "tradit
ional" motif
Exteri or materials for postw ar houses varied widely. Wood drop siding
was often used for

HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE
102

wall cladding, as were
brick or stone veneers.
By the end of the histor
ic period, synthetic
materials such as ceme
nt-asbestos shingles. sim
ulated stone veneer, and
vinyl siding began
to be used as original ex
terior finishes. On the int
erior, post-World War
II houses
generally continued the
open-plan informality ad
opted by the earlier bung
alows.
Th e Minimal Traditional
style, popular from the
late 1930s into the early
1950s,
loosely adapted Colonial
Revival details to imme
diate prewar and po stw
ar houses,
although even these inf
luences were often limite
d to application of fixed
non-functional
shutters or use of mUltip
le-pane windows. Eaves
were enclosed and brou
ght close to the
house. in contrast to the
open eaves of Craftsman
-style bungalows. The Ra
nch style, more
prevalent af ter 1950, pla
ced more emphasis on the
low-slung roofline, with
a long sidegabled or hipped ro of de
signed to elongate and
flatten the ho us e's appe
arance in relation
to its surroundings.
Only a few houses of thi
s type were identified in
the project area. M os t fo
llow the
typical rectangular plan,
side-gabled ro of profile
(1207 Leona, 1305 Salin
a, 1203 Cotton).
1400 Co tto n constructe
d c. 1955 is the only ide
ntified example of the Ra
nch style, with its
low side-gabled ro of an
d sprawling rectangular
-plan appearance. The ho
use, like other
post-World War II reside
nces in the project area,
has undergone a series
of la te r nonhistoric modifications.
CO MM ER CI AL BUIL
DINGS

The project area contains
a variety of historic comm
ercial buildings, dating
from
th e 1880s through the
1950s. These properties
are primarily located alo
ng E. I11h and 121h
Street commercial corri
dors with a small numb
er on Chicon Street and
one on th e corner
of San Bernard and E. lh
13 Street. Though the
se commercial properties
display a range of
plans, roof-forms, cons
truction techniques, and
exterior cladding, the ma
jority of buildings
within the project area
can be grouped into broa
d SUbtypes based upon
their principal
physical attributes. Thes
e categories include On
e-Part Commercial Bloc
k; Tw o- Pa rt
Commercial Block; and
Gas Station.
HI ST OR IC RESOURCE

S SURVEY OF EA ST
AU ST IN , TEXAS

PA GE
103

One-P art Commercial Block
Generally, the One-Part Commercial Block is a one-story, free standin
g or adjacent
groupi ng of buildings consisting of a prominent plate-glass display windo
w topped by a
transom. Roofs are typically flat with a parapet. Decorative features
typically include
corbeled brick, ornamental panels, pressed-metal cornices, and cast stone
copings. Though
the majority of One-Part Commercial Block s within the project area
conform to this
definition to the extent that they are flat roofed, one story structures
with parapets, they
tend to deviate from this definition in that they generally lack decorative
ornamentation
(1215 Chicon). Transoms, if presen t have been obscured by unsym
pathetic alterations
(1806 E. 12th, 1131-1 133 E. 11th, 1000-1 002 E 11th). Once promin
ent plate glass windows

and doors have been replaced with smaller windows and solid-core wood
or metal doors.
In some cases the original primary facade has been completely replace
d with a later more
"modern" facade. The buildings located at 1806, 1808, and 1812 E.
12th Street are
example of this trend. In each case the original facade has been encase
d by a later, almost
severe stone veneer facade. Exterior materials include glazed tile, concre
te block, scored
concre te stone veneer, stucco, and brick.

Two-Part Commercial Block
The Two-P art Commercial Block is generally a two-to -four story comm
ercial
building in which the first story facade consists of a commercial storefr
ont similar to that
of the One-P art Commercial Block while the upper stories exterior openin
gs are limited to
smaller windo ws in varying patterns. Within the project area there are
two resources that
fall into this subtype. These two flat roof resources, 1814 and 1816-1
818 E 12th Street,
have been heavily altered by the application of a whitewashed scored
-concrete finish over
the original buff brick exteriors. Any decorative features or transoms
have been obscured.
Original first floor window and door openings have been severely altered
as well.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE
104

Gas Station
Three pre-1958 vehicle
service stations we re ide
ntified with the project
area. All
three of these buildings
have some relation to the
service of automobiles
in the early and
mid-20 th century. Th e Ga
s Stations at 1213 Chico
n, 1614 E. 12lh, and 17
20 E. 12lh are
similar in form reflectin
g typical plans and appe
arances for service statio
ns of the postWorld W ar II era. Thes
e buildings are compos
ed of a flat-roofed rectan
gular-plan mass,
clearly divided into an
office are and an adjacen
t tw o or three bay serv
ice area. A fixed
fla t-r oo f ca no py extends
across the former fuel isl
and. Ex ter io r cladding
materials include
concrete block wo od sid
ing, and enameled metal
panels.
RE LI GI OU S BUILDING

S

Sanctuaries
Th er e are a total of sev
en pre-1956 churches in
the project area. All are
primarily
front- gabled rectangular
structures and all but on
e utilize brick ex ter io r
cladding.
Adjacent side or rear wi
ngs or detached structur
es house administrative
and or educational
functions. Stylistic influe
nces include Gothic Reviv
al (1201 Waller, 1010
E. lO lh, 110 1 E.
lO lh, 1164 San Bernard
), Colonial Revival (1701
E. 12lh) and Gr ee k Reviv
allRomanesque
(1206 E. 9 lh). Th e oldes
t church, 1201 Waller,
is unique in that is a rar
e surviving example
of a late 19 th century, Ca
rpenter Gothic frame ch
urch. Ch ar ac ter defining
details include
fishscale shingles, point
ed-arch windows, Class
ically inspired ga bl ed -ro
of entry porch.
symmetrical facade, an
d steeply-pitched roofli
ne. The ot he r six church
es were built in the
1940s and 1950s and dis
play a less vernacular pro
file. The Gothic Revival
churches
display distinctive eleme
nts such as buttressess,
rose windows, broad-sc
reen facades,
pointed arched window
s, and cast concrete and
stone spires. 1701 E. 12 th
, the Colonial
Revival Church, with its
Classically inspired frontfacade portico presents
a more
symmetrical temple-fron
t appearance. 1206 E. th
9 , much like 1701 E. th
12 , presents a
symmetrical, temple-fron
t appearance but displa
ys a distinctly Romane
sque flavor in its
rounded arched window
s and decorative brickwo
rk.
HI ST OR IC RESOURCE
S SURVEY

OF EAST AUSTIN, TE

XAS

PAGE

105

ee

Administrative/Edu caf lon al
The administrative/educational bui
ldings, as previously mentioned, are
either
adjacent or detached structures bui
lt to house the day-to-day adminis
trative or educational
functions of their associated church
es. In two cases (1105 E. 10 th and
1162 San Bernard),
these buildings are detached former
single-family dwellings converted hou
se the
administrative functions of the associ
ated churches. 1206 E. 9th , rea r is
a substantially
altered early rectangular building tha
t formerly functioned as a monastery
The oth er
resources of this subtype are later
rear or side additions (1186 Chicon
, rear; 1010 E. 10 th ,
rear). Ext erio r cladding materials var
y and include stone veneer, brick,
synthetic siding,
and wo od siding.

CIV IC BUILDINGS

The buildings within the project are
a that fit into this typ e are those stru
ctures
designed to house institutional or pub
lic functions. There are thre e buildin
gs within the
project area that fit into this categor
y (1017 E. 11 th , 1192 Angelina, 117
4 San Bernard).
1017 E. 11 th was constructed in 194
9 as a Masonic Temple. It currently
functions as a
police station. This rectangular plan
building, with its symmetrical facade
and prominent
two-story Doric portico, displays a
distinct Greek Revival temple-front
appearance.
Exteriors are clad with brick veneer.
1192 Angelina, constructed c. 193
0, is a rectangular
plan structure with Spanish Coloni
al Stylistic influences. Cha rac ter def
ining features
include flat roo f with parapet, rounde
d arched entry porch, and stucco ext
erior finish. A
slight Craftsman influence is displaye
d in this building'S decorative window
screens. The
third building in this category, 117
4 San Bernard, was constructed as
a medical clinic in
1941. The building currently functio
ns as a single-family dwelling. This
building is
rectangular in plan and has a cross-h
ipped roof. Exterior materials include
brick and

HIS TOR IC RESOURCES SURVEY
OF EAS T AUSTIN, TEX AS

PAG E
106

stucco and windows are 6/6 wood sash. Exteri or ornamentation is limited
to a decorative
entry porch with a stucco exterior finish.

LAND SCAPI NG

Proper ties in this category are those structures built for the enhancement
of the
natural environment. Two resources, the stone and concrete steps 911
E 11 th and the
median at the 1300 block of Angelina, fit into this category. The proper
ty at 911 E. 11th
originally functioned as a staircase for the house (now gone) at the same
address. The
median is a grassy plot of land surrounded by concrete curbing. In the
middle of this
median is a young live-oak tree.

INFRA STRUC TURE

Resou rces in the Infrastructure catego ry include the structures that provid
e
underlying suppo rt for the day-to-day operation of the city. Included
in this catego ry are
several moonlight towers and a concrete culvert. The moonlight towers
, located on E. 11 th
Street, Pennsylvania, and Colteto are steel structures built by the City
of Austin in 1895 to
provide nighttime illumination. The culvert, locate d in the 2000 block
ofE. 12th was
constr ucted c. 1955 as a replacement for an earlier wood bridge.

COMM EMOR A TIVE PROPE RTIES

The Commemorative category includes resources constructed to mark
an
important event, person, site, etc. There is one historic resource, located
in the 1000 block
th
ofE. 9 , that falls within this category. This resource, a Texas Histor
ical Commission site
plaque, marks the former site of a female seminary. The site currently
is the location of the
Guada lupe Church educational facility. The structu re consists of a metal
plaque mounted
on a steel pole.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

107

RECRE ATION AL PROPE RTIES

Resources in this category include those properties within the project
area related
to entertainment and recreational activities. There are two properties
in the project area,
Swedish Hill Park and Lott Park, that are in this category. Swedish Hill
Park, located at
907 E. 14th is a grassy lot with numerous live-oak trees. The park was
dedicated in early
2000 and was the former site of a number of historic homes related to
the Swedish Hill
community. Lott Park, located in the 900 block of Olive Street, is the former
site of the
Olive Street School. Currently, the site is a grassy lot with recreational
equipment and
outdoo r park furniture.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

108

RE FE RE NC ES
Austin American Statesman
1979 Feb rua ry 16 issue of the new
spaper, Austin.
1984 Feb rua ry 13 issue of the new
spaper, Austin.
Austin City Gazette
1851 Jul y 9 issue of the newspaper
, Austin.
Sep tem ber 22 issue of the newspaper
, Austin.
Austin Daily Statesman
1887 Jun e 2 issue of the newspaper
.
Austin Public Sch ool s
1954 Seventy-three Vital Years: Pub
lic Education in Austin 1881-1

954. Austin.

Austin Rec ord
1869 Jul y 9 issue of the newspaper
, Austin.
Jul y 2 issue of the newspaper, Austin.
Baker, D. W. C.
1875 A Texas Scrapbook. A. S. Bar
nes and Company, Ne w York.
Barker, Nancy N.
1971 The French Legation in Texas,
Volume l. Texas State Historical
Association, Austin.

Barr, Alwyn
1973

Bla ck Texans: A History ofNegroe
s in Texas 1528-1971. Jenkins
Publishing Company, Austin.

Bollaert, William
1956 Bol lae rt's Texas. edited by W.
Eugene Ho llon and Ru th L. Butler.
University of Oklahoma Press, Nor
man.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1915 Texas in the Middle of the Eig
hteenth Century: Studies in Spanish
Co lon ial Administration. 1970 Tex
as History Paperback Reprint,
University of Texas Press and the Tex
as Sta te Historical Association,
Austin.

HIS TOR IC RESO"CRCES SURVEY

OF EAST AUSTIN, TEX AS

PAG E

109

Brewer, 1. Mason
1940 An Historical Outline of the Negro in Travis County. Samuel Huston
College, Austin.
1950 A Pictorial and Historical Souvenir ofNegro Life in Austin, Texas 1950-

51. Austin.
Brown, Frank
ca. 1902

Annals of Travis County and the City of Austin from the Earliest
Times to the Close of 1875. II
II

Connell, Earl Monroe
1925 The Mexican Population ofAustin, Texas. Master of Arts Thesis,
University of Texas at Austin.
Costa, Joe A.
1875

Census ofAustin Texas, 5 volumes, Austin History Center.

Daily Austin Republican
1867 November 6 issue of the newspaper, Austin.
1868 July 20 issue of the newspaper, Austin.
August 17 issue of the newspaper, Austin.
December 1 issue of the newspaper, Austin.
Daily Democratic Statesman
1878 June 20 issue of the newspaper, Austin.
June 30 issue of the newspaper, Austin.
1880 September 15 issue of the newspaper, Austin.
1882 February 14, 1882 issue of the newspaper, Austin.
Daily State Journal
1871 July 2 issue of the newspaper.
Daily Texan
1987
1989

August 26 issue of the newspaper, Austin.
February 16 issue of the newspaper.

Daily Tribune
1898 April 29 issue of the newspaper.

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

110

DeBo w, 1. D. B.
1854 Compendium of the Seventh Census. A.O.P. Nicholson, Public Printe
r.
Washington.
Delta Sigma Theta Sorority
1972 A Pictorial History ofAustin, Travis County, Texas 1839-1920.
Husto nTillotson College, Austin.
Edwar ds and Churches
1883 Edwards and Churches General Directory of the City ofAustin
For 188384. E.W. Swindells, Austin.
Fontaine, Jacob ill with Gene Burd
1983 Jacob Fontaine: From Slavery to the Greatness of the Pulpit, Press,
and
Public Service. Eakin Press, Austin.
Foster , William C.
1995 Spanish Expeditions Into Texas 1689-1768. University of Texas
Press,
Austin.
Gage, Larry Jay
1960 "The City of Austin on the Eve of the Civil War." Southwestern
Historical
Quarterly, Volume LXIII (3) January:428-438. Texas State Histor ical
Association, Austin.
General Land Office
1830 Spanish Collection Volum e XVI, Empresario Contracts: 131-13
3.
Graham, Phillip
1938 The Life and Poems ofMirabeau B. Lamar. University of North
Carolina
Press, Chapel Hill.
Gray, Judge George H.
1872 Outline History of Austin. In the 1872 Austin City Directory,
Austin
History Center.
Gray, S. A. and W. D. Moore
1872 Mercantile and General Directory ofAustin, Texas 1872-73. S.
A. Gray
Book and Job Printer, Austin.
Gonzales, Anibal
1982 Sayersville Historical Association Bulletin.
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

111

Gullick, Charle s A., editor-in-chief
1928 The Papers ofMirabeau Buonaparte Lamar. Six Volum
es, Texas State
Library, Austin.
Hafert epe, Kenne th
1989 A History of the French Legati on in Texas. Texas State
Historical
Association, Austin.
Harris on, William
1867 "Crazy Billy Map of Austin Texas," Austin Histor y Center.
Horns by, Alton Jr.
1973 "The Freedmen's Bureau in Texas 1865-1870." Southwestern
Histor ical
Quarterly, Volume LXXV I(I), April. Texas State Historical Association,
Austin.
Hump hrey, David C.
1985 Austin : An Illustrated History. Wmds or Publications, Austin
.
Jenkins, John H. and Kenneth Kesselus
1990 Edwar d Burleson, Texas Fronti er Leader. Jenkins Publis
hing Comp any,
Austin.
King, Edwa rd
1874 "Glimpses of Texas. " Scribn er'sMo nthly, Volum e VTINovembe
r, 1873 to
April, 1874. Scribner's and Comp any, New York.
Koch, Augus tus
1873 Birdseye View of the City ofAustin , Texas.
1887 Austin: State Capital of Texas.
Koch and Fowle r, Consulting Engineers
1928 A City Plan For Austin, Texas. Koch and Fowle r Consu
lting Engin eers,
Inc., Dallas.
Kraus, Steven Joseph
1973 Water, Sewers and Streets: The Acquis ition ofPublic Utilitie
s in Austin ,
Texas 1875-1930. Thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
Lack, Paul Dean
1973 Urban Slavery in the Southwest. Dissertation, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

112

Malone, Billy Charles
1958 An Early History ofAustin, Texas 1839- 1861. Thesis, University
of Texas
at Austin.
Manaster, Jane
1986 The Ethnic Geography ofAustin, Texas 1875-1910. Thesis, Univer
sity of
Texas, Austin.
Masson, Marilyn, Terry Jones, Mike Myers, and Dana Antho ny
1993 Cultur al Resources Survey and Assess ment for the Propo sed Reuse
of
Bergstrom Air Force Base and Adjoin ing Areas, Travis County, Texas.
Hicks & Company Archeology Series Numb er 28, Hicks & Company,
Austin.
Morrison, C. D. and Company
1879 C.D. Morrison and Company's General Directory of the City of
Austin
For 1879-80. Jennings Brothers Publishing Company, Marshall, Texas.
Morrison & Founn y
1881 Morri son and Fourmy's General Directory For the City ofAustin
For
1881-8 2. E. W. Swindells, Austin.

1885 Morri son and Fourmy's General Directory For the City ofAustin
For
1885- 86. Morrison and Fourmy General Publishers, Galveston.
1887 Morri son and Fourmy's General Directory For the City ofAustin
For
1887- 88. Clarke and Courts, Galveston.
1889 Morri son andFo urmy's General Directory For the City ofAustin
For
1889-90. Clarke and Courts, Galveston.

1891

Morri son and Fourmy's General Directory For the City ofAustin For
1891- 92. Clarke and Courts, Galveston.

1893

Morri son andFourmy's General Direct ory For the City ofAustin For
1893- 94. Clarke and Courts, Galveston.

1895 Morri son and Fourmy's General Directory For the City ofAustin
For
1895- 96. Clarke and Courts, Galveston.
1898 Morri son and Fourmy's General Direct ory For the City ofAustin
For
1898- 99. Ben C. Jones Company, Printers, Austin.

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXA S

PAGE

113

1900 Mo rris on and Fourmy's Gen
eral Directory For the Cit y ofAustin
For
1900-1901. Morrison and F ourmy
General Publishers, Galveston.
On Campus
1987

September 7 issue of the newspaper
, Austin.

Peareson, P. E.
1900 "Reminiscences of Judge Edw
in Waller." Texas State Historical
Association Quarterly, Volume IV
July:33-53. Texas Sta te Historical
Association, Austin.
Ramsdell, Charles William
1910 Reconstruction in Texas. Uni
versity of Texas Press, Austin.
Red, William S.
1913 Allen's Reminiscences of Tex
as 1838-1842. Southwestern Histori
cal
Quarterly, Volume xv n (1) Januar
y:43-60. Texas Sta te Historical
Association, Austin.
Salinas, Martin
1986 Historic Ind ian Populations
of the Rio Grande Delta, Their Rol
e in the
History of Southern Texas and Nor
theastern Mexico. University of Tex
as
Press, Austin.
Sanborn Fire Insurance Ma p Compan
y
1900 Fire Insurance Maps of Aus
tin, Texas.
Scarbrough, Clara Ste am s
1973 Lan d of Good Water (l'akac
hue Pouetsu): A Williamson County
History.
Williamson County Sun Publishers,
Georgetown.
Sevcik, Edward A.
1992 "Selling the Austin Dam: A
Disastrous Experiment in Encouragi
ng
Growth." Southwestern Historical
Quarterly. Volume XC VI (3)
October:215-240. Texas State His
torical Association, Austin.
Shackles, Christine 1.
1963 Reminiscences of Huston-Ti
llotson Col/ege. Austin.
Smallwood. James M.
1981 Time of Ho pe - Time of Despai
r: Black Texans Du rin g Reconstruc
tion.
National University Press, Kennica
t Press, Point Washington, New Yor
k.
HIS TOR IC RESOURCES SUR VEY
OF EAS T AUSTIN, TEX

AS

PAG E

114

Southern Intelligencer
1865 Octob er 26 issue of the newspaper, Austin.
Southwell, Sam Beall
1949 "ASoc ial and Literary History of Austin From 1881 to 1896."
Thesis,
University of Texas, Austin.
Stephenson, J.B.
City Directory ofAustin. J. B. Stephenson, Printer, Austin.
1905

Terrell, Alex W.
1910 "The City of Austin From 1839 To 1865." Quarterly of the Texas
State
HistoricalAssociation, Volume XIV: 114-128, October. Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.
Thrall, Home r S.
1879 A Pictorial History of Texas From the Earliest Visits of
the Europ ean
Adventurers to A.D. 1879. N. D. Thompson and Company, Publishers,
St. Louis.
United States Bureau of the Census
1850
Slave Schedule of the Seventh Census: Travis County, Texas .
Government Printing Office, Washington.

Slave Schedule of the Eighth Census: Travis County, Texas. Government
Printing Office, Washington.

1860

The Seventh Census: Repor t of the Superintendent of the Censu s For
December 1, 1852 to which is appended the Repor t For Decem ber 1,
1851. Robert Armstrong, Printer, Washington.

1853b

The Seventh Census: Population and Social Statistics. Rober t Armst
rong,
Printer, Washington.

1853a

The Twelfth Census: Population. United States Census Office.
Washington.

1904

Population Schedule of the Tenth Census: Travis County, Texas.
Government Printing Office, Washington.

1880

U. T. News
1987

August 20 issue of the newspaper.

HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

115

Weddl e, Rober t S.
1964 The San Saba Mission, Spanish Pivot in Texas. University of Texas
Press,
Austin.

Weekly Free Man's Press
1868 Augus t 1 issue of the newspaper, Austin.
Wheeler, T. B.
1920 "Reminiscences of Recon structi on in Texas." Texas Historical
Association
Quarterly. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Williams, David A.
1997 Bricks Without Straw: A Comprehensive History ofAfrica n Ameri
cans in
Texas. Eakin Press, Austin.
Winkler, Ernes t William
1907 "The Seat ofGov emme nt in Texas." Quarterly of the Texas
State
Historical Association, Volum e X (3) January: 185-245. Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.
Ybarra. Simon
1993 Personal communication to James T. Jones and Marilyn Masso
n.
Yoaku m, Hende rson K.
1855 History of Texas from its First Settlement in 1685 to Its Annexation
to the
United States in 1846. Volum e IT, Redfield Publishing Company, New
York.

Interviews: See Annotations at the end of References Section
Daniels, Barba ra with Terri Myers, Augus t 3, 2000
Hanco ck, Buster with Eleanor Thom pson and Terri Myers June 2, 2000

ANNOTATED ORAL HIS TO RIE

S: EAST AUSTIN HIS TO RIC RES

OURCES SURVEY

The following annotations are taken from
oral histories conducted by project
director Terri Myers and preservation
liaisons Eva Lindsey and Eleanor Tho
mpson as part
of the Eas t Austin Architectural and His
torical Survey project. An earlier inte
rview that
Ms. Myers conducted with Mrs. Mabel
Hancock Walker Newton is included
for its
relevance to the project area and to Afr
ican American history in East Austin.
Other
informal interviews took place during
the course of the project but those incl
uded in this
report are directly related to the develop
mental history of the East Austin surv
ey area.
Barbara Da nie ls: Interview with Ter
ri Myers, Au gus t 3, 2000
Mrs. Daniels is the former historian
for

Simpson United Methodist Church. She
said the congregation formed from We
sley Chapel. The Sunday School organiz
ed
in 1879 and met in a school near presen
t Blackshear (possibly Robertson Hill
School).
The church itself organized in 1880.
She discussed the transition that was taki
ng place in
the development of East Austin: Wesley
Chapel had been located near Trinity and
11th
Street. When people began moving eas
t from Trinity Street, Simpson and We
sley broke
away from one another.
The old church was built in 1922 and
faced The parsonage was located on an
adjacent lot at 1703 E. 12th. It was rem
oved in the 1980s. The new church bui
lding at
1701 E. 12th Street was constructed in
1952. It replaced a house and barn on
the site and
is built on the foundation of a partially
underground stone basement that may
have been
part of the barn.
Mrs. Daniels' family was from Caldwe
ll Cou

nty and she was real young when she
moved from Lockhart. They first live
d in the St. Johns Addition which stre
tched from
Highland ~fa.l1 to Highway 183, east on
Cameron Road and south to Highway
290.
Willie Toliver Jr. Formal Interviews Jun
e 12, 2000 and September 15, 2000
Bus ter Ha nco ck: Informal Intervie
HIS TO RIC RES OU RC ES SURVEY

w Eleanor Thompson and Terri My

OF EAST AUSTIN, TEX AS

ers June 2, 2000
PAG E

117

This interview focused on members of the Hancock family, descendants of slaves
and reported to have been sons of Judge John Hancock. Buster is the grands
on of Orange
Hancock. He lives in East Austin as does his cousin Emma Riley, another
of Orange
Hancock's grandchildren. She lives at 1903 E. 16th Street and has much inform
ation
about the family.
According to Buster, Orange Hancock had 23 children. One, Emma Hanco
ck
Wicks, was recorded in the famous WP A era slave narratives in which she describ
ed life as
a little girl during the last years of slavery near the Hancock plantation (prese
nt Rosedale)
and in the first years after emancipation on the farm near Waters Park. Emma
eventually
moved into town with her son Frank Wicks and they lived on New York Street
near
Buster Hancock's present home. Buster's father James (Orange's son) moved
from the
Orange Hancock farm to the African American enclave of Clarksville. Buster
grew up in
Clarksville at 1704 W. 11th (now 1904 W. lIth Street). His father James was
a railroad
worker who worked six days a week.
Many of the Hancock descendants and others who lived in the "Negro
Community" near the Waters Park and Duval community eventually moved
to East Austin
for better schools and greater job opportunities, particularly in the 1930s and
1940s.
Among their names are Hancock, Daniels, Wicks, Dickerson and Hansborough
.

Mrs. Arlie Johnson: Interview with Terri Myers, August 7, 2000
Mrs. Johnson who was born and raised in rural East Austin engaged in severa
l
telephone interviews with Terri Myers from her home in San Francisco. A
formal
interview was conducted on August 7,2000 and focused on the history of the
Eliza Bell
House at 1012 Juniper Street in the East Austin project area. Mrs. Johnson
had contacted
the city of Austin, and subsequently Ms. Myers, to seek a historical marker
for the house
due to its age and associations with Mrs. Bell, who was one of the earliest landow
ners in
the project area. Mrs. Johnson's sister, Ella Irene Hill Bell, had been marrie
d Eliza Bell's
grandson, Willie "Bill" Bell, since 1918 and had lived in the house at 1012 until
her death
HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVE Y OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

118

in 1995. Both Mrs. Johnson and her sister knew "Granny Bell as she was called and cared
for her in her old age. According to Mrs. Johnson, Eliza Bell's mother and uncle "Uncle
Henry" worked for a man named Robinson [sic] who "owned all of land around there"
(Robertson Hill) and they either were deeded or sold the parcel containing her house from

him. Mrs. Bell's mother and uncles (Henry and William Bell) subdivided the land on
Juniper Street and sold lots to family members and friends beginning in the 1870s.
Mrs. Johnson stated that Mrs. Bell told her that the house was the oldest one in
the neighborhood, "the old homestead". In 1918, when Mrs. Bell was 95 years old, she
told Mrs. Johnson that she had planted the Pecan tree that is still in the yard when she was
14 years old, which would date the tree to 1837. This seems unlikely since the city of
Austin wasn't incorporated until 1838 and the Robertsons didn't acquire the property until
1848. Still, the house and the Bell's occupancy may possibly date to the antebellum
period. Robertson is known to have owned slaves and to have built quarters for them to
the north of his home (the French Legation)(Hafertepe 1989). Mrs. Johnson stated that
the house was originally a 2-room cabin and that she had added several rooms including an
indoor bathroom in the 1950s to its present configuration. The house now has two
bedrooms, a living room, dining room, kitchen and bathroom. Mrs. Hill died about five
years ago (1995?) and the house passed to her grandson and great grandson. Mrs.
Johnson believed the grandson bad died but the great grandson's still lives in the house.
Other early residents of Juniper Street that Mrs. Johnson knew from the early 1900s were
the Shackles and Waltons. She knew Dr. Hamilton (James Hamilton who owned the
Dedrick-Hamilton House at 914 E. 11th Street). The Manns who lived a couple houses to
the west, were "newcomers" [the Manns lived at 10068 Juniper and then built a stone
veneered house at 1004 Juniper about 1945 (both demolished by Anderson Community
Development Corporation 1998)].
Mrs. Johnson's family, the Hills, also lived in East Austin. She was born and
reared on Webberville Road. Her parents, George and Ella Hill organized the Pleasant

HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

119

Hill Baptis t Church in East Austin and they were celebrating the 100th
anniversary of the
church this year.

Leona rd Mann : Interviews with Te"i Myers May 9, 2000 and with
Eleanor Thompson and Te"i Myers September 12, 2000
Leona rd Mann met with members of the East Austin Architectural and

Historical

Surve y team and city of Austin staff Jerry Freese and Barbara Stocldin
on May 9,200 0, in
the projec t area to discuss property ownership, demographic, use and
social chang e in the
area, particularly on E. 11th Street. On September 12, 2000, he met
with projec t director
Terri Myers and preservation liaison Eleano r Thompson at the Southg
ate-Lewis House ,
1501 E. 12th Street, for a formal taped interview. A full transcript of
the interview taped
on Septem ber 12, 2000, is on file at the Austin History Center. The follow
ing information
was gleaned from the two meetings.
Mr. Mann was born in 1932. His parent s were Leonard and Olive Dom
Mann
from East Texas, Weimar, east of La Grange. He grew up in the shotgu
n house at
1008 Juniper Street (destroyed 1998) and his mother built a new stone
veneer house at
1004 Juniper during World War II when his father was stationed in the

Phillipines

(demolished 1998). He is very familiar with the businesses on E. 11 th
Street from the
1940s onward. His father owned a Phillips 66 service station on E. 11th.
Other
notew orthy businesses in the 1940s and 1950s were Dr. Young's Hillsid
e Drugs tore at
Navas ota, Walter Yates' variety and liquor store, Deaco n Jones' Bar B
Q and Break fast
restau rant at 1002 E. 11th Street. Dr. DeLas hwa was another pharm
acist who owned the
large house on the hill east of the Hillside Drug (now the offices of Planne
d Parent hood)
on E. 11 th Street.
Mr. Mann emphasized the importance of the Schieffer family to the comm
unity
on East 11 th Street. They remained in the neighborhood after many other
white families
had moved away. According to Mr. Mann, three members of the family
had stucco
house s near one another. Several family members owned and operated
the meat market

HISTO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTI N, TEXAS

PAGE

120

and grocery. They helped [African American] families in the neighborhood
by offering
credit and jobs when needed.
Mr. Mann also discussed how African Americans were systematically
moved
further and further east from central Austin as land values increased and
their

proper ty

became more valuable to whites. He gave an example of Dr. Young
a pharmacist who
started out with a store on San Jacinto, later moved to 6th Street and
East Avenue and
finally to E. 11th and Navasota (Hillside Drug). This happened to many
others, he
said. Institutions such as churches were likewise moved from the central
city to the east
side.
In the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s a lot of whites, particularly Germans
lived in the

area. They began moving out in the 1950s and 1960s. Arnold's Bakery
- there was a
bakery in the front and a house in back. It becam e the Southern Dinett
e in the 1940s and
1950s. [possibly an attached unit that has since burned?]

Mabel Hancock Walker Newton: Interview with Terri Myers on January 29,
1999
Mrs. Newto n was interviewed as part of a project to document the Rubin
and
Elizabeth Hanco ck farmstead in the small community of Water s Park,
in far North
Austin. She is a granddaughter of Rubin Hanco ck who was a slave and,
according to

African American enclaves in Clarksville and Wheatville, East Austin
had the

attraction of

the county's only black high school and two black colleges. Rural familie
s often sent their
older children to board with families in East Austin while attending Ander
son High School
or college. Many never returned to the fanns and made new lives in the
expanding
African American neighborhoods of East Austin during the early 20th
century.

Ora Lee Taylor Nobles: Interview Eleanor Thompson and Terri Myers, July
17, 2000
Mrs. Ora Lee Taylor Nobles taped a fonnal interview with Terri Myers
and
Eleanor Thompson on July 17, 2000, in her home at 2008 E. 8th Street,
Austin, Texas. A
full transcript of this interview has been submitted to the Austin Histor
y Center. Mrs.
Nobles is an East Austin political and social activist whose interview focuse
d on family
and community life in the 1930s and 1940s. Although she did not grow
up in the
immediate projec t area, her interview shed light on development and demog
raphic patterns
in East Austin in the early 20th century.
Mrs. Noble s was born April 28, 1921 in Travis County. A midwife attend
ed her
birth at the family home at 2014 E. 9th Street. Her sister Julia Faye Mitche
ll still lives in
the family house. Mrs. Nobles parents Maude Estelle Fields and Monro
e Taylor Sr. had
the house built about 1915. Lots in the Grandview Addition lost $50
and the mortgage
was $5.00 per month. They used to send money orders to the "Home
owners Exchange"
at 444 Cotton Excha nge Building, Dallas, Texas through Gracy Title.
Both the house
Mrs. Nobles lives in now and her parents' home are in the Grandview
Addition.
Mrs. Noble s said the neighborhood was always integrated with blacks
, Mexicans
and whites. Neighbors included the Boatwrights, Frank Cushback, Duran
ts (white) and
the Gonzales and Mend oza (Mexican) families. Her family were workin
g people: father
worked first as a truck driver and later a foreman at Calcascieu Lumber
for a total of35
years. Her mothe r washe d clothes for UT students. Both her parents
catered parties for
members of the lumber company. Mother and children picked cotton,
as well, and went as
far as EI Paso and Corpu s Christi to do so. Generally, they picked fields
near Hutto,

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PAGE

122

Taylor, Georgetown, an
d Ne w Sweden where the
y stayed in "c ot to n pickin
g shacks".
They go t about .50 cent
s pe r 100 pounds of cotto
n.
The family shopped at Fr
anzetti's Checker Front
Store on 6t h Street. Th
ey were
one of the only families
to own a car and had a
garage. He r father ga ve
rides to the
neighboring ladies wh o
wo rk ed at the Driskill an
d other do wn to wn hotel
s when he went
to wo rk in the mornings.
She remembered a 1929
Dodge. Ev er yo ne used
th e streetcar
and the end of th e str ee
tca r line wa s 6th and Ch
icon while th e city limits
we re at Pleasant
Valley Road. Fo r amus
ement, th e family sometim
es to ok the str ee tca r to
La ke Austin on
Saturdays. Other family
members lived around tow
n and some came in fro
m the country
to visit. Sometimes the
y we nt to visit family in
Kyle.
Mrs. Nobles attended Gr
egorytown School - now
Blackshear - beginning
when
she was about eight ye
ars old. She attended Ke
aling and th en ol d Ande
rson. La ter
she went back to night
school and graduated fro
m new Anderson. In 19
37, at age 16, she
we nt to Madame Christia
n's Crescent Beauty Scho
ol. [perhaps sh e had to
quit school at
one point?, "Daddy go t
sick - I had to go to the
cotton patch"]. She to ok
th e sta te exam
and built a beauty shop
behind th e house. She
always kept the family ho
me but lived at
1404 Apt. D Co tto n for
18 years.
lit h and 12th St re et bu
sinesses recalled by Mrs.
Nobles included Miss Pi
e
Johnson's store, a grocer
y an d cafe at the corner
of 11 th and Chicon, on
th e east side.
There is a house and a lit
tle sto re where they had
chili. The St ar ks had a
sto re by King
Tears (o n E. 12th Stree
t). Mrs. Nobles had a Ba
r B Q that ju st closed.
On the co m er of
E. 11th Street and Wall
er, Ho wa rd Wynn had a
beer joint (Haenel Store?
). Mr. Mayes
had a liquor store wher
e th e Victory Grill is. F.
G. Kane had a be er joint.
Where there is
no w a vacant lot is Ro ck
Carter's Cab Company
and there were ho us es fro
m th e lodge
further on down (toward
Ea st Avenue?).
Haehnel Store (1123 E.
lit h) was a grocery store
and Bi g Bo y Davis' barb
ershop.
There was a bakery (Arn
old's ?) and next do or M
rs. Josephine Ed mu nd so
n lived on th e
comer. Mrs. Dedrick wa
s - (Jewel?) Hamilton's
mother. Tillie St ew ar t
wa s her daughter
HI ST OR IC RE SO UR CE

S SU RV EY OF EA ST
AU

ST IN , TEXAS

PA GE

123

too . Ankie Kirk bought the house
next doo r
Millie Kane and her mother lived the

(912 E. 11th Street, now demolished
).

re.

Mrs. Nobles was raised in bot h the
Holines

s Church (her mother's) and Primitiv
e
Bap tist (father). The Holiness Chu
rch was where Greater Mt. Zion is
now. At home the
family had a garden where they gre
w onions, beans, potatoes, greens.
Eac h child had a
chicken and they even had cows, hor
ses and Mexicans had goats.
Except for 6th Street, the stre ets wer
e not paved in Eas t Austin until ver
y late.
Eleventh Street was eventually pav
ed. Miss Hattie Nichols and Mrs. No
bles' mo the r
fought to get sewer, paving and gas
in the neighborhood in the late 1930s
and early
1940s. They still had outside toilets
at that time. At one time Emancipation
Par k wa s
by the railroad tracks. There was a
celebration there for the 1876 centenn
ial. Wh en Mrs.
Nobles was a child it was in Rosewo
od. The creek now runs under Wa
shington Avenue
dow n Poq uito Street. They used to
pick watercress along the creek.
Industrial properties included a cot
ton gin on 6th and Comal, a railroa
d
roundhouse at 6th and Chicon. Wh
ere the Durants had a beer joint at 6th
and Chicon,
the horses would come to water at
a trough. There was an oil mill and
a place wh ere
the y killed animals (on 6th). Peo ple
brought animals down to dip vats the
re. The re we re
bee r join ts on 6th, 7th, 11th and 12t
h Street. Sixth Street had the [most]
businesses.

Mr. Ro ger Taylor: Interview with Ka
ren

Riles & Eleanor Thompson, September
7, 2000

Mr. Taylor discussed historic businesse
s along Eas t 11th Street and Eas t 12t
h
Street, especially clubs such as the
Co tton Club and Victory Grill. He
described the
800 blo ck of Eas t 11th Street as "fac
ulty row" where many of the Samuel
Hu sto n College
teachers lived. That entire area has
since been demolished. Mr. Taylor
detailed his
mother's efforts to bring gas and oth
er services to Eas t Austin and describ
ed the family'S
early activism in bringing city services
the African American community. He
discussed
changes in the physical environmen
t, such as the loss of "Lookout Point"
and the
development ofl lI-3 5. He stated tha
t Loo kou t Point was a hill that lay in
the middle of
HIS TO RIC RESOURCES SURVEY

OF EA ST AUSTIN, TEXAS

PA GE

124

Eas t Avenue. Developed with step
s somewhat like

present Mt. Bonnell, people cou ld
hike to the top for views of the city
. It was a popular Lovers Lane bef
ore being leveled
for the highway. Mr. Taylor also disc
ussed the eradication of neighborhood
s on the wes t
side of Eas t Avenue, particularly tho
se along Sabine and in the vicinity of
present
Bra cke nrid ge Hospital, where African
Americans wer e displaced as a resu
lt of urb an
renewal.

Ms. J. B. Tho mp son : Interview wit
h Eva Lindsey, Jul y 20, 2000
Ms. Thompson was born in 1915 at
910 E. 10th Street, moved to a hou
se on
Ro sew ood Avenue and grew up on
E. 13th Street, all within the Eas t Aus
tin pro jec t area.
Ms. Tho mp son was an educator and
lifelong resident of Eas t Austin. She
attended
Gre gor yto wn School (now Blackshea
r) and old Anderson High School. Bo
th the hom e in
wh ich she wa s bor n and the house
on Ro sew ood have been demolished
as par t of urb an
ren ew al efforts. Mrs. Thompson disc
ussed educational facilities, historic
businesses,
churches and neighborhoods in Eas
t Austin, and the effects of urban ren
ewal on the
community.

Winie Toliver Jr.: Interview with Terri
Myers, June 12, 2000
Willie Toliver Jr. met with Terri My
ers at his home at 5501 Manor Roa
d, Austin,
Tex as 787 22 on two occasions and
had several follow-up telephone con
versations. See
formal transcript of taped June 12,
200 0 interview. Tapes and transcri
pts are on file at
the Au stin History Center as part of
the Eas t Austin Architectural and His
torical Sur vey
project.

Mr. Toliver's interview focuses on the
importance ofE . 12th Street as the
hea rt of

a thriving commercial and residential
corridor thro ugh Eas t Austin in the
1940s and 1950s.
It is detailed and offers valuable insi
ght on the influence of African Americ
an edu cat ors in
the community, the community's coh
esiveness, and fact that people of all
economic classes
lived in the same neighborhood bec
ause of segregation.
HIS TO RIC RES OU RCE S SURVEY

OF EAS T AU STI N, TEXAS

PAG E

125

Mr. Tolive r grew up on East 13th Street in the project area. He was
born in 1937
and lived with his mothe r Nelline Toliver and grandparents Harry and
Louise Lott at 1405

E. 13th Street. Mr. Toliver said he is four generations removed from
slavery. Mr.
Tolive rs family on his maternal grandmothers side goes back to Elizab
eth Glasco a
woman who was a slave and after emancipation opene d a restaurant on
E. 6th Street in
Austin. Elizab eth Glasco is the matriarch of the family. Her daughter
was Cora E.
Glasco Hamil ton who married Isaiah Hamilton, a blacksmith. Mr. Tolive
r allowed us to
scan a photo graph of Mr. Hamilton at work. Hamilton's daughter Louise
married Harry
Lott, one of Austin's first postal carriers (photograph) for whom Lott
Park, in the project
area, is named. Both Louise and Harry were prominent within the East
Austin African
American community. Mrs. Lott was a businesswoman who administered
an insurance
agency and was active in establishing the Howson Community Center

HISTO RIC RESOU RCES SURVEY OF EAST AUSTIN, TEXAS

on Angelina Street.

PAGE

126

•

e

ve

Subtype

1900

Date

1890

1935

Stylistic Influence

center passage

historical
marker

L-plan

bungalow

1885

NRHP Recommendation

Justification

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Sireet Historic
District

smgl,:.family

NRHP Recommendation

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

Justification

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criterion C

Eligible under Criterion C

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

National Register Assessments

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1925

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1925

Not Eligible

bungalow

1900

Greek
RevivallRomanesque

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
singlc-fanlily

bungalow

1950

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

1930

Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

religious

rectangular

1910

Not Eligible

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.
Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
NR listed in 1985; signilicant for historic assot:iatiolls: line
example of its type; contributes to character of the 9th-I Dth
Street Historic District.
Fine example of its type; contributes to character of the
9th-10th Street Historic District.
Fine example of its type; contributes to character of the
9th-10th Street Historic District.
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations and architectural cratlsmanship; contributes to
character of the 9th-10th Street Histori..: District.
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; line example of its type;
contributes to character of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

i
I

Page I

1009 E. 10th

religious

bungalow

1940

Not Eligible

1005 E. 10th

domestic:
single-family

pyramidal
bungalow

1900
Fine example of its type; contributes to character of the
9th-10th Street Historic District.

1206 E. 9th,
rear

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1885

Fine example of its type; contributes to character of the
9th-10th Street Historic District.

E.9th

domestic:
single-family

L-plan
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1108 E. 9th

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to character of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

1106 E. 9th

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1014 E. 9th

domestic:
singlc-fan1ily

L-plan

18~5

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1012E.9th

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

NR listed in 1985; significant for historic aSSDciatiolls: line
example of its type; contributes to character of the 9th-10th
Street Historic District.

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1010 E. 9th

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criterion C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations and architectural craftsmanship; contributes to
character of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

1008 E. 9th

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criterion C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1935
Not Eligible

bungalow

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1004 K 9th

Not Eligible

1890

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

L-plan

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

1002 K 9th

Eligible under Criteria A and C

historical
marker

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

commemorative

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1000 block E.
9th

Stylistic Influence

1900

L-plan

center passage

1885

dom~stic:

L-plan

1000E.9th

Greek
RevivalJRomanesque

Date

1900

1940

1910

1930

1950

Subtype

Gothic

Property Type

L-plan

bungalow

pyramidal
bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

1900

1925

1925

1953

I

rectangular

bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

Address

National Register Assessments

/I

1010 E. 10th

religious

rectangular

1953

Gothic

Page I

•

pe

-

rectangular

Subtype

1900

1955

Date

1955

1923

1915

Sty listic Influence

center passage

rectangular

rectangular

pyramidal
bungalow

Date

1885

1880

1900

1935

Subtype

center passage

center passage

modified
L-plan

bungalow

1926

1924

1924

1925

I Property Type

pyramidal
bungalOW

shotgun

two-room

bungalow

~--------- ~-~---

Address

National Register Assessments

Significalll for historic associations; fine example of its type.

1955

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1011 E. 10th

domestic:
single-family

center passage

1900

Not Eligible

1013 E. 10th

domestic:
single-family

rectangu lar

1955

Not Eligible

1101 E. 10th

religious

rectangular

1923

NRHP Recommendation

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Justification

Significant for historic associations; tine exampk of its type.

Classical Revival

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1925

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1924

Not Eligible

1924

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-! Oth Street Historic District.

1926

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1935

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type: contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

two-room

1900

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

domestic:
singlt:-family

shotgun

1880

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

domestic:
single-family

pyramidal
bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1885

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

domestic:
single-family

center passage

modified
L-plan

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Page 2

II09E 10th

domestic:
single-family

1915

center passage

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1108 E. 10th,
rear

domestic:
single-family

pyramidal
bungalow

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

11 08-8 E. 10th

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

1108 E. 10th

religious

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

1107 E. 10th

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

-

1106 E. 10th

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

--

1105 E. 10th

Eligible under Criteria A and C

--

1104 E. 10th

Eligible under Criteria A and C

---

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1102 E. 10th

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Gothic

National Register Assessments

rectangular

Gothic

religious

----

101OE. 10th.
rear

Stylistic Influence

Justification

Classical Revival

NRHP Recommendation

Detemlined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-! Orb Street Historic District

!

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type: contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.
Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.
Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District
Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

Page 2

pe
L-plan

Subtype

1893

Date

bungalow

1915

Craftsman

II iSE. 10th

domestic:
single-family

modified
L-plan

1905

Queen Anne

Eligible under Criteria A and C

NRHP Recommendation

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

Justification

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
-

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
--------

Not Eligible

Significant for historic associations; one of few extant
examples of its type.

-

1940

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

-

1900

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

---

1955

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

--

1960

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

-

1925

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks integrity, does not !lIcet NR age tlm:shuld. andlor lacks
significance

--

rectangular

Eligible under Criteria A and C

one-part
commercial
block

1880

Not Eligible

!

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

irregular

1900

Lacks integrity, does not llIeet NR age thrc,/iold, and/or lacks
significance

commercial

rectangular

Not Eligible
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

commercial

bungalow

1960
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

commercial

center passage

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Page 3

1006 E. 11th

commercial

stone steps

Not Eligible

1900

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1000-02 E.
11th

domestic:
single-family

Significant for historic associations; one of few extant
exanJples of its type.

924-28 E. 11th

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

nO-AlB E,
11th

landscaping

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

-

916 E. 11th

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

---

912 E. 11th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

--

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

911 E. 11th

Contributes to the character of the 9th-10th Street Historic
District

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

rectangular

Not Eligible

commercial

Craftsman

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

900 E. 11th

1925

Not Eligible

L-plan

Inu

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

-

1212 E. 10th

Not Eligible

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1206E.IOth

irregular

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine exanlple of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District

National Register Assessments

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Stylistic Intluence

1111 E. 10th

Justification

Craftsman

1893

1915

bungalow

L-plan

NRHP Recommendation
Queen Anne

domestic:
singk-family

1905

1110E.IOth

modified
L-plan

Date

Craftsman

Subtype

---

Property Type

dOlllestic:
single-family

1'120

1925

1900

1960

1900

1880

1925

1960

1955

1900

1940

Stylistic Influence

Address

1204 E. 10th

irregular

bungalow

L-plan

rectangular

stone steps

center passage

bungalow

rectangular

irregular

one-part
commercial
block

rectangular

National Register Assessments

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Page 3

pe

e

y

y

I Subtype
Date
NRHP Recommendation
Justification

Craftsman

Not Eligible

I

National Register Assessments

Stylistic Influence

1925

Not Eligible

Significant for historic associations; distinguished example of
its type.
NR listed in 1985; significant for historic associations; line
exanlple of its type.

I

NR listed in 1998; significant for historic associations.

I

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Detennined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

NR listed in 1976; local landmark; significant for historic
associations; one of 19 extant examples of its type.

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

I

bungalow

Craftsman

i

1885

Not Eligible

I

center passage

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Detemlined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type.

1920

Eligible under Criteria A and C

bungalow

1940

Not Eligible

Significant for historic associations; distinguished example of
its type.

one-part
commercial
block

1895

Eligible under Criteria A and C

moonlight
tower

1920

Eligible under Criterion A

NR listed in 1985; significant for historic associations; fmc
example of its type.

one-part
commercial
block

1920

Eligible under Criteria A and C

NR listed in 1998; significant for historic associations.

domestic:
single-family

I

903 E. 12th

:

domestic:
single-family
I

Page 4

901 E. 12th

bungalow

Classical Revival

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

1900

Detemlined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 9th-10th Street Historic District.

-

commercial

rectangular

Classical Revival

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

-

121l E. 11th

infrastructure

1910

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

-

1209 NBICE.
11th

commercial

modified
L-plan

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

-

1200 block of
E. llili

domestic:
single-family

NR listed in 1976; local landmark; significant for historic
associations; one of 19 extant examples of its type.

-

1131-33 E.
11th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1123 E. 11th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

--

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

coml nereial

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1122-24 E.
11th

Not Eligible

-

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

-----

Eligible under Criteria A and C

-

Not Eligible

1119 E. 11th

1920

rectangular

1880

-----

domestic:
single-family

one-part
commercial
block

lit

1107 E. 11th

Eligible under Criteria A and C
Classical Revival

1950

1949

one-part
commercial
block

rectangular

commercial

Justification

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1104 E 11th

1883

1883

irregular

irregular

NRHP Recommendation

Eligible under Criterion A

commercial

1950

1101 E 11th

one-part
commercial
block

1949

Not Eligible

rectangular

1920

civic

rectangular

1017 E. 11th

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1880

Classical Revival

one-part
commercial
block

Stylistic Influence

Not Eligible

commercial

Not Eligible

1010 E. 11th

Craftsman

Date

Craftsman

Subtype

1910

1900

1920

1920

1895

1940

1920

1885

1925

--

Property Type

modified
L-plan

rectangular

bungalow

one-part
commercial
block

moonlight
tower

one-part
commercial
block

bungalow

--

center passage

-

bungalow

Address

National Register Assessments

Page 4

pe

center passage

domestic:
single-family

modified
L-plan

190n

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

1935

Not Eligible

Date

domestic:
single-family

Subtype

pyramidal

Stylistic Influence

1950

domestic:
single-family

Date

pyramidal

Subtype

1<)00

1900

1935

1901

1<)01

Ins

1935

1925

1895

1915

1935

1955

19IO

1935

Property Type

center passage

modified
L-plan

L-plan

L-plan

L-plan

bungalow

rectangular

bungalow

modified
L-plan

rectangular

bungalOW

rectangular

pyramidal
bungalow

rectangular

Address

National Register Assessments

NRHP Recommendation

Justification

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

I

domestic:
single-family

1308 E 12th

domestic:
single-family

pyramidal
bungalow

rectangu Jar

1955

1910

1935

Classical Revival

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Justification

1301 E 12th

rectangular

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

commercial

1935

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural allributes and knowll
significant histOlical associations

1224 E. 12th

bungalow

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural aHributes ami known
significant histOlical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Significant for associations with historic trends and persons;
fine example of its type
Detennined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations: fine example of its type.
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associalions
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its Iype; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

I

domestic:
single-family

1915

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1219 E 12th

rectangular

1895

Craftsman

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-f::unily

1925

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1215 E 12th

modified
L-plan

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
signifIcant historical associations

domestic:
singlc- family

bungalow

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
signifIcant historical associations

1209 E. 12th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Detennined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Page 5

1205 E. 12th

Eligible under Criteria A, B,
and C

NRHP Recommendation

1935

Not Eligible

rectangular

Not Eligible

commercial

Craftsman

Not Eligible

1925

Not Eligible

bungalOW

Significant for associations with historic trends and persons;
fine example of its type

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A, B,
and C

1901

Detennined eligible in I <)93; significant for historic
associations: fine example of its type.

L-plan

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
singl,,-family

Not Eligible

1901

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

L-plan

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1204 E 12th

dorn"stic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1201 E 12th

Not Eligible

1117 E 12th

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

1115 E. 12th

Not Eligibk

National Register Assessments

1112 EI2th

1900

Stylistic Influence

1016 E 12th

Craftsman

IUIO E 12th

Classical Revival

I

1950
Craftsman

90S E. 12th

Page 5

•

ype
rectangular

Subtype

1925

1930

Date

NRHP Recomm endation
Justificat ion

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Nation al Registe r Assessm ents

Sty listie Influence
Significant for historic associatiolls; tine example of its type.

Colonial Revival

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR agc threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1940

bungalow

one-foom

1905

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

I

domestic:
single-family

foursquare

1952

Craftsman, Queen
Anne, Classical Revival

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes ami known
significant historical associations

domestic:
singlc-family

rectangular

1945

Not Eligible

religious

rectangular

1955

1925

comn lercial

gas Station

1930

bungalow

comll1ercial

pyramidal

1930

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

pyramidal

1920

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

Craftsman

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1915

1935

rectangular

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Significant for historic assOl:lations; ilne example of its type.

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical assOI:iations

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1888

Justification

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not llleet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

I

1706 E. 12th,
rear

I

Page 6

1706 E. 12th

irregular

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1701 E. 12th

domestic:
single-family

Lacks notewOlthy architec1ural auributes alld known
significant historical associations

1700E.12th

1910

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1614 E. 12th

rectangular

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1514E. 12th,
rear

conullcrcial

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1514 E. 12th,
rear

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1514 E. 12th

1910

hipped

1506 E. 12th

pyramidal

1910

1501 E. 12th

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1500 E. 12th

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1416 E. 12th

pyramidal

1935

Craftsman

Not Eligible

hipped

1910

domestic:
single-family

1410E.12th

rectangular

1'125

Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

bungalow

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

1406E.12th

Not Eligible

NR listed in 1985; significant for historic associations;
distinguished example of its type.

1'125

Eligible under Criteria A and C

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Craftsman, Queen
Anne, Classical Revival

domestic:
single-family

1319 E. 12th

NRHP Recommendation

Stylistic Influence

Not Eligible

1930

Not Eligible

rectangular

Not Eligible

dOlm:stic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1315 E. 12th

Not Eligible

Date

Colonial Revival

Subtype

1888

1915

1920

1930

1930

1955

1945

1952

1905

1940

Property Type

irregular

rectangular

rectangular

pyramidal

pyramidal

gas Station

rectangular

rectangular

foursquare

one-room
Address

National Register Assessments

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes anti known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
NR listed in 1985; significant for historic associations;
distinguished example of its type.
Lacks integrity, does not lIlt!et NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks notewOlthy architel1ural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Page 6

pe

--

bungalow

Subtype

1955

1925

Date

1935

1940

1955

1920

1955

1946

1920

1925

1920

1950

1950

gas Station

pyramidal
bungalow

one-part
commercial
block

one-part
commercial
block

pyramidal

one-part
commercial
block

two-part
commercial
block

two-part
commercial
block

one-part
commercial
block

one-part
commercial
block

shotgun

one-part
commercial
block

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural atl1iblileS and known
significant historical associations

gas Station

1955

Not Eligible

dotllestic:
singlc-family

pyramidal
bungalow

1935

Not EligibJ<:

COllllllcrcial

one-part
commercial
block

1940

Not Eligible

Date

1713 E. 12th

dOlllcsti c:
singk-family

bungalow

1720E. 12th

commercial

1804 E. 12th

1806E.12th

1906 E, 12th

commercial

1912 E. 12th

commercial

1914 E. 12th

commercial

one-part
commercial
block
one-part
commercial
block
shotgun

1920

1950

1950

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

La~ks integrity, dOt!s not meet NI< agL! tlllL!,hol,l, anll/or lacks
significance

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes und known
significant historical associations

NOIEligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

I

Ii

Not Eligible

II

I

one-part
commercial
block

1925

Not Eligible

Justification

commercial

1920

NRHP Recommendation

1900-04E.
12th

two-part
commercial
block

1946

Lacks noteworthy architectural attlibutes and known
significant historical associations

commercial

two-part
commercial
block

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1816-18 E.
12th

I

Page 7

commercial

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks imegrity, does not meet NR agt.! threshold, anll/or lacks
significance

L1cks integrity. does not meet NI{ age thrcshold. and/or lacks
significance

Not Eligible
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1955
Lacks integrity. does not meet NI{ age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

one-part
commercial
block

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

cOlllmercial

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

1812 E. 12th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

1920

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

pyramidal

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1810 E. 12th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

commercial

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1808 E. 12th

1814 E. 12th

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1955

Not Eligibk

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

one-part
commercial
block

Sty listie Inl1uence

National Register Assessments

1925

Subtype

Stylistic Influence

Justification

Property Type

Not Eligible

NRHP Recommendation

Address

Not Eligible

I

National Register Assessments

Page 7

ype

y

e

mily~

I

I

I

1 Date

1960

Subtype

rectangular

1905

1900

L-plan

1925

irregular

bungalow

1905

culvert

L-plan

1940

irregular

bungalow

1905

bungalow

L-plan

1920

pyramidal
bungalow

pyramidal

1955

bungalow

rectangular

rectangular

bungalow

rectangular

1960

2000 E. 12th

domestic:
single-family

irregular

1900

2000 block E.
12th

infrastructure

culvert

1955

2001 E. 12th

dome>tic:
single-family

irregular

1940

1955

commercial

1940

19l5-AlB E.
12th

1935

Date

1920

Subtype

Stylistic Influence

NRHP Recommendation

Classical
Revival/Craftsman

l'roperty Type

Not Eligible

Justification
I

.1

L.

Address

1920

1955

-.---

1940

------

National Register Assessments

National Registe r Assessm ents

NRHP Recomm endation

Lacks noteworthy architectural altributcs and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

I

Justifica tion

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; line example of its type.

Significant for historic associations; line example of its type.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

__ . _ - - -

Not Eligible

_.

Not Eligible

-

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

...

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

I

Not Eligible

1940

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1955

Not Eligible

1920

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1905

Not Eligible

bungalow

1940

Craftsman

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

rectangular

1905

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-fanlily

pyramidal

1925

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1905

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

2108 E. 12th

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

Classical
Revival/Craftsman

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

:

i

Page 8

2107 E. 12th

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

2106 E. 12th

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1955
Significant for historic associations; fme example of its type.

2105 E. 12th

domestic:
single-family

Significant for historic associations; fllle example of its type.

2104-B E 12th

domestic:
single-family

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

2104-A E. 12th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

2103 E. 12th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

2100 E. 12th

rectangular

1920

Not Eligible

commercial

bungalow

1920

Eligible under Criteria A and C

2008 E. 12th

pyramidal
bungalow

1935

Not Eligible

!\iot Eligible
Not Eligible

doml'stic:
single-family

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

2007 E. 12th

Eligible under Criteria A and C

dOI11.:stic:
single-family

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

2005 E. 12th

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

dOll1estic:
single-fanlily

Stylistic Influence

-

Craftsman

a

2003 E. 12th

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
Significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Page 8

pe

y

y

-.--

Subtype

1955

Date
NRHP Recommendation

National Register Assessments

Stylistic Influence
Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age thrl!shold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

I

Designated a local landmark; determined eligihle in 1993;
significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

Significant for historic associations; aile of few extant
ellamples of its type.

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Justification

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Not Eligible

I
I

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1910

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. andlor lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to character of the Swedish Hill Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to character of the Swedish Hill Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine ellarnple of its type;
contributes to character of the Swedish Hill Historic District.

I

modified
L·plan

rectangular

IgSO

Not Eligible

two·room

1940

1875

rectangular

center passage

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1910

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

pyramidal

1908

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

irregular

1950

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Tudor Revival

bungalow

1915

1930

pyramidal

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single·family

19S0

Designated a local landmark; determined eligihle in 1993;
significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

domestic:
single-family

hipped

Classical
Revival!ltalianate

Significant for historic associations; one of few extant
examples of its type.

domestic:
single-family

1930

Justification

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

Page 9

909 E. 13th

domestic:
single- family

shotgun

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

90S E. 13th

domestic:
single·family

1880

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

907 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

two·room

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

90S E. 13th

the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

904E.l3th

to

902·B E. 13th

domestic:
single·fanlily

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to character of the Swedish Hill Historic District.

902·A E. 13th

Contributes

domestic:
singk·family

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to character of the Swedish Hill Historic District.

SI7 E. 13th

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

dornestic:
singh:-family

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to character of the Swedish Hill Historic District.

813 112 E. 13th

1873

NRHP Recommendation

Not Eligible

-

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

-

domestic:
singic·family

center
passage!
I-house

bungalow

-----

813 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

1925

- - - ---

810 E. 13th

bungalow

1925
Eligible under Criteria A and C

bungalow

Tudor Revival

Classical
Revi va1lItalianate

domestic:
singic·family

808 E. 13th

1873

1930

center
passagel
I-house

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

806 1/2 E. 13th

1880

1940

two-room

rectangular

Stvlistic Influence

Not Eligible

domeslic:
single·family

Not Eligible

2110 E. 12th

Not Eligible

1955

Eligible under Criteria A and C

rectangular

Eligible under Criteria A and C

dom.:stic:
single· family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

2109 E. 121h

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Date

1930

1950

1915

1950

1908

1910

1875

1880

1910

Subtype

----~-

Property Type

shotgun

hipped

pyramidal

bungalow

irregular

pyramidal

center passage

two-room

modified
LL-plan

Address

National Register Assessments

•

\0

the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Page 9

•

ype

y

y

~-

Date

-

SubtY}le

1935

---

bungalow

1920

1905

bungalow

L-plan

1920

irregular

bungalow

1910

bungalow

bungalow

1935

pyramidal
bungalow

bungalow

1935

bungalow

bungalow

1925

pyranlidal
bungalOW

bungalow

1940

rectangular

rectangular

--

1895

IYOY

1930

1920

1920

e

1955

I

National Register Assessments

hungalow

1935

Craftsman

Eligible under Crit~ria A and C

COniriblllcs to (he character of the Swelle Hill Histork Distrkl

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1920

1000 E. 13th

domestic:
single-fanlily

irregular

1895

1001 E. 13th

dOlllestic:
single-family

hungalow

190<)

1002-B E. 13th

dOIll~slic:

-

-

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District
---------

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Justifica tion

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Not Eligible

-

NRHP Recomm endation

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Nation al Registe r Assessments

Stylistic Influence

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1940

Craftsman

Eligible under Criteria A and C

rectangu lar

1925

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes io character of the Swedish Hill Historic District.

domestic:
single-family

1935

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1203-B E. 13th

bungalow

1935

Eligible under Crileria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the Swedish Hill Historic District.

-

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1910

Craftsman

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

- -

Page 10

1203-A E. 13th

bungalow

1920

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1905

Craftsman

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1955

Craftsman

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

1920

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1201 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

1200E.13th

domestic:
single-family

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

1009 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

1008 E. 13th

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1007 E, 13th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 13th Street Historic District.

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1006-B E, 13th

pyramidal
bungalow

1920

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Craftsman

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1930

Eligihle under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1006-A E. 13th

pyramidal
bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1005 E. 13th

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

single-family

Craftsman

singk-family

Craftsman

911 E. 13th

dom~stic:

Craftsman

Craftsman

910 E. 13th

--

Justification

Craftsman

NRHP Recommendation

Craftsman

Stylistic Influence

Not Eligible

Date

Property Type

Address

Significant for historic associations; fine example of ils type:
contributes to character of the Swedish Hill Historic District
Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations: fine example of its type: contributes to character
of the Swedish Hill Historic District
Contrihutes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age thwshold. and/or lacks
significance
Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the 13th Street Historic District.

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Page 10

pe

y

y

y

y

y

Subtype

1950

Date

1900

Not Eligible

1910

1317 E. 13th

domestic:
singic-family

1402 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

L-plan

bungalow

1920

1900

1930

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Justification

domestic:
single-family

1955

Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1315 E. 13th

rectangular

1920

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
singk-family

1935

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1314 E. 13th

pyramidal

1900

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

Not Eligible
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1313 E 13th

the character of the 13th Street Historic District

domestic:
single-family

1905
. Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

to

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
Significant historical associations
' Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

I

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
sigllificant historical associations
Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to character of the 13th Street Historic District.
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

I

I

I

I

I

Page 11

1312 E. 13th

L-plan

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Contributes

domestic:
single-family

1920

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
signifIcant historical associations

L-plan

Not Eligible

1900

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to character of the 13th Street Historic District.

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1308 E. 13th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

pyramidal

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1307 E. 13th

No! Eligible

NRHP Recommendation

pyranlidal

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

National Register Assessments

L-plan

Stylistic Influence

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

center passage

1310 E. 13th

rectangular

1930

Not Eligible

bungalow

domestic:
single-family

1306 E. 13th

1910

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1910

Not Eligible

center passage

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age thrt!shold, and/or lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1950

Not Eligible

Justification

Not Eligible

NRHP Recommendation

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1304 E. 13th

center passage

1207 E. 13th

1930

1206 E. 13th

bungalow

domestic:
single· family

Stylistic Influence

1900

1205 E. 13th

L-plan

rectangular

1910

domestic:
singk-family

pyranlidal

1203-C E 13th

1900

Date

center passage

Subtype

1920

1905

1900

1935

1920

1955

1920

1900

1930

Property Type

pyramidal

L-plan

L-plan

bungalow

pyramidal

rectangular

rectangular

L-plan

bungalow
Address

National Register Assessments

Page 11

pe

pyramidal
bungalow

center passage

Subtype

1910

1900

Date

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to character of the 13th Street Historic District.
Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

National Register Assessments

Justification

•

NRHP Recommendation

Craftsman

Sty listie Influence

Craftsman

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Craftsman

Significant for historic associations; one of few surviving
examples of its type; contributes to the character of the 13th
Street Historic District

Craftsman

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Craftsman

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Craftsman

I

1925

Craftsman

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Significant for historic associations; excellent example of its
type; contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1930

Craftsman

I

bungalow

1910

Significant for historic associations; one of few survivmg
examples of its type; contributes to the character of the 13th
Street Historic District

Significant for historic associations; excellent example of its
type; contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic
District

bungalow

1925

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

pyramidal
bungalow

1925

Eligible under Criteria A and C

bungalow

1925

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

bungalow

1925

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1925

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to character of the 13th Street Historic District.

1603 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1895

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Page 12

1602 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1925

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

1601 E. 13th

domestic:
singk-farnily

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1600 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

1925

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Craftsman

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

1509-8 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1925

Justification

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

-

1509 E. 13th

dome,tic:
single-family

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1507 E. 13th

domestic:
single- family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1506E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1505 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

-

Eligible under Criteria A and C

---

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

_________________

Eligible under Criteria A and C

L-.

1504 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

NRHP Recommendation
Craftsman

--------

1503 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

1925

Craftsman

•

1502 E. 13th

bungalow

1925

1925

bungalow

bungalow

domestic:
single-family

Craftsman

1411 E. 13th

1925

1910

bungalow

pyramidal
bungalow

1895

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

1409 E. 13th

Stylistic Influence
Craftsman

1900
Craftsman

center passage
Craftsman

domestic:
single-family

Craftsman

1407 E. 13th
Craftsman

Date

Craftsman

Subtype

1925

1925

1925

1925

1925

1925

1910

1930

1925

Property Type

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

pyramidal
bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

____

Address

National Register Assessments

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Page 12

pe

y

y

y

y

y

y

I SubtYl'e

1925

Date

1915

1935

1935

1935

1905

1955

1905

1940

1885

1895

1955

1915

1915

1905

1910

bungalow

pyramidal

bungalow

pyramidal
bungalow

bungalow

L-plan

rectangular

L-plan

rectangular

L-plan

two-room

rectangular

two-room

two-room

L-plan

shotgun

National Register Assessments

/I

don1l'stk:
single-family

bungalow

192~

CraftsrnUtl

Eligible under Criteria A ~nd C

Contribute;; 10 Ine character of the I ;lth SUeet Historic Districl

1605 E. 13th

domcslic:
singll;.family

pyramidal

1915

1607 E. 13th

domestic:
singlc-family

bungalow

1935

Eligible under Criteria A and C

~~~ll~~~~i1Y

pyramidal
bungalow

1935

Eligible under Criteria A and C
NRHP Recommendation

llligible under Criteria A llnd C

Justification

Not Eligible

Contributes to the ~haractet of the 13th Street Hisloric District

Not Eligible

Contributes to tht: character of the 13th Street Historic District

1905

Eligible under Criteria A and C

L-plan

1915

Not Eligible

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

two-room

1915

Eligible under Criteria A and C

two-room

1955

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

rectangular

1895

Eligible under Criteria A and C

two-foom

1885

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

L-plan

1940

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

Eligible under Criteria A and C

I

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Contributes to the charach:r of the nth Street Historic District

Not Eligible
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

domestic:
singk-fanlily

1905

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
singk-family

L-plan

Craftsman

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

1955

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

1905

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

IS09E.13th

domestic:
single-family

1935

L-plan

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1807 E. 13th

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1803E.13th

single-family
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1802 E. 13th

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1801 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

Conlributes 10 lil.! characlcr of the 13th Strcet Historic Uistrkt

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Contributes to the character of the 13th Slret:t Historic District

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not ml."!!t NR age threshold. andlor lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural atlributes and known
significant historical assoeiations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic assoeiations; fine example of its type;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Conuibutes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic assoeiations; one of few extant
examples of its type.

I

Page 13

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Significant for historic associations; one of few extant
examples of its type.

1800 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

dom~stic:

1705 E. 13th

1705 E. 13th,
rear

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1703 E. 13th

Not Eligible

1701 E. 13th

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1611 E. 13th

I

I

National Register Assessments

1609 E. 13th

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Strlistic Influence

1604B.13th

Craftsman

Justification

Craftsman

NRHP Recommendation

Not Eligible

Stylistic Influence

Not Eligible

Dale

Not Eligible

Subtype

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Property Type

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Address

1903 E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

shotgun

1910

Page 13

•

pe

y

y

L-plan

Subtype

1935

1925

Date

-

two-room

bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

bungalow

pyramidal

rectangular

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

pyramidal

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

1935

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1925

1906 E. 13th

domcstic:
single-family

bungalow

1<J55

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical assodations

Not Eligible

Craftsman

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

2103-AE.13th

domestic:
single-family

2103·B E. 13th

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

bungalow

1935

1950

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

I

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
signi licance
Lacks noteworthy architectural auributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural aUributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks nOleworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threShold, andlor lacks
significance

i

rectangular

Lacks integrity, does not mcet NR age thre>hold, and/or lacks
significance

!

I Justification

domestic:
single-family

1920

Not Eligible

NRHP Recommendation

2102 E. 13th

bungalow

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

1915

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

2100 E. 13th

pyramidal

Craftsman

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

1950

Not Eligible

2008 E. 13th

bungalow

Significant for historic associations; outstanding example of its
type.

domcSlic:
single-family

1940

Eligible under Criteria A and C

2007-8 E. 13th

bungalow

Lacks integrity, does not Illeet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

1935

Not Eligible

2007 -A E. 13th

bungalow

Not Eligible

Craftsman
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

I

Page 14

2005 E. 13th

Not Eligible

1940

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

rectangular

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Craftsman

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

2003-8 E. 13th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1910

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

pyramidal

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. andlor lacks
significance

2003-A E. 13th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1925

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

bungalow

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

2000 E 13th

Not Eligible

1955

Not Eligible

rectangular

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1908 E. 13th

Not Eligible

!

Significant for historic associations; outstanding example of its
type.

-

1905 E. 13th

Not Eligible

National Register Assessments

two-room

Justification
Stylistic Influence

domestic:
single-family

NRHP Recommendation
Craftsman

1904-8 E. 13th

1925

1925

1955

L-plan

1955

domestic:
single-family

Stylistic Influence
Craftsman

1904-A E. 13th

1925

Date
Craftsman

Subtype
Craftsman

Property Type

1910

1940

1935

1940

1950

1915

1920

1935

1950

1940

Address

National Register Assessments

1940

Not Eligible

lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Page 14

pe

y

y

y

y

y

rectangular

Subtype

1950

Date
NRHP Recommendation
Justification

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Craftsman

Eligible under Criteria A and C

National Register Assessments

Stylistic Influence

Not Eligible

Queen Anne

Significant for historic associations; one of few surviving
examples of its type.

1955

Eligible under Criteria A and C

rectangular

1900

1915

center passage

center passage

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks integrity, does not lIIeet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1930

Not Eligible

domcstic:
single-family

1930

1940

160S E. 14th,
rear

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

1905

bungalow

I 60S E. 14th

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

1930

Eligible under Criteria A and C

NR listed in 1986; significant for historic associations;
outstanding example of its type; contributes to character of the
Swedish Hill Historic District.

151 I E. 14th

domestic:
single-family

1905

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible
Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

1509 E. 14th

rectan gular

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-fanlily

1955
Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

1507 E. 14th

rectangular

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
singk-family

Craftsman

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic
District

1011 E. 14th

L-plan

1940

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

1920

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1009 E. 14th

Not Eligible

rectangular
Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to character of the Swedish Hill Historic District.

domestic:
single-family

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic
District

1007 E. 14th

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
Significance

rectangu lar

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domo:stic:
singlo:-family

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1005 E. 14th

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

bungalow

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshOld, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
singh:-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Craftsman

Significant for historic associations; one of few surviving
examples of its type.
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
NR listed in 1986; significant for historic associations;
outstanding example of its type; contributes to character of the
Swedish Hill Historic District.

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andior lacks
significance
Significant for historic associations; flllt:' example of its type;
contributes to character of the Swedish Hill Historic District.

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
Significance

Not Eligible

I

Contributes to the character of the SW<.:de Hill Historic
District

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

i

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic
District

Not Eligible

I

Contributes to the character of the Swede Hill Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

I

Lacks noteworthy architectural atlributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andior lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

,

Page 15

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1003 E. 14th

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andior lacks
significance

Not Eligible

1915
Eligible under Criteria A and C

park

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1'140

Eligible under Criteria A and C

recreational

Not Eligible

907 E. 14th

Justifica lion

Eligible under Criteria A and C

bungalow

1900

NRHP Recommendation
Craftsman

domestic:
single-family

1915

903 E. 14th

bungalow

bungalow

park

domestic:
single-family

Stylistic Influence
Craftsman

I 2105-B E. 131h

1920

center passage

bungalow

domestic:
single-family

Queen Anne

2105-AE.13th

Craftsman

1950

Not Eligible

rectangular

Not Eligible

domL'stic:
single-family

Not Eligible

2104 E. 13th

Not Eligible

Date

Not Eligible

Subtype

1940

1955

1905

1930

1905

1930

1930

1915

1955

1905

Property Tvpe

rectangu lar

rectangular

L-plan

rectangular

rectangular

rectangular

rectangular

center passage

rectangular

L-plan

Address

National Register Assessments

1701 E. 14th

domestic:
single-family

L-p\an

1905

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Page 15

pe
1905

I

L-plan

1925

I Subtype

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

center passage

rectangular

center passage

rectangular

two-room

L-plan

pyramidal

pyramidal

T-plan

bungalow

rectangular

Not Eligible

1907 E. 14th

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1940

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1909 E. 14th

bungalow

1925

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

2105-8 E. 14th

domestic:
single-family

2107 E. 14th

domestic:
single-family

2109 E. 141h

domestic:
single·family

1180 Alamo

domestic:
single- family

1207 Alamo

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

pyramidal

pyramidal

T-plan

bungalow

1935

1925

1915

1910

1900

1935

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

rectangular

Not Eligible

1935

•

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

i

2105-A E. 14th

two-room

1955

I

domestic:
single-family

rectan gu lar

i

2103-B E. 14th

I

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

I Justification

Lacks noteworthy architectural attribules and known
significant historical associations

------

Page 16

2103-A E. 14th

Lacks nOleworthy architectural attribules and known
significant historical associalions

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1930

Lacks noteworthy architectural attribules and known
significant historical associations

center passage

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attribules and known
significant historical associations

2101 E. 14th

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1940

Lacks noteworthy architectural attribules and known
significant historical associations

rectangu lar

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attribules and known
significant historical associations

2005 E. 14th

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Lacks nOleworthy architeclUral attribules and known
significant historical associations

1910

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age Ihreshold, andlor lacks
significance

center passage

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

2003 E. 14th

National Register Assessments

1920

NRHP Recommendation

bungalow

I

domestic:
single-family

I Stylistic Influence

1803-8 E. 14th

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

1925

Not Eligible

bungalow

Date

1920

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1801 E. 14th

J ustifica lion

NRHP Recommendation

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1905

Not Eligible

L-plan

Not Eligible

domestic:
singk-family

Not Eligible

1703 E. 14th

Not Eligible

Date

Nol Eligible

Subtype

Not Eligible

Property Type

.

Address

i

Stylistic Influence

1940

1925

1910

1940

1930

1955

1935

1925

1915

1910

1900

1935

1935

National Register Assessments

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Page 16

pe

rectangular

1930

Spanish Colonial
Revival

NRHP Recommendation

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Justification

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
signi ficance

Lacks integrity> does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
NR listed in 1995: local landmark; signifH;allt for historic
associations; rare example of its type,
Contributes 10 the character of the J 3th Street Historic District

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, ami/or lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fmc example of its type;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
signiftcance

--~--

Craftsman

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1920

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1940

Not Eligible

1930

Not Eligible

NR listed in 1995; local landmark; signitlc<lllt for historic
associations; rare example of its type_

1910

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1915

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1905

Not Eligible

Not Eligible
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

bungalow

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

rectangular

1905

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

I

Page 17

1210 Bob
Harrison

domcsllc:
single-family

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1955
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1209 Bob
Harrison

domestic:
singlc"family

pyramidal

Not Eligible

1208-8 Bob
Harrison

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

Spanish Colonial
Revival

1930

Lacks integrity, docs not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1208"A Bob
Harrison

domestic:
single-family

L"plan

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

-

1206 Bob
Harrison

domestic:
singk-family

L-plan

1930

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

--

1202 Bob
Harrison

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1200 Bob
Harrison

Median

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

domestic:
single-family

shotgun

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1304 Angelina

shotgun

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

landscaping

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1300 block
Angelina

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

domestic:
singk-family

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1208 Angelina

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1206 Angelina

Justification

National Register Assessments

civic

NRHP Recommendation

Stylistic Intluence

1192 Angelina

Date

1890

Subtype

L-plan

1930

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1190 Angelina

1935

1935

bungalow

bungalow

1890

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

2100 Alamo

Stylistic Influence

1930

1930

rectangular

bungalow

1930

domestic:
singk-family

shotgun

1309 Alamo

1930

Date

Craftsman

Subtype

shotgun

1955

1905

1905

1915

1910

1930

1940

1920

1930

Property Type

Median

rectangular

L-plan

L-plan

bungalow

pyramidal

bungalow

rectangular

bungalow

bungalow

Address

National Register Assessments

1212 Bob
Harrison

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1930

Page 17

•

pe

Not Eligible

1310 Bob
Harrison

domestic:
single-family

pyramidal
bungalow

1910

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Justification

1910

Contrihutes to the character of the 13th Stred Historic District

shotgun

Eligihle under Criteria A and C

1915

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

center passage

Not Eligible

1910

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

center passage

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

1905

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

1408-A Bob
Harrison

1930

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

1930

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Page 18

1406 Bob
Harrison

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

hipped

1900

Contributes to the character of thc 13th Street Historic District

Not Eligible

1905

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

domestic:
singlt:-family

two-room

1925

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

Craftsman

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

hipped

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

1915

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

1405 Bob
Harrison

L-plan

Significant for historic associations; best example of only two
extant dwellings of this type within the project area;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1404 Bob
Harrison

domestic:
single-family

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1403 Bob
Harrison

bungalow

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

1402-B Bob
Harrison

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1402 Bob
Harrison

bungalow

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Significant for historic associations; one of few surviving
examples of this type.

Significant for historic associations; one of few extant
examples of its type.

1400 Bob
Harrison

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1316 Bob
Harrison

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1314 Bob
Harrison

Eligihle under Criteria A and C

i

National Register Assessments

1950

1915

Justification

NRHP Recommendation

rectangular

pyramidal

NRHP Recommendation

Stylistic Influence

domestic:
single-family

Date

1306 Bob
Harrison

Subtype

1950

1925

pyramidal

pyramidal

domestic:
single-family

1950

1950

1305 Bob
Harrison

Craftsman

1925

Eligible under Criteria A and C

pyramidal

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1304 Bob
Harrison

Not Eligible

Date

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Subtype

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Property Type

domestic:
single-family

Stylistic Influence

1910

1915

1915

1925

1905

1900

1930

1930

1905

1910

1915

1910

Address

1312 Bob
Harrison

pyramidal

rectangular

pyramidal
bungalow

pyramidal

bungalow

bungalow

L-plan

hipped

bungalow

two-room

hipped

--

center passage

center passage

shotgun

National Register Assessments

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold. andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. andlor lacks
significance
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes (0 the character of the 13th Street Historic District
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. andlor lacks
significance
Significant for historic associations; best example of only two
extant dwellings of this type within the project area;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; one of few surviving
examples of this type,

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; one of few extant
examples of its type.

Page 18

pe

y

Subtype

I Date

1935

Justification

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C
Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

I

National Register Assessments

NRHP Recommendation

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Not Eligible

Stylistic Influence

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1955

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Lacks integrity, does not me.:t NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
signi ficant historical associations
Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Significant for historic associations: fille example of its type,
Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold. and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy archite;;lUral attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshOld. and/or lacks
significance

I

I

Page 19

one-part
commercial
block

1940

Eligible under Criteria A and C

rectangular

1920

Craftsman

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

rectangular

1925

Not Eligible

bungalow

1961

Not Eligible

I

I

Lacks noteworthy architectural auributts and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

rectangular

1934

Not Eligible

rectangular

1935

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

bungalow

1935

Not Eligible

1900

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type

194()

Eligible under Criteria A and C

rectangular

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

commercial

1900

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

commercial

center passage

Not Eligible

Significant for historic associations; line example of its type.

commercial

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1209 Chicon

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1203 Chicon

religious

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1200Chicon

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1191 Chicon

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1186 Chicon,
rear

religious

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1186 Chicon

domestic:
singl.:-family

rectangular

Not Eligible

bungalow

1183 Chicon

1930

1930

domestic:
single-family

I

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Histone District

one-part
commercial
block

1181 Chicon

domestic:
singk-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

two-room

912 Catalpa

Justification

1930

domestic:
single-family

domestic:
single-family

NRHP Recommendation

one-part
commercial
block

1001 Catalpa

1189 Branch

one-part
commercial
block

commercial

Stylistic Influence

1930

14i I Bob
Harrison

one-part
commercial
block

commercial

1900

1411 Bob
Harrison

center passage

1935

1940

rectangular

rectangular

domestic:
singk-family

1900

1408-8 Bob
Harrison

two-room

Date

Craftsman

Subtype

1935

1935

1934

1961

1925

1920

1940

1955

Property Type

bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

rectangular

bungalow

rectangular

rectangular

one-part
commercial
block

Address

National Register Assessments

Page 19

pe

ily

y

one-part
commercial
block

Subtype

1955

1955

Date

1955

one-part
commercial
block

rectangular

1940

1955

rectangular

1930

gas Station

rectangular

1935

1930

1930

1925

1910

1915

1935

1925

1925

bungalow

two-room

shotgun

bungalow

pyramidal

pyranlidal

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

National Register Assessments

Date

1212 Chicon

commercial

one-part
commercial
block

1955

Not Eligible

1215 Chicon

commercial

one-part
commercial
block

1955

Not Eligible

1217 Chicon

commercial

gas Station

1955

Not Eligible

NRHP Recommendation

dom.:stic:
single-family

rectangular

1940

Not Eligible

1301 Chicon,
war

domestic:
multiple-family

rectangular

1930

Not Eligible

1304 Chicon

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1935

N 01 Eligible

1925

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1925

•

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Justification

bungalow

I

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
signi ficance

I

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical assoeiations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1935

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

bungalow

1915

Classical Revival

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

pyramidal

1910

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single- family

pyramidal

1925

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1930

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1208 Coleto

domestic:
single-family

shotgun

1930

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Page 20

1206 Coleto

domestic:
single-family

two-room

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1204 Coleto

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes alld known
significant historical associations

1194 Cole to

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1188 Coleto

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1184 Coleto

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1308 Chicon

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1306 Chicon

Justification

NRHP Recommendation

1301-B Chicon

Not Eligible

NOIEligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1955

Not Eligible

rectangular

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

130 I-A Chicon

Stylistic Influence

National Register Assessments

Subtype

Stylistic Influence

Property Type
Classical Revival

•

Address

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Page 20

e

center passage

bungalow

moonlight
tower

bungalow

SubtYIJe

1900

1925

1895

1925

Date

shotgun

pyramidal

1920

1915

1920

1890

1935

1935

1945

1955

1930

1930

1930

Date

pyramidal
bungalow

L-plan

rectangular

bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

rectangular

rectangular

rectangular

J Sub9'pe

National Register Assessments

NRHP Recommendation

Stylistic Influence

Justification

moonlight
tower

1895

1304 Coleto

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1925

Not Eligible

1194 Comal

domestic:
singk-family

center passage

1900

Eligible under Criteria A and C

National Register Assessments

NRHP Recommendation

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural allributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Justification

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

NR listed in 1976; listed as a local landmark; significant for
historic associations; one of 19 extant examples of its type.

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1930

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

rectangular

1930

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

1930

Significant for historic associations; finc eXilmph: of its type,

Eligible under Criteria A and C
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

13 10 Concho

rectangular

1955

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

1945

NR listed in 1976; listed as a local landmark; significant for
historic associations; one of 19 extant examples of its type.

Lacks nOieworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1308 Concho

rectangular

1935

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-fanli1y

rectangular

1935

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Queen Anne
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

\306 Concho

bungalow

Significant for historic associations; excellent example of its
type; contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic
District

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1305 Concho

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

domestic:
single-family

i

1304 Concho

I

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

1920

1890

L-plan
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

domestic:
single-family

1313 112 Comal

I

Page 21

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1313 Comal

dome,tic:
single-family

pyramidal
bungalow

1915

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1303 Comal

domestic:
single-family

pyramidal

1920

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1300Comal

domestic:
single-family

shotgun

Queen Anne

1204Comal

comlllercial

Not Eligible

Stylistic Influence

infrastructure

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1300 block
Coleto

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1925

Eligible under Criteria A and C

bungalow

Not Eligible

domestic:
singld'amily

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1210Colelo

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Property Type

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Address

1195 Comal

•

Significant for historic associations; excellent example of its
type; contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic
District
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Hiswric District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Page 21

•

pe
rectangular

Subtype

1920

1955

Date

-

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

bungalow

bungalow

center passage

rectangular

rectangular

L-plan

two-room

--_._-

Stylistic Influence

Property Type

Subtype

Date

1203 Cotton

domestic:
singk-family

rectangular

1955

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1920

domestic:
singll!-family

bungalow

1925

dOlll"stic:
single-family

bungalow

1950

NRHP Recommendation

Justification

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

-

Address

1925

1950

1920

1935

1930

1955

1925

1937

1920

1955

1955

1905

_.

1890

National Register Assessments

NRHP Recommendation

1890

Queen Anne

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Justification

Classical Revival

Not Eligible

National Register Assessments

Stylistic Influence

two-room

1905

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
singll!-family

Not Eligible

900 Juniper

L-plan

1955

Not Eligible

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domt!stic:
single-family

rectangular

Not Eligible

1208 Hackberry

1955

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

Not Eligible

1202 Hackberry

Craftsman

domestic:
single-family

1920

Not Eligible

I

1201 Hackberry

center passage

Ranch

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
signiticance

domestic:
single-family

1937

Not Eligible

1200 Hackberry

bungalow

Not Eligible

I

domestic:
single-family

1925

Not Eligible

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1165 Curve

bungalow

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Craftsman

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Page 22

1408 Cotton

Not Eligible

NO[ Eligible

1955

Craftsman

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

rectangular

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1930

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

bungalow

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1935

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

bungalow

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible
Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1400 Cotton

1920

bungalow

Not Eligible

Craftsman

domestic:
single-family

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

1306-A/B
Cotton

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; one of few extant example of its type; contributes
to character of the Juniper Street Historic District..

1209 Cotton

domestic:
single-family

Craftsman

----

1207 Colton

Craftsman

-----

1206 Cotton

Ranch

-

1205 Colton

Classical Revival

Queen Anne

-

1204 Cotton

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
signiticancl!
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does nOlIllL'ct NR agl! threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lucks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. andlor lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Detennined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Detennined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; one of few extant example of its type; contributes
to character of the Juniper Street Historic District..

Page 22

L-plan

Subtype

1885

Date

NRHP Recommendation
Justification

Eligible under Criteria A and C

National Register Assessments

Stylistic Influence

1930

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1950

Classical Revival

Detennined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the Juniper Street Historic District.

1870

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1935

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Detennined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; excellent CXJlIlpic of its type; contributes to
character of the Juniper Street Historic District.

1885

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1915

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Detennined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the Juniper Street Historic District.

1945

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

the character of the Juniper Street Historic

two-room

1945

to

domestic:
single-family

1945

Contributes
District

1100 Juniper

rectangular

1935

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
multiple-family

L-plan

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

1013 Juniper

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
singl..:-family

two-room

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

1012 Juniper

pyramidal
bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

1011 Juniper

rectangular

1910

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Queen Anne
Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1009 Juniper

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1002 Juniper

Detennined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine exanlple of its type.

domestic:
single-family

Significant for historic associations; one of few remaining
examples of its type.

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Detennined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; one of few remaining examples of its type

Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
a~sociations; excellent example of its type: contrihutes to
character of the Juniper Street Historic Dbtrkt.
Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the Juniper Street Historic District
Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District
Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District
Contributes to the character of the Juniper Stn:et Historic
District
Contributes to the chameter of the Juniper Street Historic
District
Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine exanlple of its type.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; one of few remaining
examples of its type.

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criterion A

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; onc of few remaining examples of its type

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

NotEligiblc

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
I

I

I

•

Page 23

'J 15-B Juniper

1890

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criterion A

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

188S

hipped

IS-A Juniper

L-plan

domestic:
multiple-family

Stylistic Influence

Queen Anne

905-AIB
Juniper

l)

1890

L-plan

rectangular

hipped

domestic:
single-family

Classical Revival

904 Juniper

dOlllt!stic:
single-family

1910

Eligible under Criteria A and C

L-plan

1)13 Juniper

L-plan

1885

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

1935

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the Juniper Street Historic District.

'J02 Juniper

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Date

'JII Juniper

1945

1945

1945

1915

1885

1935

1870

19S0

1930

1885

Subtype

L-plan

rectangular

rectangular

rectangular

pyramidal
bungalow

two-room

bungalow

L-plan

rectangular

two-room

Justification

Property Type

domestic:
single-family

pe

ly

y

y

y

y

y

ily

y

NRHP Recommendation

Address

'J08 Juniper

National Register Assessments

Page 23

pe

y

y

y

y

y

y

y

y

Not Eligible

Contributes to the character of the New York Historic District

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

-~

1925

Not Eligible

National Register Assessments

bungalow

1895

Not Eligible

Justification

T-plan

1910

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Detennined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type.

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

I

I

I

Page 24

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1925

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1950

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

1945

Not Eligible
Contributes to the character of the New York Historic District

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

1955

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1935
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

bungalow

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1940

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

bungalow

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1935

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and kJlown
significant historical associations

bungalow

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type.

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
singkAamily

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type

NRHP Recommendation

1935

Stylistic Influence

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

1307 Leona

1106 Myrtle

Date

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

1155 Lydia

SubtYJle

1905

Not Eligible

hipped

1302 Leona

1154 Lydia

1925

domestic:
single-family

domestic:
single-fanlily

904 Lydia

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

1925

1207 Leona

900 Lydia

1930

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1930

Eligible under Criteria A and C

bungalow

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1925

Not Eligible

1206 Leona

Justification

Not Eligible

1205 Leona

Stylistic Influence

NRHP Recommendation

Not Eligible

1204 Leona

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1203 Leona

bungalow

1190 Leona

1925

1186 Leona

bungalow

domestic:
single-family

1905

1183 Leona

hipped

bungalow

1935

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

I 104 Juniper

1935

Date

bungalow

Subtype

1940

1935

1955

1945

1950

1925

1910

1895

1925

1925

Property Type

bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

rectangular

rectangular

bungalow

bungalow

T-plan

bungalow

bungalow

•

Address

National Register Assessments

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1925

•

Page 24

pe

1930

Not Eligible

1157 Navasota

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

1905

Not Eligible

1182 Navasota

domestic:
single-family

1184 Navasota

dom.:stic:
single-family

1186 Navasota

domestic:
single-family

1190 Navasota

domestic:
single-family

1191 Navasota

commercial

1192 Navasota

domestic:
single-family

hipped

1910

center passage

1920

bungalow

1930

bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

1920

1930

Classical Revival

Not Eligible

I Justification

domestic:
single-family

1925

I Stylistic Influence

1180 Navasota

bungalow

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, aud/or lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not me.:t NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A, B,
andC

Significant for associations with historic trends and person;
fine example of its type.

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

No! Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1952

Not Eligible

1920

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

I

domestic:
single-family

i

Page 25

1175 Navasota

Lacks noteworthy archit.:ctural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks not.:worthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

1920

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

r.:ctangular

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-fan1i1y

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1174 Navasota

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1915

Lacks integrity. does not Illeet NR agl! threshold. and/or lacks
significance

center passage

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Significant for associations with historic trends and person;
fine example of its type.

1173 Navasota

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

1925

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

bungalow

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
singlc-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1170 Navasota

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

NotEligibk

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity. does not m.:.:t NR age thr.:shold. and/or lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1920

Not Eligible

rectangular

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A. B.
andC

Not Eligible

domcstic:
single-family

Lacks integrity. does not meet N R age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

National Register Assessments

bungalow

Justification

I NRHP Recommendation

dom.:stic:
single-fan1ily

I Date

1113 Myrtle

NRHP Recommendation

I SubW>e

Not Eligible

1935

1950

H-plan

rectangular

1950

1930

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1109 Myrtle

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1935

Classical Revival

H-plan

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1107 Myrtle

Not Eligible

Date

Not Eligible

Subtype

Not Eligible

Property Type

1159 Navasota

Stylistic Influence

1905

1920

1925

1915

1920

1925

1910

1920

1930

1920

1930

1952

1920

Address

rectangular

bungalow

L-plan

rectangular

bungalow

center passage

rectangular

bungalow

hipped

center passage

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

pyramidal

National Register Assessments

"

pyramidal

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Page 25

•

pe

L-plan

bungalow

Subtype

1950

1900

1930

Date

~-

rectangular

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

hipped

hipped

irregular

bungalow

bungalow

hipped

L-plan

bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

1930

1208 Navasota

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

1900

1300 Navasota

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

1950

1308 Navasota

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1915

Justification
-

Craftsman

domestic:
single-family

NRHP Recommendation

Stylistic Influence

-

1195 Navasota

1915

Date

1920

Subtype

1920

Property Type

1910

1905

1955

1920

1910

1910

1905

1925

1925

Address

National Register Assessments

--

National Register Assessments

Significant for historic associations; excellent example of its
type.
---~--

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. andlor lacks
significance
- - --------

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
...

_- ---

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
defines the character of the New York Historic District.
--

NRHP Recommendation

Significant for historic associations; excellent example of its
type; defines the character of the New York Historic District.
---

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
defines to the character of the New York Historic District.
---

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
--

Justification

-----

Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Significant for historic associations; excellent example of its
type.

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
-

Stylistic Influence

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Classical Revival

Craftsman

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C
Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type.

1925

Craftsman

Eligible under Criteria A and C

bungalow

1925

Craftsman

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1905

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1706 New York

L-plan

1910

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

hipped

1910

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Queen Anne
Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
defines the character of the New York Historic District.

1704 New York

bungalow

1920

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1955

Craftsman

1617 New York

irregular

1905

Craftsman

Significant for historic associations; excellent example of its
type; defines the character of the New York Historic District.

domestic:
single-family

hipped

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1612 New York

1910

Craftsman

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
defines to the character of the New York Historic District.

domestic:
single-family

hipped

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1608 New York

1920

Queen Anne

domestic:
single-family

1920

bungalow

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1607 New York

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

-

Page 26

1606 New York

bungalow

Significant for historic associations; outstanding example of its
type; contributes to the character of the New York Historic
District.

domestic:
single-family

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to the character of the New York Historic District.

1604 New York

Contributes to the character of the New York Historic District

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1506 New York

Significant for historic associations; excellent example of its
type; contributes to the character of the New York Historic
District.

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1504 New York

Craftsman

Classical Revival

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1503 New York

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; outstanding example of its
type; contributes to the character of the New York Historic
District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to the character of the New York Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the New York Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; excellent example of its
type; contributes to the character of the New York Historic
District.

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Page 26

~e

L-plan

Subtype

1905

Date

NRHP Recommendation

Justification

Classical Revival

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; tine example of its type.

1925

Not Eligible

1905

Not Eligible

pyramidal

1906 New York

domestic:
single-family

1907 New York

domestic:
single-family

1909 New York

domestic:
single-family

2002 New York

domestic:
single-family

2003 New York

domestic:
single-family

2005 New York

domestic:
single-family

2006 New York

domestic:
single-family

two-room

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

pyranlidal

pyramidal

two-room

hipped

bungalow

1915

1910

1910

1935

1905

1925

1935

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Justification

L-plan

Significant for historic associations; tine example of its type.

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1903 New York

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1905

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

L-plan

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1902 New York

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1905

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

L-plan

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1900 New York

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, docs not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Laeks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, docs not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural anributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A atld C

Significant for historic associations; unusual example of its
type.

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes atld known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

i

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

I
I
I

I

Page 27

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

National Register Assessments

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

bungalow

1808 New York

NRHP Recommendation

Not Eligible
Eligible under Criteria A and C

1925

Not Eligible

bungalow

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1807 New York

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

1955

Not Eligible

rectangular

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

I 803 New York

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1925

Not Eligible

bungalow

Significant for historic associations; unusual example of its
type.

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1802 New York

Not Eligible

1905

Not Eligible

L-plan

Stylistic Influence

Stylistic Influence

Classical Revival

Date

domestic:
single-family

2007 New York

1925

1955

1925

1925

1905

1905

1905

1915

1910

1910

1935

1905

1925

1935

1955

Subtype

1708 New York

I

bungalow

rectangular

bungalow

bungalow

L-plan

L-plan

L-plan

pyramidal

pyranlidal

pyramidal

two-room

hipped

bungalow

two-room

rectangular

Property Type

y

y

y

y

y

y

y

y

Address

National Register Assessments

1955

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

Page 27

1le
bungalow

Subtype

1935

1935

Date

1955

1930

1920

rectangular

two-room

bungalow

two-room

1910

two-room

1955

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1930

Not Eligible

2101 New York

•
2009 New York

domestic:
single-family

domestic:
single-family

domestic:
single-family

1001 Olive

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

park

two-room

two-room

two-room

1935

1885

1875

1900

1935

1935

two-room

1935

rectangular

1955

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

!

Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
Significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

I

907-NB Olive

rectangular

Justification

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

NRHP Recommendation

902 Olive

1935

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

recreational

bungalow

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

900 block Olive

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

1935

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

900 Olive

bungalow

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet N R age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1305 Olander

1910

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

pyramidal

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Contributes to the character of the J uni per Street Historic
District

1203 Olander

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

domestic:
single-family

1920

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

2105 New York

two-room

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the Juniper Street Historic
District

domestic:
single-family

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Page 28

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

2103 New York

National Register Assessments

domestic:
single-family

domestic:
multi pIe-family

Stylistic Influence

Not Eligible

2008-NB New
York

Not Eligible

1935

bungalow

Not Eligible

rectangular

domestic:
multiple-family

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

2008 New York

905 Olive

pyramidal

Not Eligible

Date

Not Eligible

1935

Subtype

903 Olive

1935

1935

1935

1885

1875

1900

1935

1935

1935

1955

Justification

Property Type

1205 Olander

bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

L-plan

park

two-room

two-room

two-room

two-room

rectangular

NRHP Recommendation

Address

Stylistic Influence

ly

ly

y
i

National Register Assessments

Not Eligible

.

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Page 28

pe
Subtype

1910

Date

---

pyramidal
bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

T-plan

rectangular

foursquare

moonlight
tower

rectangular

bungalow

bungalow

pyramidal

pyramidal
bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

pyramidal
bungalow

--

bungalow

/I

r-plan

- -

domestic;
single-family

2006
Pennsylvania

domestic:
single-family

2104
Pennsylvania

domestic:
single-family

2106
Pennsylvania

domestic:
single-family

pyramidal
bungalow

1920

1178 Poquito

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1950

pyramidal
bungalow

bungalow

bungalow

1915

1920

1930

1925

Craftsman

Justification

2004
Pennsylvania

pyramidal

Craftsman

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

1925

Not Eligible

!

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations: fine exaniple of its type.

I
i

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

I

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type

Not Eligible
Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine exanlple of its type.

1908
Pennsylvania

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-fanlily

1935

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type

1904
Pennsylvania

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1900
Pennsylvania

Not Eligible

1950
Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type

rectangular

NR listed in 1976; listed as a local landmark; significant for
historic associations; one of 19 extant examples of its type.

domestic:
single-family

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1706
Pennsylvania

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1895

Significant for historic associations; outstanding example of its
type.

moonlight
tower

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

infrastructure

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1700 block of
Pennsylvania

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1930

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

-

foursquare

Lacks notewonhy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

--

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

--

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type

NR listed in 1976; listed as a local landmark; significant for
historic associations; one of 19 extant exaniples of its type.
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; outstanding example of its
type,

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

I

Lacks noteworthy architectural attribUies and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

I

Page 29

1618
Pennsylvania

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1950

Eligible under Criteria A and C
Not Eligible

rectangular

Not Eligible

-

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

---

Not Eligible

'---------

16101/2
Pennsylvania

1890

I

National Register Assessments

domestic:
singll!-family

Not Eligible

1935

NRHP Recommendation

1600-10
Pennsylvania

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Stylistic Influence

bungalow

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1109 Olive

Tudor Revival

Justification

Tudor Revival

1935

1935

bungalow

NRHP Recommendation

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

1108 Olive

Stylistic Influence

1935

1910

1890

pyramidal
bungalow

1950

domestic:
single-family

1930

1100 Olive

Craftsman

Date

Not Eligible

Subtype

Craftsman

---------

Property Type

1895

1950

1935

1925

1915

1920

1930

1925

1920

1950

------

Address

National Register Assessments

Page 29

•

Date

--

Subtype

1955

~-~

le

irregular

-~---

omm

--

1950

1950

1935

1935

1955

1920

1925

1935

1920

1955

1890

1955

1930

1920

1950

bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

rectangular

rectangular

pyramidal
bungalow

two-room

bungalow

bungalow

rectangular

L-plan

rectangular

pyramidal

bungalow

irregular

y

-~

y

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

irregular

1950

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1950

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1950

Not Eligible

-~

-

IZ04-A Salina

domestic:
single-family

L-plan

1204-B Salina

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

1204-C Salina

domestic:
single-family

pyramidal

1206 Salina

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1955

1890

1955

1930

1920

Craftsman

Justification

rectangular

1920

Not Eligible

NRHP Recommendation

bungalow

1935

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age thwshold, and/or lacks
significance

bungalow

1925

Not Eligible

two-room

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Not Eligible

commercial

1920

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1202 Salina

pyramidal
bungalow

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
Single-family

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1210 Rosewood

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

1955

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1304 Poquito

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1303 Poquito

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1206 Poquito

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1935

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

I 197 PoquilO

1935

rectangular

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

------~--

Page 30

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1195 Poquito

rectangular

Significant for its historic associations.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1192 112
Poquito

Eligible under Criteria A

1192 Poquito

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Not Eligible

1182 PoquilO

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

irregular

Eligible under Criteria A and C

educationaVcomm
emul

Craftsman

1 179 Poquito

Stvlistic Influence

National Register Assessments

Not Eligible

Date

Stylistic Influence

1955

Subtype

Not Eligible

Justification

Property Type

Not Eligible

NRHP Recommendation

Address

1193 Poquito

National Register Assessments

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance
Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A

Significant for its historic associations.

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity. does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fme example of its type;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Significant for historic associations; fine example of its type;
contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Page 30

e
rectangular

Subtvne

1925

1925

Date

1935

rectangular

rectangular

1935

Not Eligible

rectangular

1935

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1910

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1895

Queen Anne

L-plan

1895

1941

rectangular

1940

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District
Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District
Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

NR listed in 1985; significant for historic associations;
excellent example of its type; contributes to character of the
San Bernard Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

NR listed in 1985; local landmark; significant for historic
associations; fine e;{ample of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District

l

rectangular

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks integrity, docs not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Justification

modified
L-plan

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Gothic Revival

Contributes of the character of the 13th Street Historic District

1929

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

rectangular

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Craftsman

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District

1920

bungalow

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

NRHP Reconunendation

two-room

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1925

Not Eligible

Contributes of the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Lacks integrity, docs not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

bungalow

Not Eligible

1880

Not Eligible

iron fence

Not Eligible

1950

Not Eligible

rectan gu lar

National Register Assessments

1935

Stvlistic Influence

rectangular

Eligible under Criteria A and C

civic

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District

domestic:
single-family

I

domestic:
single-family
i

I

1174-B San
Bernard
I

Page 31

1174 San
Bernard

domestic:
single-family

1925

rectangular

Eligible under Criteria A and C

lin 1f2 San
Bernard

religious

Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

1170 San
Bernard

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

NR listed in 1985; significant for historic associations;
excellent example of its type; contributes to character of the
San Bernard Historic District.

1164 San
Bernard

NR listed in 1985; local landmark; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

1160 San
Bernard

domestic:
single-family

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District

I I 58-AlB San
Bernard

1925

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

Justification

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1152 San
Bernard

NRHP Recommendation

Gothic Revival

structure

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1100 block of
San Bernard

rectangular

domestic:
single-family

1950

1304 Salina

rectangular

domestic:
single-family

1880

1302 Salina

iron fence

domestic:
single-family

1925

1209 Salina

Stvlistic Influence

Craftsman

rectangular

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single-family

-

1207 Salina

Queen Anne

- - _.. _ - - - - - - - - - -

Date

bungalow

-

Subtype

domestic:
single-family

1910

1920

1929

1895

1895

1941

1940

Property Type

1305 Salina

two-room

bungalow

rectangular

modified
L-plan

L-plan

rectangular

rectangular
Address

National Register Assessments

Page 31

pe
Subtype

1955

Date

1900

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1915

1935

1209 San
Bernard

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1920

1211 San
Bernard

commercial

rectangular

1920

Craftsman

Craftsman

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Justification

1925

Craftsman

NRHP Recommendation

1925

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold. and/or lacks
significance

1925

Craftsman

Not Eligible

1925

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Queen Anne

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

1900

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Queen Anne

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

bungalow

Significant for historic associations; outstanding example of its
type; contributes to character of the San Bernard Historic
District.

bungalow

Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

bungalow

Queen Anne

bungalow

1895

Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District

bungalow

Eligible under Criteria A and C

L-plan

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

T-plan

1950

Lacks integrity. does not meet N R age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

National Register Assessments

Classical Revival,
Queen Anne

Stylistic Influence

1910

Not Eligible

Justification

Queen Anne

irregular

Classical Revival.
Queen Anne

Eligible under Criteria A and C

U-plan

Stylistic Influence
Queen Anne

Queen Anne

Eligible under Criteria A and C

domestic:
single- family

1905

Craftsman

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

L-plan

1925

1207 San
Bernard

domestic:
single-family

pyramidal

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1198 San
Bernard

domestic:
single-family

1905

bungalow

1925

1197 San
Bernard

domestic:
single-family

1955

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

1196 112 San
Bernard

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1196 San
Bernard

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District

domestic:
singk-family

Date

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1193112 San
Bernard

NRHP Recommendation

Subtype
Craftsman

Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District

domestic:
single-family

pyramidal

bungalow

1925

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

1193 San
Bernard

1194 San
Bernard

Page 32

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible

Significant for historic associations; one of few extant example
ofits type.

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1192 San
Bernard

Craftsman

domestic:
single-family

1910

bungalow

1925

1191-NB San
Bernard

irregular

bungalow

1915

domestic:
single-family

1950

bungalow

1935

1178 San
Bernard

Craftsman

domestic:
single-family

V-plan

bungalow

1920

1176 San
Bernard

1895

bungalow

1920

Property Type

T-plan

rectangular

.

Address

National Register Assessments

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bemard Historic District.
Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.
Significant for historic associations; outstanding example of its
type; contributes to character of the San Bernard Historic
District.
Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District
Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.
Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District
Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; fine example of its type; contributes to character
of the San Bernard Historic District.

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the San Bernard Historic
District

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

Not Eligible

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Significant for historic associations; one of few extant example
of its type.

Page 32

e

bungalow

bungalow

Subtype

1930

1930

Date

1920

1930

two-room

1920

rectangular

two-room

1920

1940

two-room

1910

bungalow

pyramidal

1886

1935

hipped

1890

bungalow

rectangular

1950

1920

rectangular

1930

two-room

two-room

National Register Assessments

1305 San
Bernard

religious

rectangular

1930

Not Eligible

1306 San
Bernard

domestic:
single-family

bungalow

1940

Not Eligible

Gothic Revival

two-room

1930

Justification

domestic:
single-family

1950

Gothic Revival

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1305 Waller

rectangular

1890

Classical Revival

Contributes to character of he 13th Street Historic District

domestic:
single-family

rectangular

1886

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1207 Waller

hipped

1910

Not Eligible

religious

pyramidal

1920

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1201 Waller

two-room

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Not Eligible
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

domestic:
single-family

Contributes to character of he 13th Street Historic District

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Contributes to the character of the 13th Street Historic District

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR ago: threshold, andlor lacks
significance
Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Contributes to the character of the 9th and 10th Street Historic
District

Eligible under Criteria A and C

NR listed in 1985; significant for historic associations; fine
example of its type,

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; only extant example of a rare type.

Not Eligible

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

Not Eligible

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

I

I

i

i

I

Page 33

1006 Waller

1920
Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

domestic:
single-family

two-room

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

902 Waller

1920

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

two-room

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

1206 1/2 Short
Hackberry

1920

Contributes to the character of the 9th and 10th Street Historic
District

domestic:
single-family

two-room

NR listed in 1985; significant for historic associations; fme
example of its type.

1205 Short
Hackberry

Determined eligible in 1993; significant for historic
associations; only extant example of a rare type.

domestic:
single-family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1203 Short
Hackberry

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, and/or lacks
significance

domestic:
single-family

Lacks noteworthy architectural attributes and known
significant historical associations

1201 Short
Hackberry

1935

Lacks integrity, does not meet NR age threshold, andlor lacks
significance

National Register Assessments

Eligible under Criteria A and C

NRHP Recommendation

1930

Stylistic Influence

bungalow

bungalow

Justification

Not Eligible

domestic:
single- family

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1304 San
Bernard

Not Eligible

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

NRHP Recommendation

Eligible under Criteria A and C

1930

Not Eligible

bungalow

Not Eligible

domestic:
single-family

1308 San
Bernard

Stylistic Influence

Not Eligible

1302 San
Bernard

Not Eligible

Date

Classical Revival

Subtype

Not Eligible

Property Type

Not Eligible

Address

•

Page 33

•

