@D \ÇàÜÉwâvà|ÉÇ gÉ [|áàÉÜ|vtÄ TÜv{xÉÄÉzç
What is Historical Archeology? ( From the Society For Historical Archaeology 1)
Historical archaeology is the study of the material remains of past
societies that also left behind some other form of historical evidence. This
field of research embraces the interests of a diverse group of scholars
representing the disciplines of anthropology, history, geography, and
folklore. In the New World, historical archaeologists work on a broad
range of sites preserved on land and underwater. These sites document
early European settlement and its effects on Native American peoples, as
well the subsequent spread of the frontier and later urbanization and
industrialization. By examining the physical and documentary record of
these sites, historical archaeologists attempt to discover the fabric of
common everyday life in the past and seek to understand the broader
historical development of their own and other societies.
The one thing that all historical archeology has in common is the presence of
written documentation about the cultures being studied. This distinguishes historical
archeology from prehistoric archeology, and requires historical archeologists to blend
the methods and tools of archeology, history, and anthropology in their studies of the
past. Most archeologists working on North American historic sites must also
understand the global economic and cultural systems that affected the historic period
cultures of the Americas, as well as the technological and social changes of
industrialization. These requirements do effect the training of historical archeologists, in
that they must study the appropriate areas of history and economics to apply the basic
methods, theories and techniques of archeology.
Historians and archeologists alike have learned that material remains of past
cultures, such as alterations to the landscape, house foundations, and garbage, can differ
from the written accounts of past cultures and they can differ in the kinds of information
they contain.
Documents are very often concerned with elite or “important” people, events and
institutions, and often ignore “average” people. Because of this it is difficult to get
detailed information about the daily domestic life or the physical environment of most
common people in the world, be they colonial townspeople, pioneers, railroad workers
or plantation slaves. Preserved physical evidence of past human presence is generally
democratic. The garbage of nobles and peasants is equally preserved in the
archeological record and, through analysis of that garbage, historical archeologists can
1

http://www.sha.org/about/whatis.htm
1

reconstruct such frequently undocumented aspects of life as diet, house plans, domestic
furnishings, clothing, and toys and games.
When these details of life revealed through material remains are combined with
the details revealed through documents, we get a much richer and more complete
understanding of the past than could have been obtained by either discipline alone. The
use of two independent sources of information about the same event in the past also
allows archeologists to study scientific questions about the reliability of both the
archeological record and the historical record, and our methods of interpreting them.
Historical archeology also includes the study of the present. Our present day
garbage reveals what we use and what our culture produces. Garbology is an academic
discipline that began at the University of Arizona under the direction of William Rathjie.
The project started in 1971, originating from an idea of two students for a class project.
It is a major source of information on the nature and changing patterns in modern
refuse. Industries wishing to demonstrate that discards originating with their products
are (or are not) important in the trash stream are avid followers of this research, as are
municipalities wishing to learn whether some parts of the trash they collect has any
salable value. 2

What is Material Culture?
To understand material culture, one must understand the anthropological use of
the term “culture.” How is culture defined?
Culture is
learned behavior.
the behavior of a given people or nation at a given time or over all time;
customs, social relationships, art, language, survival
strategies, even foods.
never static, always evolving.
adaptive. (People are using more land in more places, developing new
behaviors and more cultural patterns.)
interactive with the environments and cultures around it.
accumulative; changing technologies and behavior are visible in the
archaeological record.
a working system.
Material culture refers to the artifacts used in all levels and occupations within a
culture. Archeologists are constantly evolving in their understanding and research in
material culture. At the 1987 annual meeting of the Society for American Archaeology
in Baltimore, a series of sessions were devoted to papers on “Material Culture.” One of
those sessions was “The Meanings of Consumption: Ongoing Research in Historical
Archaeology.” In summary, two questions directed the papers presented.

2

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garbology
2

What assumptions should be made in Historical Archeology?
1) Human beings are culture-bearing and culture-bound creatures.
2) The production and consumption of material culture often involves the
production and consumption of information.
3) Objects have use value, exchange value, and esteem value. Commodities
(items created specifically for exchange) are culturally defined, socially
relevant and historically situated.

What research questions should be included?
1) How do architecture, landscape (use of space), commodities and knowledge
work as key elements in creating social structures for purposes of political
power, social hierarchy and power negotiations?
2) What are the interrelationships between consumption, production, ideology,
and the meanings (symbolic, cognitive interpretations) of material culture?
3) Can recursivity (the active nature of material culture) be identified in the
archeological record? How does a structure, once built, change and direct the
behavior of the people who begin to use it? How do new consumer goods
change the way people think?
Let’s take a closer look at the second question. Can we assume that changing
symbolism will record changing ideologies and a changing culture? Looking at
research done by James F. Deetz and Edwin S. Dethlefson 3 on grave stone
symbols we see that decorations on grave stones did change over time (Table next
page). They found that in a cemetery in Stoneham, Massachusetts, there were
stylistic changes in grave stones. What do they tell us about changing ideology?
The decline of death’s heads coincides with the decline of orthodox Puritanism.
The death head reflected the mortality of life. Cherubs reflect a stress on
resurrection and the preaching of Jonathan Edwards. The urn and willow
designs coincide with the rise of less emotional religions such as Unitarianism
and Methodism. 4

Deetz and Dethlefson, “Death’s Head, Cherub, Urn and Willow” , Historical Archaeology: A guide to
Substantive and Theoretical Contributions, Edited by Robert L. Schuyler, Baywood Publishing, 1978.
pp. 83 to 89
3

4

Ibid, pp 84
3

A perfect example of research addressing question 1, (How do architecture,
landscape (use of space), commodities and knowledge work as key elements in
creating social structures for purposes of political power, social hierarchy and
power negotiations) is found in research by Mark P. Leone on Mormon
settlement patterns. He found that, “Mormon settlement pattern, broadly
conceived, is directly related to the success of Mormon culture in settling this
semiarid region...... The settlement plan was the conscious product of religion.
The plan for laying out a town, called the Plat of the City of Zion, was drawn up

4

by the Prophet Joseph Smith and came to have a status not unlike revelation.” 5
“It was obvious to the leaders of the Mormon population, as to most other
nineteenth-century utopian planners, that the way the physical environment was
managed had direct effects on behavior. They believed that there were direct
causative effects.” 6

What questions do archeologists want to answer?
How do cultures form and why and how do they change? The formation
and change are called the cultural process.
Can we compare and contrast cultural processes around the world to
formulate laws of human behavior? Step by step we are developing research that
will lead us to universal laws of human behavior. Understanding the history of
archeology helps us to understand our progress. This leads us to our next
question.

What is the History of American Archeology? 7
Speculative Period (1492-1840)
Descriptive accounts of sites.
First Scientific American Archeologist - Thomas Jefferson.
The Classificatory Descriptive Period (1840-1914)
Archeology begins to emerge as a vocation.
Careful recording and mapping of sites becomes norm.
Site looting was practiced by governments, universities, and individuals.
The Classificatory-Historical Period: The Concern with Chronology (1914-1940)
Seriation for probable sequence of artifacts and site strata.
Stratigraphic excavations.
More detailed survey and dating sites.
The Classificatory-Historical Period: The Concern with Context and Function
(1940-1960)
WWII- Aerial photography during war revealed thousands of previously
unknown sites. Survey archaeology was developed to study the
relationship of sites over large areas and the reconstruction
of settlement histories.
Countries around the world have taken control of their sites and
Leone, M.P. 1978 “Archaeology as the Science of Technology: Mormon Town Plans and Fences”
Historical Archaeology: A Guide to Substantive and Theoretical Contributions, Edited by Robert L.
Schuyler, Baywood Publishing, pp. 191-200
5

6

Ibid, pp 196

7

G.R. Willey and J.A. Sabloff A History of American Archaeology available on Amazon.com
5

antiquities. The end of legal exportation of antiquities has
brought an increase in looting and illegal trade.
Questions of how and why directed research.
Historical archeology branched from Prehistoric.
The Explanatory Period (1960 - Present)
Anthropological and Processual (research designs that deductively test
hypotheses of cultural behavior).
Cultural Systems.
Holistic interaction between cultures and environments.
Cultural Resource Management (CRM).

Readings in Historical Archeology8
The following books each offer examples and descriptions of historical
archeology. They have all been written with the non-professional in mind, and should be
available through most major book retailers.
Deetz, James
1993
Flowerdew hundred: The Archaeology of a Virginia Plantation, 1619-1864.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
1977
In Small Things Forgotten: An Archeology of Early American Life. New York,
Anchor Books, Doubleday.
Delgado, James P., ed.
1997
Encyclopedia of Underwater and Maritime Archaeology. London: British
Museum Press.
Falk, Lisa, ed.
1991
Historical Archaeology in Global Perspective. Washington, DC: Smithsonian
Institution Press.
Ferguson, Leland
1992

8

http://www.sha.org/research_resources/bibliographies/readings.htm
6

Uncommon Ground: Archaeology and Early African America, 1650-1800.
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Johnson, Matthew
1993
Housing Culture: Traditional Architecture in an English Landscape.
Washington, D. C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Layton, Thomas N.
1997
The Voyage of the Frolic: New England Merchants and the Opium Trade.
Stanford University Press.
Noël Hume, Ivor
1982
Martin's Hundred. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Pounds, Norman J. G.
1989
Hearth & Home: A History of Material Culture. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Rathje, William L. and Cullen Murphy.
1992
Rubbish: The Archaeology of Garbage. New York: Harper Collins Publisher.
Samford, Particia and David L. Ribblett.
1995
Archaeology for Young Explorers. Williamsburg, VA: Colonial Williamsburg
foundation.
Schrire, Carmel
1995
Digging Through Darkness: Chronicles of an Archaeologist. Charlottesville:
University Press of Virginia.
Scott, Elizabeth M., ed.
1994
Those of Little Note: Gender, Race, and Class in Historical Archaeology. Tucson:
University of Arizona Press.
Spector, Janet D.
7

1993
What This Awl Means: Feminist Archaeology at a Wahpeton Dakota Village. St.
Paul: Minnesota Historical Society Press.
Yentsch, Anne Elizabeth
1994
A Chesapeake Family and Their Slaves: A Study in Historical Archaeology.New
York: Cambridge University Press.

8

@E@
exvÉzÇ|é|Çz ctààxÜÇá \Ç [|áàÉÜ|vtÄ TÜv{xÉÄÉzç
The archeological scientist digs to find
Within apparent chaos from the past,
Hidden order in the refuse man has left behind.
Explanation of the pattern lies
In answer to the question “why?”
Creatively invented in the scientific mind. 9

What do archeologists assume about patterns?
We are assuming that
Every social system has identifiable survival strategies.
Every survival strategy has a measurable amount of energy
and resources.
Every household and business reflects the whole system (plan
of survival) through objects used.
All systems (plan of survival) are reflected in patterns.
Patterns can be identified in the archeological record.

What is an artifact pattern?
Patterns are made of artifact numbers (how many of each kind of artifact are
found), artifact associations (what artifacts are found together), and artifact
distribution (where are the artifacts found).

What is context?
Context is an object’s (artifact’s) setting in time and place, its affinity to other
things of similar form, and its general relationship to other objects (artifacts) in the
archeological record. Context is important because it relates to one of the underlying
assumptions of archeology, that much of human cultural behavior is patterned in highly
predictable ways.10

9

South, Stanley Method and Theory in Historical Archeology, 1977 Academic Press, N.Y. pp

Webster, Evans and Sanders, Out of The Past: An Introduction to Archaeology, 1993 Penn State,
Mayfield Publishing Company.
10

9

We consider an artifact any object that was made, altered, transported, 0r used in
any way, that can give us information about human behavior.
An artifact’s spatial context refers to where the object is found and what is
found with it. The age or date of an artifact is the temporal context. The form of the
artifacts, formal context, refers to the general class of objects having general
characteristics of form (example: a button belongs in the button class). 11
When an archeologist fills out excavation forms, most of the information relates
to context.
The spatial context is recorded by the excavation unit; its location on the site
grid. When you plot an artifact in the grid, you are recording its spatial context and
what it is associated with.
Temporal context (how old is it) is recorded in the levels excavated at a site.
In archeology we assume that the law of superposition is correct. That natural and
cultural layers are deposited on top of each other, therefore, younger items are on top
and older items and older cultures will be found below younger ones. For example - the
artifacts found in level 5 (5 levels below the surface) will be older than those found in
level 1 (the first level below the surface).
Formal context is recorded in artifact types. Objects which are alike, of the
same form, are generally used alike and document the same kinds of behavior.
Artifacts form patterns based on where they are found, how many of
each kind of artifact are found, and what they are found with.
Patterns are quantitative.

Using Patterns To Interpret The Past

At the Lake Jackson site, we used Stanley South’s quantitative pattern by artifact
type. South classified and grouped artifacts according to specific function. 12

11

Ibid

12

South, 1977:95
10

South’s artifact types:
kitchen artifact group: includes all storage, cooking and eating utensils,
and all bottles including pharmaceuticals;
bone group: all animal bones
architectural group: includes window glass, nails, bolts, and all
construction hardware including door locks. 13
furniture group: hinges, knobs, drawer pulls and locks, curtain pulleys.
arms group: bullets, shot, gun flints, gun parts, bullet molds.
clothing group: buttons, buckles, thimbles, scissors, pins, beads.
personal group: coins, keys, personal items (combs, jewelry, watches,
pencils, pens).
activities group: construction tools, farm tools, toys, fishing gear, stable
and barn, miscellaneous hardware (unidentified metal).
miscellaneous: everything that doesn’t fit into any other group such as
plant materials, rangia shells, 20th century garbage like coke
bottles and pull tabs.
At Lake Jackson (41BO172) we added a tenth group of prehistoric artifacts
that included ceramic sherds, points, tools, etc. The plantation was built on top of a
prehistoric site.
Each site will have an artifact site pattern. This includes all artifacts found at the
site in quantitative form.

Do you count every brick? At Lake Jackson we did not count them because this would be not
be consistent with frame structures which biodegrade. This must be stated up front - what is
counted and what is not.
13

11

The site artifact pattern for 41BO172 is:

Figure 1
Site Artifact Pattern for Lake Jackson

12

Jackson Period Structures

Lake Jackson Structures
MH = Main
Mill

House

SM = Sugar

Convict Period

Jackson

Figure 2
Structures at the Lake Jackson site.
The structures were given letter names in the order they were to be excavated.
The structures around the main house, A and B were excavated first. The construction
techniques and materials found in these two structures were so different that we could
begin to identify Jackson construction from convict period construction.
Structure A was a storage structure built during the convict period.
Structure B was probably a three room structure the Jackson family lived in when
the main house was being constructed. When the main house was occupied by the
family, it is very possible that this became the kitchen for the main house and a
residence for the main house servants.
Structure C was a wash house built in the Jackson period. The drains still
contained their plaster.
Structure D was not discovered until the Dow Chemical Company park road was
removed and D was found under the road bed. It received surface damage in the road
building process but contained a rich amount of information. It was also built on top of
a prehistoric camp site.

13

Structures E and F have not been excavated.
The structures near the sugar mill, H and J, were almost completely destroyed in
the building of the levee and were not excavated. Structure I and the sugar mill were
excavated. Structure G was not excavated.
Now let’s look at the artifact patterns for the buildings excavated. This gives us
the structure patterns. Artifacts groups are given as percentages. Ceramics are actual
numbers.
Figure 3
Artifact Patterns by Structures

MH

A

B

C

D

SM

I

Kitchen

18.50% 25.10% 12.60% 55.50% 24.20% 24.60% 18.90%

Ceramics

110

23

Bone

7.10%

37.50% 43.70% 7.70%

44.30% 3.70%

12%

Arch.

67.9

17.4

32

26.1

24.4

47.3

22.9

Furniture

0.1

0.1

0.3

0.2

<0.1

0.1

0.2

Arms

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.7

0.3

0.1

0.2

Clothing

0.8

0.3

2.3

0.8

1.5

0.3

0.4

Personal

0.2

0.1

0.5

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.3

Activities

3.1

15

2.9

5.7

1.6

21.8

35.3

Prehistoric

<0.1

0.7

0.8

0.2

2.4

<0.1

0.2

Misc.

0.3

3.3

4.5

6.3

5.8

1.6

9.9

Total #

44935

5364

8829

1333

5526

8388

1159

35

10

14

44

14

5

If we take the total number of artifacts by type at each structure we can see what
the patterns tell us. For example, we would expect that clothing artifacts, personal
artifacts, and ceramics would be found in highest numbers where people lived.

Figure 4-Clothing, Personal and Ceramic Groups

Highest numbers are found at the (MH) main house and B, where the Jackson
family probably lived while the main house was being built. Structure D was a convict
period structure. Arms and furniture would also have been found in the dwellings.
Again, we see that arms and furniture artifacts are found mostly in the main
house (MH) and B.
Figure 5
Arms and Furniture Artifact Groups

15

Figure 6
Structure D
Now, let’s take a single structure, D, and look at the two rooms. Both rooms are
similar in design. Room B has a larger hearth than Room A. In both rooms we
excavated in the same areas, concentrating on the two open areas to the right of the
hearths. Room A had 3,986 artifacts; Room B had 446.

16

Figure 7
Artifacts Within Structure D
Room A = Red
Room B - Blue
The difference between the artifacts and their quantities leads to the hypothesis
that Room A was a kitchen for the main house during the convict period. Room B may
have served as an office, guest quarters, or other use during the convict period.
This is how we use patterns in historic archeology to identify what activities
occurred at a site and where. The bottom line is that artifacts can tell us about the past
if we organize and analyze the artifacts by their context and association.

What is a Site Pattern?
A site pattern is the layout and plan that can be seen in the alteration of the land
contained in the site. It includes all structures and the areas utilized around them. Site
patterns are also called site blue prints and site footprints. When we excavate in
archeology, we have two patterns: the artifact pattern and the site pattern. Both patterns
are compared between sites to identify cultural patterns.
One of the first research questions that must be asked about every site is, “Why is
this site at this location?” What did they build here and how did they alter the area? As
we look a different sites over time in Texas, we will be looking at their artifact patterns,
site patterns, and asking these questions.

17

@F@
[|áàÉÜ|v TÜv{xÉÄÉzç \Ç gxåtá

Figure 1
Routes of the early European explorers in and around North America. 14

European Colonization: The Archeological Perspective
Written accounts of Texas begin with the explorations of the Spanish in the 16th
century. 15 Archeological excavations have found evidence of Coronado’s expedition. An
overview can be found at http://www.psi.edu/coronado/campsite.html. Jay C. Blaine
published, “The Jimmy Owens Site: New Perspectives on the Coronado Expedition. ...
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60:257-266. Donald Blakeslee,(Wichita State
University) presented a paper on the Coronado sites at the 65th Annual Plains
Anthropological Conference. 16 The abstract of this paper is :
Fagan, Brian M. 2005 “Ancient North America: The Archaeology of a Continent” Thames & Hudson,
Page 16
14

15Ibid
16

Rapid City, South Dakota, October 10-13, 2007, http://www.plainsanth2007.org/abstracts-a-c.html
18

Session 16. A Coronado Campsite in Texas: Structure and Contexts
The Jimmy Owens site in Blanco Canyon, Texas, is one of the two
main camps in Texas of the Coronado expedition of 1541. Because the
camp was occupied only for a short period of time and because the camp
assemblage is mixed with later deposits, determining the structure of the
camp has proven difficult. Recent excavations have forded a revision in
our picture of the site, but at the same time some finds have allowed us to
describe the layout of part of the camp in terms of the specialties and even
personal identities of the soldiers involved. Continuing work on the
contexts of the camp have also been fruitful. A magnetometry survey of the
site, although confused by the presence of later metal artifacts, shows that
the site lay astride a native trail. Small outlying sites help to identify which
of the two main camps we have, and continuing work on other trails may
help to identify the spot where the army ascended onto the Llano, the
army's route back to New Mexico, and Coronado's route north to Kansas.
Hand forged horseshoe nails were found at a 1541 Coronado campsite in Blanco
Canyon (Jimmy Owens Site) and are on exhibit at the Star of The Republic Museum. 17
The Owens site artifacts are housed at the Floyd County Historical Museum in Floydada,
Texas. The Corpus Christi Museum of Science and History features artifacts recovered
from Spanish treasure ships that sank near Padre Island in 1554. 18
Alvar Nunex Cabaza de Vaca’s book, “Adventures In The Unknown Interior of
America,” was written as a report for the King of Spain. It describes many Native
American groups, their land and cultures. He also gave us an ecological, technological,
social and ethnographic picture of upper Texas Gulf Coast Indians. DeVaca recorded
two groups living on what appears from his description to be Galveston Island, and they
called themselves the Capoques and the Han. They were tall and well built. 19 De Vaca
viewed the final stage of the Late Prehistoric period and witnessed some of the changes
which resulted from contact with the Spaniards. During the first winter he spent with
the Indians, half of the Indians died from dysentery infected by the Spaniards. 20 De
Vaca lived with the coastal Indians for over a year. De Vaca, at the strong
encouragement of the Indians, became a medicine man, which may have made it easier
for them to accept him into their band. Trade was carried on by de Vaca between the
coast and areas to the north (possibly as far as Oklahoma). As de Vaca made his way
slowly toward Mexico as he looked for Spanish colonies, he camped with and observed
the Indians of the South Texas coast. 21 From de Vaca’s records, archeologists can
formulate questions about the contact period to substantiate his observations, increase
17

Texas Historical Commission, Texas Archeology Month Calendar of Events, October 2008.

18

Ibid

Covey, Cyclone (translator and editor), 1983 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of
America” University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, Page 61
19

20

Ibid, Page 61

21

Ibid, Page 80.
19

our knowledge, test our theories and collaborate our concepts of the behavior of our
coastal Indians.
The web site (www.texasbeyondhistory.net), features,- “Learning from Cabeza de
Vaca”. The article, “Artifacts, Archeology, and Cabeza de Vaca in Southern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico,” by Thomas R. Hester can be found in the Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 70 (1999) on Page 17.
The historic, or contact, period of Native Americans begins with a search through
the many written accounts of this period. Michael B. Collins in his article, “Named
Indian Groups in Texas: A Guide to Entries in the New Handbook of Texas,” 22 lists
named groups during the 16th through the 20th century. The New Handbook of
Texas, 23 is a major resource on these early accounts. The Handbook of Texas Online
lists hundreds of entrees by tribal names (search Indians contact). Lawrence Aten, in
his book, Indians of the Upper Texas Coast, 24 discusses many of the accounts of
interaction between early explorers and Native Americans.
The diagnostic artifacts that identify the contact period sites are metal and trade
items. A paper presented by Brett Cruise (THC) at the 2008 TAS Annual Meeting,
documents the importance of using metal detectors in locating contact period sites.
“Metal detector surveys by Courson Archaeological Research and test excavations
during the TAS 2008 field school at the Halston site (41OC100) produced an array of
metal artifacts, glass beads, and a small number of cultural features associated with an
historic Indian occupation.” The use of metal detectors in archeology will be discussed
in the excavation chapter.
The Star of the Republic Museum has an informative web site that includes links
to many Texas resources. In 1992, the museum hosted an exhibit and the symposium ,
“Sorrow Whispers in the Winds: Native Americans and the Republic.” A booklet about
the exhibit is available from the museum.
The archaeology of Spanish, French, and Indian Contact period sites is the theme
of Volume 63, 1992, The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. The Table of
Contents for Volume 63 is in Appendix A.
In historical archeology, it is very important that researchers are familiar with the
artifacts that will identify the time and the culture of the group being researched. In
excavation, what artifacts will be found that will be diagnostic? In Cathryn Hoyt’s
article, “Material Culture of the Spanish Explorers,” 25 she describes the clothing, armor,
weapons, animals (horses and dogs),personal belongings, trade goods, bells and tools
used by the Spanish in the 16th century. A Spanish musketeer of the sixteenth century
will leave behind a very specific collection of artifacts.

22

Collins, Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 70, 1999

23

Tyler, R. 1996 The New handbook of Texas 6 vols. Texas State Historical Association, Austin

24

Aten, 1983 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast Academic Press, New York

25

Hoyt, 1992 The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol 23
20

Figure 2
Spanish Musketeer of the 16th Century
The most exciting find, documenting the French in Texas, is The La Belle. “On a
cold winter day in 1686, The La Belle, flagship of the French explorer La Salle,
foundered in Matagorda Bay, the victim of a run of bad luck and a blue norther. La
Belle was part of a four-ship expedition led by the Sieur de La Salle, born René Robert
Cavelier, that sought to establish a fortified trading port near the mouth of the
Mississippi. Such a port would have given the French an advantage over the Spanish.” 26
The web site Texas Beyond History ( www.texasbeyondhistory.net ), gives the
history of La Belle, and the archeological excavation that rescued the ship. The artifacts
found, define the French culture of the 17th century and documents their colonial plans.
Artifacts from La Belle, can be found at the Matagorda County Museum in Bay City, the
Corpus Christi Museum of Science and History, the Museum of the Coastal Bend,
Victoria College, Victoria, Texas, and the Texas Maritime Museum in Rockport, Texas27

26

Texas Beyond History www.texasbeyondhistory.net

27

Texas Historical Commission, Texas Archeology Month Calendar of Events, October 2008
21

Spanish and French Exploration of The Texas Gulf Coast
About thirty years after the La Salle expedition, there is evidence that French
traders from New Orleans began visiting the Galveston Bay area trading European
goods to the Orcoquiza (Akokisas) Indians for skins, furs, bear grease and other goods. 28
Simars de Bellisle, who at the age of 24, was abandoned (?) on the island of
Galveston by the captain of a French ship, Marechal de’ Estrée, watched his four
companions die, and became a slave of the Akokisas for fifteen months. He escaped to
Natchitoches in 1721. 29 He was then named interpreter for an expedition to explore
Galveston Bay (Baie St. Bernard). The expedition, led by Bénard de la Harpe, was also
suppose to recover the cannons of the La Salle camp in 1684-87.30 The ship of the
expedition, the Subtile, under the command of Jean Béranger, arrived at Galveston
Island on 27, August 1721, where nine Akokisas were captured, but no canons were
found. 31 In 1721, the French mapped Galveston Island when they attempted to establish
a fort and trading post. They were unsuccessful due to the hostility of the Indians.
In 1754, Joseph Blancpain and several families sailed by sloop from New Orleans
and established a French trading post near the mouth of the Trinity River. The Spanish
learned about the trading post, named Village de Atakapas, and received help from Chief
Calzones Colorados’ Orcoquiza Indians to arrest Blancpain for trespassing on Spanish
territory. 32
“In the early summer of 1756, a handful of Spaniards established the Presidio San
Augustin de Ahumanda on the site where they had discovered and destroyed a French
trading post a year and half previously. Indeed, it was this French incursion into what
Spanish considered their territory that precipitated the founding of this remote outpost
on the lower Trinity River in what is now southeast Texas.” 33 A 1776 map (Figure 3)
shows a Spanish settlement on Lake Miller, near the mouth of the Trinity River. 34

28

Stewart, Richard 1978 “200 Years Ago, Spanish Soldiers, Friars and Indians Celebrated.”
Beaumont Enterprise-Journal, March 26, 1978, D-1

Glass, James L. 1989 “A Review of the Culture and Language of the Inhabitants of Southeast Texas at
the Opening of the Historic Period.” Journal Houston Archeological Society, 93: 1-9 A survey of
ethnographic records and linguistic studies describing the Indians of the Upper Gulf Coast during the
period of European contact.
29

30

Ibid

31

Ibid, Page 4

32

Stewart, 1978

Ambler, J. Richard 1970 Additional Archeological Survey of the Wallisville Reservoir Area, Southeast
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Report, No. 6, University of Texas, Austin
33

Spanish Settlement Areas on Lake Miller in 1776, Redrawn from original Spanish document. (From
Fox, Day, and Highley 1980: Figure 25. Courtest Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
34

22

Figure 3
1776 Map of A Spanish Settlement on Lake Miller
Note the settlement blueprint? Presidio-Village-Mission
In 1785, the Spanish navigator Jose de Evia, surveyed and named Galveston
Island and Bay for the Viceroy of Mexico.35
An unnamed map in the Rosenberg Library, Galveston, (Map 204A) shows four
dwellings on Galveston Island in 1816 at approximately the location of Water Street and
15th Street in Galveston today. Why Galveston Island? It has the only natural deep
water port between New Orleans and Vera Cruz, Mexico.
35

McComb, David G. 1986 Galveston, A History, University of Texas Press, Austin. pp 267
23

In 1817, Jean and Pierre Laffite established a settlement loyal to Spain on
Galveston Island. 36 The Laffite settlement was on the northeastern portion of the island
near the harbor. The main house, a two story red frame building, was called Maison
Rouge. Several other frame structures served as boarding houses and drinking
establishments. There was also a customs office.
In 1818, Jean Laffite helped the French establish a fort (Champ d’Asile) on the
Trinity River. A summary of these events can be found on the Handbook of Texas Online
(www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/CC/uec2.html). “Generals Lallemand
and Rigaud, of Napoleon’s Old Guard, confided in him their plans for rescuing Napoleon
from St. Helena and placing his brother, Joseph Bonaparte, on the throne of an
independent Mexico, and although he reported it all to his secret Spanish employers, he
[Laffite] managed to render actual assistance to the French......” 37
Now the plot thickens. Was this a collection of French refugees or was this a
military plot? Members of the Houston Archeological Society have been looking for this
fort for over 20 years.
Three books were published in 1819: Hartmann and Millard, Le
Texas, ou Notice historique sur le Champ d'Asile; L. F. L'Heritier, Le
Champ d 'Asile; and L'Héroine du Texas, a fictionalized version of the love
story of two real colonists. Although it was probably written in Paris,
L'Héroine may be the first novel set in Texas. Philippe Brideau, the
archvillain of Honoré de Balzac's novel La Rabouilleuse (1842; translated
as A Bachelor's Establishment), was a colonist at Champ d'Asile. The most
popular book featuring Champ d'Asile was first published in French in
1878: Adventures of a French Captain, at Present a Planter in Texas,
Formerly a Refugee of Camp Asylum, whose author uses the pseudonym
Girard Roy Just. In 1985, after extensive research in Texas, French
novelist Jean Soublin published Le Champ d'Asile in which the
Comanches play an expanded role. In this novel some of the survivors
form a utopian colony, an imaginative conclusion that telescopes the
Franco-Texan experience of the entire nineteenth century. 38
The book, Adventures of a French Captain, can be read on line through Google
by searching Camp Asylum Texas. The Table of Contents is Appendix B. Appendix C is
From Page 61, his account of the founding of Camp Asylum.

Anderson, Texas B. 1985 Cognitive Structures, Status and Cultural Affiliation: The Archaeology of
Ashton Villa, PhD Thesis, Rice University
36

Partlow, Miriam 1974, Liberty, Liberty county, And The Atascosito District. The Pemberton Press,
Jenkins Publishing Co. Austin
37

Handbook of Texas Online, s.v.”,” www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/CC/uec2.html
(accessed August 28, 2008)
38

24

A recent publication by William C. Davis, The Pirates Laffite: The Treacherous
World of the Corsairs of the Gulf, has in Chapter 17, Page 349, an account of Champ
d’Asile. This 2006 publication by Harcourt Trade can also be read on line.
One publication you can locate only in the papers of Harry Daves, located at the
TAMU Library in Galveston, is the 1818 diary of Sean Casey, an “associate”[physician] of
Jean Laffite. A translation of this diary and permission to use it was given to me by
Daves in 1990. Casey’s record reports Laffite’s assistance to the French. The 1818 diary
of Sean Casey is Appendix E.
The map (Figure 4) was drawn by the Spanish Royal Corps of Engineers in 1819.
The description of the site reads “Fortifications on left bank Trinity River, Province of
Texas, by adventurers under command of Generals Lallamond and Rigand.”
When Jean Laffite disbanded his settlement in Galveston, several of his men
remained to settle in the area [Trinity River Delta]. Charles Coronea was captured by
pirates at the age of 12 and became a cabin boy to Laffite. He settled in Bolivar and later
moved to High Island. As a Texas colonist, Coronea served as a soldier at San Jacinto
and received Veteran’s Donation Certificate No. 1163. Charles Nathan Tilton, another
Laffite associate, also served at San Jacinto. Other Chambers County residents believed
to be associates of Laffite were S. J. Burney, John Sherman, Ab Wilcox, and Joseph
Lawrence. 39 Joseph Lawrence lived near the junction of Old River and the Trinity.
Figure 4
French Fort Pattern 40
Champ d’ Asile

Fleischman, Flavia 1976, Old River Country: A History of West Chambers County, Miran Publishers,
Fort Worth, Texas
39

1819 Spanish Royal Corps of Engineers, “Fortifications on left bank Trinity River, Province of Texas, by
adventurers under command of Geneerals Lallamond and Rigand.”
40

25

For more information on Spanish presidios, French forts, and early Texas frontier
forts, refer to Handbook of Texas Online under Presidios and Military History.
The archeological blueprint of Spanish presidios was very uniform. The Handbook on
Line, gives this description. “The presidios were constructed of local building materials
(sometime adobe, sometimes log). Where stone was available it was preferred for the
permanent structure. The forts were typically square or rectangular with some walls ten
feet high. On two diagonal corners, round bastions (torreones) were placed. They rose
above the walls of the presidio and were pierced with firing ports, through which
soldiers could fire down the length of all four walls at attackers.” 41 Every Spanish and
French fort had a very specific role in the struggle of conquest and each location was
very strategic.
Rancho de las Cabras was originally built in the presidio style. Rancho de las
Cabras “State Historic Site is off State Highway 97 just outside of Floresville in Wilson
County. The park includes the site of a ranching outpost (the Rancho de las Cabras) of
the San Francisco de la Espada Mission in San Antonio. Missionaries and Indians raised
livestock at the ranch from 1731 to 1794. The site originally included fortifications and a
chapel, but only a few foundations remained in the 1980s.” 42

Figure 5
Rancho De Las Cabras 43
Presidio Site Pattern

41

Handbook of Texas Online - Presidios, (accessed September 6, 2008)

42

Ibid RANCHO DE LAS CABRAS STATE HISTORIC SITE. (accessed September 14, 2008)

Plan map of the ruins of ancho de las Cabras, Wilson County. (From Ivey and Fox 1981: Fig. 2
Courtest Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio)
43

26

To promote the preservation and restoration of old missions and fort sites of Texas,
in 1961, The Texas Old Missions and Forts Restoration Association was organized. The
association has annual meetings and publishes a quarterly newsletter, El Campanario.44

The American Colonial Period
In 1819, the year after the failed French fort, Champ d’ Asile, Moses Austin
developed a plan for settling an American colony in Spanish Texas. The Adams-Onís
Treaty had clarified Spanish title to Texas. Austin arrived in San Antonio, on December
23, 1820, seeking permission to bring his colonists. After his idea was rejected by
Governor Antonio María Martínez, he chanced to meet the Baron de Bastrop.. Austin
and Bastrop had meet nineteen years earlier when in New Orleans. After Bastrop, heard
the enthusiasm with which Moses spoke of his colonization plan, the Baron returned
with him to the governor's office to request permission to establish the colony. On
December 26, 1820, Governor Martínez endorsed and forwarded the plan to higher
authority. 45
Moses died in 1821, at the home of his daughter, Emily, and his son Stephen took
up the banner to bring American settlers to Texas. Thus begins the exciting story of the
Stephen F. Austin colony and the birth of Texas.
For the story of Austin’s Colony, the sugar industry, Texas plantations and early
Texas history, I will refer you to Sugar, Planters, Slaves, and Convicts.
There is a wealth of research that needs to be continued on Texas plantations
during the pre/post civil war periods.
There is equally interesting research to be done on small plantations and small
farmers.
The first questions we must ask is, “What do we know about the Antebellum South
and plantation systems?” The general public view of the Antebellum South is big
plantations, big houses and many slaves.
The South has a highly romanticized
plantation tradition. The statistics reveal that the South was not dominated by
plantations. The typical southern farmer was a small-scale, independent yeoman
farmer. In the upland antebellum cotton belt, planters lived in log dwellings only
slightly larger than their slave houses. Money was invested in land and slaves, not great
houses. Some plantation systems were migratory. When land was depleted, owners
moved west with their families and slaves to start over.

Antebellum Texas Agriculture
Texas, prior to the Civil War, was a part of the rural slave south. However - Texas
had advantages not found in many areas of the South. Statistical studies done on public
Handbook of Texas Online - Texas Old Missions and Forts Restoration Association (accessed
September 6, 2008)
44

45

The Handbook of Texas Online - Austin, Moses (accessed August 29, 2008)
27

and economic records by Richard Lowe and Randolph Campbell found that Texas did
have a quantitative portrait that set it apart. 46
In summary, between 1850 and 1860:47
1) 75% + Texans were directly involved in farming. Texas farm production
equaled the farms of other states. 33% of Texas farms were operated by slave
owners. Slave owners in Texas were equal in numbers to other southern states.
More farmers in Texas owned their land than in any of the other southern
states.
2) The agricultural population in Texas consisted of two groups; slave owners and
non slave owners.
“Typical non slave owner in Texas”
Lived in north-central prairies or in the eastern uplands.
Native of Upper South.
Landowner in his late 30s.
In the 1850s, increased the value of his real property by more than 50%.
“Typical slave owner in Texas” Lived in the Gulf coastal plain or in the eastern timberlands.
Native of the Lower South.
Landowner in his early 40s.
In the 1850s he doubled the value of his real estate and increased the
size of his slave force.
Slave Owning Minority in Texas (33% of Texas farms):
Controlled 2/3 of agricultural property and production in state,
And grew 9/10s of all cotton in the state.
This is a higher percentage than in all other cotton producing states.
3) Cotton productivity per slave in Texas increased notably during 1850 and
1860.
Cotton productivity per slave in Texas was equal or greater than all other
southern states.
Cotton growers enjoyed substantial rates of return on their investments.
The rate of return per slave was higher in Texas than all other southern
states.
Texas farmers were self sufficient in food supply and produced surpluses.
Farming in Texas experienced rapid growth between 1850 and 1860.
Land in Texas was cheaper than other southern states as well as the cost
of slaves.
At the beginning of the Civil War, in Texas, thousands of acres of prime
cotton land was untouched.

R.G. Lowe and R. B. Campbell, 1987 “Planters & Plain Folk: Agriculture in Antebellum Texas”
Southern Methodist University Press, Dallas
46

47

Ibid
28

Glorianna Plantation: A Small Uplands Texas Plantation
Glorianna Plantation was established in Jasper County, Texas, as a cotton,
plantation, supported by slave labor in 1859. It was abandoned in 1882. Cotton
production in Texas during this time was part of a global industrial economic system,
supplying raw materials to textile industries in New England, England, and India.
The soil region where the plantation was located is called Woodville-Redco and is a
gently undulating region of loamy and clayey soil that drains poorly into the Neches
River Valley system. This is the oldest, poorest (leached of its nutrients through time)
soil type in the county, marginal soil for agriculture, and yet a plantation was
established here.
River bottom plantations are rich in renewable soils and support long term
agriculture. Upland plantations have poor soil and will support cotton agriculture for
between 5-10 years. When the soil wears out, plantations move. New land must be
purchased, new buildings built, and new lands prepared and planted. Planters wealth
was in land and slaves - not in plantation structures.
On October 12, 1859, Ehud Norsworthy purchased 180 acres, from the Obediah
Denman grant. He also purchased 225 acres from the E. Issacks grant. (405 total)
Ehud and his bride, Sara, established a homestead of one house, one barn with carriage
house attached, one well, one smokehouse, one tool shed, and one outhouse.
Ehud was a gentleman of 43 who had already sired one family when he married his 19
year old bride, Sara.
The 1860 United States Census for Jasper lists one E. Norsworthy, age 46, a farmer
with real estate valued at $6,000, and personal property valued at $12,000. Others
listed were Sara (21), Benjamin (22), George (20), Basusiophas (14), Josephine (12),
Rebecca (6), and one male infant not named. Family records record the birth of a
daughter, Lou Ehud, born on October 24, 1860.
The United States Slave Census list 1,360 slaves in Jasper County in 1860; 30
belonged to Ehud Norsworthy. Of male slaves, he owned one age 82, ten between the
ages of 52 and 17, and three under the age of 12. The 1860 Jasper County Census shows
10 slave owners who owned between 30 and 53 slaves making Norsworthy one of the
largest slave owners in the Jasper County. By definition, a planter is one who owns 20 or
more slaves. In Texas, in 1850, only 6% of slave owners were planters.

29

Figure 6
Slave Holders In Texas 1850 48
# slaves

Farmers
1
2-4

5-9

1937 2640 1585
25%

34% 20%

10-19

Planters
20-49
50-99

100-199

200-299
1

1121

374

82

9

14%

5%

1%

.o1%

94%

.001%

6%

When the American Civil War began, a company was formed in Jasper, under the
direction of B.H. Norsworthy. (This is probably Benjamin, Ehud’s son. They became
Company E. First Texas Legion, Ross’ Brigade, Jackson’s Division in the Army of
Tennessee. A member of the company was one Edwin Irwin Kellie, Known as E.I. Kellie
or Captain Kellie, the color sergeant of the regiment. At the end of the war, the flag of
Company E, was saved from surrender to the North by Kellie who wrapped it around his
body under his clothes. The flag was the greatest possession of his life and was buried
with him in 1928.
In 1864, Ehud Norsworthy died in Jasper, County. His wife Sara, received 320
acres of land of the present homestead including the houses. The rest of his land was
shared by his children.
E. I. Kellie returned from the war and married the widow Sara Norsworthy and
took over the responsibility of the homestead. He purchased the newspaper, East Texas
Clarion, and changed the name to The Jasper News-Boy. In 1882, Kellie purchased a
house in the town of Jasper and the homestead was abandoned at the time. The land
was allowed to return to forest and the wooden structures of the homestead collapsed.
The artifacts found, date within the 1850 to 1890 period.
The homestead site was excavated between 1982 and 1985. 49 The house site was
identified by a 300 year old magnolia tree, reported by Kellie descendants, to be in the
yard of the house. The area was scattered with historic artifacts. Identified was the
main house, the kitchen, the barn and one unidentified structure. A trash pile was
discovered behind the barn.

J.D.B.De Bow 1854:The industrial Resources, etc., of the Southern and Western United States: Returns
of the Census of 1850,on population, agriculture and general industry, etc., with an Appendix, Page 95
48

Few, Joan 1986 Glorianna Homestead, 41JP94: An Archaeological and Historical Explanation of a
Nineteenth Century East Texas Piney Woods Agricultural Adaptation. M.A. Thesis, University of
Houston
49

30

Figure 7
Glorianna Blueprint
Main House Surrounded By Support Buildings
Small Plantation Site Pattern

Figure 8
Artifact Pattern 41JP94
Glorianna Plantation
Kitchen
Bone
Architectural
Furniture
Arms
Clothing
Personal
Activities
Total

1113
17
3229
0
8
18
11
107
4,503

31

24.72%
.38%
71.71%
.18%
.40%
.24%
2.37%

Figure 9
Artifact Pattern Comparison Between Glorianna and Lake Jackson
Glorianna
Kitchen
Bone
Architecture
Furniture
Arms
Clothing
Personal
Activities

24.7%
.4%
71.7%
0
.18%
.4%
.24%
2.37%

LJ Main House
18.5%
7.1%
69.7%
.1%
.2%
.8%
.2%
3.1%

LJ-B
12.6%
43.7%
32.%
.3%
.4%
2.3%
.5%
2.9%

The Glorianna pattern includes all of the structures around the main house. The
Lake Jackson main house and Structure B are the main structures in the Lake Jackson
main house area. Of note also, were the way these structures met their demise. The
Lake Jackson plantation was destroyed in the 1900 hurricane. People were still living in
the main house and using the out buildings. Everything was blown out of the house
during the storm. The Glorianna plantation was abandoned and allowed to decay. The
furniture would have been removed as well as everything of value and would not be a
part of the archaeological record. We are also comparing a very large plantation
complex with a very modest small plantation.
To obtain a better understanding of patterns and artifacts, there must be
comparisons of many site with similar function. The comparison of ceramics
assemblages from five, nineteenth century farming sites was published in the TAS
Bulletin in 1988. That article is found in Appendix D

Slave and Freedmen History
The history of the slaves of Texas has been difficult to cull from general history; the
archeology, even harder. We were not able to excavate the slave quarters at the Lake
Jackson plantation because they were on city property where we were not permitted to
excavate. The slave quarters at the Glorianna plantation, we could not find. We did find
a great amount of information about the slaves at Lake Jackson in the probate records of
Abner and Margaret Jackson. Several sites have been able to explore structures
identified as slave quarters; the Levi Jordan plantation and the Varner-Hogg State
Park.
African American archeology has finally found an important place in Texas. The
2008 issue of the TAS Bulletin is focused on African American archeology. This is an
excellent introduction as the Table of Content shows. A critical question is, “What
artifacts are diagnostic of African American occupations?

32

Another resource for African American archaeology is the Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, Vol. 76, #4, April 1973, Printed by The Texas State Historical
Association. The volume covers slave and Freedmen history.

33

@G@
hÜutÇ TÜv{xÉÄÉzç

-

Figure 1 - Darragh House (41GV98) 50
In urban archeology, the city must be researched and the area being excavated
must be put into the proper context of the city. As an example of doing urban
archeology, we will look at how the Darragh House in Galveston was excavated and how
the report was written.
Pin and Ink Drawing by M.C. Lazzari, from a book by Howard Barnstone, 1965, The Galveston That
Was, Macmillan, New York, pp. 224
50

34

Galveston was built on a sandbar in the Gulf of Mexico. In hurricane territory?
One has to ask, why? Because it was the only natural deep water port between New
Orleans and Vera Cruz, Mexico. We have already mentioned early Galveston, now let’s
look at two lots on one block within the city (Lots 8 and 9 on Block 435) and how we
researched and excavated this site beginning with early Galveston history.
Early Galveston History
The Gulf of Mexico coastline formed its present shoreline and Galveston Island
about 4,500 years ago. 51 Galveston island was explored by the French, Spanish, and
Dutch during the seventeenth century, but it was claimed for Spain by the Spaniard
Hevia, who named it for the Viceroy of Mexico, Galvez. 52 By the nineteenth century,
Galveston Bay was recognized by American and European nations as a strategic location
in the Gulf of Mexico.
The human exploitation of Galveston Island has been guided by the island’s
ecological assets and liabilities. Prehistoric man utilized the mild winter climate and the
abundance of seafood; historic man utilized the natural harbor and the lure of the beach.
The lack of underground water, the difficulty in militarily defending the island, and the
island community’s vulnerability to hurricanes have been the plagues of historic
Galveston. The technologies to overcome these liabilities were not always available at
the crucial periods in Galveston’s development when they were needed.
Of primary concern, is the environmental assessment of the island itself. What did
Galveston Island have to offer in resources that could be employed in the processes of
human survival.
Galveston is a geologically young island of sand located on the northern coast of
the Gulf of Mexico at approximately 94 degrees,West, and 29 degrees, North. A barrier
island, lying parallel to the mainland, it contains on the Galveston Bay side, a deep
natural port. Europeans, in their quest for control of North America, needed harbors.
Totally dependent on ships for conquest and supplies, it is not surprising that Galveston
Island is mentioned very early in maps and communications. Between 1721 and 1900,
Galvestonians concentrated on developing the assets of the harbor as necessary to
support a large trading center.

51

Anderson 1985

Hayes, Charles W., 1974 Galveston: History of the Island and the City, Jenkins Garrett Press,
(Original manuscript; 1879, covers years 1526-1870)
52

35

N

Figure 2 - 1816 Map of Galveston
The arrow points to the deepest part of the channel between Pelican Island
and Galveston Island at 28 (feet?).
Moses Austin’s land grant included Galveston Island. In 1825 Galveston was made
a Mexican Port of Entry. William P. Harris became the collector of the port of Galveston
in 1836. Many Texas colonists sought refuge on Galveston Island during the Texas
revolution of 1835-36. The custom house of the Republic of Texas was established in
Galveston in 1837, and Gail Borden was appointed collector. 53
The revolution in Texas awakened the prospects of development and East Coast
land developers became interested in the Galveston Bay area. Michael B. Menard
purchased (for $50,000 dollars) a league and labor on the east end of Galveston
53Anderson,

Texas Burroughs, 1985, “Cognitive Structures, Status and Cultural Affiliation; The
Archaeology of Ashton Villa”, unpublished thesis, Rice University, Houston
36

Island. Colonel William Fairfax Gray claimed two sections of land which included
Laffite’s fort. The Texas Republic retained fifteen acres on the extreme east end of the
island and a block of lots for a custom house and other public buildings 54 This is the
first reference to blocks and lots in Galveston. The highest land on the island is located
near the harbor on the landward side of the island, with the highest point at Avenue A
(Water Street) and Eleventh Street. This land became the eastern portion of the city in
the first city grid.

Galveston Between 1840 and 1960
By accumulating information from an 1847 map of the city grid, a 1867 map of the
extended grid, and information from early city directories, it was possible to pinpoint
major buildings by function and identify specific business and residential areas in the
city. An unanswered question concerning the city grid, is the differentiation in block lot
alignments in the warehouse area on the west side of the city from the rest of the city. In
the warehouse district, blocks were divided into 10 lots which ran east to west.

Division of Blocks into Lots in Warehouse District
Between 29 th and 33 rd Streets
Lots Running East to West
N

Figure 4

54

Anderson 1985
37

In all other areas of the city, blocks were divided into 14 lots that ran north to
south.
To verify that this newly created walking city did utilize the most elevated land
adjacent to the harbor, it is possible to locate the elevation for each block from the
pre-1900 storm elevations found in the 1880 Sanborn Insurance maps which give the
elevation for each block they insured. The island ridge, or backbone as the locals call it,
became a major street named Broadway. The largest, most elegant homes were built on
or near the East end of Broadway. The East end of the ridge was the highest area of the
island with elevations of 6 to 7 feet above mean tide. This elevation decreases as one
moves westward. Along the seaward side (beach) of the island, large sand dunes existed
rising 15 to 16 feet in height. These formed a natural sea wall against hurricane surges.
Builders and developers cut away at the dunes until they were non existent in 1900, a
major factor in the massive damage of the 1900 storm. 55
Galveston’s commercial interest centered on shipping; importing and exporting.
Wharves were extended out into the harbor to the deeper waters of the channel. The
technology for wharf building was ample in the mid-nineteenth century, but the
technology needed for dredging deeper channels was not known at this time. 56 Space
was available for the building of warehouses to store incoming and outgoing goods.
Between 1837 and 1860, Galveston became the gateway to Texas.
Prior to 1854, the waterfront properties in Galveston were in the hands of private
owners and shippers. In 1854, the Galveston Wharf and Cotton Press Company was
formed by consolidating the individual wharf companies. This was a semi-public
company with one-third of the stock being held by the city. 57 As steamboats replaced
sailing ships, the wharves were extended farther into the Galveston channel. A
Galveston visitor in 1857, remarked that speculation in real estate was astronomical and
the building boom astonishing. 58 An 1867 map by R.C. Trimble and William Lindset,
shows the Galveston Wharf and Cotton Press Company controlling twenty blocks of
harbor shore line west of 31 st Street. The railroad controlled eight blocks for two
separate depots near the Wharf Company warehouses. Three separate cotton press
company’s were listed: Shipper’s Cotton Press, Merchants Cotton Press, and Factor’s
Cotton Press.
Industries in Galveston were few due to a lack of fresh water. Two iron foundries,
a rope factory, a soap factory, and book binders and publishers were listed before the
Civil War. 59
55

Anderson 1985

56

Fornell, Earl Wesley, 1961 The Galveston Era , University of Texas Press , Austin

57

Ibid

58

Houston Telegraph, May 25, 1857

59

Fornell 1961
38

During this period, the city government may have encouraged physical
improvements but neglected vital matters such as sanitation and the enforcement of
port quarantines. Quarantines were bad for business. A “laissez faire” attitude
prevailed. Yellow fever epidemics frequently ravaged Galveston, the worst ones being in
1858, 1844, and 1853. Prior to 1860, the infant mortality rate was almost fifty percent. 60
In the 1850s, ships ran weekly between Galveston and New York, Boston and New
Orleans. The Galveston Bremen Line operated five vessels between Texas and Bremen,
Germany, which explains the large (about 40%) German population of Galveston.
Eleven foreign nations maintained consular representatives in Galveston. 61
Galveston’s streets were paved with shell and watered daily. It might be assumed
that salt water was used for street watering for water was an expensive commodity.
Residents stored rain water in cisterns and roof top tanks. Water had to be imported
from the mainland as well as top soil. It was not until the 1890s that water was piped in
from the mainland.
The Civil War rang the death knoll of Galveston as a major Texas city. It exposed
the liabilities of the island system, primarily, its vulnerability. Galveston could not be
easily defended militarily and was exposed to the constant threat of hurricanes.
Galveston did not have the technical ability to build hurricane proof bridges, specifically
railroad bridges, necessary to make it the hub of a mercantile system. It lacked water.
Galveston was expendable. It became a spur line to Houston.
62Houston

had none of the problems inherent to Galveston, and it had a vast
amount of land for exploitation. By 1860, Texas had 400 miles or railroad connecting
cotton producing areas and their markets. In 1860, a bridge from Galveston to the main
land was completed. Before that time, Galveston had rail line on the island, connecting
wharves and warehouses, but they were intra island. After the Civil War, as commerce
resumed, cotton was sent from Houston to Galveston for shipment, but investors could
see the assets of Houston. Galvestonians such as Thomas William House and William
Marsh Rice began to shift their warehouse facilities from Galveston to Houston during
the Civil War. Galveston’s port traffic declined steadily between 1860 and 1900 as
railroads connected Texas to the United States, and Houston developed its deep water
port. By 1890, it is estimated that half of the cotton produced in North Texas went East
by rail and manufactured goods made the return trip, bypassing Galveston.

60

Fornell 1961

61

Fornell 1961

62

Fornell 1961
39

In 1865, the Galveston Medical College was founded. Little did Galvestonians
realize, that one hundred years later it would be the largest single employer of persons
on Galveston Island, a major sustainer of the Galveston economy. 63
Between 1865 and 1900, Galveston on the surface, seemed to be surviving and
Galvestonians were utilizing the available technologies to make their lives more
comfortable. A great deal of wealth was accumulated and beautiful homes were built on
the east end of Galveston, along and to the north of Broadway. Ashton Villa, a major
modern day tourist attraction, was built on Broadway between Twenty Third and
Twenty Fourth Streets in 1859, and was enlarged during the Victorian period. Gas lights
were installed in Galveston just prior to the Civil War and served seventy clients. The
gas was produced from coal from Liverpool. 64
In the late 1800’s, water was still a primary problem for Galveston. Rain water was
still collected in roof top tanks and cisterns. A water train ran from Houston to
Galveston daily. A fire of massive proportions to the central town business district in
1885, focused attention on the need for a pumped water system. An attempt was made
in 1891, to drill an artesian well on Galveston Island. After several attempts and
reaching a depth of 1500 feet, they were unsuccessful. 65 Galveston then turned to a
much more expensive solution to its water problem, that of piping it from the mainland.
In June of 1892, Frank Holly of The Holly Manufacturing Co., Builders of the Holly
System of Water Works, contracted with the water commissioners, of the City of
Galveston to install a pumped water system. L. H. Peck drew up the plans for the
location of valves, hydrants, and mains in 1896. The main pipeline to the mainland was
to rest on the floor of Galveston Bay.
The location of the mains, gives a very clear picture of how Galvestonians ranked
their space. All blocks between Eighth Street and Twenty Ninth Street (east to west) and
the Harbor to Avenue M (north to south) got water. These blocks contained the main
residential areas, the government buildings, the commerce district, and the wharf front,
and is the same area defined by the original city grid. The Darragh House lies within
this area. The lack of one hundred percent water coverage in the warehouse district is
interesting due to the fact that a water system was as important to fire control as it was
to human consumption. A sewage system was not incorporated into this water system. 66
Galveston was the first city in Texas to have telephones and electricity. At the end
of the century, she was still a major port in Texas, had more wealthy citizens than other
Texas cities, and bragged of her culture, but in population, she had fallen behind
Houston, Dallas and San Antonio.

63 McComb, David G. 1986 Galveston: A History, University of Texas Press, Austin
64

Anderson 1985

65

Rosenburg Library Records, City of Galveston Records and McComb, 1986

66

Rosenburg Library Records, City of Galveston Records.
40

The great storm of 1900 has been well documented. The loss of life was in the
thousands, and property loss in the millions. On Thursday morning, September 27,
1900, The Houston Daily Post published a map showing the destruction of Galveston.
Two of the papers staff members spent a week following the hurricane, walking and
mapping the destruction.

Figure 5
Location of Darragh House 41GV98
Map Showing Changes Made by 1900 Storm 67
If Galveston was going to survive, it was going to have to rebuild, and find a way to
protect itself. The plans began almost immediately to build a sea wall, in essence,
replace the sand dunes which had once served that purpose. The protection plan
included a sea wall, a grade raising (from a few inches to eleven feet) and a bridge to the
mainland that would assist in evacuation. The bridge, finished in 1912, included two
railways, rails for the Houston-Galveston Interurban, a thirty inch water main and a
nineteen foot road bed for cars. 68
Galveston County constructed the sea wall and the State of Texas made relief funds
available and gave other economic assistance for the grade raising. The U.S. Army, to
Walden, Don 1990 “Raising Galveston”, American Heritage of Invention and Technology,
Winter 1990, Volume 5/ Number 3, pp. 8
67

68

Fornell, 1961
41

protect Fort Crockett, extended the wall to Fifty Third Street. The railroads and the
Interurban paid 75% of the bridge cost with Galveston County paying 25%.

Figure 6 - The Raising of Galveston
Galveston on two levels: the area at the right has already been raised; on the
left, the houses are lifted and ready but the land is still low. 69
The sea wall turned Galveston’s attention to the Island’s other exploitable natural
resource, the beach. The sea wall became a tourist attraction itself. The opening of the
causeway in 1912, made it possible to drive to Galveston for a day on the beach as well as
the convenience of the Interurban. The Interurban offered hourly service between
Houston and Galveston for a round trip fare of $2. 70 The sea wall also opened new areas
for development and a safer environment for permanent residences and investments.
The hurricanes of 1909, and 1915, put the wall to the test. The wall stood and though
Galveston received major property damage, there was minimal loss of human life.
Galveston’s shift was away from its failing port to the development of the beach
and a tourist industry. The laissez-faire attitude still prevailed even though a change in
city government, to a commissioner form, had occurred after the 1900 storm. The city
69

Walden, 1990 pp17

70

McComb 1986
42

turned a blind eye to the profitable enterprises of prostitution, liquor, and gambling. In
1934, there was 1 prostitute for every 62 persons in Galveston as compared to 1:960 in
London, 1:481 in Paris and 1:250 in Tokyo. In 1955, when George Roy Clough was
elected mayor of Galveston, he declared that prostitution was a biological necessity for a
seaport, and declared his support for a wide-open town. 71
When prohibition began in 1918, Galveston used its port to distribute illegal liquor
through out the United States. There were two major gangs of Galveston bootleggers,
the downtown gang and the beach gang. The Maceo family from Italy, were the kingpins
of Galveston gambling. 72 Galveston was illegal, but it was attracting tourists.
In 1956, Will Wilson was elected State Attorney General. To him, gambling was
the core of lawlessness and Galveston was a symbol of vice in the state. Wilson declared
a personal war on the Maceo empire. Through confiscation and destruction of gambling
paraphernalia, and felony gambling charges, the free state of Galveston ceased to exist. 73
Galveston faced total dependence on the outside world for survival. A legal tourist
industry had to be encouraged and other sources of employment potentials had to be
courted. The largest single employer in Galveston in 1955, was The University of Texas
Medical Branch, providing twenty percent of the island’s income. Four percent of
Galveston’s income was through the American National Insurance Company, a Moody
family holding. The Galveston Independent School District was the third largest
employer. 74
Tourist were attracted to the beach, but they had to be encouraged to stop in
Galveston on the way to and from the beach and linger awhile. This was done through
private development and community effort. George Mitchell filled the developmental
role, revitalizing the Victorian strand as a tourist attraction. The Galveston Historical
Foundation, founded in 1957, as a non-profit organization with dues paying members,
focused on the importance of historic structures in Galveston and their place in the
tourist industry. The City of Galveston in 1971, enacted special zoning ordinances so
that the East End Historical District and the Silk Stocking Historical District could be
created. The City also created the Historical District Board to administer the historical
districts. Board members are appointed by the City Council to serve three year terms.
In 1974, the United States Government, passed the Housing and Community
Development Act to aid and assist in historic preservation greatly encouraging the
success of historic districts.
In 1976, a report was prepared for the City of Galveston by the Galveston Historical
Foundation on the status of the historic districts and their attempts at neighborhood
71

McComb 1986

72

Ibib

73

Ibid

74

Ibid
43

conservation. The report states that the social demography of the historic districts is
changing. Increased values have resulted in more middle income family dwellings
within the districts. Rental landlords, enticed by the profits of higher prices, have
frequently selected to sell off their property resulting in a filtering out of lower income
renters. Some rental landlords have opted to upgrade their structures to take advantage
of higher income renters. Residence of long duration in the districts have upgraded
their homes to keep up with the neighborhood improvements. The districts are
decreasing in elderly residence and increasing in children. Households below poverty
level are decreasing. 75

Darragh House Excavations: Lots 8 and 9 on Block 435, Galveston
In 1986, the Houston Archeological Society was ask to join the Archeological
Society of Galveston in the excavations of Darragh House owned by the Galveston
Historical Foundation. Our fist questions were; “Why should an excavation take place?”
and, “What could be learned?” The house is located in the area of Galveston which has
the highest natural elevation above sea level (approximately 7 feet above mean tide).
One of the oldest recorded Euro-American settlements on the island, is within a few
blocks of the Darragh House location, therefore it was possible that cultural evidence of
Euro-American occupation could be contained within the area proposed for excavation.
Galveston Island formed as a barrier island long after people came to North America,
therefore is was possible that evidence of Native American occupation, prior to the
historic development of the island, could be discovered.
The economic and social history of Galveston is well documented, therefore,
important questions could be addressed toward the daily lives of people within the
Galveston system.
The assumptions made in the research design include:
1) Elevation is a determining factor in land selection and preference.
2) In urban communities, sheet middens (thin scatters of trash generated on the
currently occupied ground surface that reflect the activities of the people during that
time period) do exist to a degree capable of:
a) identify artifact patterns, and
b) identify changes in artifact patterns that reveal urban cycles and economic
shifts.
3) Individual urban house holds will reflect much larger economic system.
4) The history of urban Galveston can be explained as an interaction between culture
and environment.
The Island of Galveston offers a hostile environment for settlement. Galveston
Island had an inadequate fresh water supply, no top soil, lacks building materials, is
vulnerable to hurricanes, and is hard to defend militarily. With these liabilities, how

75

1976, Historic Districts and Neighborhood Conservation Report
44

much of the energy of an urban system will be deflected from the development and
maintenance of an economic system to the activities necessary for living on the island?
The Darragh House was located on Block 435, lots 8 and 9, on the corner of
Church Street and 15th Street.

Figure 7 - The Red Dot Shows The Darragh House Location
45

History of the Darragh Family
John L. Darragh was born in Antrim County, Ireland, and immigrated with his
parents to America. He grew up in Philadelphia and went into the grocery business.
Records differ on when he arrived in Galveston. Some sources say in 1839, some 1843.
Soon after arriving in Galveston, he was elected justice of the peace for Galveston
County and was referred to as Judge Darragh. He married is first wife, Ellen Howes, in
1842 and they had four sons; one son, John, lived to adulthood. Darragh served as an
Alderman of the City of Galveston in 1848 and 1849. In 1875, The Gulf, Colorado, and
Santa Fe Railway Company issued capital stock. On December 11, 1875, Darragh, was
issued certificate No. 126, for 10 shares, and was invited to the meeting of Galveston
corporations held on Dec. 23, 1874, as a representative of the Galveston City Company.76
On July 25, 1878, his wife obtained a divorce and a partition of the property. 77
In 1879, he married Susan Earles who bore him one son and died in childbirth in
1880. She was 50 years his junior and he supposedly boarded her out in a “miserable
house.” At this time he was in his 80s.
Less than a year later in 1881, he married his third wife, Miss Laura Leonard, again
a woman “50 years his junior.” They were married in her parents home in Luling,
Texas, and it was several days after returning to Galveston from their wedding trip that
Darragh acknowledged their marriage. He moved her into his house on Winnie Street
between 24th and 25th Streets, which is described as an “assignation house,” a house of
prostitution. Laura bore him three sons; Albert Mills, Charles Leonard, and Frederick E.
78

Darragh was President of the Galveston Wharf Company when he built his house
for Laura in 1886. He apparently combined two existing smaller houses and added two
towers and a cupola. A Greek Revival portico of six columns was added to tie the two
buildings together. Alfred Muller was the architect and Nicholas Clayton apparently
served as consultant and supervisor. Nicholas Clayton also designed the impressive
cast-iron fence which runs on the east and south sides of the house and connects to a
brick and cast iron fence on the north side of lots 8 and 9. 79
The architect’s drawings, titled “Mrs. J. L. Darragh Residence,” show first floor
rooms labeled parlor, rear parlor, sitting room and rear hall. Second floor plans called

76

http://www.atsfry.com/splinters/Volume07/spv0774.htm

77

Darragh Papers, Galveston and Texas History Center, Rosenberg Library, Galveston

78

Darragh Papers, Rosenberg Library

79

1966 Barnstone, Howard The Galveston That Was , Macmillan Co, New York, pp.149
46

Figure 8
Darragh House Fence Design 80
for two bedrooms, a boys’ room and a spare room. The two story west wing of the house
is not labeled, but is assumed to be the kitchen facilities with servants’ quarters above.
Darragh was an astute business man although slovenly in his personal habits, had
no friends or confidants, was reticent, and did not visit others socially or receive guests.
After his second wife died, leaving him with an infant son, he hired a wet nurse who
complained that he often failed to provide her any food to eat while living in his house
and caring for his son.81

80
81

Ibid, pp 150
Darragh Papers, Rosenberg Library
47

It was following the move to Darragh House that complaints begin to surface of his
very strange behavior. On December 26, 1888, a court declared John L. Darragh to be
insane. During an investigation on the contents of his will in March of 1893, various
persons testified that in general, Darragh was “eccentric.” There was a difference of
opinion regarding his sanity, but general consensus was that he begin to lose his mental
abilities about 1886. 82

Excavation Method
Galveston Island is a unique area for urban, cultural, and economic studies
because we have documented several important survival factors:
1) the economic focus shifts with changes in land elevations and those changes
should be reflected in the changes in debris deposits, before and after the land
fills following the 1900 storm.
2) Galveston Island is a limited parcel of land. The city proper cannot expand at
will and must shift and adjust to changing economic needs.
3) There are rigid environmental constraints most specifically seen in the lack of
fresh water, building materials, and natural resources which must all be
imported.
Our objective, in this research, was to look a what had been left by previous
Galvestonians on lots 8 and 9 of Block 435. How many people lived or worked in this
space? When was it occupied and what activities took place at his site? We begin with a
chain of title (Figure 9). This chain of title was research by Dianna Rasmuessen of the
Rosenberg Library in 1986.
What archeologist really study is space. We view our lives in working and living
spaces and we leave behind remnants (artifacts and site patterns) of our activities within
those spaces. Excavations must be designed to expose occupational spaces, even when
they are stacked one on top of the other, to reveal the past. A space in an urban area is a
fragment of a larger economic system of that urban area.
For the Darragh House excavations, excavation units were placed in as systematic
a grid as possible using one yard square excavation units (Figure 10). The prime
meridian of the site is the fence line on 15th Street. The site equator runs along the
south fence line. Excavation units were numbered by their southeast corners. The site
datum was a small black dot located on the north-west corner of the largest portion of
the base of the south-east fence corner post. This datum point measured the vertical
(depth) location (provenience) of all artifacts in each excavation unit. Arbitrary levels
were 1/10 of a foot in depth to show changes over time in the sheet middens of artifacts.
Sheet middens refer to the trash that is deposited in domestic and commercial areas.

82

Darragh Papers
48

Figure 9 - Chain of Title

49

Site Datum
Figure 10
Darragh House Excavation Plan
East Fence is Site Meridian - South Fence is Site Equator

50

All records were kept on level forms. Artifacts were grouped and recorded on the
forms using Stanley South’s method of artifact pattern recognition reflecting universal
human behavior. 83
Excavation was hampered by existing structures, construction debris which could
not be moved, and vagrants. Three excavation units that were under the house were
used by vagrants causing damage to the unit walls; they were sleeping in the units.
These three excavation units (under the house) also received a heavy runoff of
water during a brief but intense thunderstorm while those units were open. For these
reasons, these three units were abandoned and filled with available rubble and
excavation backfill. The information from these units will be used where applicable.
1888 to The Present
The current ground surface reflects the Darragh House between 1888 and the
present. The Darragh House did not receive any land fill following the 1900 storm.
Mrs. Darragh had already brought in fill, and the Darragh House land surface was
higher than those lots surrounding it. The sidewalk and fence are in their original
location. In the North Wall Profile of 7W/11N ( Figure 11), the rich river bottom alluvial
fill imported by Mrs. Darragh reaches a depth of about 1.5 feet.

Figure 11
North Wall Profile of Unit
7W/11N

83

South, Stanley 1977 Method and Theory in Historical Archeology Academic Press, N.Y.
51

The same approximate depth can be seen in the West Wall Profile of 15W/4N
(Figure 12). Below the house was sand fill of equal depth, which also included a large
quantity of construction debris or recent deposit. We are assuming that around the
house and in lots 10 and 11, this fill will be consistent.

Figure 12
West Wall Profile of Unit 15 W/ 4N

52

Between the north side of the house and the 8 foot high wall running along the
north side of the property, the Darragh’s had an oyster shell driveway. A 1889 Sanborn
insurance map shows the Darragh House footprint (site pattern) after the Darraghs had
enlarged and changed the house.
Figure 13
1889 Sanborn Insurance Map
N

Oyster Drive

Darragh House

53

Between the driveway and the wall, there was a strip of about one yard. We decided
to add additional excavation units to explore this area. These additional units on the
North side of the property are shown in Figure 14. We also closed out two units under
the house that had been damaged by vagrants (they were sleeping in the units).

Figure 14
Changes in Site Plan

54

Unit 15W/38N, was the first unit excavated in the drive area. The South wall
profile of the unit gave us a clear view of the drive and the deposits (Figure 15).

Figure 15
15W/38N South Wall Profile
The top five inches contained dark soil and had a heavy concentration of 20th
century artifacts. Most were functional, inexpensive items relating to daily living and
food preparation. A very ornate metal border had settled down into the soil between the
oyster shells and the soil. During the Darragh period, this could have contained
decorative plants and was later used as a trash dump when the property was boarding
houses and apartments in the early 20th century. About 6 inches of soil, accumulated

55

during the twentieth century, covered the oyster driveway. Oyster shells have a
tendency to settle over time and if not replenished, will loose elevation.
Below the 20th century deposit, we see the three layers that represent the Darragh
house oyster shell driveway; the large oyster shells at a depth of about a foot, a deposit
of crushed oyster shell and a deposit of sand. Below this oyster shell drive were found
artifacts dating to the nineteenth century.
To the west of unit 15W/38N, was uncovered a brick foundation and base of what
appears to be an outhouse, against the north wall at the north west corner of lot 9. It
was partially destroyed by a trench dug before 1986, when the land was purchased by
the Galveston Historical Foundation (possibly for water runoff). This “two seater”
appears to have drained into the alley, or into a receptacle located below the ground in
the alley. A city sewer and water system had not been installed at the time the Darragh
House was constructed. This could have been a very well built “necessary” used by the
Darragh family. The cistern located on the Sanborn Map of 1889 would also have been
used by the Darragh family during this period.
20th Century Artifact Pattern
The first seven levels (1/10 of a foot for each level) reflect the debris that
accumulated between the time that fill was deposited by Mrs. Darragh and the present.
Those artifacts give us the 20th century artifact pattern.
Figure 16
41GV98
20th Century Artifact Pattern for Levels 1-7
Artifact Group

Number

%

Kitchen

936

21%

Bone

59

1%

Architecture

3028

68%

Furniture

1

Arms

11

0.20%

Clothing

15

0.30%

Personal

42

0.50%

Activity

356

8%

Total

4485

56

The kitchen artifacts were broken fragments of items used in food preparation and
food containers, including bottle glass. Bones represented meals utilizing pork and beef.
Architecture materials included fragments of slate roofing, broken window glass, brick
fragments, etc. Arms included one small hand gun located in 15W/4N, shell cases and
pellets. Clothing included buttons, fragments of fasteners and hooks. Personal items
included small coins, keys and toy fragments. All unidentified metal objects were
counted under activities. Also, car parts give evidence of car repair activities in the area
between the house and the north wall, as well as car parts in the trash midden.
These artifacts are not unique or unusual for a twentieth century assemblage.
Samples were kept of architectural materials, but all broken architectural fragments and
unidentifiable rusty fragments were discarded. Kitchen, bone, arms, clothing and
personal artifacts are curated at the Galveston County Museum.
It is time to look at all the excavation levels; Figure 17.

Figure 17
Artifact Distribution
by Levels

57

Below the Darragh dirt fill, foundation structures, artifact distributions, dirt
similarities and artifact quantities by functional groups indicate that levels 18-20
represent a distinct occupation. The base of the foundation piers supporting the oldest
portion of the house are at the same depth as the foundation referred to as “the yellow
brick road” discovered in units 4-6W/35N (Figure 18). The brick cistern below the
house contains some of these same sulfur colored bricks and is probably contemporary
in construction time. A border (very possibly a flower bed border due to its curved
shape) was found in 7W/23N at this same depth (levels 18-20).

Figure 18

6W/36N
5W/36N
Looking North, Yellow Brick Foundation Under Oyster Drive

58

Figure 19
1871 Map of Galveston
Yellow Brick Foundation

This structure?

The only whole bottle found during the excavations came out of the sand floor of
the yellow brick structure. It had the shape of a European wine bottle of the mid
nineteenth century.
Two large structural nails with cedar wood attached were also associated with the
yellow brick foundation and may indicate a wooden structure. The yellow brick was
certainly not strong enough to support a brick structure. The artifacts contained suggest
a large amount of food preparation, which may suggest a kitchen for the main house.
Because of the fire danger, kitchens were often a distance from the house. In the 1971
map, it appears to be a two story structure and may have also housed servants.

59

Middle Nineteenth Century Galveston Pattern
In levels 18-20, everything came together to suggest that this area was the pre
Darragh pattern. The base of the foundations of the original house, the yellow brick
foundation, the yellow bricks in the cistern under the house, the curved border
suggesting a flower bed boarder, and the soil types and colors all matched.

Figure 20
Middle Nineteenth Century Galveston Pattern
(Within the 1845-1884 Period)
Levels 18-20
Artifact Group

Number

%

Kitchen

50

4%

Bone

68

5%

Architecture

766

58%

Furniture

0

Arms

0

Clothing

7

0.20%

Personal

4

0.10%

Activity

417

31.70%

Total

1312

60

Figure 21
Artifact Distribution for Levels 18-20
The site pattern for levels 18-20, shows the main components and what ties them
together; they are on the same level surface, they contain the same soil types and colors,
the yellow bricks show up in the outbuilding foundation and the cistern. The
outbuilding was probably the kitchen and the dense artifact deposit along the north
property line was probably the kitchen trash area. This was a time before the city had
garbage pickup and disposing of trash along property lines was a common practice.

61

Figure 22
Artifact Distribution for Levels 21-28
The artifacts form the site pattern for these lower levels. We did not find any
structural features. The soil was very sandy and because of tides, there was water
moving in and out of the ground during tide levels. Percolation of artifacts up and down
in the soil could be very high, making identification of levels difficult.

62

Figure 23
Artifacts Patterns For Three Levels of 41GV98

Early Galveston

Middle 19th Century

20th Century.

Artifact Group

Levels 21-28

Levels 18-20

Levels 1-6

Kitchen

19%

4%

21%

Bone

7%

5%

1%

Architecture

39%

58%

68%

Furniture

0

0

0

Arms

0

0

0.20%

Clothing

1%

0.20%

0.30%

Personal

1%

0.10%

0.50%

Activity

33%

31.70%

8%

Total Artifacts

2458

1312

4485

Our conclusions and summary will be part of our workshop discussion.

The best find I have saved for last. In units 12W/35N, under the oyster drive we
found what we think is part of a boat. (Figures 24 & 25)

63

Figure 24
12W/35N
Levels 35 and 36

Figure 25
12W/35N
Levels 35 and 36

The shape is more visible in Figure 25. We had to stop excavating because we were
below the tide level. When the tide was in, the units filled, and when the tide was out we worked in mud. All of the wood we could see (we did not disturb this feature) had the
same width and curved in the form of a boat. The left side shows the frame.
Is it a boat?
64

Bibliobraphy For Chapter 4
1895

History of Texas : Galveston Biography, Woodson Research Center
(F386.H7)

Anderson, Texas Burroughs
1985
“Cognitive Structures, Status and Cultural Affiliation; The Archaeology of
Ashton Villa,” unpublished thesis, Rice University
Barnstone, Howard
1965
The Galveston That Was, Macmillan, New York
Beasley, Ellen
1976
“Historic Districts and Neighborhood Conservation,” Prepared for the City of
Galveston by the Galveston Historical Foundation
Cable, Carole
1981
Architecture and Planning in Galveston, Texas, Monticello Ill. Architecture
Series: Bibliography
Darragh, John
Collected papers. 27-0044, Boxes 3 and 4, Rosenberg Galveston and Texas
History Center, Galveston.
Ellis, Michael J.
1986
The Hurricane Almanac, Caribbean Blue, Inc. Corpus Christi
Epperson, Jean L.
1986
“Early Custom Houses of Galveston,” Journal Houston Archeological Society,
#85, August, 1986, pp 8
Fornell, Earl Wesley
1961
The Galveston Era, University of Texas Press, Austin
Galveston City Directories
1883-1978
Galveston City Directory
1860
The Galveston Gas Works Company Report
Galveston County Deed Records
1838-1921
Book A248 and 217; Book B1/11, 392 and 405; Book E, 29 336,498;
Book F, 373; Book N, 89; Book P,301; Book 5, 399; Book 29, 401; Book
35, 512; Book 331, 318; Book 343, 303; Book 394, 229

65

Galveston County Tax Records, 1871, 72
Galveston Daily News
1871
June 6-8
1896
July 22
1990
September 10
1990
October 1
Galveston Historical Society
1951
Historic Galveston Homes
Galveston, Shipper’s Digest
1934
Shipper’s Digest of Galveston
Garner, John C.
1966
Historical American Buildings Survey, Collected Workpapers, Box 2ff16,
Rosenberg Galveston and Texas History Center, Galveston
Hardy, D. H. and Roberts, I.D.
1910
Historical Review of Southeast Texas, Lewis Publishing Company, Chicago
Hayes, Charles W.
1974
Galveston: History of the Island and the City, Jenkins Garrett Press, Original
manuscript, 1897, covers years 1526 - 1870
Hooton, Charles
1847
St. Louis’ Isle, or Texiana, Simmonds and Ward, London, Government Pub.
Microfilm (F3 reel 1)
Insurance Board Records
Block 435, lots 8-11, Rosenberg Library
Kempner, Isaac Herbert
1961
Recalled Recollections: An Autobiography,Egan Co, Dallas
McComb, David G.
1986
Galveston: A History, University of Texas Press, Austin
Mealy, William
1978
An Album of Old-Time Postcards From Houston and Galveston,
Corona Pub. Co, San Antonio
Miller, Robert
1929
“History of Galveston’s Water Supply,” Galveston Tribune, May 25, 1929
Miner, Ralph W.
66

1969

Conservation of Historic and Cultural Resources, American Society of
Planning Officials, P.A.S. Report 244, Chicago

Ousley, Clarence
1900
Galveston in Nineteen Hundred, W.C. Chase Co. Atlanta, GA
Rabinowitz, Howard N.
“Southern Urban Development, 1860-1900.” In The City in Southern
History: The Growth of Urban Civilization in the South, Edited by B.A.
Brownell, and D.R. Goldfield, Kennikat Press, Port Washington, N.Y.
online at http://books.google.com/books?
Reed, Thomas J.
1969
Land Use Controls In Historic Areas, Article in Notre Dame Lawyer, Vol. 44,
No. 3, Feb. 1969, Reprinted by the National Trust for Historic Preservation,
Washington, D.C. 1969
Still, Bayrd
1974
Urban America: A History With Documents, Little Brown, Boston
U.S. Census
1960
Galveston County Texas
Webb, Walter Prescott
1952
Handbook of Texas, Austin, The Texas State Historical Assn. pp. 78,69,666
Wheeler, Kenneth W.
1969
To Wear A City’s Crown; The Beginning of Urban Growth in Texas,
1845-1865, Harverd University Press, Cambridge

Web Sites of Interest
http://www.galvestonhistory.org/Lost_Galveston.asp (Galveston Historical
Foundation

http://www.eastendgalveston.org/EEHDA_WALKING_TOUR.pdf (East End Historic
District)
http://www.gthcenter.org/collections/photos/special1.htm (Galveston and Texas
History Center, Photo Albums & Special Collections)

67

@H@
Xåvtätà|ÉÇá |Ç [|áàÉÜ|v TÜv{xÉÄÉzç
Planning An Excavation?
Step one is to select a site that meets certain criteria.
Will excavation answer valid research questions? What do you want to learn
from this site? Excavating to see what you can find is not valid.
Remember, we destroy what we study. We cannot return a site to its
pre-excavation status.
Can you get permission to excavate the site.? If privately owned, will the
owner give you written permission? The artifacts will belong to the site
owner; where will the artifacts go when research is complete? Sites on
public property require a state permit and a professional archaeologist.
What is the site integrity? A site that has 100% integrity has not been
disturbed in any way. A site with 0% integrity has been so disturbed
that excavation will not contribute any usable information.
Is the site about to be destroyed by natural or development processes?
Is the site safe for excavation?
Does the person responsible for the excavation
have the training to carry out planning the project, excavation,
artifact analysis and report writing?
A site has been selected, and the owner has given written permission. The next
step, is doing the historic research. Research the “Bulletin” of TAS for information about
historic sites in your area and sites similar to the one you are researching. Visit the local
museum, the county museum, the local library and find out what is known about this
site. Look into probate records, county records, tax records, census records, all public
records. Research old newspapers. Search for family members who may have letters,
Bibles, family records. Search the web! Become familiar with the Texas State Archives,
and the Daughters of the Republic of Texas Library. Most of all, talk to people network! Talk to local historians; let people know what information you are looking for.
When working with documents, a word of caution; is the document authentic?
Is the date correct? Is the writer of the documented identified? Is the information in
the document correct? Does it agree with other documents?
When you have obtained enough information about the site to determine whether
or not the site contains important information, then it is time to do a site survey to see
what is visible on the surface. Most historical sites are shallow and most will have some
ruins and artifacts on the surface. Taking what information you have from your research
and surface survey, develop your research questions. Your research questions will
determine your excavation plans.

68

Research Questions at 41BO172: Lake Jackson State Archeological
Landmark.
The Lake Jackson site was one of the largest plantations on the Brazos River. Only
the Varner-Hogg plantation had been research with a focus on the sugar mill and a
slave structure. We had many research questions that we wanted to explore.
Questions:
1.
2.
3.
4.

How did the plantation system really work? How did the sugar and cotton
plantations of the Brazos River valley area differ from other plantations in Texas
and in the Antebellum South? How were they the same?
How were the plantation structures built? What buildings were related to each
other by their activities? What activities occurred outside of buildings?
How self sufficient was this plantation system? How many artifacts are
imported and how many appear to be hand made?
How was space used? Where everything was located at the site is critical to
understanding a plantation economic and social system. The allocation of space
indicates economic and social priorities and stratification.

Is excavation different in historic archeology?
Excavation is basically the same. Using any text on field methods will give you the
proper excavation techniques.
One major difference is the use of feet and yards instead of the metric system
Why? Because our past structures in Texas, beginning in the American colonial period,
used the British measurements in building construction. So, we excavate in yard
squares instead of metric squares.

How to make a perfect yard square
excavation unit.

Figure 1

69

We use the 3-4-5 method. With this method, you can use English tapes (foot = 12
increments) or the Civil Engineers tapes (foot equals 10 increments). Triangulating
three tapes at three feet, four feet and five feet gives you a perfect right angle at corner B
(the corner of 3 feet and 4 feet). Place your corner markers in the three corners of your
unit at A, B and C (this gives you 2 three foot walls of your unit); then move your tapes
to get a right angle at corner D across from B.
To check to make sure your square is perfect, you check your distances between the
four corners. If you are using English rulers (12 increments to the foot), your distance
between A and C or B and D will be 50.91” (51 will do). If you are using Civil Engineers
tapes (10 increments to the foot) then you will have 42.3”.

Reading A Civil Engineers Stadia Rod

Figure 2
Reading A Civil Engineers Stadia Rod

70

Archeologists use transits and stadia rods to take depth measurements at the site
and to insure that excavation units are level across the site. The Civil Engineers stadia
rod will be divided into feet, tenths of feet and hundredths of feet. The bars will have
arrows or lines directing you to the key points in each foot. Notice that the #2 is in bold
and is larger than the other numbers. This is 2 feet. Between the 2 and the small 1
represents 1/10th of a foot. The beginning of the foot will always be at the top of a bar as
seen here, the middle of the foot (.50) will always be at the bottom of a bar. Each bar
and each space represents a 10/100th of a foot.

Figure 3
Reading the Stadia Rod Through The Transit

Now you are looking through your transit and you see the stadia rod. There are
three lines. For depth measurements one always reads the middle line. What is this
reading? Note that the 3 is in a larger bolder lettering than the 1. This indicates that the
3 is three feet and the 1 reads 3.10. This reading is almost 3.04 so we will round up to
3.04. The short lines on the right side of the bars denote 5 and 10 increments.

How To Fill Out Level Forms
A historic site will be divided into a grid system of 3 foot excavation units. Each
unit and each level will have a level form. Each unit gives the spacial context of the

71

artifacts. Where at the site were they found. Each level gives a temporal context; the
deeper the level, the older the artifact.
Each level form must be filled out completely.
On line 1 is found the site # (the trinomial of state # (41) County code and site
number in the county. All states in the U.S. use this system. The unit number is the SW
corner of your excavation unit. Your SW corner designates your unit’s horizontal
location on the grid system. Your level # reflects the depth of your unit. Levels can be
as small as an 1/10th of a foot to one half of a foot using 10 increments to the foot.
Don’t forget to record the date.

72

On line 2 the level depth is recorded - the actual measurements of the beginning of
the level and the end of the level: example 1.5 feet to 2 feet. (Remember that the reading
from the stadia rod is subtracted from the site datum.) The recorder is the person filling
out the level form.
Beginning and Ending Depths are recorded for every level; the four corners and
center.
If a photo is taken, record what was photographed, the film # and picture # and the
name of the photographer. It is recommended that a photo be taken at the bottom of
each level.
Record everyone who worked on the level.
The bag # is very important. This is the record of the artifacts that have been
collected for the level. How many bags of artifacts were collected and mark them 1/4,
2/4, 3/4, and 4/4.- if there are four. If the matrix was screened (which is
recommended) be sure to record the size of the screen.
Before the bags are turned in, the artifacts are counted by their type. Note that
they are also subdivided into types within their group. These categories can the changed
according to the type of site you are researching. For comparison purposes, the groups
should always be the same.
When describing your soil, take a small piece of the soil and make a mark with it
on your level form; even when doing a Munsell reading.

Piece Plotting
On the back of the level form will be a grid of your three foot by three foot unit.
Piece plotting is recording the location of the artifacts found “in situ” (in place).
Behavior patterns are derived from the functions of the artifacts found, how many of
them are found and their association with other artifacts. Location is very important
and the location of most artifacts will be plotted with vertical (depth below datum) and
horizontal (location in the unit) provenience. Note that each corner is marked with the
coordinates of the site grid

Figure 5
Piece Plotting

73

Words of caution about excavating:
Keep your tetanus shots current.
Always wear leather gloves.
Keep hydrated.
Be redundant - record, record, record.
Be sure level forms and bags are filled out completely.
Keep your unit level so that artifacts and features (example - drip line) can be
seen.

Oral History In Your Research Plan
Oral histories can be a very important part of your research. Before you do an oral
history, be sure you are aware of legal requirements. The Oral History Association, on
their website, has a pamphlet, “Oral History and the Law,” by John A. Neuenschwander,
2002. They also have oral history evaluation guidelines. Other web sites to visit are the
Oral History Research Office at Columbia University, and the Texas Oral History
Association at Baylor, www.baylor.edu/TOHA/.
Oral histories take practice, research and preparation. I suggest you contact a local
or regional oral history association and attend their sessions.

74

@I@
_tu tÇw VâÜtà|ÉÇ
When artifacts enter the lab, the first step is to record the bags by bag number and
all the information on the bag. It is good to have a paper copy and a computer copy. Do
not throw the bags away until all of the analysis is complete.
Then the artifacts can be washed, and labeled. If the artifact can not be labeled
(too small or too fragile, etc.) then put it in a small plastic bag with bag number, unit
and level. There are many ways of labeling artifacts, just be systematic.
When the artifacts have been labeled (the record of their provenience) then they
can be identified and properly sorted into their artifact group. When all of the
information is entered on the computer on a spread sheet, then the patterns will
emerge. What do you have - how many do you have-where was it found-and what was it
found with.

Curation

Caring for artifacts so that they will be preserved and available for future study is a
very important part of the research process. The best guidelines are those of the Society
for Historical Archaeology, presented here.

The Society for Historical Archaeology
Standards and Guidelines for the Curation of
Archaeological Collections84
Introduction

Archaeologists have an ethical obligation to preserve the data they collect during
archaeological projects for future generations. The following standards and guidelines
were developed by The Society for Historical Archaeology with the explicit goals of
permitting the long-term preservation of archaeological collections and maintaining
their research and public education values. These SHA standards are in accordance with
the more general federal regulations issued as 36 CFR Part 79: Curation of FederallyOwned and Administered Archaeological Collections. For the purposes of archaeological
curation, the following terms are employed:

•

84

Archaeological Collections are comprised of several components, including
but not limited to artifacts, environmental and dating samples, field
documentation, laboratory documentation, photographic records, related
historical documents, and reports.

www.sha.org
75

•

•

Curation is an integral element of the archaeological process and refers to
the long-term management and preservation of archaeological
materials and their associated documentation.
Curation Facility is a designated repository for archaeological materials,
which can provide accountable, professional curation of collections in
a secure, climate-controlled environment on long-term basis.

•

Due to its significance, planning for curation should begin in the project design
phase through consultation with the curatorial facility, which will ultimately receive the
collection. Curation expenses and storage fees must be considered in the preparation of
project budgets.
Recommendations
The following recommendations for the processing and storage of archaeological
materials represent the minimum standards, which are essential if our professional
responsibility to preserve archaeological collections for the future is to be realized.
1. Artifact Cleaning
All artifacts should be cleaned unless this will harm the object or result in the loss of
potential data (i.e., blood-residue analysis). Cleaning is necessary for the accurate
identification and study of most artifact types. Appropriate cleaning procedures depend
upon the type and condition of the material. Due care must be exercised during the
cleaning process to insure that the integrity and information value of the object is
maintained.
2. Artifact Labeling
2a. Artifacts must be labeled in such a way that the site and intrasite provenience data
are retrievable. Labeling must be done in a permanent and archivally stable manner.
Where direct labeling on the object is not feasible, other archivally stable methods of
permanently maintaining the relationship between an artifact and its provenience may
be used (i.e., string tags with acid-free paper for beads).
2b. All diagnostic artifacts must be labeled whenever physically possible. If not
appropriate, the object must be packaged in archivally stable materials, which are
permanently labeled.
2c. When certain less-diagnostic artifact types occur in large quantities within a specific
provenience, all specimens need not be individually labeled. Examples include but are
not limited to slag, shell, fire cracked rocks, flakes, window glass, brick, mortar, plaster,
and coal (exceptions should include unusual specimens or those of particular research
potential). These artifacts may be grouped by material type and placed in a resealable
plastic bag with the exterior permanently labeled. In the bag with less diagnostic
artifacts, a Mylar or an acid-free paper slip labeled with the provenience information
must be included. Other material classes not appropriate for individual labeling (i.e.,

76

floral remains, soil samples) should be stored in suitable labeled containers with a
labeled Mylar strip placed inside.
2d. All faunal material, which can be physically labeled, should be labeled. Bones too
small for individual marking should be placed in a labeled, resealable plastic bag. It is
recommended that bones within a provenience unit be bagged separately by zoological
class to prevent or reduce the crushing of fragile remains.
2e. An explanation of the label information, including locational data about the
excavation units, must be submitted with the collection. It is suggested that one copy be
stored with the site artifacts and one with the documentation.
3. Storage
3a. The most suitable artifact storage container currently available is the polyethylene,
zip-lock-type plastic bag. Unless the curation facility requires a different container,
these should be used. Paper bags and polyethylene bags of less than 2 mm thickness are
not acceptable for permanent curation. Exceptionally large or unusually shaped artifacts
may require different methods but should be stored using archivally stable materials.
Bags should be perforated to allow air exchange and inhibit the development of
unwanted microenvironments. Use of unperforated bags, however, may sometimes be
appropriate for very climate-sensitive artifacts, which need special storage conditions,
such as iron.
3b. It is recommended that all bags be permanently labeled with the appropriate site
and provenience information. For certain fragile or sensitive materials (i.e., C14 samples
or floral remains), standard-sized glass or other archivally stable containers labeled with
the provenience data are recommended.
3c. Artifact storage boxes must be made of archivally stable materials and standard
sized. The curation repository will determine the specific type. Consultation with the
curation facility before containers are purchased is highly recommended. Artifacts must
be packed in such a way as to avoid crushing or otherwise damaging them. It is also
mandatory that all packing materials be archivally stable.
3d. All storage containers must be labeled with the site and provenience information.
Rather than direct marking of the box, a transparent label holder affixed to the
container is suggested. Listing the contents of the box may be appropriate.
3e. If storage is to be by provenience unit, certain artifact classes (i.e., ceramic vessels,
bottles) should be retained in their analytic categories. They should not be disassembled
nor the sherds returned to their original provenience for storage. Notation should be
made in the provenience-unit documentation that these artifacts are stored elsewhere.
3f. All slides, black-and-white negatives, and prints are to be stored in archivally stable
materials.
77

4. Documentation
Records, notes, reports, catalogs, related historical documents, and photographs are
integral components of an archaeological collection. They must be submitted with the
artifacts for permanent curation. Two copies of all records are recommended. Paper
documentation should be on acid-free paper. Readable copies reproduced by a heat
fusion process (e.g., photocopy) are acceptable. Documentation must include the
following:
•

Ownership document (legal title) for archaeological materials with a complete
listing of all components of the collection including the number of containers,
their contents and associated provenience units, and all accompanying
documentation.
•
Catalog of the artifacts by provenience unit, recognizing that there are different
levels of cataloging. At a minimum, catalogs must include an identification of the
object, material of manufacture, and quantification (count and/or weight).
•
Description of the artifact according to the best current levels of professional
knowledge is recommended where possible. Notation regarding artifacts stored
outside of their provenience unit should be included.
•
Copy of the final report, site location data, project scope of work, and any
relevant historical documentation pertaining to the site.
•
Statement indicating whether conservation treatment was performed, a list of
those objects treated, and a complete description of the treatments used. If
conservation was not complete, a list of those objects requiring immediate
attention must be included.
•
Archivally stable photocopy of all original field and laboratory documentation.
•
Master set of permanent black-and-white photographs, negatives, color slides,
and videotapes using the best current standard films and papers. Slides should be
unprojected originals or copies. All photographic material should be minimally
labeled with the site, provenience, and catalog number using archivally stable
methods.
•
Catalog of all photographic materials describing the images.
•
Electronic data (i.e., tape, disks) may accompany the documentation and must be
accompanied by a by a statement describing the system and software used and
the content of each disk, tape, etc. Standardized methods for the storage of
electronic data will likely be developed in the future.
5. Conservation
5a. All archaeological excavation carries the professional obligation to preserve the
materials recovered through both proper curation and appropriate conservation
treatments. Conservation of perishable material is an ethical responsibility and an
essential element in the archaeological process. Project design should include a
consideration of conservation needs and the funding requirements for this essential
service.
5b. Conservation is especially critical for underwater sites of all kinds and can cost up to
twice the expense of the fieldwork. Excavation of an underwater site must not be

78

undertaken without conservation facilities established beforehand and adequate
funding for conservation dedicated to the project.
5c. Conservation treatments must be appropriate to the artifact's material and its
condition, and should reflect the best current standards in methodology and materials.
All treatments must be carried out by or under the supervision of an adequately trained
professional. All treatments must be fully documented. This documentation must form a
part of the site's permanent archive.
5d. The decision to conserve any artifact or class of artifacts is a complex one. It may
reflect, in different cases, the condition, uniqueness, research potential, or the exhibit
potential of an artifact. It may also reflect the availability of long-term storage under
controlled environmental conditions and the degree to which those conditions may be
achieved and precisely controlled. Consultation with the curation facility regarding this
subject is strongly recommended.
6. Curation Facility
6a. Repositories used for the permanent curation of archaeological collections must
provide, at a minimum, (1) physical security, (2) climate control, (3) fire suppression,
(4) collection monitoring, and (5) access by qualified researchers. These requirements
demand adequate space and resources dedicated to the purpose of curation. Curation
space within a repository must be organized to allow controlled access, efficient
collection retrieval, and optimum preservation. A professional staff, safe and secure
storage, effective fire protection, disaster and pest management plans are essential.
Collections should be isolated from work areas and people to the extent possible.
6b. For many historic artifacts, climate control is crucial to reduce their rate of
deterioration and minimize the need for conservation treatment. Relative humidity
(RH) and temperature must be continually monitored and controlled to minimize
harmful fluctuations. Control of light levels, especially ultraviolet (UV) radiation is also
needed. Regular inspection to detect insect, rodent, or other biological problems; assess
structural defects in the physical plant; and monitor the condition of the artifacts is
essential. Specific guidelines for humidity, temperature, and light control are as follows:
•

•

Relative Humidity: Due to the extreme sensitivity of many artifacts to RH,
control of RH is crucial. For most objects, RH should be kept between 40–60%
with monthly fluctuations of less than 5%. Iron and some other materials require
much lower RH levels for long-term preservation.
Temperature: Normally, lower temperatures are better for artifact curation
because chemical and biological activity increases with higher temperatures. In
areas where people are present, the temperature should remain between 65º F
and 70º F. For storage spaces where people are seldom present, temperatures in
the 40º F to 60º F range are desirable. Temperatures in a collections area should
never exceed 75º F. Abrupt changes in temperature, which put great stress on
artifacts, must be prevented.
79

•

Light (UV Radiation): Light levels in collections should not exceed 150 lux (15
foot candles). Control of UV radiation is necessary to protect containers and their
labels from deterioration. All light sources should be filtered for UV radiation.

6c. Where possible, the repository selected for curation should be in the same state as
the site or in a facility that stores materials from the same region. Preference should be
given to a facility that curates other collections from the same site or site area.
7. Deaccessioning
7a. The discarding of archaeological materials by a curation facility is not recommended
because discard or deaccessioning can jeopardize the ability to study the primary site
data, particularly because current levels of knowledge may not adequately recognize the
research value of certain artifact classes. Exceptions are live ammunition, toxic or
radioactive materials, and other hazardous substances. However, deactivation of
historic ammunition rather than discard is suggested to preserve this often-rare
material culture.
7b. In decisions regarding any deaccessioning, materials recovered from good
archaeological contexts should be given the greatest priority for retention. First, effort
should be made to find a repository that will accept material to be deaccessioned. If
unsuccessful, placement in a stable environmental setting, which permits later retrieval
of the material, is strongly encouraged. Decisions about any deaccessioning of
archeological materials should be made by or in consultation with professional
archaeologists. Any deaccessioning must be fully documented, including a thorough
description of the material, the procedures used for selection of the artifacts, the
sampling techniques employed, and the final destination of the material. This additional
documentation must be filed with the primary site documentation. Adequate samples
should be retained of any material classes that are deaccessioned. Defining what is an
adequate sample will vary by material and should take into account the range of
variation within a particular artifact class.
8. Human Remains
Archaeologists can encounter human remains during, and these materials may be
curated. All human remains must be treated in a dignified manner and with respect for
the deceased individuals. Due to the wide range of potential situations, specific
treatment and the ultimate deposition of human remains must be handled case by case
and in accordance with applicable laws and religious traditions.
Printed in The Society for Historical Archaeology Newsletter (vol. 26, no. 4) December
1993.
For more information contact the Chair of the SHA's Curation, Conservation, and
Collections Management Committee, Robert Sonderman at Bob_Sonderman@nps.gov.

80

CONSERVATION TREATMENTS85
1.

What criteria do conservators use to determine how and when to treat an
artifact?
2. Metals
1. How do you assess a metal artifact and decide on its treatment?
2. How do you assess an iron artifact and decide on its treatment?
3. What is electrolytic reduction and what are its risks and benefits?
4. Should I polish archaeological metals?
5. What is a Corrosion Inhibitor?
6. What is a Moisture Barrier?
3. Ceramics
1. How do you assess a ceramic artifact and decide on its treatment?
2. What adhesive do you use to use to mend ceramics?
3. What do you use to fill gaps in ceramics?
4. Glass
1. How do you preserve archaeological glass?
2. What adhesive do you use to mend glass?
3. What do you use to fill gaps in glass?
5. Bone
1. How do you assess bone, antler and ivory artifacts and decide on a
treatment?
2. What are the conservation issues involved with the recovery of human
remains?
3. How do you assess a shell artifact and decide on a conservation treatment?
6. Wood
1. How do you assess waterlogged wood and decide on a conservation
treatment?
7. Leather
1. How do you assess archaeological leather and decide on a treatment?
8. Horn, tortoiseshell, baleen
1. How do you assess objects made of horn, tortoiseshell or baleen and
decide on a conservation treatment?
9. Rubber and plastics
1. How do you assess archaeological objects made of rubber and plastic and
decide upon a conservation treatment?
10. Textiles, paper
1. How do you assess archaeological textiles and decide on a treatment?
2. How do you assess archaeological paper and decide on a treatment?
11. Composite artifacts (made of more than one material)
1. How do you assesses composite objects and decide on a treatment?
12. Architectural materials, brick, stone
1. How do you assess architectural materials and decide on a treatment?
85

http://www.sha.org/research_resources/conservation_faqs/treatment.htm
81

13. Environmental remains
1. How should I care for archaeobotanical remains?

82

@J@
TÜà|ytvàá
In Texas, before American colonization, we are looking for artifacts that identify
the Spanish, French, and Mexican explorers and colonists, and all those people we have
yet to learn about. American colonization, beginning with Austin’s colony, is
documented by historic artifacts that inform us of the economic, social, and technical
adaptive systems that were unique to Texas and the South. We want to know where all
of the artifacts came from; were they imported, where they made on the site? Where did
the raw materials come from? How were they made? What knowledge and skill was
required? Was this knowledge known by all members of the society or a select trained
few? What was the original function of the artifact? Did it have multiple functions?
Where was it made? What were the trade patterns in Texas? Where were goods
imported into Texas? We know that human beings are “stylish” and that they like “new,
innovative things,” and with this in mind we must examine all artifacts for their
changing design and indication of time periods. Also, objects can denote religious
preference and an ideology.
A diagnostic artifact is characteristic of a particular time period, a particular
culture (remember, Texas is made up of Americans, British, Germans,
Czechoslovakians, Hispanics, Irish, et al.), or a particular activity or survival strategy.
In historic archeology, we will encounter thousands of types of artifacts, but most will
fall under the artifacts categories identified by Stanley South. 86 We will discuss each of
his categories, and sources for reference.

Kitchen Artifacts Group
Kitchen artifacts will be divided into the following types: We will discuss here the
first two, ceramics and bottles.
Ceramics - Grouped and described by design, clay type, manufacturer’s mark, and
or importers mark, size and function.
Bottles - wine, beer, whiskey bottles, food bottles, pharmaceutical
bottles.
Glasswear --stemmed, decanter, dishes, etc.
Tablewear -- cutlery, knives, forks, spoons, etc.
Kitchenware -- pots, pans, pothooks, gridirons, trivets, metal teapots,
water kettles, coffee pots, buckets, handles, kettles, etc.

86

South, Stanley, 1977 Method and Theory in Historical Archeology, Academic Press, New York
83

Ceramic Identification:
The study of ceramics can be an overwhelming pursuit. Our study will focus
on Texas ceramics of the nineteenth century. Where did they come from, how did they
get here, how will we classify them, and what can they tell us about the past? I
recommend that your first step be to read The China Cabinet paper written by Sandra
Pollan and published in the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 70, which
is included in this document as Appendix F.
In the Lake Jackson study, Sandra classified the ceramics by their decoration.
Before 1850, we find CC wears (cream colored) and undecorated, minimally decorated
wears such as shell edged and sponge decorated, hand painted vessels with more
intricate patterns of flowers, leaves and landscapes, and the transfer-printed vessels.
Transfer prints are some of the most beautiful ceramics of the period and
come in different colors which date to different periods.

Figure 1
A transfer wear pattern.

84

Figure 2
A flow blue transfer pattern.
Transfer prints were also allowed to “bleed” forming the flow blue design. This
plate is from the Ridgeways Pottery; the Osborne design. 87
How did China come into Texas during the Colonial Period? People
brought it with them or it came by boat. From the 1861 Texas Almanac, we have the
boat schedules from New Orleans into Texas ports. Trains connected Galveston and
Houston and smaller freight lines connected outlying areas of Texas. Texas china came
through New Orleans and therefore we find many of the same ceramic types throughout
Texas.

87

www.atlantaantiquegallery.com/wsm/i-14636_ridgeways_flow_blue_salad_plate.html

85

Texas Almanacs are a wealth of information. The advertisement below, listed the
types of china being sold. A web search of Edwards’ Royal Iron Stone Chinas, produced
a history of the potter and white ironstone.

Figure 3 - Page 254, 1861, Texas Almanac
A web site worth visiting is:
http://collections.rmsc.org/BritishPottery/Wares.html#ironstone

86

We will be discussing makers marks and the dating of china in our academy in
detail. There are some general rules for dating marks:88
Printed marks incorporating the Royal Arms are a 19th or 20th century date.
Printed marks incorporating the name of the pattern are after 1810.
Marks incorporating the word 'Limited', or the abbreviations 'Ltd', 'Ld', etc., denote a
date after 1861, and most examples are much later.
Incorporation of the words 'Trade Mark' in a mark denotes a date subsequent to the Act
of 1862.
Inclusion of the word 'Royal' in a firm's title or trade name suggests a date in the second
half of the 19th century, if not a 20th-century dating.
Inclusion of the abbreviation 'R N' (for Registered Number) followed by numbers
denotes a date subsequent to 1883.
Inclusion of the word 'England', 'Germany', 'France', 'Italy' in marks denotes a date after
1891, although some manufacturers added the word slightly before this date.
'Made in England', 'Made in Germany' and so on, denotes a 20th-century date.
Use of the words 'Bone China', 'English Bone China', etc., denotes a 20th-century date.
Items made in Japan between 1945 and 1953 were required by law to be marked "Made
in Occupied Japan."
Most European antique and vintage china and porcelain pieces are well marked as to
manufacturer whereas U.S makers were hit and miss on marking their pieces.

Identification of Ceramic Form
When we refer to ceramic form, we are referring to the shapes of cups, saucers,
plates, bowls and serving pieces. The following figures of form are taken from
“Nineteenth-Century Transfer-Printed Ceramics From The Townsite of Old Velasco
(41BO125) Brazoria county, Texas: An Illustrated Catalogue,” by Sandra D. Pollan, W.
Sue Gross, Amy C. Earls, Johnney T. Pollan, Jr. and James L. Smith, Prepared for U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District, by Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Consulting
Archeologists, Austin, Texas, June 1996.
88

/www.mygrannysatticantiques.com/html/pottery__porcelain_and_china_m.htm

87

Figure 4
Cup, cup plate, and saucer forms.
Figure 3, pp 8, Pollan, et. al. 1996

88

Figure 5

Other hollow teaware and toiletware forms.
Figure 4, pp. 8, Pollan, et. al. 1996

89

Figure 6
Plate, soup plate, platter, and dish forms.
Figure 5, pp 8, Pollan et al., 1996

90

Figure 7
Parts of a plate or platter and parts of a cup or bowl.
Figure 6, pp. 8, Pollan et al. 1996

91

A Lab Identification Sheet For Ceramics:
(Not every tiny piece of ceramics will need to be closely examined. If any of the
following are possible to determine, a Lab ID sheet should be filled out.
Lab Identification Sheet For Ceramics
Size: On the back of this sheet, trace the ceramic sherd.
Is this sherd a rim? ________no, _________yes, - diameter _______________
Is this sherd part of a base? __________no, __________yes, - diameter_______
Does this sherd contain decoration? ________no, ___________yes -describe
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________

What color or colors are in the decoration?______________________________
Describe the form: ______________________________________________
What part of the vessel: ___________________________________________
Is there a makers mark? Describe ____________________________________
____________________________________________________________
An Importers mark? _____Describe:__________________________________
Have photos been taken of both sides of the sherd? ______ Where located? _______
In millimeters, what is the thickness of the sherd? __________________________
What is the paste type? _________________________
Any additional information:

92

Bottle Identification:
Bottle identification can be as complicated as ceramics. The best primer to the
understanding of bottles is on the web site of The Society of Historical Archaeology.
The introduction to the site is included here.

BLM/SHA:Historic Glass Bottle Identification & Information
Website 89
Contents:
Dating
Typing/Shapes
Glassmaking
Colors
Finishes (Lips)
Body & Seams
Bases
Fragment ID
Glossary
References
Links
FAQ's
About this site
Website Map

The Bureau of Land Management (BLM), an agency within the U.S. Department
of the Interior, administers 261 million surface acres of America's public lands, located
primarily in 12 Western States (including Alaska). Part of the mission of the BLM is the
management and preservation of the cultural and heritage resources found on America's
public lands - prehistoric and historic.
The author created this website as a BLM employee and continues to update and
enhance the site in retirement as a volunteer. This website now has a permanent home
courtesy of the Society for Historical Archaeology (SHA).

89

Society of Historical Archaeology web site. October 3, 2008, This website created and managed by:
Bill Lindsey Bureau of Land Management (retired) - Klamath Falls, Oregon

93

Goal of this website: To enable the user to answer two primary questions about
most utilitarian bottles and jars* produced in the United States (and Canada**) between
the early 1800s and 1950s, as follows:
1. What is the age of the bottle? (Bottle Dating)
2. What type of bottle is it? (Bottle Identification, Typing or Typology)
The above two questions also address what was succinctly articulated in the
Intermountain Antiquities Computer System (IMACS) and the nominal purpose of this
website, which is “…to provide archaeologists with a manual for a standard approach
to arriving at historical artifact function and chronology” (University of Utah 1992).
This entire website is essentially a "key" - albeit a complex one - to the
dating and typing (typology) of historic bottles. In addition, this site also assists
the user with these questions:
3. What technology, techniques, or processes were used to manufacture the bottle?
4. Where did the bottle come from, i.e., where was it made and/or used?
5. Where can I go for more information on historic bottles?

"open" pontil scar
Bottle ca. 1850-1855
This website will explain why this sharp glass mark on the base of a bottle is a key
mid-19th century diagnostic characteristic.

94

Since there were hundreds of thousands of uniquely different bottles produced in
the United States (and Canada**) between 1800 and the 1950s, it is beyond the scope or
even possibility of this or any website (or book) to provide specific details about more
than just a tiny fraction of those bottles (Fike 1987). This site instead attempts to help
the user determine some key facts - approximate age & function - about any given bottle
based on observable physical characteristics. Hundreds of specific historic bottles are
used as examples within the pages of this website to illustrate the concepts discussed;
with luck you may find the specific bottle you have an interest in discussed though
typically you will not.
This website is intended for...
▪ Field archaeologists trying to identify and date bottles or bottle fragments which are
found during cultural surveys and excavations in the United States;
▪ Educators dealing with the subject of historic archaeology; and
▪ Collectors and the general public trying to date a bottle, determine what it was used
likely for, and/or begin their search for information dealing with the fascinating world
of historic bottles.

HOW TO USE THIS SITE
If you are attempting to determine the approximate manufacturing date - or age of a particular bottle (or significant sized fragment) the first page to visit would be the
Bottle Dating page and its related sub-pages. These pages lead a user through a series
of questions about the physical - or morphological - characteristics of historic bottles
which help to narrow down the age of an item. This complex of pages is a major
hub of the rest of this website and the best place to start a search.

95

Some of the embossed markings on the bottle base above are a great information source
for 20th century bottle identification; some are meaningless. Bottle is an Owens-Illinois
Company produced beer bottle made in 1951.
This website will help you determine what to look for when identifying and dating
historic bottles.
Also linked to the Dating page is a sub-page called Examples of Dating
Historic Bottles which tracks a few different bottles through a dating and general
information quest to illustrate how the dating process and this website work.
If you are interested in identifying what a bottle was likely used for - i.e., what
"type" of bottle it is (aka "typology") - the Bottle Typing/Diagnostic Shapes page
and the extensive array of related sub-pages should be visited. This very large complex
of pages includes bottle type specific sub-pages with extensive style based dating
information. The "Bottle Typing/Diagnostic Shapes" complex of pages is in
essence an on-line "type collection" of major bottles styles and types made
during the 19th through mid-20th centuries. Please note that the main "Bottle
Typing/Diagnostic Shapes" page - and many of the subordinate pages - are very large
with hundreds of imbedded images; it may take 20 to 30 seconds or more to load even
with moderate to high speed internet connections.
Be aware that none of the pages are all inclusive since related information exists
on one or many other website pages. For example, there is information pertinent to
dating a bottle on virtually every website page. The title of any given page gives the
predominant theme of that page and would be the first place to start when pursuing
information on that particular subject. However, the process of bottle identification and
dating is quite complex with many exceptions; thus, the need for many web pages
covering a lot of descriptive information. A listing or "map" of all the main
96

subject pages and connected sub-pages found within this website is found at
the following link Website Map. Use that page to get a feel for the structure of this
website and to access any of the other web pages.
When possible, the information on this website is given general reliability rating
estimates (e.g., high, moderate, low or "usually", "occasionally", "almost always",
"almost never") to allow a user some "feel" for the probable accuracy of their conclusion
or determination. In addition, there are a hundreds of dating and/or typing
determination examples scattered throughout virtually every site page to give the user a
feel for the processes involved in dating and/or typing a bottle.

To do a word/phrase search of this website one must use the "Search SHA" boxes
found on many of the main SHA web pages, including the Research Resources page
(upper right side of that page) which links to this site. The Historic Bottle Website
(HBW) has no internal search mechanism so be aware that when running a search one
will also get non-HBW response links to other portions of the SHA site.
It is suggested that if you only bookmark one page of this website for future
reference, that it be the Website Map.
*Note on the scope of this website: This website is designed to provide
information on the dating of typical utilitarian bottles and jars made in the United
States during the 19th through mid-20th centuries. It does not attempt to address the
dating of "specialty" or imported bottles made during that time, though much of the
information found on this website is pertinent to these items to varying degrees. What
is a utilitarian bottle or jar? What are specialty bottles? Both are hard questions to
answer and the answer is somewhat arbitrary in the end. For this website the
distinction between the two categories is related to the varying time frames that
different glass making techniques were used for for the two classes of bottles. Click on
utilitarian bottles or "specialty" bottles to view the portion of the Glossary Page
that covers these subjects. We have tried to define the distinction between these two
classes of bottles from the perspective of the intent of and information found on this
website.
**Note on Canadian bottles: This website was prepared based primarily on
information about bottle manufacturing technologies, processes, and styles specific to
the United States. Empirical observations indicate that Canadian-made bottles very
often followed similar glassmaking technique and process chronologies making much of
the information applicable to Canadian made bottles. However, some Canadian-made
bottles mirrored English manufacturing techniques/timeframes and many English
stylistic trends (particularly for liquor, soda, and beer bottles) which differed somewhat
from typical U. S. items - though many Canadian bottles also mirrored U. S. styles. If

97

using this site for the dating or typing of a known or likely Canadian-made bottle, keep
this in mind as the reliability of the information may be reduced.
The opinions expressed are those of the author of this website and not necessarily
those of The Society for Historical Archaeology nor the Bureau of Land Management.
This website created and managed by:Bill Lindsey,Bureau of Land Management
(retired) - Klamath Falls, Oregon , Questions? See FAQ #21.
Copyright © 2008 Bill Lindsey. All rights reserved. Viewers are encouraged, for personal
or classroom use, to download limited copies of posted material. No material may be
copied for commercial purposes. Author reserves the right to update this information as
appropriate. 9/7/08

Bone Artifact Group
Bone analysis (faunal analysis) is a very specialized analytical subset in
archeology. For an introduction, I recommend reading, Approaches to Faunal Analysis
in Archaeology by Patricia Daly, American Antiquity, Vol. 34, No. 2 (Apr., 1969), pp.
146-153, Published by: Society for American Archaeology The first page can be found at
http://www.jstor.org/pss/278041. A web search in faunal analysis in archeology will
produce many resources.
At most historic sites, you will be identifying domestic animals that have been
butchered. You can create your own faunal collection for comparative study by saving
bones from you own domestic use and by becoming friends with your local butcher. Ask
him for discarded bones to add to your collection. He or she may be willing to identify
bones for you.
The best resource is your local society. Assist with the lab work and learn how to
use their comparative collection. We were very fortunate at the Lake Jackson site to
have W. L. (Bill) McClure analyze the faunal artifacts. There were 17,300 bones or
fragments of bones in the assemblage. Of these, 42% were too fragmented to identify.
The bones that were identified fish (5018/ 50%), 12 amphibians, reptiles (564/6%),
birds (588/6%), and mammals (3802/38%).
Structure B at the Lake Jackson site, was probably occupied by the Jackson
family while the main house was being built, then this structure probably became
housing for house servants and perhaps the main house kitchen, and then was used
during the convict period. In Structure B 4,101 bones were found of fish, frogs,
alligator, turtle, snake, birds, chicken, turkey, wild goose and duck, opossum, rabbit,
squirrel, rats, deer, pig, and cow. Pig and cow bones had the largest numbers.
In Structure D, a convict period structure, were found 2720 bones very similar to
whose found in Structure B with two exceptions, a beaver bone was found and one

98

human tooth. Both structures show a utilization of natural resources and domesticated
pigs and cattle. The slave quarters at Lake Jackson were not in the area available for
excavation so we cannot do a faunal comparison between the main house are and the
slave quarters.
•

McClure’s report on the vertebrates found at Lake Jackson, is Appendix M in this
manual and was published in the TAS Bulletin, Vol. 70

99

Architectural Group
The architectural group includes:
Window glass - count and sort by thickness
Nails, screws, spikes - count and sort by type
Construction hardware - hinges, pintles (one of the pins that fit into the gudgeons
[socket] and so suspend the rudder), shutter hooks, staples, fireplace
backing plates, lead window cames, etc.
Door lock parts -- doorknobs, case lock parts, keyhole escutcheons, locking bolts,
and brackets, etc.
Most of our early structures in Colonial Texas were log cabins. It is important to
understand the way log cabins were built and their technical terms. Both of the
following drawings are from the American Association for State and Local History,
Technical Leaflet 74, History News Vol. 29, No. 5, May 1974, Log Cabin
Restoration:Guidelines for the Historical Society, written by Donald A. Hutslar, Ohio
Historical Society. The pamphlet is contained in Appendix G.

100

Figure 8 - Log Cabin Identification.

Figure 9
TAS members documenting the ruins of a log cabin.
101

A web site with additional information is provided by the Technical Preservation
Services, National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior. The following is the
first page from preservation brief # 26.90

The Preservation and Repair of Historic Log Buildings

Bruce D. Bomberger

»Historical Background
»Traditional Log Construction
»Historical Evaluation and Damage Assessment
»Preservation Treatments
»Log Repair
»Preserving Log Buildings in Their Historic Settings
»Summary
»Selected Reading
A NOTE TO OUR USERS: The web versions of the Preservation Briefs differ somewhat
from the printed versions. Many illustrations are new, captions are simplified,
illustrations are typically in color rather than black and white, and some complex charts
have been omitted. The intent of this Brief is to present a concise history and
description of the diversity of American log buildings and to provide basic guidance
regarding their preservation and maintenance. A log building is defined as a building
whose structural walls are composed of horizontally laid or vertically positioned logs.
While this Brief will focus upon horizontally laid, corner-notched log construction, and,
in particular, houses as a building type, the basic approach to preservation presented
here, as well as many of the physical treatments, can be applied to virtually any kind of
log structure.
In researching log cabins for the Glorianna Plantation excavations, I visited a log
cabin in East Texas that was built about the time of the Civil War. The foundation was
of rocks, the logs were local, and the fireplace chimney was braced with a long timber
saw. A log barn in the same area had no metal or glass in the structure. Wooden pegs
were used in the roof and leather and rope made up the “hardware” parts. The owner
stated that his grandfather, who built the barn, was very proud of the fact that there
were no manufactured items in the barn, all were home made. We must remember that
in historic archeology, especially in rural areas, the biodegradable factor can be very
high, leaving few or no artifacts to record a structure.

90

http://www.nps.gov/hps/tps/briefs/brief26.htm#Historical%20Background
102

The Williams-Buck Homestead (41WM272) was excavated at the 2001 TAS Field
School by the Youth Program. The artifacts were analyzed by students at the University
of Houston Clear Lake. The research objectives were to establish whether or not a
structure did exist at this location. From the dates of artifacts recovered could we
establish that the lean-to was lived in for a short period of time as the history of the site
indicates, or was it occupied after the dogtrot cabin was built, or was it a trash dump for
the homestead? The results of the excavation did suggest that a lean-to probably was
there. The report is contained in Appendix I.
Another important aspect of research is what architecture can tell us. The
notches in log cabins have a history. The key to log construction, is the corner notch, the
joint where logs from adjacent walls are attached to one another. 91
The saddle notch may be the oldest of the notch styles. “The saddle notch was
developed in Europe and later became very common throughout the North American
zone of log construction.” 92

Figure 10 - Saddle Notches
Drawing by Terry Jordan

Jordan, Terry G. 1980, Log Cabin Village: A History and Guide, Texas State Historical Association,
pp. 13
91

92

Ibid, pp.16
103

The half-dovetail notch, sometimes called the ‘mitre-dovetail,’ is very widespread
in Texas and the eastern United States. It was derived long ago in Europe from an
ancestral type, the ‘full-dovetail’ notch.” 93

Figure 11- Dove Tail Notches
Drawing by Terry Jordan
The “V” notch looks like a saddle notch but is “V” shaped. “In Texas, ‘V’ notching
is very closely associated with people of upper southern [upper U.S. south] and German
heritage. It occurs mainly in central and northern Texas, but is only rarely encountered
in the eastern part of the state.” 94

93

Ibid, pp.13

94

Ibid, pp. 16
104

“The square notch, often called a ‘quarter’ notch by Anglo-Texans, is apparently
derived from the half-dovetail type, and possibly also from ‘V’ notching.” 95 This notch
requires less skill to make than others, and does not make a tight joint.

Figure 12 - Square Notching
Drawing by Terry Jordan
The floor plans of log house can vary, but there are some common floor patterns.
The size of the pens in a log cabin depend on the size of the trees in the local woods. 96

Figure 13
Log Building Floor Plans
Drawing by Terry Jordan

95

Ibid, pp.17

96

Ibid, pp. 21
105

Window Glass
Investigations by historical archaeologists (Walker 1971;
Chance and Chance 1974; Roenke 1978: Ball 1983; Moir 1987; Ison
1990; Rivers 1998) reveal that window glass gradually increased in
thickness throughout the nineteenth century. Numerous equations
have been derived for predicting an initial construction date based on
the mean thickness of window glass fragments recovered from a site.
However, there are questions concerning the accuracy and
application of these equations, especially when dealing with sites that
have a long period of occupation. By looking at the whole distribution
of window glass recovered from a site it may be possible to conduct
window glass dating analysis at sites that were considered less than
perfect candidates. Looking at the whole distribution of recovered
window glass may also provide information about the length of
occupation, the building of additions or remodeling, and the use of
scavenged materials. 97

At the primary structure of the McConnell’s homestead, about 27,000 artifacts
were found with 19% being window glass fragments. The maximum thickness of
window fragments recovered was 2.94 mm (1960), the minimum thickness was 0.73
mm(1774), the mean was 1.47 mm (1836), the median 1.38 (1829), and the mode was
1.22 mm (1815). A second structure was excavated with about 9,500 artifacts, 20%
being window glass. The maximum thickness was 3.0 mm (1965), the minimum
thickness was 1.0 mm (1797), the mean was 2.19 mm (1897), the median 2.20 mm
(1898), and the mode was 2.06 mm (1886). 98

Day, Grant L. 2001 “Window Glass Dating: when was McConnell’s Homestead Built?” Paper
presented at: The 4th Annual South Central Historical Archeology Conference, in Little Rock
Arkansas, on October 19, 2001. www.crai-ky.com/education/reports/windowglass.pdf
97

98

Ibid
106

William Updike and Flora Church excavated the Glenwood Quarters, an
antebellum residence in Charleston, West Virginia. Built between 1850 and 1852 for
James Madison Laidley. George W. Summers purchased Glenwood in 1857, and his
descendants lived in the house until the 1970s. 99 Window glass from the Glenwood
Quarters (n=15) has an average thickness of 1.87 mm, which by the Moir formula
calculates to a date of 1870. While 15 sherds is far too small an
assemblage to make an adequate chronometric assessment, creating a histogram reveals
that the most common date range for window glass fragments falls in the 1860-1869
period (n=4) (Figure 5).
Figure 14 - window glass dates from Glenwood Quarters

Updike, W. D., and Church, F., Cultural Resource Analysts Inc. 3556 Teays Valley Road,
Suite 3, Hurricane, WV 25526. www.marshall.edu/gsepd/humn/GlenwoodProject/
Glenwood_CRA-analysis.pdf
99

107

Measuring Window Glass Thickness
Window glass is measured with a caliper.

Figure 15
Measuring Window Glass With A Vernier Caliper
The window glass should be held firmly between the lower jaws. Using the
thumb of your right hand, move the jaws together until they are tight. Read your
millimeter measurement on the top metric scale.

108

Figure 16
Measuring on the top metric scale, we see that this window glass is a fraction over
2 mm - about 2.2 mm, which gives us a date of about 1880.

Nails
The best primer for nails, is the Nail Chronology as an aid to dating old
buildings, included here. in Appendix H. It includes an excellent history of nail making
technology. The Tremont Nail Co. Wareham, Mass., has been making old fashioned cut
nails since 1819. Their web site includes pictures of all of the different types of nails.
Old Sears and Roebuck & Co. catalogues will give information about what nails were on
the markets during which time periods. From the Tremont Sample Nail Kit, we have
listed the type of nail, with length and head type.
In the lab, nails should be sorted by square and round, and then subdivided by
type and head.

109

Figure 17 - Nails by Size and Head Type
Tremont Nail Co.

110

Furniture Group
Furniture was primarily made of wood. However you will find pieces of furniture
hardware. The best website for this research is http://www.robinsonsantiques.com/
index.htm for Robinson’s Antiques, Original Antique Hardware. They have
architectural hardware and furniture hardware.
Under Antique Furniture Hardware you will find:

Drawer Pulls Ring Pulls Handles and Knobs
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

"Hoosier" Kitchen Cabinet Hardware
Escutcheons (Key hole covers)
Desk and Wardrobe Parts
Latches
Mirror Swivels "Hinges"
Castors, Table Leg and Piano Stool Feet
Hooks
Chest Lifts,
Ice Box Hardware
Original Labels
Flush Ring Pulls
Bed Parts
Table Leaf Supports
Furn. Hinges, Locks, Keys, File, Shelf Brackets, Mirror Rosettes
.
Under Antique House Hardware you will find:

Door knobs locks & latches (Click Here)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Door Knockers(Click Here)
Cupboard Latches (Click Here)
Bin Pulls(Click Here)
Hooks(Click Here)
Window Hardware (Click Here)
Registers & Fire Place Fronts (Click Here)
Escutcheons (Key Hole Covers)(Click Here)
Hinges ~ House, Screen & Swinging (Click Here)
111

•
•
•
•
•
•

Door bells, (Click Here)
Hand Rail Brackets (Click Here)
Mail Slots (Click Here)
Shelf Brackets (Click Here)
Picture Nails (Click Here)
Plant & Lamp Hooks, Lamp Brackets (Click Here)

Robinson’s also has a link to patent date information:http://
www.robinsonsantiques.com/patent.htm. If you have a patent number on an artifact,
you can find the date.
A web search under antique furniture hardware will bring up very useful sites.

Clothing Artifact Group
Buttons
Buttons are found at 99.99% of all historic sites. They are a dating tool, a gender
identifier, a status marker, and are full of cultural information. For Texas, a good
primer on buttons is Juliann C. Pool’s, “An Overview of Nineteenth and Twentieth
Century Buttons.” This document was published as “Research Notes: Historic Sites and
Materials, Number 1”, by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin, Texas, in
November. 1986 and revised in March of 1991. It is included in the Appendix as item
“J.”
Juliann Pool also did our analysis of the Lake Jackson buttons. Her paper, “If
Buttons Could Talk...” is item “N” in the Appendix.
Another excellent paper on Buttons is “Buttons Recovered at the Elizabeth Powell
Site,” by Sandra D. Pollan and Johnney Pollan. This can be found in the Houston
Archeological Society Report #25, Part 2, December, 2007. There are four excellent
articles in Report # 25, on historic artifacts; beads, buttons, coins, and nails.
One of my favorite references on buttons is a chart by Chris Kneupper of the
Brasosport Archaeological Society. It is a great little reference for dating buttons.

112

Figure 18
Notice in Figure 18, that black ceramic and glass buttons appear about 1870.
This is when Queen Victoria’s husband, Prince Albert, died and the Queen adopted black
as her mourning clothing. It became a fashion statement for grief and black buttons
appeared to supply the clothing makers.
Buttons are the most common of the clothing artifacts found in historic sites, but
the artifact group includes any item found on shoes, hats, clothing, (buckles, thimbles,
beads, etc.) and includes all sewing equipment such as pins, and scissors, etc. Sewing
machines and their parts would be included under activities.

Personal Artifacts
Personal artifacts is a hugh category and includes any artifact that probably
belonged to one person; coins, keys, combs, toiletries, jewelry, watches, pencils, pens
---- and the list goes on and on. Old catalogues are a great resource for these items. Do
not forget organizations of collectors. The web can be a vast resource.

113

Activity Artifacts
Activity artifacts relate to specific actions that require specific tools; construction
tools, farm tools, toys (yes - playing is an activity), leisure tools (fishing, sports, etc.),
garden tools, stable and barn tools, etc. etc. etc. ------. This artifact group also includes
all unidentified metal.
A very difficult challenge can be in identifying old farm equipment. A technical
leaflet on “Antique Farm Equipment: researching and identifying,” is item “K” in the
Appendix. Nineteenth century catalogues are another great resource. Rural museums
usually have old farm equipment. If an object can be named - a web search will usually
be very helpful. There are museums dedicated to everything, for example, barbed wire.
Now we all know barbed wire, and we all think it is a common thing. There are
hundreds of variations of barbed wire dating to different time periods. The web site for
the barbwire museum gives us lots of information (www.barbwiremuseum.com).

Figure 19 - Examples of Barbed Wire Types

114

Another wonderful resource for identifying tools are the old catalogues.

Figure 20 - Sears Catalogue 1897, pp.41
115

When researching tools, it is important to think about where they would be
located.

Figure 21 - Tools on Log Cabin Wall 100
Tools hanging on interior or exterior walls was the norm. At Lake Jackson, on
the East exterior wall of structure A, various tools were hung. When the structure
collapsed during the 1900 hurricane, those tools came down with the wall and were
sandwiched between a brick surface and the fallen wall.
The following figure shows a drawing with items on the wall of a dog trot log
cabin.

100

Jordan, 1980, pp.95
116

Figure 22 - Tools on a Dog Trot Wall 101

Activity artifacts rang in the hundreds, and we can not discuss them all here. The
resources are extensive and easily assessable.

Miscellaneous Artifact Group
Everything that doesn’t fit into any other group belongs here.

101

Jordan, 1980, pp. 105
117

@K@
TÑÑxÇw|vxá
Appendix A, Table of Contents, The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 63,
1992

118

Appendix B

The Adventures of a French Captain,
At Present a Planter in Texas, Formerly a Refugee of Camp Asylum
by Girard Roy Just (J.J.E. Roy?)
Translated From the French
By
Lady Blanche Murphy
1878, Benziger Brothers, New York
CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION
7
CHAPTER I.
A Sketch of my Life up to the Date of my Landing at
Baltimore,
17
CHAPTER II.
The Tournel Family My Stay in Baltimore,
37
CHAPTER III.
Troubles of the French Refugees Grants of Land by Congress
Speculations of American Capitalists Proposed Settlement in
Texas General Lallemand's Address and Petition to the Court of
Madrid Silence of the Court Execution of the Plan, Meeting of
the Refugees at Philadelphia, Monsieur Tournel's Views, I
decide upon throwing in my Lot with the Texas Settlers,
43
CHAPTER IV.
Departure from Philadelphia, Arrival at Galveston, Temporary
Stay on an Island, The Pirate Lafitte, The Rio Trinidad, The
Settlement of Camp Asylum, First Troubles, Military
Organization of the Settlers, Forts and Trenches, Manifesto of
the Camp Asylum Refugees, Its Effect in Europe, Subscriptions
for the Refugees, Occupations of the Settlers, Monsieur Collin,
His Plans, I give him a Letter to Monsieur Tournel, Camp Life,
Amusements, Treaty with the Indians, General Lallemand
chosen "Great Chief", Ball given to the Inhabitants of San
Antonio de Bejar,
58
CHAPTER V.
Sad Condition of the Colony, Monsieur Tournel's Letter, Treaty
between Spain and the United States, The Policy of the Two
Governments, Expulsion of the French from Camp Asylum,
Retreat to Galveston, Sufferings of the Colonists, Sickness,
Storm in the Gulf of Mexico and inundation of the Island,
Dangers Run by the Settlers, Departure of the Sick for New
Orleans, I leave with some of the Settlers, intending to reach
119

Louisiana by Land Fate of those who had gone by Sea, Marengo
County and Eaglesville, on the Tombeckbee, Final Dispersion of
the Refugees of Camp Asylum.
77
CHAPTER VI.
Journey from Galveston to the Headwaters of the Sabine, My
Costume, Our Life on the March, A Buffalo Hunt, The New
Mazeppa,
91
CHAPTER VII.
A Sad Awakening I fall into the Hands of the Indians, My
Journey to the Comanche Village, I am presented to the Great
Chief, A New Actor on the Scene, Effect produced by my
Decoration and my Standing as a French Officer, I am
constituted the Guest of the Tribe,
105
CHAPTER VIII.
Michael Gournay, the Canadian Manners, and Customs of some
of the Indian Tribes,
125
CHAPTER IX.
My Stay with the Comanches, War, Rejoicings, Departure of the
Warriors on the Warpath, I wish to leave the Village, The
Indians oppose my Wish, Attack on the Village by a Body of
Spanish Soldiers, I go back to Louisiana with Gournay,
136
CHAPTER X.
We reach the Frontiers of Louisiana, An Unexpected Meeting, A
Caravan of American Emigrants, I meet the Tournel Family and
Monsieur Collin, New Scheme for Colonizing Texas,
154
CHAPTER XI.
I join the Emigrants and return with them to Texas, Our
Settlement on the Rio Brazos, The War of Independence The
Prosperity of Texas,
161

120

Appendix C
From Page 61, The Adventures of a French Captain, At Present a Planter in Texas,
Formerly a Refugee of Camp Asylum (account of the founding of Camp Asylum)
On the 20th of March, 1818 (this date is memorable),
General Lallemand and a hundred more emigrants from New
Orleans at last appeared before Galveston. He found his old
comrades, though wearied, by no means discouraged, and eager
to go on in their perilous undertaking. On the 24th we took to
sea again in ten large boats bought from the pirates. One of
them, carried out to sea by a strong undercurrent, was
swamped, and of her crew of six men, only Monsieur Chenet,
formerly an infantry lieutenant in the Old Guard, was saved. It
was a gloomy omen of the many misfortunes that awaited us !
We ascended the Rio Trinidad undc/ the guidance of
some Indians with whom we had already established friendly
relations, thanks to a few bottles of rum and some knives and
muskets. These Indians, who hated the Spaniards, had a kindly
remembrance of the French, whom they had known in the
neighboring State of Louisiana. They seemed glad to be able to
do us a service. After several days we landed on an immense
uninhabited plain, several leagues in extent, and surrounded by
a belt of woods down to the very edge of the river. A fruitful soil,
an abundance of tropical plants and flowers, a river as wide as
the Seine, but full of alligators, a sky as pure and a climate as
temperate as that of Naples such were the advantages of the
place we had chosen, and which we now christened " Camp
Asylum."
Our first days here were not devoid of hardships. The
colony was obliged to protect itself against wild beasts and
reptiles, especially the rattlesnakes, which abound in those
parts, while, as if to make things worse, the boats bringing the
stores from Galveston to Camp Asylum were delayed on the
road, so that we suffered all the torments of hunger for a whole
week.
At last the boats came safely to land, and the Choctaws
and other tribes poured in to visit the camps. We Frenchmen are
lighthearted beings, and soon merriment and hope regained the
upper hand amongst us. We began to believe in ourselves once
more, and proceeded to our settlement. Three divisions were
formed infantry, cavalry, and artillery, for we thought nothing
but a military government could be trusted to endure.
Fortifications were built to protect the camp against the inroads
of the Spaniards or Indians. They consisted of two little forts,

121

called respectively Fort Napoleon and Fort Lallemand, each
surrounded by a trench two yards deep, and communicating
with one another by means of a covered way that effectually
protected all the ground over which our settlement had spread.

122

Appendix D

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

Appendix E
The 1818 Diary of Sean Casey.
January 3, 1818 - The schooner Huntress (of American colors)
put in at the Isle, we had none of warning of her arriving. She
was almost fired upon before Mr. Laffite tells us she was
expected with valuable cargo from his French homeland.
A General Rigaud has come ashore. He and Mr. Laffite seemed
as to be old friends. Gen. Rigaud has brought 200 explores (sic)
with him. Rumor is they are fragments of Napoleon’s army and
Napoleon shall arrive before the winter. Personally I do not
know the mission of these heavily armed exploreers,(sic) but I
say they are hear (sic) to fend off savages and to join us.
January 5 - I have spoken with Mr. Churchill. Their purpose was
made of where they are going, they will set up a military fort on
the Lavaca River for Napoleon, they have made camp some
where in the area 1100 varas west from us.
January 12 - we are to sail for New Orleans to get a General of
the French army. I shall sail with Mr. Churchill aboard the
Jupiter. This General, he must be very important for us to take
Mr. Laffite’s ship.
January 18 - well we have arrived here in New Orleans.
January 28 - no sign of the French yet.
January 30 - Last night the French fleet has arrived. He [?]
came aboard before Albert could. Return with Mr. Churchill
and Davis, Gen Lallemand and I talked the better part of the
night. He appears to be of noble breeding and quite a fighter. I
hope we will become friends. The reason they were late, they
purchased 6 shallow draft boats in Virginia. They have 10 small
ships, 1 schooner [rest of the sentence is missing].
February 3 - We put in port back at the Isle [Galveston].
February 7 - I made a vat of remedy for the French. They drank
it like water. I hope it eases their ills. These men have suffered
so much on just our Isle, for it is civilized. I cannot foresee them
surviving on the Lavaca. I fear they shall not see another year.
They are armed well and look like well bred fighting men but the
elements can’t be fought.
134

March 8 - We are prepared to launch our vessels for they are all
loaded, Mr. Laffite has supplied the expedition with 8 more
shallow draft boats and ? [unreadable number] of Mr. Laffite’s
fleet has been ordered to escort them up the Trinity - Good God
of all places, I do not understand the reasoning behind choosing
that River, it leads straight to Hell, there are savages and waste
land. The River itself is just navigatable (sic) with deep draft
ships, I feel it is uninhabitable. I would settle on the Lavaca as
first planned or on the Sabine.
March 9 - weather has taken a turn for the worse. To bad to
leave. Maybe in the morrow. I take this as a bad omen.
March 11 - We have a big blow coming in. We are trying to make
for the mouth of the Trinity. The Bay is treacherous in the
weather, ice and snow are cloaking the ship, the wind is sharp
enough to cut a man in half....
March 12 - Last night the Santa Rista hit a reef and turned back.
Our ship is taken (sic) water, I am unsure if we will see the end
of the voyage. We have taken refuge about 2700 varas north of
the mouth.
March 14 - I fear we can’t stay here any longer. The Dorada
may make it to the mouth where we can to locate others. We
lost Mr. Villanuance ... to the savages. He and Mr. Autigo were
out cutting planks when they were attacked. Mr. Autigo took an
arrow to the leg, he is said to have sent six of the devils back to
hell, he is strong and fierce enough. I have little doubt he did, he
will recover fast enough. We will sleep in waves tonight [and]
double the watch for they may attack.
March 15 - Lallemand and a French detachment of
approximately 75 men were spotted today on the west side.
They are going up River to find the spot. We can not ferry them
up river because our repairs aren’t finished yet. They say Mr.
Laffite lost 2 ships and the French lost their schooner in the
storm. The El Verno ran aground 1000 varas east of the mouth
in from of the Oro Creek mouth and the Melita strayed from the
group and has not been spotted in 1 1/2 days. We can only hope
for the best, the rest of the fleet is at Orcquinsas (sic) Bluff.
March 25 - We are once again loaded the ships are ready to sail
the Dorada is sturdy enough to get back to the Isle, the French
are in high spirits, the crews of the ship are not. They have been
up this God forsaken river before and know they are going to sail
135

into a nightmare - they will once again [unreadable word] the
Edge of Hell.
March 27 - We found Lallemand. They are safe God almighty
they are safe. This is a true miracle before our eyes. They tell
the same tale as the currier of how a savage saved them, they
picked a small bluff about [ word scratched out] there is a bend
about 700 varas north and a bend in the river south of them
about 1000 varas. They are on a small bluff about 7 varas above
the high water mark and a mouth of a creek not very far north it
shall make an excellent harbor for them. The is a supreme spot
for artillery. They should have no trouble with Spanish ships.
March 29 - all stores are unloaded and we are headed out to
open sea. Mr. Laffite left the Ginny to stand guard for the
French for 2 weeks, this didn’t settle very well with the crew.
Capt. Lockown protested, but they agreed to stay in the end of
the argument.
May 2 - a shallow draft ship approaches from the east. It is
flying French colors yet it has not answered the entering signals.
The Concord is coming in with it.
May 3 - the ship is from the French Camp. Lallemand has sent
Regold to loan the French 25 slaves and any of his crews he can
spare for the men at the camp have taken ill. They need doctors
too for the endurance of Spring. Masters Megow, Churchill,
Williams, Regold, Col. Sarzzin,me, and Laffite met earlier. I
have never seen Laffite so enraged. He feels he has done enough
for the settlers for he has lost 42 men and 2 ships getting them
there. He feels they owe him. Regold assures him once
Napoleon arrives, Laffite will be reimbursed. Laffite agrees to
loan them 20 slaves for one month and Megow and I shall
return with them. I am very unhappy with this decision. I don’t
feel [unreadable words] a return trip. Mr. Laffite convinces me
to go back with them and Megow and I will be amply rewarded.
Megow is highly distressed, we sail in the morning. 20 unhappy
slaves are loaded on the ship they fear going up the river for the
savages and the devil live there. 2 distressed doctors, Megow
and I are sent for the endurance of the month.
May 5 - We arrive at the camp. The construction is going poorly
due to the illnesses, Lallemand is bed ridden with a stomach
disease. More than half the camp have it. It seems as though
they can’t control their bowels. The smell is putrid, the insects
are terrible, they moved the camp about 200 varas north of the
136

creek and now they are about 1500 varas from the North bluff.
They shall construct a stockade there.
May 20 - I cannot wait for the ship to come for us. They have
started construction and stockades. They have about 17 block
houses started along with a store room in the middle. It holds
their food, ammunition, supplies and I wasn’t suppose to see it
but a large amount of gold. I am out of paper this is the last
entry for now.

137

Appendix F

138

139

140

141

142

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

Appendix G

151

152

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

160

161

162

Appendix H

163

164

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

176

Appendix I
The Williams-Buck Homestead

41WM272

Preliminary Analysis Of The
Artifacts From The 2001
Texas Archeological Society Field School Youth Program
Artifact Analysis By
Faculty and Students
From
The University of Houston Clear Lake
Joan Few, Anderson Bradford, Vanessa Bristol, Jerry Hamric, Gordon Lambert,
Adrienne Lowry, Trey Magnum, Valerie Marzullo, Tom Mattes, Karri Schuetzle,
Karen Sprouse, Laura C. Trellue, Catherine Watson
History
The youth attending the TAS 2001 Field School excavated an area believed to be
the site of a lean-to shelter built by Billy Williams. Williams homesteaded the land
along the North Fork of the San Gabriel River in 1848. Indians were still very present in
the area. When Williams arrived, he encountered a burnt out wagon and the bodies of
the Stephens family who had been killed in an Indian raid. Williams buried the
Stephens in what is now the Williams-Buck Cemetery close to the homestead.
In 1848 there were at least 250 settlers in the area. In the early months of that
year, 107 of them signed a petition to organize a new county. The Texas legislature
established Williamson County on March 13, 1848, naming it for Robert M. Williamson.
Georgetown, the county seat, was laid out during the summer of that year, and the
district court was in session by October. According to the census of 1850, Williamson
County had a population of 1,379 whites and 155 slaves, living in agricultural
communities on Brushy Creek and the San Gabriel Rivers. Most of the improved
acreage was used to grow corn. Three families owned fifteen or more slaves in 1850, but
family farms and subsistence agriculture remained the norm prior to the Civil War
(www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/view/WW/hcw11.html) . The
Williams homestead was located approximately twelve miles north/west of Georgetown.
In 1850, using rock and oak trees off the land, Williams built the east pen of his
dogtrot home, and the west pen in 1851. In 1900 Williams sold the farm to A. Buck.
Excavation Objectives
Our excavation objective was to establish whether or not a structure did exist at
this location. If it did, what was its size, shape and orientation? From the artifacts, we
hope to get information on activities associated with the structure and life in pioneer
Texas. From the dates of artifacts recovered we hope to establish if the lean-to was lived
in for only a short period, as the history of the site indicates, or if it was occupied after
the dogtrot was built, or became a trash dump for the homestead. The area around the
possible structure will be studied for yard activities and trash disposal.

177

The ten-meter square area of study was divided into one-meter square units for
excavation. The datum point for each unit was located in the SW corner. Prior to
excavation, elevations were taken of the SW corner of each unit as seen in Figure 1.
Arbitrary levels were excavated 10 centimeters at a time. All artifacts were collected and
all diagnostics were plotted on the level forms. Figure 2 shows the units excavated, their
bag numbers and number of levels.
Trash Dispersal
Our research will also look at the way trash is deposited across the surface of the
area. Research has shown that there are patterns of trash deposits around residential
structures. The patterns of refuse disposal in the Texas sites examined (The Labadie
House at Cedar Hill, Shelton House and Shearer House) appear to be somewhat
consistent with the Brunswick pattern of refuse disposal. In the Anglo-American
Brunswick pattern of the 17th century, refuse was discarded adjacent to homes,
primarily out of the back door, but also adjacent to the front door (South: 1977, Chapter
3).
At the Labadie house at Cedar Hill, artifacts date from pre 1850 to post 1890
including datable ceramics and nails. A dump site, that appears to have been household
refuse, was found about 10 meters to the rear of the house about and 4 meters on the
house side of the fence line (Cedar Hill Park, Wallisville Lake Project: 1989, 198-201).
Additional artifacts were found to the right of the main entrance of the Labadie site,
about half way down the side of the house, approximately 10 meters from that side. This
conforms to the Brunswick pattern (Cedar Hill Park: 1989, 250-252).
At the Shelton house, a trash dump of household refuse was found in the rear of
the house about 35 meters from the right rear of the house. Again, this pattern is
consistent with the Brunswick pattern (Wallisville Lake, 1980:113).
There are three trash dumps at the Shearer house site. All three are located down
the right side of the house. The first is 50 feet to the front of the house, and is at a 45
degree angle. The second is 55 feet from the house and directly across from the rear of
the house. The third is located 75 feet from the house and at a 45 degree angle to the
right rear corner of the house. These disposal locations are all consistent with the
Brunswick pattern (Wallisville Lake, 1980: 118).
It appears from these few sites, that the Brunswick pattern of refuse disposal may
be consistent with the trash disposal patterns of nineteenth century sites in Texas. The
site (41WM272) being tested is approximately 35 feet southwest of the southwest corner
of the dogtrot built by Williams and it is close to a fence line.
Imported Goods Available In 1861
The advertisements in the Texas Almanac of 1861 document what items were being
imported into Texas and would have been available to the Williams family at that time.
Stores in Georgetown and other Central Texas towns would have been able to procure
these goods. In 1861, the principal ports of Texas were Galveston and Lavaca.
From New York came carriages, (Singer) sewing machines, safes, bagging, rope,
bacon, pork, flour, and cotton cloth. French Goods, Wines, Liquors, and Havana Cigars
and Irish linens, spectacles, eyeglasses and Brazilian pebbles.
From Philadelphia came garden seeds, coaches, buggies, wagons and harnesses.
178

From Newark came coaches, buggies, wagons, carryalls, sulkies, ambulances and
all carriage trimmings.
Crockery came from the Staffordshire Potteries in England. (English tablewares
were imported in great numbers.)
From New Orleans came schoolbooks imported from the “North”, French and
British dry goods, silk goods, ribbons, white silk laces, embroideries, hosiery, medicines,
pure chemicals, fine perfumery, fancy soaps, surgical instruments, paints, oils, dye
stuffs.
Things advertised as imported but without point of origin are: drugs, medicines,
chemicals, paints, oils, dye stuffs, brushes, sponges, stationery, window glass, putty,
medicine chests, staple and fancy dry goods, carpets, clothing, boots, shoes, hats, caps,
green and black teas, cutlery, mechanical toys, stoneware, oil lamps, Rio Coffee, Porter,
Ale, Bremen, Bavarian Lager Beer, English Linseed Oil, Havana and German Cigars,
western produce, hardware, agricultural implements, iron and steel, nails, castings, lard,
butter, cheese, whiskey, pork bacon from the West, Scotch Irish whiskey, and Holland
Gin
Retailers in the Houston area advertised hardware, iron, steel, nails, castings,
pumps, window glass, stoves, brandy, wine, cigars and garden seeds from Philadelphia.
Also drugs and chemicals, imported to Philadelphia from Europe were listed.
Texas lottery tickets could also be purchased and were advertised by Wood, Eddy &
Co. The advertisement stated that the same company that managed the Delaware,
Missouri, and Kentucky State lotteries managed the State lottery.
Artifact Grouping By Function/Recognizing Patterns in Historical Archaeology
A pattern is the arrangement, the configuration of artifacts (including structures,
land alteration, deposits, etc.) by type and quantity, which reflect cultural activities,
cultural time periods, and cultural change. We are assuming that every social system
has identifiable survival strategies; that every survival strategy has a measurable amount
of energy and resources; that every household and business reflects the whole system
through objects used; that all systems are reflected in patterns, and that patterns can be
identified in the archaeological (material) record by: 1) artifact numbers (how many), 2)
artifact association (what with), and 3) artifact distribution (where).
In analyzing our artifacts we will be using Stanley South’s quantitative pattern by
artifact type. South classified and grouped artifacts according to specific function
(South, 1977:95):
kitchen artifact group: includes all storage, cooking and eating
utensils, and all bottles including pharmaceuticals
bone group:
architectural group: includes window glass, nails, bolts, and all
construction hardware including door locks, etc.
furniture group: hinges, knobs, drawer pulls and locks, curtain
pulleys, mirrors, chimney lamps, etc.
arms group: bullets, shot, gun flints, gun parts, bullet molds,etc.
clothing group: buttons, buckles, thimbles, scissors, pins,beads, etc.
personal group: coins, keys, combs, jewelry, watches, pencils,pens, etc.
179

tobacco pipe group:
activities group: construction tools, farm tools, toys, fishing
gear, stable and barn, miscellaneous hardware
(unidentified metal), charcoal, etc.
miscellaneous: everything that doesn’t fit into any other group
such as plant materials, shells, rocks, 20th century garbage,etc.
Artifact Analysis By Excavation Unit
Figure 3 shows the total number of artifacts found in the first levels of excavation
(completed levels) and their distribution across the site. Figure 4 shows the three
features that were found, the one hearth and the two clusters of rocks that may have
been a part of the structure. The dotted lines in Figure 4 show the area where a lean-to
may have been located based on the density of charcoal flakes and ashy soil in
association with the rock clusters.
Unit Descriptions:
Excavation units are discussed beginning in the southwest corner of the site
proceeding north and then east.
N100 E100
Bag # 41WM272-15
Level 1
Total Number of Artifacts: 169
Kitchen group: There were a total of 90 pieces found in this class. There were 10
ceramic pieces, three with decoration; one hand painted sherd with green paint; one
hand painted sherd had red paint; and one sherd was a banded ware. Hand painted
wares were popular between 1810 and 1860 (per Few 1988 and Majewski 1984:41). Five
sheds were whiteware and two sherds were pieces of crockery. There were forty-eight
pieces of bottle glass. Thirty pieces were once clear glass and turned amethyst color
from the manganese when exposed to sunlight (cir. 1880 to 1914), four (4) pieces of
aqua glass fragments, one (1) piece of dark green glass fragment, and thirteen (13)
pieces of clear glass fragments were also found. One (1) metal three tined fork was
found: two tines were missing; the holes on the tang indicate that it had a decorative
handle.

N100 E100
Bag # 41WM272-15
Level 1
Total Number of Artifacts: 169
Kitchen group: There were a total of 90 pieces found in this class. There were 10 ceramic
pieces, three with decoration; one hand painted sherd with green paint; one handpainted sherd
had red paint; and one sherd was a banded ware. Hand painted wares were popular between 1810
and 1860 (per Few 1988 and Majewski 1984:41). Five sheds were white ware and two sherds

180

were pieces of crockery. There were forty-eight pieces of bottle glass. Thirty pieces were once
clear glass and turned amethyst color from the manganese when exposed to sunlight (cir. 1880 to
1914), four (4) pieces of aqua glass fragments, one (1) piece of dark green glass fragment, and
thirteen (13) pieces of clear glass fragments were also found. One (1) metal three tined fork was
found: two tines were missing; the holes on the tang indicate that it had a decorative handle.
Thirty-one (31) pieces of a stove were found: one metal stove burner; one metal stove part
(possibly a corner piece); and twenty-nine metal stove fragments.
Bone group: There were fourteen (14) unidentifiable bone fragments in this group.
Architectural group: There were a total of 36 pieces of this group found.
Twenty-four (24) machine cut square nails were found. Six (6) were whole nails and the
remaining eighteen (18) were fragments. (cir. Late 1830’s to present).
Eight (8) modern wire round nails were found. Four (4) were whole nails and four (4) were
fragments. (cir. 1850’s to present per Nelson 1962).
One (1) unusual nail with an eye through the center was included. This could be possible custom
forging.
Furniture: There were three (3) pieces of lantern glass.
Arms group: One (1) piece of shell casing. It is a 22 short rim fire case.
Clothing group: Nine (9) boot eyelets
Personal group: Eight (8) pieces of a porcelain jar were found. Seven (7) of these pieces appear
to be a cold cream jar. There are maker’s marks and numbers on the bottom piece of the jar
which are #4657. There is also a “p” as part of the makers mark. There is one (1) odd piece of
porcelain.
Activities group: There was one (1) cotter pin, one (1) piece of the top part of a horseshoe nail,
four (4) pieces of thin wire and two (2) fencing staples.
N102/E100
Bag # 41WM272-16
Level 1
Total Number of Artifacts: 146
Kitchen: There were a total of 30 artifacts that belonged to the kitchen subgroup, 43% of the
total number of artifacts found in this unit. There were 9 pieces of clear glass, 1 piece of
turquoise glass, 18 pieces of clear glass (bottle), 2 pieces of lavender glass, 5 pieces of green
glass, and 1 piece of glass with patina. There were 12 ceramic sherds; 1 crockery, 9 white
ironstone (whiteware), 1 banded ware with red and green bands, and 1teal colored transfer ware.
One whiteware fragment had a markers mark with four letters “EGLA”, probably “ENGLAND.”
Bone: There were 30 bone fragments (20.5% of the total).
Architecture: There were 17 artifacts in this group (24% of the total). There were 4 fragments
of modern wire nails and 6 pieces of modern machine nails and 2 hand wrought nails.
Tobacco: 1 small fragments of a rim of a pipe bowl.
Activities: There were a total of 43 artifacts in this group (28.7% of the total). There were 4
pieces of charcoal, 2 porcelain fragments of a doll’s face, 15 pieces of a metal container
(probably snuff) numerous metal fragments, 1 broken horse shoe nail, 1 metal band/bar, 1 fence

181

staple, 1 tri-foil washer, 1 metal barbed wire fragments, 3 pieces of hay baling wire and 15 pieces
of baling
wire.
N 104 / E 100
Bag # 41WM272-9
Level 1
Total Number of Artifacts: 173
Kitchen: The largest number of artifacts was in this subgroup, a total of 122 separate pieces,
which constituted 71% of the total unit. Under the ceramics classification, there were seven (7)
pieces of white undecorated ironstone ware. The pieces were small and it was not apparent what
type of serving or kitchenware they came from.
There was a total of 89 pieces of glass in this unit. The largest piece was item 12 on the
inventory record, an entire bottleneck with an intact rim. Its height was 1 1/8 inches, with an
internal diameter of three quarters of an inch and an outside diameter of 1 1/16 of an inch.
Proportionally, this would indicate the original bottle had probably been of one quart capacity.
The neck had a molded ring below the lip to accommodate a wire to retain the stopper. This is
very similar to the illustration entitled “brandy bottle” on the antiquebottle.com web site. The
seam pattern from the mold ran all the way to the lip of the bottle, indicating that it was
manufactured after 1902. The violet or amethyst color is consistent with clear bottle glass that
experienced an internal chemical change after long exposure to the sun. This would be due to a
type of Manganese containing glass that became unavailable during WWI. Based on the color
and seam observations, the bottleneck dates no earlier than 1902 and probably no later the period
1914-1918. (References: A Bit About Bottles-The Austin Bottle and Insulator Collectors and the
web site http://www.antiquebottles.com.)
The bottleneck was the largest of eight pieces of violet or amethyst glass. The rest were
small shards, possibly from the same bottle. Other shards of colored glass included eleven pieces
of brown glass, eight of green, and three of blue. These all seemed to be parts of small bottles.
Additionally, there were 59 shards of clear glass. Inventory item 16 (clear glass) seemed to
contain mostly bottle glass, but upon close inspection, two of the pieces appeared to be window
glass, approximately 3/32 inches thick. These were reclassified into the architectural category.
Another reclassification of material involved 28 pieces of scrap metal that had originally been
included with the activities group. Some of these metal fragments were large enough or had
apparent rims that seemed to indicate cans or food containers.
Bone: There were seven (7) fragments of bone, approximately 7% of all artifacts. All appeared to
be from a small animal. There was no evidence of teeth or larger bones.
Architecture: This subgroup contained only five (5) items, approximately 3% of the total. Two
of these were the pieces of window glass mentioned above. The other three were nails, one of the
square cut variety and two of the round wire type. The square nail, based on its 1 1/4 inch length
and the taper of the shank, would be classified as a size 3d cut square nail. Its head was 6 mm
square. The shank was 4 x 2 mm. This type of square nail was manufactured from about 1830 on.
The other two nails were of the round wire type. Based on information in a table on page 38 of
the 1897 Sears Roebuck and Company Catalog, these nails appear to be size 8d common. They
182

were 3 1/2 inches long, with 1/4 inch diameter heads. Their shanks were 1/8 inch in diameter.
Round nails of this type were manufactured after 1850. The information on the cut nail was
obtained from the National Park Service Technical Leaflet entitled Nail Chronology as an Aid to
Dating Old Buildings.
Clothing: (<1% of total) The only item in the clothing subgroup was the heel of a boot, quite
deteriorated and fragile. There were the remains of five layers of leather, with two nails still in
the leather. There were also associated fragments of other nails. The remaining heel was about
one inch high and 1 1/2 inches long. By comparing these dimensions with illustrations in
footwear section of the 1897 Sears Roebuck and Company Catalog, and by estimating
proportions, a rough determination was made that the original boot could have been 12 inches
long (comparable to men’s size 10 1/2 –11).
Personal: (<1% of total) A flattened metal can seemed to initially belong with the kitchen
subgroup. Closer examination indicated that it was not a round can, but was of the flattened
ovoid shape or style referred to as a “tobacco can”. For this reason, it was relocated to the
personal category.
Activities: (20% of total) Bailing wire, fence wire, and one fence staple represented this
subgroup, with a total of 35 pieces. The single piece of barbed wire matches illustration 35B in
the images section of the www.barbedwiremuseum.com web site. This is consistent with Glidden
single strand wire with coiled two point barbs (patent #RE6913, Feb. 18, 1876). There were also
33 short pieces of small diameter wire of the sort typically used on hay bales. Lastly, there was a
medium sized staple of the type used to attach barbed wire.
Miscellaneous: (Approximately 1% of total) Two small broken snail shells were the only items
in this subgroup.
N104/E100
Bag # 41WM272-17
Level 2 - Incomplete
Kitchen: 2 fragments of bottle glass.
Bone: 2 animal tooth fragments.
Activity: 2 metal fragments.
N102/E102
Bag # 41WM272-19
Level 1
Total Number of Artifacts: 393
Kitchen: There were a total of 95 artifacts belonging to the kitchen sub-group, 24.17% of the
total artifacts found in this unit. There were six pieces of ceramic fragments, three were white
and three beige. Next there were eighty-nine pieces of bottle glass, of which forty-one were
clear, pharmaceutical bottle fragments, three of these having an octagonal base; forty-eight beer
and wine bottle fragments, thirteen of which were amethyst, three brown, five aqua, and twentyseven clear. Among the amethyst fragments, was a bottleneck fragment with a height of one and
one-eighth inches, three-quarter inch inside diameter, and on and one-sixteenth outside diameter.
The neck also has a molded ring below the lip to accommodate a stopper. The neck design and
183

amethyst color would indicate the bottle was made between 1902-1918. Reference: A Bit About
Bottles. The Austin Bottle and Insulator Collectors Handout and web site
(http://www.antiquebottles.com.).
Bone: There were 12 artifacts identified as belonging to the bone sub-group, 3.053% of the
total for this unit. One piece is possibly a bird bone; and the other eleven fragments are possible
deer bones.
Architecture: There were a total of 17 artifacts in the architecture sub-group, 4.326% of the
total for this unit. There were eight small wire nail fragments; three round nails; one square nail;
and five square nail fragments.
Furniture: Only 2 artifacts were found belonging to the furniture sub-group, 0.509% of the otal
for this unit. There are two pieces of amethyst colored glass, both of which appear to be the
base of a candleholder.
Clothing: There were 61 artifacts found in the clothing sub-group, 15.522% of the total for this
unit. All were fragments of a leather boot. There were three boot eyelets; twelve boot nail
fragments; forty-five boot leather fragments; and one boot heel.
Activities: There were total of 206 artifacts in the activities sub-group. 52.417% of the total of
this unit. The artifacts consisted of seventy-five small, unidentified metal fragments; one piece
of banding metal; five small pieces of wire; two fencing staples; and one-hundred and twentythree fragments of charcoal.
N103/E102
Bag # 41WM272-20
Level 1
Artifact Total: 168
Kitchen: There were a total of 24 artifacts that belonged to this sub-group, 14% of the total
artifacts found in this unit. There were two pieces of ceramic stoneware, including one piece of
whiteware (late 19th cent.) and one piece of crockery (post-1880). There were 22 pieces of bottle
glass, including two tops (similar to Bags 272-4 and 9), possibly from brandy bottles circa
1902-1918 (www.antiquebottles.com); one bottom fragment (one third) with the letters "...ND
SPRINGS O..." around the edge and the numbers "1915" off center above the letters; four purple
pieces; two brown pieces; and 13 small, clear unidentifiable pieces.
Architecture: There were four artifacts identified as belonging to this sub-group, 2% of the total.
There were four modern machine nails, including one finishing nail and three common nails.
Personal Group: There were 62 artifacts in this sub-group, 37% of the total. These artifacts
appear to represent the remains of a metal can similar to the snuff can in Bag 272-4; age
unknown.
Activities Group: There were 77 artifacts in this sub-group, 46% of the total. There were three
small pieces of baling wire; two rounded staples; one flat piece of rectangular metal (1”x2.5”)
with half a drilled hole at one end, function unknown; one small piece of charred wood; and 70
pieces of charcoal.
Miscellaneous Group: There was one artifact in this sub-group, less than 1% of the total. The
artifact was a very small sherd of unknown material.

184

N105/E102
Bag # 41WM272-10
Level 1
Total Number of Artifacts: 184
Kitchen: There were a total of 129 artifacts in the group. There were 56 fragments of clear
glass, 45 pieces of yellow glass shards, 24 pieces of lavender glass, 1 pieces of green glass, 3
pieces of smokey glass, and 14 pieces of brown glass. The 16 ceramic sherds included; 16
ironstone whitewares, and 2 porcelean sherds. One ironstone sherd was a cup rim and another
was a saucer base.
Bone: 5 bone fragments (unidentified)
Architecture: There were 11 artifacts in this group: 5 common nails, 4 sprigs (finishing nail),
and 2 brad nails.
Clothing: Three artifacts in this group composed of 1 snap, and 2 buttons of mother of pearl
inlay.
Activities: There were eight artifacts in this group; 1 leather fragment possibly from a shoe, 1
piece of metal possibly from a tin can, 3 pieces of wire and 3 wire staples.
Miscellaneous: One fragment of layered material similar to shale.
N100/E103
Bag # 41WM272-4
Level 1
Artifact Total: 177 total pieces
Kitchen: There were a total of 121 artifacts that belonged to this sub-group, 68% of the total
artifacts found in this unit. There were 35 pieces of ceramic stoneware, including 10 latenineteenth century stoneware/Bristolware, all from the same original piece; eight salt-glazed,
seven from the same original piece; 14 whiteware, all from the same original piece; two sherds
of transferware, circa 1820-1830 to 1900 (one red and one green); and one piece of white
ironstone. There were 85 pieces of bottle glass, including 62 pieces that represent the remains of
one large, Mason-like jar. The jar is aqua-marine in color, with a 6" diameter bottom (whole),
3.5" screw top (estimated from the 1/3 remaining) and a 4" pontoon. Via an email
communication with Dave Hinson (via the Web site www.antiquebottles.com), this piece was
identified as being a machine made food jar manufactured between the turn of the 19th century
and the 1910s. There were also six pieces of glass that were the remains of two bottles (similar in
shape and color to the bottles found in Bags 272-9 and 272-20); 16 small, clear unidentifiable
pieces; and one brown sherd. Finally, there was a small, metal medicine bottle cap with a weave
pattern on the top.
Bone: There were 19 pieces of bone found in this unit, 11% of the total artifacts. The pieces were
all small and unidentifiable.
Architecture: There were 13 artifacts identified as belonging to this sub-group, 7% of the total.
One was a flat staple and the remaining 12 were nails of various sizes and shapes. There were
three modern machine nails, seven modern wire, one cast iron and one cut.

185

Personal Group: There were 19 artifacts in this sub-group, 11% of the total. These artifacts
appear to represent the remains of the metal bottom of a rectangular snuff can (11/2 " x 2"), age
unknown.
Activities Group: There were five artifacts in this sub-group, 3% of the total. There were four
small pieces of baling wire and one rounded staple.
N104/E103
Bag # 41WM272-14
Level 1 - Incomplete
Total Artifacts: 86
Kitchen: Glass fragments consisted of 40 pieces in a variety of colors: amethyst, pink, green
and clear. One fragment was identified as part of a coke bottle. One jar lid, possibly from a
mason jar was identified.
Architecture: 3 pieces; one small modern nail, one large modern nail and one screw.
Clothing: 2 leather boot fragments, similar to some found in other units.
Activities: 40 pieces; charcoal, miscellaneous wire, metal fragments and 3 metal straps. One of
the metal straps looks like a barrel strap with rivets. Also one tool which looks like a hand made
scraping tool.
N102/E104
Bag # 41WM272-12
Level 1
Total Number of Artifacts: 218
Kitchen: This category contained 132 artifacts. The glass fragments were different colors
indicating different types and functions. The glass colors were: 1 piece of olive, 8 pieces of
brown or amber, 43 clear, 16 pieces of white, 45 pieces of blue and 3 pieces of purple or
amethyst. The amber glass and purple glass are indicative of alcohol or liquor containers.
Eleven shards of white undecorated ironstone appear to be part of a 7 inch diameter saucer. This
level assemblage also included 3 brown fragments of crockery and 2 pieces of white ironstone.
Bone: Four bone fragments included 1 complete tooth, 2 tooth fragments and one very small
bone fragment.
Architecture: 42 nails were found in this unit. In The National Parks Service Leaflet #48, Lee
H Nelson describes the nails as; 12 round nails modern wire nails dating from 1880 to the
present, 1 modern finishing nail, dating from 1850 to the present, 1 early machine cut nail with
hand made head dating from 1790 to 1880, and 1 completely machine cut Sprigs and Brad nail
dating from 1805-1820.
Furniture: One piece of furniture hardware was found; a hinge with 3 eyes. It was 3 inches
long and 1 inch wide.
Arms: One spent bullet that was 1/2 inch in diameter.
Clothing: There were 5 artifacts found. Four eyelets from a boot and the tip of a bootlace.
Personal: One crushed tobacco can.
Activities: There were 28 artifacts: 2 pieces of barbed wire, without the barbs, one was twisted;

186

bailing wire, 4 twisted pieces and 1 straight piece; 1 rounded staple;17 fragments of a rusty metal
band; 3 horseshoe nails that were 58 mm in length , as described on the web site
(www.horseshoes.com/advice/nails).
Miscellaneous: 1 copper disc, 1 fossilized shell, 1 piece of chert.
N103/E105
Bag # 41WM272-3
Level 1
Total Number of Artifacts: 56
Kitchen: 46 kitchen artifacts were recovered from this level. Glass fragments numbered 42.
the colors of glass included; clear, a frosted bottleneck, green, teal, brown, and pink. The teal
glass resembled pieces found in other units of the site. We had one piece of white ware that had
a partial crest, which we were unable to identify and two undecorated white ware ceramic pieces.
A rusted can top/bottom was unidentifiable.
Bone: One bone fragment: burnt and unidentifiable.
Architecture: Five artifacts; staples, a nail fragment and a piece of chain.
Arms: One shotgun cap and primer that we believe was manufactured by the Union Metallic
Cartridge Co. of Bridgeport. This 12 gauge shotgun shell was N. 8410 in the Sears Catalogue of
1897 (Black Club Paper Shell). This shell was manufactured before 1912 when the company
merged with the Remington Arms Co.
Clothing: One shoe/boot eyelet.
Activities: Two artifacts were found; a fish hook that was 2.6”/65mm in length and a piece of
porcelain, slightly curved that is possibly a fragment from a china doll face.
N103/E105
Bag # 41WM272-6
Level 2 - Incomplete
Total Number of Artifacts: 16
Kitchen: Twelve small glass fragments accounted for 75% of the total assemblage for this
incomplete level. There were six pieces of clear glass and two pieces each of brown, green and
pink glass. These shards were probably all bottle glass, but they were not large enough to
distinguish between beer/wine and food bottles.
Architecture: Two artifacts (12.5% total); one was a #3d common round wire nail. Size
determination for this nail was based on a table at the bottom of page 38 of the 1897 Sears,
Roebuck & Company Catalog. A National Park Service publication, Technical Bulletin # 48,
Nail Chronology, was very helpful in determining the age of various types of nails based on
manufacturing processes. These nails were produced sometime between 1850 and modern times.
The second artifact was a fragment of a larger square cut nail. This fragment was about 1.25
inches long, indicating it was probably a 5d or 6d nail. This nail was probably a machine cut nail
dating from sometime after 1830.
Activities: Two artifacts (12.5%); a piece of barbed fence wire that was found to be consistent
with Glidden Round Single Strand fence wire (Patent #RE6913, Feb. 18, 1876). This
information came from a web site: www.barbwiremuseum.com/barbedwireimages.htm. The
187

other artifact in the activity group appeared to be a flat spring. It was two inches long by 5/16
inches wide. It was 1/16 of an inch thick and has a small hole (approximately 1/32”) stamped or
bored through one end.
N105/E105
This unit contained Feature 1 - a portion of a hearth (See Figure 4).
Bag # 41WM272-11
Level 1
Total Number of Artifacts: 123
Kitchen: There were a total of 18 artifacts that belonged to the kitchen sub-group, 15% of the
total artifacts found in this unit. There were two pieces of late 19th century ceramic whiteware;
four pieces of wine/beer bottle glass, including three purple and one brown piece; and 11 food
bottle pieces, including seven white, three light green and one dark green. There was also one
piece of yellow cut glass, the remains of a larger piece.
Architecture: There were 14 artifacts identified as belonging to this sub-group, 11% of the total
for this unit. Two were small, vertical shards of window glass; 10 were nails, including three
modern wire, four wire, two square and one finishing; and two small, cabinet sized hinge pins.
Clothing Group: There were three artifacts in this sub-group, 2% of the total; three identical
shoe eyes.
Activities Group: There were 87 artifacts in this sub-group, 71% of the total. These included
one small piece of unidentified wire; one small piece of unidentified metal; one large, iron
handle (use unknown); two rounded staples; three tin flakes; and one barbed wire point (circa ?).
There was also one seed and 64 small pieces of charcoal.
Miscellaneous Group: There was only one piece in this group, less than 1% of the total. The
artifact is a 1 1/4" long dowl-shaped piece of unknown material.
Special Soil Sample: The NW quad of this unit contained the remains of a circular hearth. A
small soil sample of 2 1/2 pounds (Bag 41WM272 - 2 of 2) was taken from that hearth for fine
water screening in the lab. The fine screening yielded 17 dark colored seed casings (halves);
three light-colored seed casings, one whole and two pieces; one seed; two snail shells, one whole
and one partial; seven tiny, elongated spiral snail shells, whole; and one unknown piece of
material. It also yielded five grams of charcoal pieces. There were no artifacts to indicate what
the function of the fire might have been.
N101/E106
Bag 41WM272-1
Level 1
Total Number of Artifacts: 11
Kitchen: Three fragments of bottle glass were found. These small fragments were in three
slightly varying degrees of green.
Clothing: One intact white china four-holed button with a diameter of 1/4 inch as found. This
button was described in the Texas Parks and Wildlife, “An Overview of Nineteenth Century
Buttons” (1986) as a white saucer type, with a concave front, rimless and a slightly convexed
shape on the back with four holes. These types of buttons were very common and were made by
an English gentleman named Richard Prosser in the 1840s.
188

Activities: These included one piece of bailing wire, 4 pieces of charcoal and 2 barbs from a
Glidden Hanging Barb wire. This barb is unique in that is a single strand of wire with the barbs
pointing in the same direction (www.barbwiremuseum.com/barbwireimages.htm).
N104/E107
Bag # 41WM272-2
Level 1
Total Number of Artifacts: 30
Kitchen: A total of 16 kitchen artifacts with 14 glass fragments. The glass consisted of a
variety of colors; brown, clear, frosted and green. The majority of these pieces resemble food
bottles and beer/wine bottles. The remaining 2 artifacts are unidentified ceramic fragments.
Architecture: Nails were the only architectural artifacts; three square and one round.
Activities: Ten artifacts in this category consisted of charcoal pieces, metal shards, and strap
metal. The most interesting artifact was a crank arm and handle. After researching the size and
angle of the arm, we feel that the crank handle probably came from a blacksmith’s drill. The
curvature of the broken portion is opposite to that of a meat grinder, which was our first
consideration. The curvature appears to match that of the drill handle. Given the fact that many
horse shoe nails were found in the assemblage, we feel that the blacksmith's drill is a probable
tool that would have been used at the site. There is another possibility, however. The crank
handle of a roller organ is a good match for our handle. Given the fact that many settlers took
musical instruments of this type with them, we feel that this must be considered as a possible
source. In our research we found examples in the 1897 Sears and Roebuck Catalogue on pages
65 and 524. Since this configuration of crank handle shape was found in several different types
of equipment we feel that it is possible that this is a generic type of handle that could have been
used in many different applications.
N104/E107
Bag # 41WM272-7
Level 2 - Incomplete
Total Number of Artifacts: 8
Kitchen: Bottle glass fragments consisted of 2 piece of clear bottle glass and one of brown glass.
There were two sherds of ceramic whiteware of one sherd of blue transferware.
Architecture: One fragment of a square nail.
Activities: One small bag of tiny fragments of charcoal.

189

190

191

192

193

Figure 5
Artifacts By Type

Bars are numbered by Bag numbers - Figure 2
Conclusion
The number, density, and types of artifacts does indicate that a lean-to may have
occupied this area. The hearth, Feature 1, needs more excavation. This study was a
seven day exercise for the TAS youth program. Future research will be necessary.

194

Figure 6

195

References Cited
Fox, Anne A., William Day and Lynn Highley
1980 Archaeological and Historical Investigations at Wallisville Lake, Chambers and Liberty
Counties, Texas, Center for archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, archaeological survey Report, No. 90
South, Stanley
1977 Method and Theory in Historical Archeology, Academic Press
Weinstein, Richard A., Thurston H. Hahn III, Margaret Swett Henson, David B. Kelley, and
James P. Whelan, Jr.
1989 Archaeological Testing and Mitigation At Cedar Hill Park, Wallisville Lake Project,
Chambers County, Texas, Coastal Environments, Inc. 1260 Main Street, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana 70802

196

Appendix J

197

198

199

200

201

202

203

204

205

206

207

208

209

210

Appendix K

211

212

213

214

215

216

217

218

Appendix L

219

220

221

222

223

224

225

226

227

228

229

230

231

232

233

234

235

236

237

238

239

240

Appendix M

241

242

243

244

245

246

247

248

Appendix N

249

250

251

252

253

254

255

256

257

258

259

260

