AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED
VILLAGE OF CREEDMOOR PUBLIC PARK
IN TRAVIS COUNTY, TEXAS

Principal Investigator:
Bradford M. Jones
Written by:
Matthew C. Stotts and Bradford M. Jones

Prepared for:
The Village of Creedmoor

Prepared by:
Hicks & Company
Austin, Texas
Texas Antiquities Code Permit #4754
Archeology Series No. 200

April 2008

Table of Contents

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT .................................................................................................................................................. 1
INTRODUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SUMMARY................................................................................... 3
Administrative Matters .............................................................................................................................. 3
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ...................................................................................................................... 5
CULTURAL BACKGROUND AND PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ........................................................... 7
Previous Investigations............................................................................................................................. 8
FIELD METHODOLOGY .............................................................................................................................. 9
RESULTS OF FIELD INVESTIGATIONS .................................................................................................. 11
Newly Recorded Site – Site 41TV2290 .................................................................................................. 16
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................... 27
REFERENCES............................................................................................................................................ 29

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1
Figure 2

Figure 3
Figure 4
Figure 5
Figure 6

Figure 7
Figure 8
Figure 9
Figure 10

Figure 11
Figure 12
Figure 13
Figure 14
Figure 15
Figure 16
Figure 17
Figure 18

Figure 19

Project Location ........................................................................................................................ 4
View of typical vegetation in undisturbed portions of project area looking southwest. Note in
background large warehouse and other buildings owned by Village of Creedmoor, piles of fill
material, and water tower associated with historic cotton gin................................................... 6
Map of Project Area with Shovel Tests and Site 41TV2290 Marked...................................... 12
View of trash pile along fence in Village of Creedmoor tract, looking east............................. 13
View looking east down Maha Creek in northern portion of project area. Note rutted trail
paralleling left side of the creek. ............................................................................................. 14
View looking of west of warehouse and adjacent storage structures and concession stand.
Note piles of fill material on surface and gravelly ground surface on right side of photo were
landscape has been raised by artificial fill............................................................................... 15
View of old baseball field looking east with fill material piles in foreground. Old backstop
frame visible in background on right side of photo. ................................................................ 15
Site 41TV2290 map superimposed over aerial photograph. .................................................. 17
View of west side of barn at 41TV2290. ................................................................................. 19
View of underside of corrugated roofing on barn. Painted logo identifies sheet metal as
manufactured for Walter Tips of Austin, Texas by the Apollo Roofing Company of
Pittsburgh ................................................................................................................................ 19
View of 18 X 18 foot concrete enclosure or water tank in cotton gin complex. ...................... 20
L-shaped concrete slab in cotton gin complex........................................................................ 20
View of another concrete slab typical of those found in the area of the cotton gin................. 21
View looking southeast of water tower associated cotton gin................................................. 21
Well covered by partial destroyed roof on northwest side of cotton gin complex. .................. 22
Partial view of deep subsurface pit in portion of a large, multilevel concrete slab in the cotton
gin complex. ............................................................................................................................ 23
View of water pump or similar piece of machinery associated with the cotton gin. ................ 24
Artifacts recovered from shovel tests. Top row is front and back of a single porcelain plate
base with illegible mark recovered in ST. CK8. Bottom two rows are pieces of miscellaneous
rusted metal found in ST. CK9................................................................................................ 24
View of trash-filled well located on the eastern portion of the project area within the
northwestern edge of Site 41TV2290. .................................................................................... 25

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

i

Table of Contents

LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A

Agency Coordination Letters

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

ii

Abstract

ABSTRACT
Hicks & Company archeologists conducted an intensive areal archeological
survey of a 10-acre tract of land slated for construction of a new public park
facility by the Village of Creedmoor in southeastern Travis County. The project
area consists of 7.5 acres of land already owned by the Village of Creedmoor and
2.5 acres of adjacent land that is being acquired from private landowners. This
area is located approximately 270 meters south of the Farm to Market (FM) 1327
and FM 1625 intersection in Creedmoor, Texas. Funding for the project is
provided by a grant from the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD).
Because the Village of Creedmoor will own the property, this project falls under
the Texas Antiquities Code (TAC). The survey was conducted in compliance with
the Antiquities Code of Texas (13 TAC 26) under TAC Permit #4754. The survey
involved pedestrian inspection of the entire project area supplemented with 21
shovel tests. Significant disturbance was encountered across much of the
project area due to multiple episodes of grading and filling on the Village of
Creedmoor’s property.
Artifacts and features consistent with the known
historical development of the property during the twentieth century were
observed in the southern and eastern additions to the project area, resulting in
the designation of one new site trinomial, 41TV2290. This site consists of the
remnants of a cotton gin that was operated from at least 1918 through the late
1950s and two wells that were tapped in the late 1930s or 1940s. Very few
subsurface artifacts were recovered, and the site lacks sufficient integrity or
research potential for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) or for designation as a State Archeological Landmark (SAL). Based on
these findings, Hicks & Company recommends that no additional investigation
is necessary for the project to proceed to construction.
No artifact collections were made during the course of this project. All site
forms, photographs and project related records will be curated at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL).

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

1

Abstract

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

2

Introduction and Management Summary

INTRODUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
The Village of Creedmoor proposes to construct a new park facility on a 10-acre
tract of land on the east side of Farm to Market (FM) 1625, approximately 270
meters south of the intersection of FM 1327 and FM 1625. The project area
consists of 7.5 acres of land already owned by the Village of Creedmoor and 2.5
acres of property that are being acquired from a private landowner. The project
is sponsored by the Village of Creedmoor through a grant from the Texas Parks
and Wildlife Department (TPWD). Because the Village of Creedmoor will own the
property, this project falls under the Texas Antiquities Code. In a coordination
letter dated June 8, 2007, the Texas Historical Commission (THC) recommended
archeological survey of the project area prior to the initiation of construction
(Appendix A).
The cultural resource investigation of the proposed park involved an intensive
areal survey within the all potentially impacted portions of the proposed facility
(Figure 1). Within the proposed project area, the Village of Creedmoor plans to
construct a roofed pavilion with piers and trusses, three connecting trails, six
covered picnic tables, sports fields, tennis courts, and a disc golf course. Based
on construction schematics provided by the village of Creedmoor, impacts within
the APE will be relatively shallow (less than 50 centimeters in depth), except in
the area of the pavilion where support beams will be set into the ground. The
archeological survey involved a 100 percent pedestrian inspection of the entire
APE of the undertaking, supplemented with 21 shovel tests. Investigations
exceeded the minimum standards for archeological surveys outlined by the THC
in accordance with the standards in 13 TAC 26.5(35), 13 TAC 26.20(1), and 13
TAC 26.20(2), requiring no less than two shovel tests per acre.
A large majority of the project area had been disturbed due to surface grading
and filling. Undisturbed contexts were essentially limited to the additional
acreage that is being acquired from private owners around the periphery of the
current Village of Creedmoor property.

ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
The fieldwork was conducted on January 9, 2008 under Texas Antiquities Code
(TAC) Permit #4754. Weather conditions were sunny and cool and no problems
were encountered during the course of the fieldwork. Bradford Jones served as
Principal Investigator on the project.
Matthew Stotts served as project
archeologist and Carolyn Keagle served as field technician. Matthew Stotts,
Bradford Jones, and Carolyn Keagle conducted the fieldwork. Bradford Jones
conducted archival research.
Report writing and curation of the project
documents and photos was carried out by Matthew Stotts and Bradford Jones in
January of 2008 following the conclusion of fieldwork. This report is offered in
partial fulfillment of the requirements of TAC Permit #4754.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

3

Introduction and Management Summary

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

4

Environmental Setting

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The proposed Village of Creedmoor Public Park project area is located in Travis
County, Texas within the Blackland Prairie physiographic province.
The
regional ecology is a grassland characterized by gentle topography. In its
natural state it is predominantly covered with native grasses including little
bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium), big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii), Indian
grass (Sorghastrum nutans), and tall dropseed (Sporobolus asper) in the uplands
and eastern grama grass (Tripsacum dactyloides) and switch grass (Panicum
virgatum) in the lowlands (Gould 1975). The generally southeasterly trending
rivers and streams are also home to elm, cottonwood, pecan, oak, and
sugarberry trees. Today much of the region is agricultural land, with an
emphasis on cotton, corn, milo and wheat, a use that it has been prized for
since significant European settlement began in the region. Blair (1950:101-102)
notes an array of mammal species including deer, rabbit, coyote, bobcat, as well
as many reptiles, amphibians, and snails that are typical of this region.
The project area is located in a primarily rural portion of southeast Travis
County on the south side of Creedmoor. The project area is a combination of
open fields used for various purposes by the Village of Creedmoor and grazing
lands. The project area’s southwest corner contains a community center and
parking lot that had previously been constructed. Maha Creek passes through
the northern portion of the project area. Vegetation in the specific project area
consists of species typical of mesquite savannah and pasture (Figure 2).
The mapped soil units in the project area and immediate vicinity are
characterized as deep Houston Black clays overlying the Cretaceous Age Taylor
Group geological formation (Werchan et al. 1974). Houston Black clays are
deep, extremely dense and compact mottled clays with a generally low
probability to contain deeply buried cultural deposits. Archeological sites
associated with these soils are expected to exist as surficial manifestations or be
shallowly buried at depths accessible by shovel testing. Given the prevalence of
historic age farming in this area, any archeological sites are likely to be
disturbed.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

5

Cultural Background and Previous Investigations

Figure 2: View of typical vegetation in undisturbed portions of project area looking
southwest. Note in background large warehouse and other buildings owned by
Village of Creedmoor, piles of fill material, and water tower associated with historic
cotton gin.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

6

Cultural Background and Previous Investigations

CULTURAL BACKGROUND AND PREVIOUS
INVESTIGATIONS
The project area is located within the central Texas archeological region.
Specifically, it lies on the eastern edge of the Balcones Escarpment. Central
Texas is one of the better-known regions of the state archeologically. Most
chronologies for central Texas are based on four main time periods, representing
roughly 12,000 years of habitation. The sequence from Collins (2004) is as
follows: Paleoindian period (ca.11,500-8,800 BP), Archaic period (ca. 8,800­
1,200 BP), the Late Prehistoric period (1,200-400 BP), and the Historic Period
(400 BP to present).
The 6,600-year Archaic period is typically further
subdivided into Early (8,800-6,000 BP), Middle (6,000-4,000 BP) and Late
(4,000-1,200 BP).
Although these divisions represent arbitrary temporal
categories, they are also based in large part on perceived adaptations in
subsistence, and are reflected in changes in lithic and other technologies.
The project area falls within the Blackland Prairie archeological region, which is
somewhat underrepresented in terms of prehistoric site density.
Intact
prehistoric sites tend to be clustered along first order streams, with only
occasional minor sites in between. It has been suggested that prehistoric
utilization of this region was intermittent, or confined mainly to the riparian
arteries along major waterways (Brownlow 2003). Researchers have tended to
link the low archeological site density within the Blackland Prairie to limited
water supply and the lack of large mammals such as bison and pronghorn
antelope (Shafer and Bryant 1976), forcing the nomadic hunter-gatherers who
moved through this region on their seasonal migrations to adhere to the
waterways. However, cultural and territorial forces must also be acknowledged.
The fact is, the Blackland Prairie is located at the intersection of several
archeologically distinctive culture areas—the hunter-gatherer burned rock
cultures of the north and west, the coastal groups to the east, and the Caddoan
tribes of the Post Oak Savannah/Eastern Woodlands. One final explanation for
the low occurrence of prehistoric sites on the Blackland Prairie is that many
prehistoric archeological sites were no doubt destroyed by farming and intensive
agricultural use of the Blackland Prairie during the latter half of the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries.
Based on what is known about the prehistoric environment, it seems probable
that prehistoric occupation of the Blackland Prairie would have required the
utilization of both plateau and prairie resources with considerable seasonal
mobility between the two (Potter 2006; Ricklis and Collins 1994). While lithic
reduction areas are not uncommon and burned rock middens are not completely
absent from the region, most of the occupation sites in the Blackland Prairie
represent short-term campsites in open, unprotected areas situated on alluvial
terraces adjacent to streams or rivers (Black 1989). Many central Texas
archeological sites located along the larger waterways, such as the Colorado
River, the San Gabriel River, and Brushy Creek, have also been deeply buried by
Holocene alluvium (Johnson 2000). A typical open occupation site in central
Texas contains refuse such as chert flaking debris, broken chert tools,
fragmented burned rock, land snails, fragmented animal bone and charred plant
remains within the context of a cooking facility such as an oven or a stone
hearth. An additional characteristic of open sites is the presence of diagnostic
stone tools often representing occupations from different periods or phases and
ultimately suggesting repeated use over hundreds or perhaps thousands of

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

7

Cultural Background and Previous Investigations

years.
Buried intact prehistoric occupation sites are typically considered
archeologically significant when identified.
The Village of Creedmoor, in which the project area is located, was settled by at
least the 1850s at which time local business included a meat market, an ice
cream shop, a general store, a drugstore, a blacksmith shop, and a barbershop
(Parker 1996). The community was originally known as Willow Springs, however,
it was renamed in the 1880s by the settlers populating it who wished to express
their strong faith in the name of the town (Barkley 1963:15). The name Willow
Springs derived from the willow trees that grew next to a spring which was
located by the cotton gin (Barkley 1963:15). According to local informants, the
spring and the vein of water that fed it were the only source of fresh water
available to the local people, and contrasts with the salt water that comes from
other water veins tapped via artesian wells (Gussie Graef personal
communication 2008). Like many of the Blackland prairie communities, cotton
farming was Creedmoor’s most important local industry, the importance of
which is signified by the common use of the “the gin” as a spatial referent in
local histories. A tornado hit the town in 1921, destroying the school and a
cotton gin. By the 1950s two gins existed in the town, and cotton continued to
be a significant local product. The importance of cotton farming appears to have
decreased after 1950 given the closure of at least one of the gins, the remains of
which were identified in the project area. In 2000, the population of Creedmoor
stood at 211, the highest in its history and a significant increase from the
population of twenty that lived here in 1897 (Parker 2008).

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Background research for this project was conducted utilizing records on the
THC’s Archeological Sites Atlas. The background research indicates that no
previously recorded archeological sites exist within the project area, and no
archeological surveys have been conducted within the project area. Two previous
archeological surveys have occurred within less than a one kilometer of the
project area (Figure 1). In 2003, Hicks & Company archeologists conducted a
linear survey 67 meters south of the current project area within a designated
high probability area along an alternate route of SH 45 Southeast. No sites in
the vicinity of the current project area were recorded during that survey. A
second survey terminating 50 meters south of the project area, also associated
with a high probability area along an alternate route for SH 45 Southeast, was
conducted by PBS&J in 2005. During this survey, Site 41TV2116 - an early 20th
century house site - was identified 213 meters south of the current project area.
This site was not recommended as eligible for the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) or as a State Archeological Landmark (SAL), and no further work
was recommended.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

8

Field Methodology

FIELD METHODOLOGY
As outlined in the TAC Permit Scope of Work, Hicks & Company archeologists
conducted a 100% pedestrian inspection of the project area. Subsurface testing
in the form of shovel tests was conducted at regular intervals in order to satisfy
the minimum survey standards of the THC. Shovel testing was conducted at a
rate of greater than two tests per acre, resulting in the excavation of 21 tests.
Sediment removed from the shovel tests was screened through ¼ -inch mesh
hardware cloth, and the results were recorded on standardized forms. Site
41TV2290 was assessed by means of no fewer than six shovel tests to delineate
site boundaries and define site context and integrity. The site was electronically
recorded with hand-held GPS units and plotted onto a 7.5' USGS topographic
quadrangle and/or aerial photograph. One new site trinomial was produced, and
specific site information recorded on standardized forms will be submitted to
TARL for inclusion in their archives.
As per the THC’s Policy on late nineteenth and early twentieth century sites
(Denton 1999), Site 41TV2290 was documented not only through field efforts,
but also through survey level archival research. This research included deed
record research, reviews of census records, historic map research, and oral
interviews with the current landowners in order to assess the NRHP and SAL
eligibility of the site. The names of the individuals associated with the site were
checked in the New Handbook of Texas History, though none were discussed.
Survey investigations followed a general no-collection strategy. As no temporally
diagnostic artifacts were observed in the field or in the shovel tests, no artifacts
were collected. Artifacts that were recorded during the course of the field
investigations, either on the surface or in subsurface tests, were thoroughly
documented in the field and reburied in the same shovel test or left on the
surface.
Site 41TV2290 was recorded at TARL, and all project photographs and records
will be curated at that facility according to their standards.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

9

Field Methodology

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

10

Results of Field Investigations

RESULTS OF FIELD INVESTIGATIONS
Archeologists intensively surveyed all portions of the proposed Village of
Creedmoor Public Park. In addition to conducting a 100% pedestrian survey, 21
shovel tests were excavated within the proposed project area (Figure 3). Shovel
testing indicated extensive disturbance throughout the majority of the project
area, except in the portion of the property adjacent to Maha Creek and in two
properties that are currently being acquired from a private landowner. Of the 21
shovel tests dug, only two were positive for historic cultural material near the
structural remains of a mid twentieth century cotton gin that was recorded in
the southern portion of the project area. The cotton gin and two wells, Site
41TV2260, have been owned and operated by the family of the current property
owner since the late 1930s and the site will be discussed at length following an
overview of the general results of field investigations.
The project area consists of an irregularly shaped 7.5 acre central parcel owned
by the Village of Creedmoor that fronts FM 1625, and two properties that are in
the process of being acquired: a one-and-a-half acre tract on the south side and
a one acre tract on one east side (Figure 3). Based on metes and bounds
descriptions for the one-and-a-half acre property to the south, the 7.5 acre tract
was at least in part described as the site of the “old Creedmoor School house”
(Travis County Deed Records, Vol. 304: 341), though no evidence of such a
building was preserved on the surface or indicated by the survey or shovel
testing. Barkley (1963: 150) reports that the “first school was built in 1880,
several miles from the present location; for a time it was where the gin is
situated.” Barkley’s reference to the “the gin” likely describes the ruins of the
cotton gin recorded at the south end of the property as Site 41TV2290, and
provides secondary support to the designation of the property as the site of the
first Creedmoor schoolhouse. Presently, a large warehouse structure and gravel
parking lot are located on the western portion of the property, behind which are
several small storage sheds, a concession booth, and other buildings utilized by
the village. The southern and eastern two-thirds of this parcel are primarily a
now unused baseball field with the backstop frame located in the southeast
corner and large poles with lights and speakers mounted on them. Portions of
an asphalt road were observed along the eastern perimeter of this tract at the
back of the baseball field. In the space behind the warehouse and in the
location of the old baseball field, the Village of Creedmoor is currently utilizing
the land for storing fill materials (see Figure 2). Along the eastern fence line,
large piles of trash have accumulated over the years (Figure 4).

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

11

Results of Field Investigations

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

12

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 4: View of trash pile along fence in Village of Creedmoor tract, looking east.
Investigators began shovel testing the 7.5 acre tract in its northern extension
where Maha Creek runs through. This area is separated from the former
baseball field by a fence and is accessible via a gate and dirt track. The land is
currently used for cattle grazing. Four shovel tests were dug from west to east
to (ST. CK1, MS1, BJ1, and CK2) on the northern side of the creek. Surface
conditions in this portion of the site varied from patches of greater than 70­
100% surface exposure near the creek to less than 30% surface visibility
approximately five meters north where the surface vegetation was a mix of short
and tall grasses and mesquite scrub. Animal and vehicle trails were visible in
this portion of the property, especially near the creek (Figure 5). This portion of
the project area is slated for use as hike and bike paths. Shovel testing indicated
that deposits in this portion of the property consisted of an upper zone of dark
grayish brown clay (2.5Y4/2) approximately 16-20 centimeters in depth with
evidence of disturbance due to trampling by livestock, root intrusion, and
possible agricultural use. Below this was dark gray (2.5Y4/1) clay that became
increasingly dense and sticky with depth. All shovel tests were sterile for
cultural materials.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

13

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 5: View looking east down Maha Creek in northern portion of project area.
Note rutted trail paralleling left side of the creek.
Within the large area east of the present warehouse structure, where the old
baseball field was located, three shovel test transects were placed running east
to west (Figure 3). Placement of shovel tests was in part dictated by the
presence of large mounds of fill materials and the presence of small structures
(Figures 6 & 7). Shovel testing indicated that this portion of the project area
had been severely modified by the deposition of different fills associated with
flood control and the construction of the baseball field. According to Richard
Crandal (Personal Communication, 2008), much of the northern half of this area
had been filled within the past two years in order to mitigate flooding associated
with Maha Creek. Shovel testing within the northwestern portions repeatedly
encountered a dense deposit of clay fill with gravels. The clay fill varied in color
from homogenous dark gray (2.5Y4/1) clay to dark gray clay with yellow, light
gray, and light brown mottling. This transitioned to grayish brown (2.5Y5/1)
sticky clay with light brown mottling between 40 and 50 centimeters below the
surface. In two of the shovel tests along the eastern edge of the property (ST.
CK3 & MS3), fill was limited to the surface or absent all together. Sediments
within these tests were comparable to those excavated north of Maha Creek.
Evidence of other episodes of landscape modification, likely associated with the
construction of the baseball field, was encountered along the southern-most
transect within this property (ST. BJ3, BJ4, CK6). Shovel Test BJ3 was
terminated at approximately 20 centimeters below surface when a metal pipe
was encountered. This is likely a conduit for the electrical cables running to the
mounted lights and speakers surrounding the old baseball field. In shovel test
BJ4, approximately 50 meters west of Shovel Test BJ3, sediments were
completely different from those observed elsewhere. In this location a cap of 30
centimeters of mottled light yellowish brown (2.5Y6/4) and very dark gray
(2.5Y3/1) clay overlay approximately 40 centimeters of very dark brown
(7.5YR2.5/2) loose mulch fill. The mulch consisted of 50 % wood shavings and
sticks as well as shredded plastic. Below this was very dark gray (10Y3/1)
sticky clay to a meter. The final shovel test in the southern line (ST. CK6)
encountered additional clay fill, but none of the mulch.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

14

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 6: View looking of west of warehouse and adjacent storage structures and
concession stand. Note piles of fill material on surface and gravelly ground
surface on right side of photo were landscape has been raised by artificial fill.

Figure 7: View of old baseball field looking east with fill material piles in
foreground. Old backstop frame visible in background on right side of photo.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

15

Results of Field Investigations

The two properties currently being acquired by the Village of Creedmoor belong
to the Graef family. One of the properties in the process of acquisition is located
on the southern side of the project area. It is rectangular in shape, measuring
one-and-a-half acres in size. The second property being acquired runs along the
eastern portion of the 7.5 acre tract west of a branch of Maha Creek. This
second tract measures one acre in size. Both of the properties are currently
used for grazing and were densely vegetated. Both also had structural features
located on them that warranted their full or partial designation as an
archeological site 41TV2290 (see below). Within the smaller one acre tract on the
eastern side of the project area, two shovel tests (MS2 & BJ2) in the northern
two-thirds of the tract recorded deposits of very dark gray (2.5Y3/1) clay that
contained five percent gravels and calcium carbonate inclusions. Though large
pieces of trash such as corrugated siding, a 50 gallon metal drum, tires, and a
taillight were strewn across the surface, only a single piece of clear bottle glass
recovered in the upper 10 centimeters of shovel test BJ2 was noted in
subsurface tests. In the southwestern corner of this tract, however, a large well
was identified that had been most recently used to deposit trash. This feature
was recorded and pieces of glass and whiteware ceramic were noted on the
ground around it and in the property to the south, outside of the project area.
This well is described along with the more substantial remains in the one-and-a­
half acre tract in the following discussion of site 41TV2290.

NEWLY RECORDED SITE – SITE 41TV2290
Site 41TV2290 encompasses two wells, a barn, a water tower and numerous
concrete slab foundations associated with a cotton gin that operated on the site
from the early twentieth century until the late 1950s (Gary Graef Personal
Communication 2008) (Figure 8). Most of the site remains are located on the
one-and-a-half acre tract on the south side of the project area, but the site
boundaries have been extended to include a well and miscellaneous debris
located on the one acre tract on the east side of the project area. These two
tracts are separated on the southeast by land that is not part of the project area,
and could not be surveyed. This inaccessible portion is provisionally included in
the site boundary as well. The current landowners, the Graef family, have
owned the two properties for over sixty years and they confirmed that the
intervening property had always been separately owned, at least for as long as
their family has possessed their lands. Deed research established that Edmond
Graef (his name is incorrectly written as Edward on the deed) purchased the
one-and-a-half acre tract on July 6th, 1939 from E. C. Masoch and his wife
Margaret (Travis County Deed Records, Vol 614:488).
The Masochs had
purchased the property less than a year earlier on August 8, 1938 from F. L.
Long (Travis County Deed Records, Vol. 594:534). Mr. Long, whose name is not
in the US Census until 1930, at which time his profession was listed as cotton
ginner, had in turn purchased the property from Anderson D. Williams and his
wife Lillian Howard Williams on July 18th, 1918 (Travis County Deed Records,
Vol. 304:340). No earlier deed records for this property could be located, and no
deed records for the smaller one acre property on the eastern side were located.
The existing deed records do verify that the property was in use as a cotton gin
as early as 1918, and the deed to F. L. Long from Anderson D. Williams
specifically stipulates that Long received a “one third interest in the gin plant.”
The other owners of the gin are presumably Williams and possibly other
investors, though no secondary documentation has been encountered to support
this. It is interesting to note that in the 1900 and 1910 US Census records
Anderson Williams’ occupation is listed as a farmer and a renter. In the 1920
US Census, however, Anderson Williams, at the age of 70, is recorded as being
employed as a cotton buyer. In the subsequent deed transfers to Masoch and
then to Graef, no direct mention was made of the gin or interest in the gin.
Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

16

Results of Field Investigations

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

17

Results of Field Investigations

After the purchase of the acre and a half property in 1939, Edmond Graef - who
had run the cotton gin in Turnerville until it burned down in 1936 and whose
profession was recorded as “ginner” in the 1930 Census - took over running the
gin in Creedmoor with his three sons, Edgar, Martin and Colmer (Gussie Graef,
Personal Communication 2008). Edmond Graef died in 1941, at which time his
three sons took over the gin operation. In 1940 Edgar Graef was married and
moved into a three-bedroom house that was located just inside the gate, in front
of the weigh station, with his new wife Gussie. The two resided in this location
until 1942 when they moved down the road approximately one mile (Gary Greaf
and Gussie Graef, Personal Communication 2008). There is no longer any
evidence of this house within the property or in the project area. The Graef
family ran the gin from the time of its purchase until the late 1950s when it
ceased operation. Since this time, almost all of the equipment and materials
from the gin and original structures were sold or otherwise taken away from the
site.
Within the southern portion of the site, investigators identified a barn, well,
water tower, several structural foundations, and pieces of machinery associated
with the cotton gin that the family called the “Edmond Gin” (Gussie Graef,
Personal Communication 2008). A total of seven shovel tests were excavated in
the area and the three non-diagnostic artifacts that were recovered were
confined to the upper 10 centimeters of sediment. With the exception of a
dilapidated but still standing water tower, hay barn, and an electrical
pump/water heater house, all of the structures once associated with the cotton
gin have been removed leaving only the poured concrete slabs.
The barn that stands nearby the gin location is approximately 40 x 40 feet and
is constructed with milled lumber, pulled wire nails, and is covered in
corrugated tin siding (Figure 9). Stamped logos on the siding read: “Apollo
Roofing; American Sheet and Tin Plate Co. (Trade Mark Registered); Pittsburgh,
PA; Manufactured for Walter Tips; Austin, Texas” (Figure 10). The date of the
barn construction, or possibly its repair, seems to have been in 1938 or 1939
before the property was sold to the Graef family. One of the stipulations in the
deed when it was transferred to Graef was that he assume and pay a sixty dollar
debt to Walter Tips of Austin, Texas (Travis County Deed Record, Vol 614: 489).
This debt was not part of the deed transfer to Masoch from Long, and must have
been accrued during the Masoch’s brief ownership, presumably for the
construction of the barn, or at least the roof. During the period in which the gin
was in operation by the Graefs, the barn was used for cotton seed storage (Gary
Graef, Personal Communication 2008). It is currently used for hay storage,
although the vegetative growth around the entryway suggests that little activity
has occurred here for several years. Inside the barn, investigators observed
portions of a cement foundation. Investigations within the barn were limited,
however, due to warnings from several individuals about a rattlesnake den that
was recently uncovered in the hay. Additional structural remnants in the area
of the gin include an approximately 18 x 18-foot cement water tank or enclosure
(Figure 11), a small L-shaped foundation/tank (Figure 12), an approximately
80 x 22-foot multi-level foundation slab with an additional 26 x 10-foot
subsurface pit, a 12-foot diameter concrete-lined well, and several other
concrete slabs of various sizes (Figure 13). An approximately 50-foot high water
tower stands about 60 feet east of the central portion of this area (Figure 14). A
wood and tin siding construction electrical pump/water heater house is also
situated immediately west of the large foundation slab.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

18

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 9: View of west side of barn at Site 41TV2290.

Figure 10: View of underside of corrugated roofing on barn. Painted logo identifies
sheet metal as manufactured for Walter Tips of Austin, Texas by the Apollo
Roofing Company of Pittsburgh.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

19

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 11: View of 18 X 18 foot concrete enclosure or water tank in cotton gin complex.

Figure 12: L-shaped concrete slab in cotton gin complex.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

20

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 13: View of another concrete slab, typical of those found in the area of the cotton
gin.

Figure 14: View looking southeast of water tower associated with cotton gin.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

21

Results of Field Investigations

The well (Figure 15) located next to the complex of concrete foundations is
covered with large timbers and tin siding, although portions had been
compromised, allowing investigators a limited view of the interior.
The
construction of the well appears to have been done in at least two pours, as
evidenced by a horizontal seam in the concrete approximately halfway up the
interior wall. The concrete was mixed with large chert cobbles, similar to those
encountered in several nearby shovel tests. According to Gary Graef (Personal
Communication 2008), this well is one of three on the property that were used to
bring up fresh water from a vein of the Edwards Aquifer that could be tapped at
approximately 150 feet. At the time of investigation, collected rain water was
present in the bottom of the well due to the missing portions of the roof. Thick
vegetation again made detailed investigations and measurement of this feature
unsafe. The well was located immediately north of a very large, multi-level
concrete slab, which once supported the gin itself. There was once a cooling
tower here also, where water from the well was used to cool the gin’s large diesel
motor (Gary Graef, Personal Communication 2008). The slab in fact consisted of
several separate, abutting sections of varying heights. On the southern side of
these portions (all at surface level or slightly above), was a 26 x 10 foot area that
was below the ground surface (Figure 16). Due to its current function as a
trash dump it is difficult to discern what function this area served, however, it is
the likely location of a weigh station. There was reportedly a weigh station near
the front of the property as well, but no signs of this feature were observed
within the project area.

Figure 15: Well covered by partially destroyed roof on northwest side of cotton gin
complex.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

22

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 16: Partial view of deep subsurface pit in portion of a large, multilevel
concrete slab in the cotton gin complex.
In addition to the structural remains located on Site 41TV2290, investigators
encountered several large pieces of machinery (Figures 17). The area has been
taken over by tall reeds, affording negligible surface visibility over most of this
portion of the site. Artifacts were recovered from two of five shovel tests
excavated in this area, including one porcelain fragment and two unidentifiable
metal fragments (Figure 18). All of these artifacts were found in the upper
portions of the shovel tests at depths of less than 10 centimeters below the
surface. Typical soils in this area consisted of dark grayish brown clay with
occasional gravels, which continued well beyond the depth of cultural
deposition. Shovel tests situated on the north side of the fence separating this
property from the Village of Creedmoor 7.5 acre tract, indicated no evidence of
artifacts or intact deposits that could be associated with the gin.
Another well was encountered in the southwest corner of the one acre property,
east of the Village of Creedmoor property (Figure 19).
This well was
approximately eight feet in diameter rising roughly one foot above the ground
surface. The well was constructed with large limestone rocks held in place with
concrete mortar. It is the second of three wells on the property that once tapped
Edwards Aquifer water at around 150 feet. It was also completely filled with
trash, including fence posts, barbed wire, corrugated siding, sheet metal, beer
cans, and plastic bottles making it impossible to see the interior. In addition to
the large amount of dumped trash, several immature elm saplings were growing
out of the well. A few irises were growing nearby at the base of a mature elm
tree with leaves sprouting from the top of the trash heap. Additional trash was
observed outside of the project area along the side of the drainage, including
corrugated siding, fence posts, etc. that appeared to have washed in from the
north during flooding episodes. Two shovel tests, BJ3 and MS6 were excavated
near the well to assess the potential for subsurface deposition. Shovel Test BJ3
was located approximately five meters east of the well behind the baseball

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

23

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 17: View of water pump or similar piece of machinery associated with the
cotton gin.

Figure 18: Artifacts recovered from shovel tests. Top row is front and back of a
single porcelain plate base with illegible mark recovered in ST. CK8. Bottom two
rows are pieces of miscellaneous rusted metal found in ST. CK9.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

24

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 19: View of trash-filled well located on the eastern portion of the project
area within the northeastern edge of Site 41TV2290.
backstop on the Village of Creedmoor property. This test was terminated at 20
centimeters below the surface after encountering a metal pipeline/conduit, and
it is not considered part of the site area. In Shovel Test MS6, two pieces of clear
bottle glass that appeared to be fairly modern and exhibited evidence of
bulldozing were recovered from the upper 10 centimeters. This shovel test was
located approximately five meters to the east of the well. Aside from these
artifacts, no cultural material was recovered from either shovel test. The former
landowner had no recollection of a house or other structures having stood near
this location (Gary Graef, Personal Communication 2008). The soil here
consisted of very dark gray clay to a depth of at least 50 centimeters below the
ground surface.
Owing to the presence of a shallow vein from the Edwards Aquifer beneath the
property, members of the Graef family (Personal Communication 2008) dug
three wells that were utilized by people “from all over.” Two of the wells are
present within the project area, as described above, but the third was not
located. It was, however, said to be near the weigh station at the front of the
property, and this well may have been demolished prior to the survey, or may
even be present outside of the current project area. It was recounted that these
wells, known as Willow Springs, were the only place you could get clean water
aside from the salt water that could be tapped in most of the area. In terms of
the location of these wells to the spring mentioned in historical treatments of
Creedmoor, it is unclear exactly whether the wells were constructed directly over
the springs or simply tapped the same vein of water. These wells eventually ran
dry during a harsh drought, at which time the family drank water from another
well on the property that tapped the deeper Artesian salt water (Gary Graef,
Personal Communication 2008).

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

25

Results of Field Investigations

In summary, pedestrian survey and shovel testing in the area of Site 41TV2290
revealed the structural remnants of cotton gin that operated during the first half
of the twentieth century along with two wells. Archeological remains associated
with the cotton gin are almost all structural elements, with only a handful of
non-diagnostic artifacts recovered from the upper 10 centimeters below ground
surface. Although several concrete foundations remain, all of the structures
associated with the gin operation have been demolished or removed from the site
except for the former cottonseed barn, an electrical pump or water heater in a
small structure, the water tower, and the two wells. Though the site has some
value as a place of local interest in the history of Creedmoor, it does not exhibit
the criteria necessary for designation as a State Archeological Landmark:
(Criterion 1) it does not have to potential to shed light on poorly known events or
patterns of behavior, (Criterion 2) overall is not well preserved or intact,
(Criterion 3) as a cotton gin it is not a unique site type, (Criterion 4) it does not
contain types of data that that offer an opportunity to test new theories and
methods of conservation, thereby it does not contribute to new scientific
knowledge, and (Criterion 5) the site does not require legal protection from
continued looting and/or vandalism. Consequently, it is the opinion of the
Principal Investigator that the site does not warrant further archeological or
archival investigation, and that the project should be allowed to proceed to
construction.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

26

Conclusions and Recommendations

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
In January of 2008, Hicks & Company archeologists conducted an intensive
pedestrian survey of 10 acres of property slated for development as a public
park by the Village of Creedmoor under TAC Permit # 4754. The survey
included the inspection of the entire project area supplemented with 21 shovel
tests. Investigations indicated that the majority of the property has been heavily
disturbed as a result of various construction and landscape modification
activities. In addition, cultural resources were largely absent from the majority
of the project area. The exception is the remains of an early to mid-twentieth
century cotton gin and two wells located along the south and southeast portions
of the project area designated Site 41TV2290.
Site 41TV2290 is a cotton gin that was operating at least as early as 1918. That
year the owner sold the property to Long, who later sold the property to the
Masoch family in 1938. In 1939 it was again sold to the Graef family who are
the current owners. The gin was operated by the Graef family until the 1950s.
Since then, the majority of the site has destroyed or sold, resulting in only
random pieces of machinery and poured concrete slabs remaining alongside the
water tower and barn. In addition, two wells were located on the property. One
well is within the area of the cotton gin, and the second is located on the Graef’s
one acre tract of land on the eastern side of the project area. Though a small
number of non-diagnostic metal, glass, and ceramic artifacts were found during
shovel testing, there appear to be no significant intact subsurface archeological
deposits associated with remains of the cotton gin or the nearby wells. Owing to
the poor preservation of much of the cotton gin complex, the common nature of
the site type, the lack of intact deposits which could provide additional or new
information on early twentieth century occupation of the property or the
Creedmoor area, Site 41TV2290 does not merit designation as a State
Archeological Landmark. It is the opinion of the Principal Investigator that no
additional archeological investigations are warranted within any portion of the
proposed park boundaries, and the project should be allowed to proceed to
construction.
This report is offered in partial fulfillment of TAC Permit # 4754. All records and
photographs will be curated at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

27

Conclusions and Recommendations

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

28

References

REFERENCES
Barkley, Mary Starr
1963 History of Travis County and Austin: 1839-1899. Texian Press, Waco.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1): 93-117.
Black, Stephen L.
1989 Central Texas Plateau Prairie. In From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in
Central, South and Lower Pecos, Texas, edited by T.R. Hester, S.L. Black, D.G. Steele,
B.W. Olive, A.A. Fox, J.J. Reinhard, and L.C. Bement, pp.17-38. Research Series 33.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Black, Stephen L. and Alan McGraw
1985 The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity within the Upper Salado
Creek Watershed, South-Central Texas. Archeological Survey Report No. 10. Center for
Archeological Research, San Antonio.
Black, Stephen L., Lain W. Ellis, Darrell G. Creel, and Glenn T. Goode.
1997. Hot Rock Cooking on the Greater Edwards Plateau: Four Burned Rock Midden Sites in
West Central Texas, Volume I. Studies in Archeology 22. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, Austin.
Brownlow, Russell
2003 Archeological Investigations at 41WM815, A Blackland Prairie Site, Williamson County,
Texas. Archeology Studies Program, Report 23. Environmental Affairs Division. Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Collins, Michael B.
2004 Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula. Texas
A&M University Anthropology Series no. 9. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.
Denton, Mark H.
1999 Dealing With Late-19th- And Early-20th-Century Sites. CRM News & Views: 13-14.
Federal Census Data. Available at HeritageQuest Online.
1900
1910
1920
1930
Gould, Frank W.
1975 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. The Texas A&M University System,
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station.
Johnson, Leroy
2000 Life and Death as Seen at the Bessie Kruze Site (41WM13) on the Blackland Prairie of
Williamson County, Texas. Archeology Studies Program, Report No. 22. Environmental
Affairs Division. Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Parker, Donna P.

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

29

References

1996

Creedmoor. In The New Handbook of Texas, Vol.2, edited by R. Tyler, pp. 399. Texas
State Historical Association, Austin.

2008

Creedmoor. In Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. ","
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/CC/hncaj.html (accessed
January 28, 2008)

Potter, Dan
2006 Measuring Archeological Site Survival in Texas. SAA Archeological Record 6(1):7-13.
Ricklis, Robert A. and Michael B. Collins
1994 Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays
County, Texas. Volumes I and II. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Shafer, Harry J., and Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.
1976 A Preliminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources in the North Fort of the Granger
Reservoir. Williamson County, Texas. Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas
Travis County Deed Records
Vol. 304:341
Vol. 594:534
Vol. 614:488
Werchan, Leroy. E., A. C. Lowther, and Robert N. Ramsey
1974 Soil Survey of Travis County, Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service in cooperation with Texas Agricultural Experiment Station

Archeological Survey – Creedmoor Public Park – April 2008

30

APPENDIX A
AGENCY COORDINATION LETTERS

