ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
FOR A PROPOSED TxDOT HONDO AREA
OFFICE SITE
MEDINA COUNTY, TEXAS
Principal Investigator:
Rachel Feit

Written by:
Rachel Feit and Matt Stotts

Prepared for:
TxDOT – Environmental Affairs Division

Project # 4705-00-134

TAC Permit # 4571

Archeology Series No. 191

August 2007

Table of Contents

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ................................................................................................................................................. iii
INTRODUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SUMMARY................................................................................... 1
Environmental Setting............................................................................................................................... 3
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND........................................................................................................... 5
Prehistoric Background............................................................................................................................. 5
Historic Background.................................................................................................................................. 6
RESULTS OF FIELD INVESTIGATIONS .................................................................................................... 9
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................... 15
REFERENCES CITED................................................................................................................................ 17

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
Figure 5
Figure 6

Project Location Map .............................................................................................................. 2
Mature corn at the eastern edge of the project area. ............................................................. 9
Residence located on the north side of cornfield.................................................................. 10
Typical surface visibility within the survey area. ................................................................... 11
Results of Shovel Tests ........................................................................................................ 12
Dense weedy vegetation growing around the slough on the southwest corner of the
survey tract............................................................................................................................ 13

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

i

Table of Contents

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

ii

Abstract

ABSTRACT
In June 2007, Hicks & Company conducted an intensive pedestrian survey for a
12-acre property that TxDOT has proposed to acquire for a new Hondo Area
Office in Hondo, Texas (Project # 4705-00-134). The proposed tract is located
along FM173, near the intersection with CR443. At the time of the survey, the
tract was actively cultivated, with nearly mature corn covering the entire
property. The survey consisted of pedestrian inspection and six shovel tests.
Survey documented no cultural resources either on the surface or in any of the
shovel tests. The project was undertaken under Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act and under the Antiquities Code of Texas (Permit
#4571), in compliance with 36 CFR 800 and 13 TAC 26. No artifacts were
collected; original field records and photographs from this project will be curated
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. This report recommends that
no further archeological work is required for the proposed project to proceed.

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

iii

Abstract

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

iv

Introduction and Management Summary

INTRODUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
TxDOT plans to construct a new regional office facility on a 12-acre tract in
Hondo, Medina County, Texas. Since the project would be built using federal
and state money, the project falls under Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act and the Antiquities Code of Texas. Consequently, Hicks &
Company was hired to perform an archeological survey in compliance with 36
CFR 800 and 13 TAC 26, which provide guidelines for compliance with
applicable federal and state regulations. Archeological sites were to be evaluated
for National Register and State Archeological Landmark eligibility, using the
criteria outlined in 36 CFR 60.4.
The proposed office property is located in Medina County, on SH173 near Hondo
(Figure 1).
At present, the property is privately owned, and TxDOT is
negotiating with the landowner for purchase of the property. There are no
formal construction specifications for the office, since TxDOT is still early in its
planning phases. The scope of work assumed that the area of potential effects
(APE) would consist of the entire proposed office tract, and any existing TxDOT
right of way along SH173 affected by the undertaking. Since the depth of
potential impact was not known, this scope assumed that the vertical APE
would extend to the maximum depth at which cultural resources could be
buried within the property. The scope of work involved a 100% pedestrian,
intensive archeological survey supplemented with shovel tests within the tract
proposed for the new Hondo Area office. The area provided to archeologists to
survey initially consisted of an approximately 20-acre tract.
TxDOT
subsequently narrowed that tract to 12-acres proposed for acquisition (see
Figure 1). All 20-acres were surveyed.
The proposed office site is located within an agricultural region devoted
primarily to corn farming. The Hondo area is still largely rural. The survey tract
was a cornfield at the time of investigations. According to records at TARL, there
are no previously recorded sites within the project area. The closest sites are
more than six miles from the proposed project area near Hondo Creek. The
project area is largely unsurveyed except for the right of way along SH173. The
proposed office site lies within relatively flat upland surface dominated by
Knippa clay (KnA) soils. This soil is typically found on flat stable surfaces
created by ancient stream terraces. A small, unnamed slough intersects the
southwest corner of the proposed property. The underlying geologic formation is
the Pleistocene epoch Leona Formation and is part of a large ancient terrace at
the southern base of the Edwards Plateau. Since the project area is largely
agricultural, ground surface visibility was generally good (more than 70%).
Since the terrace surface is relatively stable and soils developed through a slow
process of aggradation, the project area has little potential to contain deeply
buried archeological materials. Background studies suggested that prehistoric
sites, if not already impacted by farming, would most likely be on the surface or
only shallowly buried in the APE. The background research also indicated that
there could be some potential for unrecorded historic archeological resources to
be affected by the Hondo office site development. In particular, historic remains
associated with any previous structures could be located on the tract. An
existing residential structure is located a few hundred feet to the north of the
property investigated and appears to have been built during the 1960s. Another
mid-twentieth century residence is located on the property adjoining the project
area to the south.

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

1

Introduction and Management Summary

Figure 1

Project Location Map

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

2

Introduction and Management Summary

The survey was conducted in one day on June 19, 2007 under Antiquities
Permit #4571. The survey team included Rachel Feit, principal investigator, and
Nicole Fournier, field technician. Investigators examined the 20-acre tract on
foot, and dug six shovel tests in support of the project. No backhoe trenches
were excavated, as the potential for deeply buried sites on the stable Pleistocene
terrace was judged to be extremely low. Investigators found no cultural material
on the surface or in shovel tests.
Based on these observations, it is
recommended that no further archeological work is warranted for the project to
proceed to construction.
Following sections of this report will include environmental and archeological
background sections, Results of Field Investigations, and Conclusions and
Recommendations.

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The project area is located in Medina County, approximately one mile northeast
of the City of Hondo, immediately west of SH173. This area is located in the
South Texas Brush Country Natural Region of Texas as currently designated by
the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD). The 1984 TPWD map,
Vegetation Types of Texas, indicates that the site is specifically located in the
“Crops” vegetation type. This designation is defined as cultivated cover crops or
row crops intended to provide food and/or fiber for either man or domestic
animals. The “Crops” designation may also include grasslands associated with
crop rotations. This area is traversed from east to west by the Balcones
Escarpment, creating the ecotonal zone between the Edwards Plateau (to the
north) and the South Texas Plains. Soils in the northern portion of the county
generally belong to the Tarrant-Real-Brackett and Speck-Pratley-Mereta
associations (Bureau of Economic Geology 1983), which support grasses, brush,
junipers, mesquite, shinnery oaks, and live oaks. The larger, southern portion
of the county is dominated by Eocene and Pleistocene age formations, beneath
sandy loam and clay soils that support bluestem, buffalo, and Arizona cottontop
grasses, as well as post oak, live oak, and mesquite. Cypress and pecan trees
are commonly found on the banks of rivers and creeks (Ochoa 2003), which
generally carry Holocene alluvium.
Oil, gas, clay, sand, and gravel resources are all obtained within Medina County.
High-quality clays utilized for brick production are found in the western portion
of the county. Crushed limestone, chert, igneous pebbles, caliche, and clay are
found in the county and are used widely as road materials. Along with these
mineral resources, bat guano is mined in the hills near the project area for crop
fertilization.
The proposed Hondo area office site is currently in private ownership in an area
primarily devoted to farming. The Hondo area is still largely rural. The
proposed office site lies within relatively flat upland surface dominated by
Knippa clay on 0-1% slopes (KnA; Dittmar et al. 1977). This soil is typically
found on flat stable surfaces created by ancient stream terraces and smooth
outwash plains. Land adjacent to the proposed project site is primarily rural
improved and unimproved pasturelands, crops, and rural-residential.
Hackberry, cedar elm, live oak, western soapberry, and mesquite seem to
dominate throughout the area in those areas where woody vegetation may be
found (primarily along fencelines). These range in height from young sapling
trees to approximately 25 feet. A small, unnamed slough intersects the

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

3

Introduction and Management Summary

southwest corner of the proposed property. The underlying geologic formation is
the Pleistocene epoch Leona Formation and is part of a large ancient terrace at
the southern base of the Edwards Plateau. Since the project area is largely
agricultural, much of the ground surface is visible. The terrace surface is
relatively stable, developed through a slow process of soil deposition, thus
limiting the potential for deeply buried archeological materials to be encountered
within the project area.

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

4

Archeological Background

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
PREHISTORIC BACKGROUND
The Hondo area office project location is within the northern portion of the south
Texas plains region (Gould 1960), just south of the Edwards Plateau. This
region is still little understood archeologically, reflecting a paucity of systematic
excavations as well as the geomorphic characteristics of the landscape as they
pertain to site formation processes (Black 1989). Although the south Texas
plains archeological region is a distinct entity, much of what is known of the
area is in part derived from comparisons and extrapolation with adjacent areas
that have been the subject of more intensive investigation, particularly the
central Texas archeological region. Syntheses of the prehistory of south Texas
plains archeological region have been formulated by Hester (1980), Hall et al.
(1986), and Black (1989). More recently, Hester (1995) has refined these
syntheses in a general overview of the cultural history of the region. These
syntheses provide an outline of the basic chronological divisions.
This
sequence, adapted from Black (1989) and Hester (1995), is based on four
prehistoric time periods roughly parallel to those found in central Texas. These
time periods include: Paleoindian (11,200-8,000 B.P.), Archaic (8,000-1,200
B.P.), Late Prehistoric (1,200-400 B.P.), and Protohistoric (400-300 B.P.).
Similar to the cultural chronology provided for the central Texas archeological
region, these divisions represent contrived temporal categories, but they are also
based in large part on perceived adaptations in subsistence, and are reflected in
changes in lithic and other technologies. These technological changes further
reflect changes in broader patterns of the environment and culture.
The most commonly recorded sites in the south Texas plains are open
occupation sites. In some cases, meaningful excavation of these sites has
proven to be a challenge to archeologists (Hester 1995). This vexing situation
stems from the exclusively horizontal patterning of many open occupation sites
in the region. These sites tend to exist as laterally extensive occupation areas
where temporally separated components occur on a single surface without
overlapping (Hester 1995). Other open occupation sites, especially in upland
settings, occur on stable ancient surfaces with very shallow or deflated cultural
deposits that are sometimes impossible to conclusively attribute to a particular
time period.
Comparatively few deeply stratified occupation sites have been
excavated in south Texas. Black posits that this is a result of both settlement
patterning and depositional context (Black 1989). Other site types present in
south Texas include lithic procurement and reduction sites, rockshelters,
artifact caches, and burials. Lithic procurement and reduction sites are
somewhat common and are typically found in upland areas where chert
resources in the form of Uvalde gravels occur.
Much of the prehistoric data on south Texas derive from Choke Canyon. There,
archeologists found sites spanning the entire spectrum of south Texas
prehistory. Only a handful of Paleoindian sites have been recorded at Choke
Canyon, and these were found as shallow surface manifestations (Hall et al.
1986) suggesting that indigenous groups inhabited this region only briefly on
their way somewhere else.
Hester (1987) has suggested that another
explanation for the paucity of Paleoindian sites is that erosion and shifting river
channels have caused massive destruction of these already ephemeral remains.
The Early Archaic is likewise poorly represented at Choke Canyon, though data

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

5

Archeological Background

collected from two carefully built stone hearths indicate that native peoples may
have relied heavily on aquatic resources. This idea is further supported by a
noticeable dearth of projectile points, which would otherwise indicate a strong
reliance on hunting (Hall et al. 1986). The archeology of Choke Canyon suggests
that during the Middle Archaic to Late Archaic periods, the population began to
steadily increase. Site types and artifacts increasingly demonstrate a reliance
on plant foods and small mammal consumption. The incidences of burned rock
middens increase (though these occur more commonly in central Texas), as well
as ground stone, flake tools, and distally beveled gouges (Hall et al. 1986). As in
other parts of Texas, sites of the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods in
south Texas demonstrate a radical shift in technology with the abandonment of
the typical dart point and gouge tool kit and adoption of arrow points and
ceramic technology. Sites tend to be more closely clustered around creeks,
rather than dispersed along other landforms.
According to the Texas Historical Commission’s online Site Atlas, there are no
previously recorded archeological sites within six miles of the proposed project
area; however, those that have been recorded within Medina County reflect the
overall trend for sites in the south Texas plains. The sites located nearest the
proposed Hondo area office location are located along Hondo Creek, from six to
eight miles to the southeast. These sites include one surficial lithic scatter
(41ME74), a large lithic procurement area (41ME76), and a lithic scatter and
burial site of an unknown age (41ME156). This site was the only location in
which deep soils were recorded. Another site concentration (15 prehistoric sites)
exists from seven to eight miles to the northeast of the proposed project area
around Elm and Cherry Creeks. These sites include lithic scatters, open camps,
and procurement areas, as well as several sites with preserved burned rock
hearths or burned rock middens. The sites with intact features, from which
diagnostic artifacts were recovered, date to the Middle and Late Archaic periods.
Information pertaining to the depth of cultural deposition on most of these sites
was not available, but the potential for deeply buried deposits on the first terrace
of Elm Creek was noted.

HISTORIC BACKGROUND
This region of Texas was probably first explored by Alonso De León, who passed
through the area in 1689 and named the Medina River, Hondo and Seco Creeks.
The area was frequented by roving bands of Lipan Apaches and Comanches,
whose seasonal raiding parties traveled southward from north Texas and New
Mexico on their way to Mexico. In 1842, the Republic of Texas negotiated a
contract with Henri Castro to settle the area in order to protect San Antonio
from invasion, and when Castroville was founded (September 3, 1844), it was
the westernmost settlement in Texas. Medina County was established four
years later, separating from Bexar County, and then gaining more land from
Bexar County in 1850 (Ochoa 2003).
By 1858 the county had five schools for 453 pupils and five churches, three
Protestant and two Catholic. After the Civil War, a number of German
immigrants arrived, and by 1870, the majority of the 2,078 people in the county
were of German or French origin. Cattle raising had more than doubled during
the 1870s, and in 1882, livestock was still the dominant agricultural activity. In
the 1880s, barbed wire and the arrival of the Galveston, Harrisburg and San
Antonio Railway and the International and Great Northern Railroad significantly
altered the demographics of Medina County. The rapidly flourishing towns of

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

6

Archeological Background

Hondo, La Coste, Dunlay, and New D'Hanis were established along the
Galveston, Harrisburg and San Antonio Railway, increasing the population to
nearly 8,000 people by 1900. After several unsuccessful attempts, the county
seat was moved from Castroville to Hondo in 1892. Cotton and corn were the
primary agricultural crops in Medina County at the turn of the century, with
corn production dominating following the decimation of many cotton crops by
the boll weevil.
The fourth-largest dam project in the United States (at the time) was completed
on the Medina River in 1913, providing enough water to irrigate an estimated
60,000 acres. Due to funding complications at the onset of World War I, the
project was suspended until 1924, when it was ordered to be sold at public
auction in Hondo (Ochoa 2003). As was the case throughout the state, a
number of highway and road construction and upgrade projects were completed
during the 1920s and 30s, leading to an increased dependence upon truck crops
such as spinach, sweet potatoes, cabbage, beans, turnips, tomatoes, Irish
potatoes, and strawberries within the county. In the 1930s and 40s, broom
corn was one of Medina County's most lucrative cash crops, and in 1945,
42,774 acres were dedicated to the production of broom and Indian corn.
Sorghum, oats, and nuts, and high quality honey (in the southern portion of the
county) were also intensively produced at this time. Agribusiness remains the
dominant industry in Medina County, with approximately 45% of the land
currently being primary farmland (Ochoa 2003).

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

7

Archeological Background

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

8

Results of Field Investigations

RESULTS OF FIELD INVESTIGATIONS
On June 19, 2007 Hicks & Company investigators surveyed the 20-acre tract
that TxDOT was considering for a new Hondo area office facility. The day was
warm, overcast and extremely humid, particularly within the limits of the project
area, which was a cornfield with stalks growing six to seven feet tall (Figure 2).
Residences are present on the north, west and south sides of the project area,
but are well outside it and will not be impacted by construction of the TxDOT
office. The residences to the north and south are one-story wood frame
structures and both appear to have been built between 50 and 60 years ago
(Figure 3). The residence to the west of the project area is a trailer and appears
to be 20-30 years old.

Figure 2

Mature corn at the eastern edge of the project area.

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

9

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 3

Residence located on the north side of cornfield.

Rain had recently fallen and consequently the fields were extremely muddy and
sticky. Investigators began the survey by walking the perimeter of the cornfield.
Investigators also walked the rows of the cornfield in 50-meter intervals. Due to
active cultivation, visibility within the project area was greater than 70% (Figure
4). Investigators noted naturally occurring chert pebbles and cobbles on the
surface of the plowed field. Some were chipped or broken from plowing, though
none of the lithic raw material exhibited any signs of deliberate manipulation
characteristic of aboriginal stone tool production. Investigators noted nothing
that could be considered prehistoric debitage. No historic period artifacts such
as glass, ceramics, metal, brick or even plastic were observed on the surface
around the perimeter of the field or between the rows. In short, there was
nothing but corn and mud in the cornfield.

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

10

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 4

Typical surface visibility within the survey area.

Shovel testing was originally proposed at a rate of one every two acres following
the minimum standards. However, given the obvious impacts from farming,
good surface visibility, uniformity of shovel test results, and absence of any
artifacts on the surface or in tests, the principal investigator judged six tests
sufficient to assess the property. Investigators recorded their observations and
the results of shovel tests through notes, standardized shovel test forms, and
photographs. Soil from all shovel tests was screened through ¼” hardware cloth.
The tests were marked on an aerial map and using a hand held Trimble XT GPS.
Investigators dug six shovel tests in the project area, which at the time was
approximately 20 acres (Figure 5). It is worth noting that the limits of the
property TxDOT is considering has since changed. The total project area for the
proposed office site is now approximately 12 acres out of the original 20. Shovel
Tests RF1 and NF1 were both dug in what was originally the southwest corner of
the 20-acre project area, next to an intermittent, shallow slough that runs in a
southwesterly direction and abuts that corner. This area was thought to have
the highest potential for prehistoric resources due to the proximity to the
slough, and due to the fact that it was not under cultivation, although the dense
weedy brush around it and absence of trees suggested that it had at one time
been cleared for cultivation (Figure 6). The two tests revealed similar profiles.
The upper 15-20 centimeters was characterized by brown silty clay (10YR 3/2)
overlying gray brown very sticky clay (2.5Y 3/1) containing occasional chert
pebbles. Investigators dug both tests to 80 and 72 centimeters, respectively. No
cultural material was encountered in these tests.

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

11

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 5

Results of Shovel Tests

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

12

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 6
Dense weedy vegetation growing around the slough on the
southwest corner of the survey tract.
Shovel Tests RF2, RF3, NF2, and NF3 were dug away from the slough within the
limits of the current 12-acre project area. All four tests revealed similar profiles
marked by 30-35 centimeters of plowed silty clay (7.5YR 3/2) resting atop a
hard plow pan. This overlay reddish brown silty clay (7.5YR 3/4). This second
soil overlay reddish brown very gravelly silty clay that was interpreted to be the
base of Holocene deposits. These four shovel tests were terminated between 55
and 65 centimeters below the ground surface, when the gravelly silty clay was
reached. No cultural material was noted in either the tests or on the ground
surface around the tests.

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

13

Results of Field Investigations

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

14

Conclusions and Recommendations

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Hicks & Company archeologists conducted a survey of 20 acres in Hondo, Texas
that TxDOT is proposing to acquire for a new Hondo Area Office site. The size of
the tract has since been modified and only 12 acres will be purchased for the
office site. The tract lies entirely within a cornfield in a rural area. A small
slough cuts across the southwest corner of the tract. Investigators surveyed the
tract on foot, and dug six shovel tests in support of the project. Neither
inspection of the surface nor shovel tests revealed any archeological material.
The survey documented no new sites within the project area. It is recommended
that the proposed office can proceed to construction, relative to the
requirements of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act and the
Antiquities Code of Texas. No artifacts were collected during this survey; notes,
photos and records will be curated at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory.

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

15

Conclusions and Recommendations

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

16

References Cited

REFERENCES CITED
Black, S. L.
1989 Central Texas Plateau Prairie in From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in
Central, South, and Lower Pecos Texas. By Thomas R. Hester, Stephen L. Black, D.
Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, Anne A. Fox, Karl J. Reinhard, and Leland C. Bement,
pp.17-38. Arkansas Archeological Research Series, No. 33. Fayetteville.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1983 Geologic Atlas of Texas. San Antonio Sheet. University of Texas at Austin.
Dittmar, Glenn W., Michael L. Deike, and Davie L. Richmond
1977 Soil Survey of Medina County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service.
Gould, F.W., G.O. Hoffman, and C.A. Rechenthin
1960 Vegetational areas of Texas. Texas A&M University, Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station Leaflet 492.
Hall, Grant D., Thomas R. Hester and Stephen L. Black
1986 The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas: Results of Phase II
Archaeological Investigations. Choke Canyon Series No. 10. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hester, T. R.
1980 Digging into South Texas Prehistory. Corona Publishing. San Antonio, Texas.
1995

The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66: 427-459

Ochoa, Ruben E.
2003 Medina County. In the Handbook of Texas Online.
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/MM/hcm10.html (accessed
June 28, 2007).

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

17

References Cited

Archeological Survey – Hondo Area Office – August 2007

18

