ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
WALNUT AVENUE EXTENSION BETWEEN
COUNTY LINE ROAD AND KLEIN ROAD
GUADALUPE COUNTY, TEXAS

Written by:
John A. Campbell and Bradford M. Jones

Principal Investigator:
Rachel Feit
Submitted to:
City of New Braunfels, Texas

Hicks & Company
Austin, Texas

Texas Antiquities Permit #4508
Archeology Series No. 189

August 2007

Table of Contents

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ................................................................................................................................................. iii
INTRODUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SUMMARY................................................................................... 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ...................................................................................................................... 5
CULTURAL BACKGROUND AND PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ........................................................... 7
Cultural Background ................................................................................................................................. 7
Central Texas Prehistoric Archeological Background .......................................................................... 7
South Texas Prehistoric Archeological Background ............................................................................ 8
Previous investigations ........................................................................................................................... 12
RESULTS OF FIELD INVESTIGATION..................................................................................................... 13
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................... 27
REFERENCES CITED................................................................................................................................ 29

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
Figure 5
Figure 6
Figure 7
Figure 8
Figure 9
Figure 10
Figure 11
Figure 12
Figure 13

Project Area Map....................................................................................................................... 2
Looking southwest across northern part of the project area at encroaching residential
development. Note road and utility disturbance near construction gates. ............................. 14
Looking southwest across the northern part of the project area at disturbance and road in
survey area. Note residential development in background. ................................................... 14
Looking northwest down the northern portion of the project area towards County Line Road.
Note road disturbance extending into survey areas................................................................ 15
Looking northwest at realigned stream channel and residential areas in northern portion of
the project area........................................................................................................................ 15
Photo of debris pile along eastern side of property fence at Site 41GU100. .......................... 16
Map of Site 41GU100. ............................................................................................................. 18
Photo of existing barn on Site 41GU100. ................................................................................ 19
Looking southeast across plowed field within the project area at Site 41GU100. Artifacts are
confined mainly to the fenceline where the trees stand. ......................................................... 19
General photo of Site 41GU101 looking northwest................................................................. 21
Map of Site 41GU101. ............................................................................................................. 22
Photo of artifact concentration at Site 41GU101. Catchup bottle is in foreground................. 23
Looking southeast at submerged areas just north of Site 41GU101....................................... 24

LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A

Plates

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

i

Table of Contents

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

ii

Abstract

ABSTRACT
Hicks & Company archeologists conducted a 100% pedestrian survey with
shovel testing along a proposed extension to Walnut Avenue in Guadalupe
County, Texas. Work was conducted under the Texas Antiquities Code (Permit
4508), in accordance with 13 TAC 26, which outlines the rules and regulations
for compliance. The proposed roadway extension is sponsored by the City of
New Braunfels and will consist of new location roadway extending for
approximately 1.3 miles. Investigators excavated 12 shovel tests in support of
the survey and documented two new archeological sites—Sites 41GU100 and
41GU101. Site 41GU100 is a historic farmstead consisting of a surface scatter
of artifacts and associated features dating to the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. Elements of Site 41GU100 extend beyond the limits of the
proposed right-of-way. Site 41GU101 is a historic dumpsite located entirely
within the proposed right-of-way consisting of a surface scatter of artifacts
dating to the 1930s and 1940s. The portion of Site 41GU100 investigated in the
proposed right-of-way is not recommended as eligible for listing as an SAL. Site
41GU101 is not recommended as eligible for listing as an SAL. No further work
within the right-of-way is recommended for either site. No artifacts were
collected during the survey; all project related documents and records will be
permanently curated at TARL.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

iii

Abstract

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

iv

Introduction and Management Summary

INTRODUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
In May 2007, Hicks & Company archeologists surveyed a proposed extension to
Walnut Avenue just south of the City of New Braunfels in Guadalupe County,
Texas (Figure 1). The proposed roadway extension is sponsored by the City of
New Braunfels and will consist of new location roadway extending for
approximately 1.3 miles. It will run along the eastern side of the already-built
Townview subdivision, through an existing detention pond, then through
primarily undeveloped land to its southern terminus at Klein Road. The design
entails constructing a proposed 5-lane Major Arterial roadway (four travel lanes
with a center turn lane), storm drains, and culvert crossings. The total width of
the area of potential effect (APE) of the road extension is approximately 80 feet.
The archeological investigation included an initial archival search to identify all
previously recorded surveys, archeological sites, and historic structures.
Background research for this project was conducted at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL) and the Texas Historical Commission (THC).
According to records at TARL, there are no previously recorded sites within
1,000 feet the project area. Site 41GU37 is the closest site to the project area
and lies approximately 2,100 feet (650m) to the southwest. There are no records
for this site.
Right-of-entry was available for the entire 1.3 miles of the proposed new ROW.
The survey involved intensive pedestrian inspection of these areas.
In
accordance with the THC’s minimum standards for linear archeological survey,
shovel tests were excavated at 100-meter intervals along a single transect in
areas that had not been previously disturbed or were not under water at the
time of inspection. Additional shovel tests were placed in areas where cultural
materials were encountered. Archeological sites were defined by a minimum of
six shovel tests at each site, except Site 41GU101 where flooding prevented
excavation. There, archeological materials were confined entirely to the surface,
so further testing would have been unnecessary. Shovel tests were excavated in
ten centimeter levels to a depth of one meter below the surface, ancient or
disturbed soils, or until otherwise obstructed, and all sediment was screened
through ¼” wire mesh. Investigators recorded their observations and the results
of shovel tests through notes, standardized shovel test forms, and photographs.
A total of 12 shovel tests were excavated in support of the project (Plate 1 in
Appendix A). Two of these were positive for cultural material at Site 41GU100.
Two new sites, 41GU100 and 41GU101, were discovered during the course of
the survey. Site 41GU100 is a historic artifact scatter with associated features
and Site 41GU101 is a historic dump site. Artifacts were limited to the surface
at both of these sites. It is recommended that neither of these sites are eligible
for listing as an SAL.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

1

Introduction and Management Summary

Figure 1 Project Area Map

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

2

Introduction and Management Summary

The survey was conducted on May 7, 2007. Rachel Feit functioned as the
principal investigator. Rachel Feit, John A. Campbell, and Bradford M. Jones
performed the survey. Artifacts were analyzed in the field and report writing
took place in May of 2007, immediately following the conclusion of fieldwork.
Succeeding sections of the report include sections on Environmental Setting,
Cultural Background and Previous Investigations, Results of Field
Investigations, and Conclusions and Recommendations.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

3

Introduction and Management Summary

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

4

Environmental Setting

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The project area crosses through a developing landscape at the western edge of
the Blackland Prairie. Until recently the area was still largely rural. However,
new development spreading from San Antonio and New Braunfels has spurred
suburban growth, with dispersed commercial and residential development
fanning out from the roads. Residential development, businesses in the IH 35
vicinity, rangeland/pastureland, and, in Guadalupe County, cultivated cropland
dominates land use within the project study area. Two communities exist in the
project vicinity. New Braunfels is located approximately one mile north of the
Walnut Avenue Extension and Seguin is located approximately eight miles
southeast of the project area.
The agricultural lands within the proposed Walnut Avenue Extension project
limits are utilized primarily for grazing. There are no publicly owned lands of
national, state, or local significance within the proposed project limits. In
addition to agricultural lands, the northern half of the project area is
surrounded by rapidly growing residential development.
The geologic structures underlying the project area are primarily upper
Cretaceous-age rock. All of the project area is underlain by Pecan Gap Chalk
(UT Bureau of Economic Geology 1983). Pecan Gap Chalk is comprised of chalk
and chalky marl. It weathers to form moderately deep soil, is seldom exposed,
and ranges in thickness from 100 to 400 feet. Soils in the project area primarily
consist of Altoga silty clay, Eddy gravelly clay loam, Trinity clay, and Houston
Black clay. Trinity clays occur in narrow bands along the ephemeral drainages
that traverse the project area. The remaining soils form on ancient stable
uplands through a very slow process of soil formation from the underlying
parent material. They therefore have very little potential to contain deeply
buried archeological materials. Prehistoric sites in this type of environment
would most likely be on the surface or only shallowly buried.
The Walnut Avenue Extension project area is located on the border of the
Edwards Plateau and Blackland Prairie regions of Texas. According to "The
Vegetation Types of Texas" (McMahan et. al 1984), the main vegetation type of
this region is crops. Grasslands associated with crop rotations are also present
in this region. Areas not utilized as crops are mapped as Live Oak-Ashe Juniper
Woods, Live Oak-Ashe Juniper Parks, and Live Oak-Mesquite-Ashe Juniper
Parks.
Trees that are commonly found in the region include plateau live oak (Quercus
fusiformis), ashe juniper (Juniperus ashei), Texas oak (Quercus texana), shin oak
(Quercus sinuata var. breviloba), and cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia).

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

5

Environmental Setting

Other woody vegetation includes sumac (Rhus spp.), greenbrier (Smilax bonanox), poison ivy (Toxicodendron radicans), twisted leaf yucca (Yucca rupicola),
Texas persimmon (Diospyros texana), elbowbush (Forestiera pubescens), Texas
mountain laurel (Sophora secundiflora), prickly-pear cactus (Opuntia spp.), and
pencil cactus (O. leptocaulis) (Hatch et al. 1990).
Grasses that are typical of the area include switchgrass (Panicum virgatum),
Indiangrass (Sorghastrum nutans), beardgrass (Bothriochloa spp.), little bluestem
(Schizachyrium scoparium), sideoats grama (Bouteloua curtipendula), Canada
wildrye (Elymus canadensis), curly mesquite (Hilaria belangeri) and buffalograss
(Buchloe dactyloides).
Vegetation found within the project area is generally consistent with the mapped
types as found in “The Vegetation Types of Texas”, as the main vegetation type
in the project area consists of improved pasture for livestock grazing.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

6

Cultural Background and Previous Investigations

CULTURAL BACKGROUND AND PREVIOUS
INVESTIGATIONS
CULTURAL BACKGROUND
The Walnut Avenue Extension project area is situated along the transitional
zone of the Blackland Prairie, and the South Texas regions. The two zones bear
distinct variations in prehistoric trends and information available. Where
central Texas has more recorded archeological sites than any other part of the
state, the South Texas region has only limited evidence of occupation, reflecting
a paucity of systematic excavations as well as the geomorphic characteristics of
the landscape as they pertain to site formation processes (Black 1989). The
south Texas Plains archeological region is a distinct entity but much of what is
known of the area is in part derived from comparisons made to central Texas
region.
Central Texas Prehistoric Archeological Background
Most of the chronologies for central Texas are based on four distinct time
periods, representing a 12,000-year sequence of occupation. This sequence
from Collins (2004) is as follows: Paleoindian (11,500-8,800 B.P.), Archaic
(8,800-1,300 or 1,200 B.P.), Late Prehistoric (1,200-300 B.P.), and Historic (300
B.P-present).
Although these divisions represent convenient temporal
categories, they are also based in large part on perceived adaptations in
subsistence, and are reflected in changes in lithic and other technologies.
The central Texas archeological area is one of the better-known regions of the
state. More sites have been recorded, tested, and excavated in central Texas
than in any other part of the state (Black 1989). Most of the prehistoric sites in
central Texas are open, unprotected sites sitting or situated on alluvial terraces
adjacent to streams or rivers (Black 1989). A typical open site in central Texas
contains refuse such as chert flaking debris, broken chert tools, fragmented
burned rock, land snails, fragmented animal bone, and charred plant remains
(Black 1989). An additional characteristic of open sites is the presence of
diagnostic stone tools often representing occupations from different periods or
phases and ultimately suggesting repeated use over hundreds or perhaps
thousands of years. Black (1989) describes a range of open site types expected
to be encountered throughout central Texas, the most pertinent of which will be
discussed below.
Open occupation sites are occasionally found in upland areas such as hilltops,
hill slopes, or bluff tops that lack alluvial sediments. The characteristic lack of
stratification at open sites in upland settings leads to interpretational problems,

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

7

Cultural Background and Previous Investigations

as repeated occupations from many periods cannot be clearly separated.
Although stratified, preserved, open sites, occasionally found in active flood
plain environments, and single component open sites have been recorded, they
are somewhat rare. Buried sites in alluvial settings with intact, separated
prehistoric components or occupations have the potential to reveal meaningful
insights into prehistoric behavior through the distributional patterning of the
artifacts and are much sought after studies of central Texas prehistory (Black
1989).
Lithic open occupation sites, containing only debris from chert-working
activities, are most frequently found in upland areas and are often referred to as
lithic procurement, quarry, or workshop sites. Numerous surveys conducted in
the central Texas area suggest that these lithic sites are the most common site
type in many areas. The residues from such sites are believed to be the result of
specialized,
short-term
activities
whether
identified
as
tool
maintenance/manufacture locales or intensive chert resource procurement
locales.
South Texas Prehistoric Archeological Background
Although the south Texas Plains archeological region is a distinct entity, much
of what is known of the area is in part derived from comparisons and
extrapolation with adjacent areas that have been the subject of more intensive
investigation, particularly the central Texas archeological region. Syntheses of
the prehistory of south Texas Plains archeological region have been formulated
by Hester (1980), Hall et al. (1986), and Black (1989). More recently, Hester
(1995) has refined these syntheses in a general overview of the cultural history
of the region. These syntheses provide an outline of the basic chronological
divisions. This sequence, adapted from Black (1989) and Hester (1995), is based
on four time periods roughly parallel to those found in central Texas. These
time periods include: Paleoindian (11,200-8,000 B.P.), Archaic (8,000-1,200
B.P.), Late Prehistoric (1,200-400 B.P.), and Protohistoric (A.D. 400-300 B.P.).
Similar to the cultural chronology provided for the central Texas archeological
region, these divisions represent contrived temporal categories, but they are also
based in large part on perceived adaptations in subsistence, and are reflected in
changes in lithic and other technologies. These technological changes further
reflect changes in broader patterns of the environment and culture.
The south Texas Plains archeological region is poorly understood, reflecting
primarily a lack of systematic excavations as well as the geomorphic
characteristics of the landscape as they pertain to site formation processes. The
most commonly recorded sites in south Texas are open occupation sites. In
some cases, meaningful excavation of these sites has proven to be a challenge to
archeologists (Hester 1995). This vexing situation stems from the exclusively

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

8

Cultural Background and Previous Investigations

horizontal patterning of many open occupation sites in the region. These sites
tend to exist as laterally extensive occupation areas with temporally separated
components within a single surface, and that rarely overlap (Hester 1995:430).
Other open occupation sites, especially in upland settings, occur on stable
ancient surfaces with very shallow or deflated cultural deposits that are
sometimes impossible to conclusively attribute to a particular time period.
Comparatively few deeply stratified occupation sites have been excavated in
south Texas. Black posits that this is a result of both settlement patterning and
depositional context (Black 1989). Other site types present in south Texas
include lithic procurement and reduction sites, rockshelters, artifact caches,
and burials. Lithic procurement and reduction sites are somewhat common and
are typically found in upland areas where chert resources in the form of Uvalde
gravels occur.
Much of the prehistoric data on south Texas derives from Choke Canyon. There,
archeologists found sites spanning the entire spectrum of south Texas
prehistory. Only a handful of Paleoindian sites have been recorded at Choke
Canyon and these were found as shallow surface manifestations (Hall et al.
1986), suggesting that indigenous groups inhabited this region only briefly on
their way to someplace else.
Hester (1987) has suggested that another
explanation for the paucity of Paleoindian sites is that erosion and shifting river
channels have caused massive destruction of these already ephemeral remains.
The Early Archaic is likewise poorly represented at Choke Canyon, though data
collected from two carefully built stone hearths indicate that native peoples may
have relied heavily on aquatic resources. This idea is further supported by a
noticeable dearth of projectile points, which would otherwise indicate a strong
reliance on hunting (Hall et al. 1986). The archeology of Choke Canyon suggests
that during the Middle Archaic to Late Archaic periods, the population began to
steadily increase. Sites types and artifacts increasingly demonstrate a reliance
on plant foods and small mammal consumption. The incidences of burned rock
middens increase (though these occur more rarely in east or south Texas), as
well as ground stone, flake tools, and distally beveled gouges (Hall et al. 1986).
As in other parts of Texas, sites of the late and Protohistoric periods in south
Texas demonstrate a radical shift in technology with the abandonment of the
typical dart point and gouge tool kit and adoption of arrow points and ceramic
technology. Sites tend to be more closely clustered around creeks, rather than
dispersed along other landforms.
Historic Period
Indian tribes lived in the area, including the Karankawas, Tonkawas,
Comanches, and Lipan Apaches, and witnessed the first Europeans in the form
of Spanish explorers. The Guadalupe River was named in 1689 by Spanish
explorer Alonso de Leon. During the Spanish Colonial period, Guadalupe

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

9

Cultural Background and Previous Investigations

County was sporadically settled; first by the temporary San Xavier missions
then, in 1807, the Spanish made their last attempt to settle the region in San
Marcos de Neve. The colony was abandoned in 1812 after Comanche and
Tonkawa raids. Early Anglo settlement began in the 1820’s when families from
the southern United States began to move into what was called DeWitt’s colony.
Like the Spanish, Anglo settlement, however, was also plagued by Indian raids.
After the Revolution, the Republic of Texas rewarded those who had served with
land across the state, including part of what is now Guadalupe County. The
presence of soldiers encouraged many displaced families to return to the area,
fostering the development of new communities. The Republic of Texas formally
organized Guadalupe County in 1842, and the State of Texas reorganized it in
1846. As the state grew, counties were re-shuffled and in 1858 and 1874,
Guadalupe County was finally settled in its current boundaries (Smyrl 2007).
In 1845, a German immigrant group under the auspices of the colonial effort
known as the Adelsverein settled near Comal Springs. Initially known as “Prince
Solm’s estate on the Lahn River in western Germany, Braunfels,” it was
renamed to simply New Braunfels shortly after the Adelsverein collapsed. The
settlers wasted no time setting up their community, and within a decade
emerged as a premier manufacturing and crafts center, as well as the
commercial center for area agricultural pursuits. By 1850, it was reportedly the
fourth largest city in the state (Greene 2007).
The population of the area grew rapidly. The town of Seguin became the county
seat of Guadalupe County and a popular stop on the stage line between Comal
County seat New Braunfels and nearby Gonzales after 1847. Seguin was also a
major market place for the region with many roads passing through. The
residents of Guadalupe County placed high value on education and set about
establishing schools including Guadalupe College in 1848 and the Guadalupe
High School Association in 1849. The area also saw several churches take root,
many of them also involved in education. As the population grew, so did the
farming community. Between 1850 and 1860, the amount of improved acreage
jumped almost ten times, from 4,433 acres to 42,115. During this boom
decade, stock raisers in the area started organizing cattle drives to California
and New Orleans (Smyrl 2007).
Comal County always had diversified crops due largely in part to the agricultural
habits and practices of the German immigrants. Corn and livestock were
particularly important, and were quickly augmented with cotton, wheat, oats,
wool, dairy products, and beef. As agriculture expanded west of New Braunfels
into the Hill Country, the town became an important agricultural processing and
distribution center. Cotton mills and wool manufacturing played a large part in
the area economy prior to and immediately following the Civil War.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

10

Cultural Background and Previous Investigations

Guadalupe County’s agricultural boom was to be short-lived, however. After the
Civil War, the area took a hard economic hit. In the mid 1870’s the railroad
arrived, reaching Seguin in 1876 and San Antonio the following year. This
allowed ranchers and farmers to get their products to more markets with greater
ease and less risk of damage and helped pull the county out of an economic
depression. As the area recovered, cotton became a major crop, accounting for
12 percent of improved land in 1880 and 59 percent in 1900.
The
overproduction of cotton, followed by the Great Depression, forced residents to
turn to corn or focus on livestock, often the poultry industry (Smyrl 2007).
In the forty years after 1870, the area saw a swell of immigrant arrivals. People
came from all over Europe and Mexico, joining the concentrated German
population in San Antonio and New Braunfels. Mexican immigrants increased
their share of the population in Guadalupe County from 2 percent in 1870 to
over 11 percent by 1910. The German influence remained strongest in the area,
however, bolstered by a continuous influx of new arrivals from Europe. Their
influence was so strong that the area saw some tension during the First World
War (Smyrl 2007).
The economy of Guadalupe County changed to a degree as the Guadalupe River
was developed as a source of power in the late 1920’s and early 1930’s. Oil was
discovered in the early 1920’s, further diversifying the economy. Although
agriculture never lost its dominant status for Guadalupe County, many people
who worked in San Antonio began choosing to live in the county as the
automobile and highway systems made longer commutes possible. This trend
continued into modern times as residents who worked elsewhere continued
moving into the area once reserved for farming and ranching. New Braunfels,
supported by manufacturing and tourism, saw a sustained 30 percent growth
rate in the decades following World War II, fueled by its proximity to San Antonio
(Smyrl 2007).
The specific project area falls within lands that were surveyed within the original
Sarah Dewitt Survey, No.48. The survey covers 19 labors of land (87,504.5
acres) given by the president of the Republic of Texas, Anson Jones, on
September 30, 1845 in a patent to Sarah Dewitt, the widow of Green Dewitt, as
her headright (Guadalupe County Deed Records, Vol. T: 625). Green Dewitt had
founded Dewitt’s Colony near present day Gonzales in 1825, and brought with
him his wife Sarah Seely Dewitt and their family (Lukes 2001). Sarah Dewitt
and their daughter Naomi are remembered in Texas history for cutting up
Naomi’s wedding dress to fashion the first “Come and Take It” banner during the
battle of Gonzales and was adopted as the official battle flag of the Texas
Revolution (Lukes 2001). After Green Dewitt’s death in 1835, Sarah continued
to own and acquire land throughout what became Guadalupe County, including

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

11

Cultural Background and Previous Investigations

the 1845 Patent. The surviving Dewitt family had apparently constructed
houses, out houses, barns and other buildings within the bounds of the Sarah
Dewitt survey (Guadalupe County Deed Records, Vol B: 141) though these do
not appear to have been present on any of the lands that were surveyed during
the course of this project. As early as 1847, documents indicate that Sarah
Dewitt was selling the properties to other parties from within the Sarah Dewitt
Survey, including those that are part of the current project area. Though full
research was not conducted on the entire area of the Sarah Dewitt Survey as its
size far exceeds the bounds of the current project, within the current project
area all the relevant parcels had been sold by the Dewitt family prior to 1883.
More detailed land histories are presented in the site descriptions.

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Archival research for this project was conducted at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL) and the Texas Historical Commission. There have
been no previous archeological investigations within the proposed Walnut
Avenue Extension project area.
Northeast of the project area the Texas
Department of Highways and Public Transportation conducted a survey of FM
725 from the Comal-Guadalupe county line north to New Braunfels in 1985. To
the southeast Espey, Huston & Associates conducted a survey for the LCRA of
an 8.5 kilometer transmission line in 1993. Neither of these projects identified
cultural resources. No archeological sites were recorded as a result of these
surveys. According to records at TARL, there are no previously recorded sites
within 1000 feet the project area. Site 41GU37 lies approximately 650 meters
southwest of the proposed ROW. There is no information regarding this site on
file with TARL.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

12

Results of Field Investigation

RESULTS OF FIELD INVESTIGATION
Hicks & Company archeologists conducted a pedestrian archeological survey
supplemented with shovel tests for a proposed extension to Walnut Avenue from
W. County Line Road to W. Klein Road, in Guadalupe County, Texas (Figure 1
see also Plate 1 in Appendix A). Hicks & Company’s intensive survey of the
project area was designed and performed in accordance with the Texas
Historical Commission’s minimum survey standards for linear projects, which
requires 16 shovel tests per mile, per 100 feet of width. Additionally, six shovel
tests were excavated at Site 41GU100 in order to delineate the site boundaries
relative to the project right-of-way and evaluate the site in terms of context,
depth, artifact content, and definitive characteristics. Only two shovel tests
were excavated at Site 41GU101. This was because artifacts were limited
entirely to the surface, and flooding in the project area during the time of survey,
limiting the amount of available area to shovel test. All excavated soil was
screened through ¼-inch wire mesh. Each shovel test was recorded in 10­
centimeter levels on standardized forms and plotted onto a site sketch map
and/or an aerial photograph of the project area. The walls and bottom of each
shovel test were cleaned with a trowel to examine the stratigraphy and any
evidence of historic and prehistoric activity and a soil profile was recorded for
each shovel test. Once these data were recorded, all of the shovel tests were
backfilled.
The results of each shovel test were documented through
standardized forms, field notes, and photographs. Areas of disturbance were
noted and recorded through photographs. As stated in the scope of work, all
artifacts recovered during survey were subject to field analysis, recorded, and
then replaced where they were recovered. Photographs of potentially diagnostic
artifacts were taken in the field. All newly recorded archeological sites and
revisited sites data were submitted electronically to TARL for inclusion in their
database.
The investigators inventoried all parcels of land within the proposed project
area. A total of 12 shovel tests were excavated, of which two were positive for
cultural material in the upper 20 centimeters. Surface inspection resulted in
the identification of two new sites, 41GU100 and 41GU101. Site 41GU100 is a
historic farmstead with extant structures and a surface scatter of artifacts. Site
41GU101 consists of three surface concentrations of historic trash and is likely
the result of historic dumping. The investigation documented numerous areas
containing modern and natural disturbance during the pedestrian survey and
shovel testing.
The field survey started at the northern terminus of the project area at W.
County Line Road. Here the project area occurs in an upland setting, well
outside any natural watercourses. The northern half of the project area has
been severely disturbed by residential development. This disturbance includes

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

13

Results of Field Investigation

utility installation, creek realignment, grading, clearing, and a construction
access road (Figures 2 to 5 Plate 1 Appendix A). This area was limited to
surface inspection only due to the high level of surface disturbance and the low
probability for intact buried archeological deposits.

Figure 2 Looking southwest across northern part of the project area at
encroaching residential development. Note road and utility disturbance near
construction gates.

Figure 3 Looking southwest across the northern part of the project area at
disturbance and road in survey area. Note residential development in background.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

14

Results of Field Investigation

Figure 4 Looking northwest down the northern portion of the project area towards
County Line Road. Note road disturbance extending into survey areas.

Figure 5 Looking northwest at realigned stream channel and residential areas in
northern portion of the project area.
The southern half of the project are begins approximately 3,300 feet south of
County Line Road and extends for approximately 3,300 feet to W. Klein Road.
This area is relatively undisturbed pasture and crop land with minor
disturbances from erosion and agricultural land use. Two minor drainages
cross this portion of the project area. Unfortunately, due to a broken windmill
pumping water onto the ground surface, a vast majority of this area was flooded,
resulting in extremely marshy conditions. These areas were either submerged
under a few inches of water or heavily saturated with water. Shovel testing was
limited to areas that were not subject to flooding. All 12 shovel tests were
excavated in the southern half of the project area, primarily in the vicinity of two
newly recorded sites, 41GU100 and 41GU101. Both of these sites were
identified on the surface and shovel tests were then placed to search for
subsurface deposits.
Eight shovel tests were excavated within the sites’
Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

15

Results of Field Investigation

boundaries and the remaining four shovel tests were excavated along the project
area in non submerged areas. The property adjacent to W. Klein Road was
mostly a plowed field with second or third generation hardwoods growing along
the property fence line.
Site 41GU100
This site was identified near the southern end of the project area on the surface
of a broad upland terrace. A shallow ephemeral drainage traverses the project
area approximately 160 feet north of the site. The eastern boundary of the site
abuts a residential development and the eastern edge of the proposed right-of­
way (see Plate 1). Along the southern half of the site, adjacent to the plowed
field is a shallow ditch. Adjacent to it were numerous trash piles of both modern
and historic debris (Figure 6). Some piles appear to have been pushed in with
heavy machinery, although this disturbance is limited to only a few areas.
Dumping within the ditch seems to be directly related to the adjacent
development and it is likely that the more recent trash and debris has been
mixed with the historic debris associated with the site. This recent dumping
occurs primarily on the east side of the property fence.

Figure 6 Photo of debris pile along eastern side of property fence at Site 41GU100.
The site consists of a surface scatter of historic artifacts and associated features
and is likely the remains of a farmstead (Figure 7). The features on the site
consist of a house that was converted to a barn (Figure 8), a second barn, a
metal cistern, fenced yards, and a cement tank. The land tenant informed the
investigators that another barn had been present at the site, but that it had
burned (arson) about five or six years ago. Several fence posts were charred and
heavy charcoal was found in shovel tests. The surface scatter of artifacts was
observed within the fenced yard extending south into the plowed field adjacent
Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

16

Results of Field Investigation

to the property fence (Figure 9). Artifacts identified on the site consisted of
solarized glass, aqua glass, whiteware, decal decorated whiteware, glass
marbles, a metal drawer pull, and nails. Diagnostic artifacts from the site
suggest the artifact assemblage dates from the 1890s to the 1920s.
Site 41GU100 is located along the northeastern edge of a tract of land known as
“154.525 Acres”, a property currently owned by the New Braunfels Independent
School District. The New Braunfels Independent School District had purchased
the land from Arthur Neil Zipp on October 29, 2003 (Guadalupe County Deed
Records, Vol. 1926: 532). According to an Affadavit of Adverse Possession filed
at the same time, Arthur Zipp indicated that the property had been the
possession of his father Arthur H. Zipp, who according to Arthur Zipp’s
testimony had owned the land at least 50 years and utilized it for agricultural
pursuits (Guadalupe County Deed Records, Vol 1926: 528). Though it remains
unclear when the land was divided into the present parcel, deeds indicate that
at least as early as 1865 the Zipp family had been acquiring lands within the
Sarah Dewitt Survey. On September 25, 1865, Henry Voelker and Elise Voelker
sold 918 7/10 acres of land “together with all and singular houses, outhouses
buildings, barns and stables” they had acquired in 1847 from Sarah Dewitt
herself to Johann Jacob Zipp (Guadalupe County Deed Records, Vol. I: 507; Vol.
B: 141). In 1871 Johann Zipp divided parts of this property between his sons
Christian Zipp (Guadalupe County Deed Records, Vol K:. 760) and Gottlieb Zipp
(Guadalupe County Deed Records, Vol K: 761-762). An additional 105 ½ acres
in the southwest corner of the Sarah Dewitt Survey was given to William Zipp by
Gilda Zipp on November 30, 1875 (Guadalupe County Deed Records, Vol N:
337). This deed transfer also indicated that a road would be built to connect
this property with the property on which she was residing, also the residence of
William. Five years later this same property was transferred to Gottlieb Zipp by
William Zipp (Guadalupe County Deed Records, Vol. S: 289). In 1877, Christian
Zipp purchased an additional 946 acres of land from the descendents of Sarah
Dewitt, doubling the amount of property the Zipp’s possessed within the Sarah
Dewitt Survey (Guadalupe County Deed Records, Vol O: 547-548). Though we
can not be certain that the property of interest in the archeological survey is
positively a part of the lands described in the nineteenth century deed records, it
seems likely that it is at least a part of that property, though how it came to be
defined as such is uncertain.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

17

Results of Field Investigation

Figure 7 Map of Site 41GU100.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

18

Results of Field Investigation

Figure 8 Photo of existing barn on Site 41GU100. The barn is outside the proposed
ROW.

Figure 9 Looking southeast across plowed field within the project area at Site
41GU100. Artifacts are confined mainly to the fenceline where the trees stand.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

19

Results of Field Investigation

It is not clear when the “154.525 Acre” tract was parceled off by the Zipp family
from the larger family property. However, other documents pertaining to the
metes and bounds of the tract of land north of this one, noted that in 1910 the
property was owned by Alwine and Henry Zipp (Guadalupe County Deed
Records, Vol. 34: 393). In the 1910 US census Henry Zipp is listed as a head of
household and states his profession as a farmer. Thus it seems likely that
members of the Zipp family were residing on this property in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries and were using the land to raise livestock. Review
of the 1921 and 1927 USGS New Braunfels Quadrangle maps indicate that
structures were present here at this time, in locations that match those of the
greatest artifact concentrations mapped in the plowed field as well as in the area
of the structures recorded during the survey. On the 1921 map, there is a
structure located just north of Klein Road (at the time called Long Road) near
the area where the first concentration of artifacts was located. When the 1927
map was made this structure no longer exists and no evidence of it, aside from
possibly the late nineteenth/early twentieth century artifact scatter, is present
today. The other houses shown within the Zipp 154.525 acre tract are located
further north of Klein Road where today there are standing remains of a barn.
These structures are present on both the 1921 and 1927 maps as well as later
maps. It seems likely then that the artifact scatter found in this area is part of
the debris of the residential occupation of the property by members of the Zipp
family during the early twentieth and perhaps late nineteenth century.
A total of six shovel tests were excavated on the site, with two being positive for
cultural material. Four wire nails and an unidentified metal fragment were
recovered from Shovel Test RF1 and a single whiteware fragment was found in
Shovel Test JC2. All of these artifacts were found in the upper 10 centimeters of
sediment. The structural features on the property are located outside of the
project area. These features are in disrepair and do not represent unique styles
or elements of superior craftsmanship. The Zipp family is prominent within
Guadalupe County and Johann Zipp is one of the original German immigrants
to settle the nearby town of Schumannsville (Gesick 2000). However, the Zipp’s
associated with this property appear to have been ordinary farmers. Based on
the features observed during the survey the site boundaries extend beyond the
currently surveyed right-of-way. Based on the lack of the property’s significant
historical associateion, the low density of material found at the site, a lack of
intact archeological deposits, and the poor integrity of the features, Hicks &
Company recommends that Site 41GU100 does not contain any elements or
features within the proposed right-of-way that contribute to the site’s eligibility
for listing as a SAL. No further work is recommended for this site within the
proposed project area.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

20

Results of Field Investigation

Site 41GU101
This site is located entirely within the proposed right-of-way on a broad upland
terrace adjacent to and west of an ephemeral drainage (Figure 10). The site is
defined as a historic artifact scatter limited entirely to the ground surface
(Figure 11). Artifacts are primarily concentrated in three areas and are likely
the result of dumping (Figure 12). No historic features were observed on the
site, however, the site is bounded on the west side by what appears to be a manmade ditch and on the east by a natural seasonal drainage ditch.
Approximately 90 to 115 artifacts were identified on the site and consisted of
among other artifacts, a twentieth century catchup bottle, a bleach bottle base,
a cologne bottle with threaded closure, a clear glass medicine bottle, a W.H
Fahrney bottle base from 1946, a soda water bottle, miscellaneous bottles and
bottle fragments, metal can fragments, porcelain fragments, plain whiteware,
and a blue-glazed plate fragment. Based on diagnostic artifacts and attributes
such as arsenic bleaching, the artifact assemblage likely dates to the 1930s and
1940s.

Figure 10 General photo of Site 41GU101 looking northwest.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

21

Results of Field Investigation

Figure 11 Map of Site 41GU101.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

22

Results of Field Investigation

Figure 12 Photo of artifact concentration at Site 41GU101. Catchup bottle is in
foreground.
At the time of the survey the site had been recently flooded by rains and from a
wind mill located approximately 600 feet to the north that was left pumping and
which was spilling water around it. Much of the surrounding area was still
submerged or highly saturated with water and prevented shovel testing in most
areas (Figure 13). In addition, the site is confined to a small area approximately
40 feet by 120 feet in size and is located entirely within the proposed right-of­
way. Further, artifacts in each concentration were confined entirely to the
surface. As a result only two shovel tests were excavated on the site and both
were negative for subsurface deposits. Nonetheless, since the artifacts were
basically confined to the surface and ground surface visibility was greater than
30 percent, investigators were able to define site boundaries without shovel
testing.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

23

Results of Field Investigation

Figure 13 Looking southeast at submerged areas just north of Site 41GU101.
This site is located within what is now land owned by the North Ranch Estates,
called 37.2369 acres. North Ranch Estates acquired the property from New
Braunfels Ranch Estates Limited on April 27, 2004 (Guadalupe County Deed
Records, Vol. 2148: 707). This sale broke up a 106.3636 acre tract that New
Braunfels Ranch Estates Ltd had purchased on November 15, 1994 from Rachel
M. Klein (Guadalupe County Deed Records, Vol. 1124: 919-921). Rachel Klein
in turn had inherited the property from Alfred Klein who was sold the property
by Henrietta Klein on April 25, 1913 (Guadalupe County Deed Records, Vol. 40:
425-426). The Klein family had possessed the land since 1883 when it was
purchased as part of a larger 238 9/10 acre tract from L. P. and Elizabeth David
by Charles Klein and his wife Henrietta (Guadalupe County Deed Records, Vol.
U: 429-430). Although no deed record was found prior to this sale, it seems
likely that the Davids may have acquired the property from Sarah Dewitt after
the survey was completed. Thus, based on the deed records, the 1940’s era
trash discovered along the southern boundary of the 160.3636 acre Klein
property can be associated with activities conducted by members of the Klein
family. However, no structures have been identified on the corresponding
topographic maps that are near the location of the trash scatter, and it may be
that this area was purposefully used as a dump site located away from any
known buildings.
All of the artifacts observed on the site were located on the ground surface. Due
to flooding and what appears to be recent drainage excavation at the site the
artifact assemblage has a poor integrity. Based on the distribution of the
artifacts and the lack of any features it is likely that this site served primarily as
a dumping area. Furthermore, the site is not associated with a historically
significant local person or event within Guadalupe County. Due to the late date
Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

24

Results of Field Investigation

of the artifacts, a lack of intact subsurface archeological deposits, a lack of
features, and a lack of historical significance, Hicks & Company recommends
that Site 41GU101 is not eligible for listing as a SAL. No further work is
recommended for this site.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

25

Results of Field Investigation

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

26

Conclusions and Recommendations

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Hicks & Company archeologists surveyed approximately 1.3 miles of new
location roadway for the proposed Walnut Avenue Extension. The project was
conducted under a Texas Antiquities Permit. All work conformed to the Texas
Historical Commission’s Rules of Practice and Procedure for the Antiquities Code
of Texas under 13 TAC 26. Sites were evaluated with respect to State
Archeological Landmark eligibility under the Antiquities Code. The survey
involved pedestrian survey and 12 shovel tests, only two of which were positive
for cultural material.
Severe disturbance was observed along the entire
northern half of the project area due to adjacent residential development. As a
result of the survey two new sites, 41GU100 and 41GU101, were identified in
the southern half of the project area.
Site 41GU100 represents the remains of a historic farmstead associated with the
Zipp family. The site most likely dates to the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries and consists of a broad surface scatter of historic artifacts and extant
structures; the structures are all located outside of the proposed project area.
Site 41GU101 is the remains of a historic dump site consisting of a surface
scatter of historic artifacts dating to the 1930s and 1940s. No features are
associated with this site. Neither site contains unique or significant deposits for
Guadalupe County. Furthermore, neither the sites nor the properties they sit on
are associated with significant persons or events in the history of Guadalupe
County. Based on the results of the archeological survey and archival research,
it is the opinion of the Principal Investigator that site 41GU101 is not eligible for
listing as a SAL. It is the opinion of the Principal Investigator that the site does
not contain any elements or features within the project area that would allow it
to be considered eligible for listing as an SAL. The boundaries of Site 41GU100
extend beyond the current project area. No further archeological investigations
are recommended for site 41GU101. No further archeological investigations are
recommended for this site within the proposed project area. In addition,
archeological deposits were not identified within the project area beyond the
limits of these two sites and the probability for unidentified intact archeological
deposits to occur is low due to extensive recent disturbance associated with
residential development and stream channelization. Therefore, no further
archeological investigations are recommended for the proposed project.

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

27

Results of Field Investigation

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

28

References Cited

REFERENCES CITED
Black, Stephen L.
1989 Central Texas Plateau Prairie. In From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in Central, South, and Lower Pecos Texas, edited by Thomas
R. Hester, Stephen L. Black, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, Anne A.
Fox, Karl J. Reinhard, and Leland C. Bement, pp.17-38. Arkansas
Archeological Research Series, No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayettesville.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1983 Geologic Atlas of Texas. University of Texas at Austin, Austin.
Collins, Michael B.
2004 Archeology in Central Texas in The Prehistory of Texas. Edited by
Timothy K. Perttula. Texas A & M University Press, College Station.
Federal Census Data. Available at HeritageQuest Online.
1910
Gesick, E. John, Jr.
2000 Under the Live Oak Tree: A History of Seguin. Electronic Document.
http://www.seguin.net/heritage/gesicktree/index.html. seguin.net.
Greene, Daniel P.
2007 Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. "Comal County." Electronic Document.
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/CC/hcc19.html
(accessed May 30, 2007)
Guadalupe County Deed Records
Vol. B: 141
Vol. I: 507
Vol K: 760-762
Vol. N: 337
Vol. O: 547-548
Vol. S: 289
Vol. T: 625
Vol. U: 429-430
Vol. 34: 393
Vol. 40: 425-426
Vol. 1124: 919-921
Vol. 1926: 528, 532
Vol. 2148: 707

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

29

References Cited

Hall, Grant D., Thomas R. Hester and Stephen L. Black
1986 The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas: Results
of Phase II Archaeological Investigations. Choke Canyon Series No. 10.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, San Antonio.
Hester, Thomas R.
1980 Digging into South Texas Prehistory. Corona Publishing, San Antonio.
1987

Problems and Progress in Paleo-Indian Studies in Southern Texas. La
Tierra 14(1):2-4.

1995

The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66: 427-459

Hatch, S.L., K.N. Gandhi, and L.E. Brown
1990 Checklist of the Vascular Plants of Texas. The Texas A&M University
System, Texas Agricultural Experiment Station. Pub. No. MP-1655,
College Station.
Lukes, Edward A.
2001 Dewitt,
Green.
Electronic
Document,
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/DD/fde55.html,
accessed May 24, 2007.
McMahan, Craig A., Roy G. Frye, and Kirby L. Brown
1984 The Vegetation Types of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife, Austin.
Smyrl, Vivian Elizabeth
2007 Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. "Guadalupe County." Electronic
Document.
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/GG/hcg12.html
(accessed May 30, 2007)

Archeology Survey – Walnut Road Extension – August 2007

30

APPENDIX A
PLATES

y
unt
Co

Lin

d
eR

JC4
RF4

41GU101
BJ4

RF3
JC3

BJ3
JC2
BJ2

41GU37

RF1
JC1

BJ1

41GU100

Proposed ROW
Archeological Site
Disturbed
R
d

Marsh

Plate 1
Walnut Avenue Extension
Archeological Investigations

W

Kl
ei

n

Shovel Test
0

325

650

0

100

200

Feet
Meters

W

