Intensive Archeological Survey of the
Proposed City of Austin Water Treatment Plant #4
at Bullick Hollow, Travis County, Texas

Written by:
John A. Campbell and Bradford M. Jones

Principal Investigator:
Bradford M. Jones

Texas Antiquities Code Permit #4759

Submitted to:
The City of Austin, Public Works Department

Submitted by:
Hicks & Company

Archeology Series No. 202

September 2008

Table of Contents

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.0

INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................................. 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND .............................................................................................. 5

3.0

RESEARCH DESIGN ...................................................................................................................... 9

4.0

SITES AND PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS................................................................................. 11

5.0

RESULTS OF FIELD INVESTIGATIONS ..................................................................................... 13

6.0

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS............................................................................. 27

7.0

REFERENCES CITED................................................................................................................... 29

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1:
Figure 2:
Figure 3:
Figure 4:
Figure 5:
Figure 6:
Figure 7:
Figure 8:
Figure 9:
Figure 10:
Figure 11:
Figure 12:
Figure 13:
Figure 14:
Figure 15:
Figure 16:
Figure 17:
Figure 18:
Figure 19:
Figure 20:

Figure 21:
Figure 22:
Figure 23:

Dense juniper stands in project area......................................................................................... 5
Typical open area in upland with more scattered juniper and grasses. Note the limestone
cobbles on surface .................................................................................................................... 5
Two-tract dirt road leading to the cellular tower ........................................................................ 6
Transmission line easement...................................................................................................... 7
Clearing and disturbance along the north edge of the property near Bullick ............................ 7
Dumping of cars and appliances in drainage ditch along Bullick Hollow Road......................... 8
This type of small overhang was typical in the project area.................................................... 14
View of the front of Structure 1, looking west from RM 629 right-of-way. ............................... 15
View of the western side of Structure 2. Note limestone facing on wall of poured concrete. . 16
View of the cistern. Note same type of wall construction as Structure 2 ............................... 16
View of eastern side of Structure 3 ......................................................................................... 17
View of Structure 4 from the southeast. Structure 3 is visible in the background .................. 18
View of Structure 5 from the southeast. Structure 3 is visible in the upper right hand corner of
the photo in the background .................................................................................................... 18
View of scattered architectural materials – Structure 6 – in approximate location of a building
on the 1968 7.5 minute Jollyville Quadrangle map. ................................................................ 19
View of Structure 7 from the south side of the building........................................................... 19
View of trash scatter located three meters north of Structure 7 .............................................. 20
View of typical low density scatter of historic debris across site surface in Site 41TV2296 ... 21
Example of typical high density trash pile in Site 41TV2296. This trash pile was located
approximately 15 meters south of Structure 7 in a small surface depression......................... 21
Typical scatter of glass beer bottles found throughout Site 41TV2296, as well as across much
of the project area.................................................................................................................... 22
Examples of historic artifacts recorded at Site 41TV2296: (A) Owens-Illinois Moroline
petroleum jelly jar with 1946 date, (B) Owens-Illinois prescription bottle with 1978 date, (C)
Owens-Illinois jar with 1946 date, (D) Fire King Oven Ware glass bowl fragment, (E & F)
Owens-Illinois condiment bottles with 1947 dates................................................................... 22
View of site surface along southeastern edge of Site 41TV2297. A number of flakes and a
core fragment were found here on the surface. ...................................................................... 23
View of exposed limestone bedrock common in the northern portions of the site area.......... 24
Prehistoric lithic artifacts recorded on Site 41TV2297 surface. (A) quartzite hammerstone
fragment, (B) quartzite fragment, (C) edge modified chert flake, and (D) possible chert core
fragment. All other material is chert debitage......................................................................... 25

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

i

Table of Contents

LIST OF PLATES
Plate 1
Plate 2

Project Location......................................................................................................................... 2
Project Location......................................................................................................................... 3

LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A

Coordination Letters

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

ii

Introduction

1.0 INTRODUCTION
Between February 1 and 8, 2008, archeologists from Hicks & Company
conducted an intensive archeological survey of approximately 95 acres of the
proposed Water Treatment Plant #4 at Bullick Hollow in Travis County, Texas
(Plates 1 and 2). The City of Austin, through its Public Works Department, has
sponsored the survey of the proposed facility to fulfill regulatory obligations
outlined by the Antiquities Code of Texas (TAC). There is no federal involvement
with this project such as funding, permitting, or regulation. The currently
proposed water treatment plant facilities are located in the western outskirts of
the City of Austin, in central Travis County, Texas. The project area is found
entirely within the Jollyville USGS 7.5’ quadrangle map. The project includes a
main plant facility measuring approximately 95 acres. The main plant facility is
found on a plateau ridge immediately west of the intersection of RM 620 and RM
2222. The project area footprint sits atop a slightly rolling, rocky upland plateau
with steep dropoffs marking the facility’s western and southern boundaries. A
small waterway, Bullick Hollow, crosses the southern end of the project area.
The Area of Potential Effect (APE) for the proposed water treatment facility
includes all areas of direct impact within the proposed footprint of the main
plant site as shown on Plates 1 and 2. The APE is defined on the basis of
current construction plans and schematics at the time of the permit application
and any subsequent modifications may require additional action under the TAC.
The survey resulted in the identification of two new archeological sites,
41TV2296 and 41TV2297. Site 41TV2296 is a surficial historic site consisting of
seven structural features and an associated trash scatter. Site 41TV2297 is a
surficial lithic scatter of unknown age. Both sites have poor integrity, lack intact
archeological deposits, and have a low research potential. It is the opinion of the
Principal Investigator that sites 41TV2296 and 41TV2297 are not eligible for
designation as State Archeological Landmarks (SALs).
In a letter dated May 8, 2008 (Appendix A), The Texas Historical Commission
concurred with Hicks & Company’s recommendations. Thus, the proposed
project has been determined to have no effect on historic properties, and the
project may proceed to construction.
Bradford M. Jones functioned as the survey’s Principal Investigator and John A.
Campbell served as project archeologist. Field investigations were conducted by
Bradford M. Jones, John A. Campbell, Matthew C. Stotts, Carolyn Keagle, and
Mason Miller. There were no artifacts collected during the course of the
fieldwork, however, all relevant project materials will be curated at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL). This report is submitted in partial
fulfillment of Texas Antiquities Permit #4759.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

1

Introduction

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

2

Introduction

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

3

Introduction

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

4

Environmental Background

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The project area is located in the western half of Travis County near Mansfield
Dam and Lake Travis. This area is in the Balcones Canyonlands at the eastern
edge of the Edwards Plateau, characterized by high upland ridges and plateaus
with steep slopes. The project area sits upon the Jollyville Plateau, a large broad
plateau overlooking Bull Creek to the east and Bullick Hollow to the west.
Vegetation in the project area is primarily dense juniper stands (Figure 1) on
the uplands with mixed hardwoods on the slopes and valley floors. Grasses are
sparsely scattered in the upland areas, with yucca, prickly pear, and mesquite
also present (Figure 2) (Riskind and Diamond 1986).

Figure 1: Dense juniper stands in project area.

Figure 2: Typical open area in upland with more scattered juniper and grasses.
Note the limestone cobbles on surface.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

5

Environmental Background

Soils documented in the project APE include shallow Tarrant (TaD) and Brackett
(BoF) series rocky and gravelly clays, both overlying solid limestone bedrock.
Tarrant series soils are generally less than 30 centimeters thick and consist of
dark, silty loamy clays with extensive gravels throughout. Brackett clays are
often slightly deeper, with a typical profile extending through 50 centimeters of
coarse, granular silty clays (Werchan et al. 1974). In both soil types, the ground
surface is normally littered with limestone gravels and cobbles. Sites located in
these contexts are most likely to be found on or immediately below the ground
surface. As the project APE is located atop and off the edge of a steep plateau,
intact, buried site deposits are unlikely to occur, however rockshelter sites
(documented with some frequency in the surrounding area) could be found in
any of the steep rocky hill slopes. Generally, historic archeological sites could
have been present within much of the project APE, regardless of project corridor
sediments and topography.
Currently the land is under no widespread use such as agriculture or
development. A cellular tower is located at the center of the project area at the
end of a two-track dirt road that leads to RM 620 (Figure 3). A transmission
line traverses the property from northeast to southwest, generally paralleling RM
620 (Figure 4). Dumping is fairly prevalent on the property particularly along
the two-track dirt road, the transmission line easement, along the edge of the
RM 620 right-of-way, and in the northeast corner of the property behind several
commercial structures (Figure 5). The largest dump area is located at the north
end of the project area in a drainage that parallels and is adjacent to Bullick
Hollow Road.
This area has seen several episodes of dumping of cars,
appliances, and other large pieces of trash (Figure 6). Overall, the vast majority
of the project area is relatively undisturbed with some evidence of previous
agricultural activities.

Figure 3: Two-tract dirt road leading to the cellular tower.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

6

Environmental Background

Figure 4: Transmission line easement.

Figure 5: Clearing and disturbance along the north edge of the property near Bullick
Hollow Road.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

7

Environmental Background

Figure 6: Dumping of cars and appliances in drainage ditch along Bullick Hollow Road.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

8

Research Design

3.0 RESEARCH DESIGN
This section presents the research design and field methodology for the intensive
archeological survey investigations of Water Treatment Plant #4 at Bullick
Hollow in Travis County, Texas.
The archeological investigations were
conducted in February 2008. There is no federal involvement with the project
and the property is owned by the City of Austin and therefore falls under the
Antiquities Code of Texas. The investigations were conducted in accordance
with the Antiquities Code of Texas (13 TAC 26), the Texas Historical
Commission’s Rules of Practice and Procedure for the Antiquities Code of Texas,
and TAC #4759. All archeological deposits identified within the project area
were evaluated using the State Archeological Landmark (SAL) criteria of
significance (13 TAC 26.8). An archeological site exhibits the potential to be
eligible as a SAL if at least one of the following criteria are met:
1.

2.

3.
4.
5.

the site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the
prehistory and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important
information;
the site's archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are
preserved and intact, thereby supporting the research potential or
preservation interests of the site;
the site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory
and/or history;
the study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods
of preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge;
the high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or
could occur, and official landmark designation is needed to insure
maximum legal protection, or alternatively further investigations are
needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and relic collecting when the
site cannot be protected.

The archeological investigations consisted of an intensive archeological survey of
the entire proposed project area.
Survey investigations included surface
inspection and shovel testing. The APE consists of the approximately 95-acre
main plant site. Shovel testing was conducted at a rate of one test for every two
acres, in accordance with the Texas Historical Commission (THC) and Council of
Texas Archeologists’ (CTA) minimum standards for archeological survey. Survey
methods varied from this standard in areas that clearly lacked the possibility of
containing archeological properties (i.e. disturbed contexts, areas of exposed
bedrock, steep slopes), and/or in areas with excellent surface visibility (>30%
surface visibility).
Areas that have been previously disturbed within the
proposed project area were documented through photographs and notes.
Investigators recorded their observations and the results of subsurface tests
through notes, standardized forms, and photographs. Site definitions complied
with THC/CTA survey standards and policy including additional requirements
for assessing historical sites and cemeteries (see below). All archeological sites
identified within the APE during the survey were investigated by means of no
fewer than six shovel tests in order to define site boundaries. Historical
archeological sites were documented not only through field efforts, but also
through survey level archival research. This research included an attempt to
determine history of ownership and land use for each site through deed and
map research, wherever possible. Census records for individuals associated with
the site were checked, and the names of these individuals were also checked in

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

9

Research Design

the New Handbook of Texas History. None of the individual landowners were
found to be significant.
The survey was conducted in all accessible areas of the APE. All work was
conducted under the terms of the Antiquities Code of Texas. All archeological
sites located during the survey were recorded at TARL, and all project
photographs, records, and a copy of the final report will be curated at that
facility according to their standards. Finally, 20 copies of the report will be sent
to the THC to satisfy the conditions of the permit.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

10

Sites and Previous Investigations

4.0 SITES AND PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Background research for the project included a review of previous survey
documentation, a review of the state site data files at TARL, the state site survey
files at the THC, and the THC’s Sites Atlas database. Results of the study
indicate there are no archeological sites previously documented within the
project APE. There are no State Archeological Landmarks (SALs), National
Register listed properties (NRHP), Texas Historical Markers (OSHMs), or
Registered Texas Historic Landmarks (RTHLs) within or in close proximity to the
proposed WTP #4 project area. No known cemeteries exist within or in close
proximity to the project area.
Although there are no previously recorded cultural resources within the
proposed WTP #4 project area, there are eight previously recorded archeological
sites located within one kilometer of the proposed project: 41TV119, 41TV1121,
41TV1122, 41TV1896, 41TV1897, 41TV2110, 41TV2257, and 41TV2262. With
the exception of 41TV119 and 41TV1897, all sites are surficial lithic scatters
that were not deemed NRHP/SAL eligible. Site 41TV119 is a rockshelter site
that was not recommended for further investigation while Site 41TV1897 is a
burned rock midden site that was recommended for NRHP/SAL-eligibility
testing.
Site 41TV119 is located approximately 776 meters northwest of the project area.
This site is a small rockshelter recorded in 1966 by John Green. Some possible
projectile point fragments in the landowner’s collection were noted as possibly
having provenance from this site. At the time the recorder visited the site, he
did not believe the site warranted further investigation. Sites 41TV1121 and
41TV1122 are also located to the northwest of the project area at a distance of
approximately 880 meters and 565 meters, respectively. Both of these sites were
recorded by Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. in 1985. Site 41TV1121 is a small
lithic scatter of unknown age situated on a flat terrace edge above Bullick
Hollow. The site was not considered eligible for NRHP or SAL listing and no
further work was recommended. Site 41TV1122 is also an indeterminate age
lithic scatter situated on a terrace of exposed bedrock overlooking Bullick
Hollow. The paucity of artifacts and a lack of potential for intact deposits
resulted in a recommendation of no additional work and determination that the
site was ineligible for NRHP or SAL listing.
Site 41TV1896 was discovered on top of a steep rock outcrop overlooking Lake
Travis, approximately 1,000 meters west of the proposed project location. The
site was recorded by Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. in 2000 as a surficial
lithic scatter measuring 200 meters by 100 meters. No diagnostic artifacts were
recovered from the site. Investigators noted the presence of several chert flakes
and a few fragments of fire-cracked rocks. The site was recommended as
ineligible for SAL or NRHP status. Site 41TV1897 is a burned rock midden site
with several lithic reduction areas located on an upland ridge above Bullick
Hollow, approximately 360 meters west of the proposed project area. The site
was recorded by Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. in 2000. Diagnostic
artifacts observed on the site included two dart point fragments dating to the
Late Archaic. Shovel testing on the site revealed archeological deposits to a
depth of 45 centimeters below the ground surface. This site was recommended
for additional testing to evaluate eligibility as a SAL or for inclusion in the NRHP.
Site 41TV2110 was defined as a lithic debitage and tool scatter on an upland
ridge at the head of Panther Hollow, approximately 200 meters southeast of the

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

11

Sites and Previous Investigations

proposed main plant site. The site area was observed within an existing
transmission line corridor by LCRA in 2004. Based on collected artifacts, the
site dates to the Paleoindian and Late Archaic. Artifacts at the site were
confined to the surface. The previous investigators recommended mapping of
the surface artifacts, but made no recommendation for SAL or NRHP eligibility.
Site 41TV2257 is located atop a hill that overlooks a steep valley to the
southeast. The site was recorded as a sparse surficial lithic scatter by Hicks &
Company during a survey of the proposed WTP #4 Cortaña tract. Over 50% of
the ground surface within the site boundary is exposed limestone bedrock. Very
sparse vegetation on the site consists of cedar trees, short grasses, and cacti.
Site 41TV2257 was determined to be ineligible for listing in the NRHP or
nomination as a SAL. No additional work was recommended for the site. Finally,
Site 41TV2263 is a prehistoric lithic scatter of unknown age with a minor late
historic component (1940s-1950s) situated 756 meters northeast of the project
area. The site was recorded by ACI Consulting in 2007 and has been heavily
looted. The investigators deemed the site ineligible for NHRP or SAL designation
due to extensive disturbance and recommended no additional work at the site as
it lacked further research potential.
Research identified two archeological surveys that had been conducted along the
southeastern edge of the project area where it parallels RM 620. No sites were
identified within the project area during either survey. The first survey was
conducted for the FHWA in 1987 along the route of RM 620. No additional
information is available regarding this survey. The second survey was carried
out by River City Engineering in 2006 as part of a study of 13 proposed water
improvement projects in the Lake Travis and RM 620 area for the Travis County
Water Control and Improvement District No. 17. Where this survey overlaps the
proposed project area, no archeological sites or cultural resources were
identified.
In 1984, Prewitt and Associates, Inc. conducted a survey of 1,810 acres in
anticipation of the Canyon Creek residential development approximately one
mile northeast of the current project area (Howard and Freeman 1984).
Importantly, this survey documented 113 archeological sites: 101 prehistoric
sites, 10 historic sites, and two sites with both historic and prehistoric
components. Forty-five of these sites were recommended as eligible for the
NRHP. The density and variety of sites identified allowed investigators to
partially reconstruct settlement patterns and population density within the
localized area of the Canyon Creek Project.
The City of Austin sponsored archeological survey investigations within a
previously proposed main plant area (Kotter and Moncure 1985). Intensive
archeological survey of the proposed location for a 240-acre City of Austin Water
Treatment Plant #4 was conducted in 1984 by the Texas Archeological Survey.
The survey was sponsored by Glass Environmental Consultants, Inc., acting on
behalf of the City of Austin in an effort to identify potential constraints during
planning, prior to the permitting phase of the project. The pedestrian survey
included limited shovel testing and documented seven archeological sites
(41TV928-934) within that project’s APE. A second survey, adjacent to the
current proposed project area but not overlapping it, was conducted by Hicks &
Company in 2006 for a potential location for WTP #4. A single surficial lithic
scatter of indeterminate age, 41TV2257, was identified during this survey. It
was not recommended for nomination to the NRHP, as an SAL, or for further
research.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

12

Results of Field Investigations

5.0 RESULTS OF FIELD INVESTIGATIONS
Surveyors traversed the main plant facility through a series of transects
separated at approximately 30 meter intervals. These transects, generally
paralleled RM 620 except in the western and southern ends of the project area,
where topography did not facilitate this path. On-site surface inspection
revealed a survey area that was generally of good to moderate visibility
(Figure 2). Areas with dense ground cover were generally periodically cleared by
hand or trowel to afford a clearer picture of the ground surface below. Aside
from the cell tower and transmission line, project area disturbance was limited
to small pockets of recent to historic trash scatters, and a small two-track dirt
road. Investigators observed exposed limestone bedrock across more than 50%
of the project area with thin sheets of soil covering the remainder.
Due to the very limited potential for deep soils and the generally good surface
visibility within the project area, investigators excavated small shovel tests at
arbitrary intervals along the transects (at areas of deeper sediments or poorer
surface visibility) at a much greater frequency than initially anticipated. In all,
surveyors dug a total of 59 subsurface tests. All of these shovel tests were
negative for cultural material. The depth of shovel tests varied between 0 and
35 centimeters below ground surface, with the vast majority of tests terminating
between 0 and 15 centimeters below ground surface. In addition to the shovel
testing, investigators generally probed the ground surface frequently to try and
identify areas suitable for shovel testing. Soils encountered throughout the
project area generally ranged from brown (10YR 4/3) to very dark gray clay loam
(10YR 3/1), intermixed with varying amounts of deteriorated limestone bedrock.
All shovel tests terminated at bedrock or dense limestone cobbles and gravels.
Portions of the project area, along the western, northern and southern
boundaries, were characterized by deep drainage cuts and steeply sloping valley
walls. These areas were subject to pedestrian inspection but not shovel probed
due to good surface visibility, steep slopes, and the severely decreased likelihood
of containing intact, buried sediments. Particular attention was paid to the
possibility of locating rockshelter sites in these steep, rocky environs. On-site
inspection revealed several rock overhangs primarily along the western edge of
the project area, but these overhangs did not appear to be of a sufficient size for
habitation (Figure 7). These areas were thoroughly inspected for cultural
materials, but were all found to be negative.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

13

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 7: This type of small overhang was typical in the project area.
Two sites were recorded as a result of the current field investigations, Sites
41TV2296 and 41TV2297. Both of these sites were identified on the surface
along the eastern edge of the project area. Site 41TV2296 is a historic scatter
and Site 41TV2297 is a lithic scatter. Both sites are recommended as not
eligible for designation as a SAL.
Site 41TV2296
This site is a twentieth century historic site consisting of a small complex of
seven buildings or possible building remains and trash scatter located off the
western edge of RM 620 and north of the access road to the cellular phone
tower. The site is 80 meters by 120 meters in size (2.37 Acres). Site boundaries
were determined based on the presence of the structures and the RM 620 rightof-way on the eastern side, and a notable decline in artifact density south of the
cellular tower access road and to the west and north of the structures. The
delineation of the western, southern and northern boundaries is arbitrary to a
certain degree as the entire project area has been utilized for dumping (all 20th
century, and most artifacts post dating 1950), and as a result historic artifacts
were consistently found in most ravines or drainages as well as clustered along
the side of the project area that fronts RM 620. Based on deed research and
artifact analysis, the age of the artifacts and buildings within the site appear to
be primarily post-1940 in date, with the majority of the materials dating to the
1960s or later.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

14

Results of Field Investigations

The parcel of land on which the site is located was originally a portion of 400
acres of land patented to the Saunders family on July 28th, 1889 (Travis County
Deed Records Vol. 257: 432). The property was then sold as part of a larger land
deal to A. F. Moeckel on June 30, 1913 (Travis County Deed Records Vol. 257:
433). In 1968, a portion of Moeckel’s land was resurveyed as a 34.5 acre tract
by his heir and executor Richard O. Ketschmar (Travis County Deed Records
Vol. 4286: 749-752). It is not clear when the 400 acre property was subdivided,
but by 1968 only this portion remained the property of Moeckel and his heir.
Sometime after 1968 the property was briefly held by Tom W. Schulze who
subsequently sold the 34.5 acre tract to Harry A. Montandon in 1972 (Travis
County Deed Records Vol. 4286: 749-752). The tract remained in the Montadon
family until 2003 when it was purchased as part of a larger group of parcels that
would come to constitute the project area (Travis County Deed Records
Instrument #2003087287).
The most evident components of the site are the seven structures or possible
structures that are located along the east and southeast portions of the site.
Comparison of the 1968 and 1981 Jollyville USGS, 7.5’ quadrangle maps
indicate at least five structures in the general area when the map was made in
1968. The most recent map only shows three, clearly indicating the collapse of
at least two of the structures during the two map editions. Structure 1 is
located 26 meters north of the cellular tower access road on the western edge of
the RM 620 right-of-way (Figure 8). The building is six meters in length (north
to south) and 3.5 meters wide. It is still standing, though much of the roof and
wall material has been lost or removed. It is constructed of a wooden frame on a
poured cement foundation with metal siding and roofing. Modern trash is
scattered around the structure.

Figure 8: View of the front of Structure 1, looking west from RM 629 right-of-way.
Structure 2 also has a poured concrete foundation, but the walls are
constructed of poured concrete with an unworked limestone facing (Figure 9).
The building is six meters in length on its north-south axis and seven meters

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

15

Results of Field Investigations

wide. The walls have partially collapsed, and it appears that the eastern half of
the structure was open, perhaps a porch. Near the northeast corner of
Structure 2 and behind Structure 1, is a circular cistern made in the same
manner with poured concrete walls with a limestone facing (Figure 10). The
cistern extends approximately six feet above the ground and is approximately
five feet wide. A metal spigot emerges from the ground near the cistern. It has
been filled with modern debris.

Figure 9: View of the western side of Structure 2. Note limestone facing on wall of
poured concrete.

Figure 10: View of the cistern. Note same type of wall construction as Structure 2.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

16

Results of Field Investigations

Structure 3 is a collapsed wood frame building measuring six meters to a side
that is set on limestone and cinder block piers with a limestone skirt enclosing
the foundation (Figure 11). The roof is wood, except on the north side where it
is sheet metal. A sink and oven are still present in the northern portion of the
house, which may indicate that this portion of the house was the kitchen. There
is also a high density of broken glass and ceramic on the ground surface near
the northwest corner which may have also been associated with kitchen related
activities.
Structure 4 consists of the flattened wall and roof elements of a building
measuring roughly two meters on a side (Figure 12). This component of the site
is likely to be a collapsed section of the southern portion of Structure 3.
Structure 5 is another collapsed wood frame building (Figure 13). Similar to
Structure 3 it appears to have been constructed on a pier and beam foundation
with a skirt of limestone and has a metal corrugated roof. There is a large
amount of window glass on the surface near this structure as well as metal
cans, bottle fragments, and other assorted trash.

Figure 11: View of eastern side of Structure 3.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

17

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 12: View of Structure 4 from the southeast. Structure 3 is visible in the
background.

Figure 13: View of Structure 5 from the southeast. Structure 3 is visible in the
upper right hand corner of the photo in the background.
Structure 6 is the probable location of a small outbuilding indicated on the
earlier 1968 Jollyville quadrangle map. At present only portions of wood and
metal corrugated roofing are present on the surface in a roughly three by three
meter area west-southwest of Structure 5 (Figure 14).
Because only
architectural remains are present and these may be debris from other
structures, the assignment of this debris pile as a structure is tentative.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

18

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 14: View of scattered architectural materials – Structure 6 – in approximate
location of a building on the 1968 7.5 minute Jollyville Quadrangle map.
Finally, Structure 7 is the largest building, a partially collapsed house that
measures five meters in width east-west and 10 meters in length north-south
(Figure 15). Like Structures 3 and 5, the house is built of a wood structure and
placed on a limestone and cinderblock pier and wooden beam foundation.
Various household artifacts were found across the surface near the structure. A
trash pile was located three meters to the north of the structure and contained a
number of common clear glass beverage and medicine bottles, metal cans, and
various plastic and metal trash (Figure 16). Two datable glass bottles found in
this trash pile range from 1946 to 1978 (see Figure 20).

Figure 15: View of Structure 7 from the south side of the building.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

19

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 16: View of trash scatter located three meters north of Structure 7.
In addition to the structures, there is a large amount of garbage associated with
the site habitation found on the surface both near the structures and scattered
throughout the woods to the south, west, and north. A total of six shovel tests
were excavated on the site, ranging between 10 centimeters and 33 centimeters
in depth. All shovel tests were negative for cultural material. The trash
represents a broad array of discarded items typical of residential habitation
including old kitchen and household appliances, tin food, coffee, and oil cans,
broken whiteware and porcelain dishes, glass medicine, condiment, and
beverage bottles, discarded car parts and tires, bicycles, etcetera (Figures 17 &
18). Perhaps the most ubiquitous items on the surface are beer bottles,
primarily of the Pearl and Shlitz brands (Figure 19). Few artifacts bore maker’s
marks that could be used to narrow down the period of manufacture beyond the
mid to late twentieth century. For example a common mark noted during the
site inspection was the Brockway symbol (a “B” in a circle) that was in use as
early as 1925 until at least the late 1980s (Soda Traderz 2008). However,
several Owens-Illinois bottles were encountered in trash piles on the western
side of the site that bore temporally diagnostic characteristics (an embossed
mark with an “I” in side an “O” within a superimposed diamond) (Figure 20).
Based on the date stamp located to the right of the mark, these bottles’ dates of
manufacture were 1946 and 1947, and these items were presumably used and
discarded sometime around this period (Lockhart 2004). Most Owens-Illinois
bottles encountered on site, however, bear a simple “I” in an “O” mark first used
after 1954 and into the present. At least one glass prescription bottle bore a
date of 1978, indicating the prolonged use of the site.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

20

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 17: View of typical low density scatter of historic debris across site surface
in Site 41TV2296.

Figure 18: Example of typical high density trash pile in Site 41TV2296. This trash
pile was located approximately 15 meters south of Structure 7 in a small surface
depression.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

21

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 19: Typical scatter of glass beer bottles found throughout Site 41TV2296, as
well as across much of the project area.

Figure 20: Examples of historic artifacts recorded at Site 41TV2296: (A) OwensIllinois Moroline petroleum jelly jar with 1946 date, (B) Owens-Illinois prescription
bottle with 1978 date, (C) Owens-Illinois jar with 1946 date, (D) Fire King Oven Ware
glass bowl fragment, (E & F) Owens-Illinois condiment bottles with 1947 dates.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

22

Results of Field Investigations

In summary, Site 41TV2296 is a complex of seven structural remains
surrounded by a broad scatter of mixed historic trash containing both structural
and personal debris. All of the archeological elements of the site are confined to
the surface and the potential for intact buried archeological deposits is
extremely low given the shallow soils and lack of depositional mechanisms. Due
to the context of the deposits, the integrity of the site as well as the preservation
of artifacts is poor. In addition, the age and nature of the archeological
assemblage has a low potential for contributing unique or variable data to the
historic archeological record of central Texas. It is the opinion of the Principal
Investigator that Site 41TV2296 is not eligible for designation as a SAL and no
further work at the site is recommended.
Site 41TV2297
This site consists of a low density scatter of chert and quartzite lithic materials
found on the surface of an area roughly 60 by 40 meters (0.5 acres) in size. The
site is situated approximately 10 meters back from the edge of a deep ravine
that traverses the southern portion of the project area from east to west. The
site is covered by moderately dense cedar with cactus and grasses found in
areas with more open canopy (Figure 21). The ground surface was primarily
exposed limestone bedrock with areas of shallow sediment deposition. Site
surface visibility varied from 100% over more than half of the site, where there is
exposed bedrock (Figure 22), to less than 20% where leaf litter and grasses were
present.

Figure 21: View of site surface along southeastern edge of Site 41TV2297.
number of flakes and a core fragment were found here on the surface.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

A

23

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 22: View of exposed limestone bedrock common in the northern portions of
the site area.
The site was defined based on the surface distribution of artifacts, because soils
were either absent or very shallow (one to five centimeters in depth below the
surface) obviating the need for shovel testing. In lieu of shovel testing, intensive
surface survey with five meter transects was utilized, supplemented with
troweling of the surface at regular intervals in locations where sediments were
present as well as in areas where artifacts were observed on the surface.
Troweling removed surface cover and thin soils in areas typically ranging
between 50 x 50 to 100 x 100 centimeters.
Three zones of higher artifact density were observed in the course of
investigating the site. The first was located along the southeastern boundary of
the site. The second zone was along the southwestern boundary of the site and
the third was near the center of the site. In all three cases, the artifacts were
consistently found in secondary contexts located in small patches or bands of
colluvially deposited sediments that had collected in small depressions on the
bedrock surface. Thus the distribution of artifacts on the surface is not linked
to prehistoric site use, but rather site formation and erosional processes.
Artifacts observed consisted of a possible utilized flake, a quartzite hammerstone
fragment, and a collection of 16 secondary and tertiary flakes of a wide variety of
colors and textures (Figure 23). Most flakes were small. Given the lack of
naturally occurring chert or quartzite observed within the project area, the
debitage likely results from the knapping of lithic materials brought into the
project area. The generally small size and secondary or tertiary flake types
suggest that the artifacts represent later stage tool manufacturing or
resharpening, and perhaps the production of flake tools for low intensity
activities.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

24

Results of Field Investigations

Figure 23: Prehistoric lithic artifacts recorded on Site 41TV2297 surface. (A)
quartzite hammerstone fragment, (B) quartzite fragment, (C) edge modified chert
flake, and (D) possible chert core fragment. All other material is chert debitage.
In summary, Site 41TV2297 does not contain any temporal diagnostics or
potential for containing significant buried cultural features or artifacts. Lacking
deposition of virtually any kind, it is extremely diffuse and exposed. It does not
fulfill any cultural significance requirements that would make it eligible for
designation as a SAL and, as such, is not recommended for further work.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

25

Results of Field Investigations

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

26

Conclusions and Recommendations

6.0 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Archeologists from Hicks & Company conducted an intensive survey of 95 acres
of the proposed Water Treatment Plant #4 at Bullick Hollow in northwest Travis
County, Texas. The proposed project area sits atop a rocky plateau off of RM
620 within the Balcones Canyonlands. Measuring approximately 95 acres in
size, archeologists traversed the proposed facility in a series of linear transects
and excavated 59 subsurface tests in the process. Citing good to moderate
surface visibility, extremely shallow soils, and the clearly upland setting of the
study area, the overwhelming majority of subsurface tests were brief shovel
probes that revealed less than 15 centimeters of gravelly sediments. No
subsurface artifacts were found within any portion of the proposed main plant
facility. Particular attention was paid to locating possible rockshelter sites along
the steep plateau dropoffs found along the APE’s western, southern and
northern edges. No such sites were observed within any portion of the current
undertaking’s footprint.
Two newly-recorded archeological sites, 41TV2296 and 41TV2297, were
documented along the eastern edge of the project area near RM 620. Site
41TV2296 is a broad surficial trash scatter of mid to late 20th century debris
associated with seven structural features. None of the structures have retained
their integrity and the surficial artifact component is out of context with poor
preservation. Due to the poor integrity of the structures and artifact context,
the lack of preservation, and the low potential for this site to contribute unique
or variable data to the archeological record of central Texas, it is the opinion of
the Principal Investigator that Site 41TV2296 is not eligible for designation as an
SAL.
Site 41TV2297 is a surficial lithic scatter of unknown age. The artifacts are
confined to the surface and appear to be displaced by erosional forces. No
diagnostic artifacts or features were identified on the site. In addition, the lack
of subsurface deposits at the site precludes the potential for preserved organic
material. Based on the lack of diagnostic artifacts, intact subsurface deposits,
organic preservation, and overall poor site integrity, it is the opinion of the
Principal Investigator that Site 41TV2297 is not eligible for designation as an
SAL.
Overall, the 95 acres of proposed Water Treatment Plant #4 at Bullick Hollow
will not likely impact any intact, SAL eligible archeological cultural elements
during the course of the facility construction. The project is recommended
cleared to proceed in relation to regulatory requirements laid out by the TAC (13
TAC 26). In a letter dated May 8, 2008 (Appendix A), The Texas Historical
Commission concurred with Hicks & Company’s recommendations. Thus, the
proposed project has been determined to have no effect on historic properties,
and the project may proceed to construction. Any future variations from the
currently-mapped site APE, given the density of sites in the vicinity and the
potential for rockshelter sites, should be surveyed when and if they become
necessary. This report is presented in partial fulfillment of TAC Permit # 4759.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

27

Conclusions and Recommendations

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

28

References Cited

7.0 REFERENCES CITED
Riskind, David H., and David D. Diamond
1986 Plant Communities of the Edwards Plateau of Texas. In The Balcones Escarpment:
Geology, Hydrology, Ecology and Social Development in Central Texas, edited by Patrick
L. Abbot and C.M. Woodruff, Jr. Published for the Geological Society of America Annual
Meeting San Antonio, Texas. Electronic Document.
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/balcones_escarpment/balconesescarpment.html.
Accessed February 25, 2008
Howard, Margaret and Martha Freeman
1984 Settlement in the Upper Bull Creek Basin: An Inventory and Assessment of the Cultural
Resources at the Canyon Creek Development, Travis County, Texas. Reports of
Investigations No. 32. Prewitt and Associates, Austin.
Kotter, Steven M., and Henry B. Moncure
1985 Cultural Resource Survey at the Proposed City of Austin Water Treatment Plant Number
Four. Technical Bulletin No. 80. Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas,
Austin.
Lockhart, Bill
2004 The Dating Game: Owens-Illinois. Electronic document.
http://www.blm.gov/historic_bottles/pdffiles/OwensIll_BLockhart.pdf,
December 18, 2006.
Soda Traderz
2008 More Bottle Manufacturing Marks, United States. Electronic
http://www.angelfire.com/pop2/collectorscorner/USA_bottle_marks.html,
February 8, 2008.

accessed

document,
accessed

Travis County Deed Records
Instrument #2003087287 Vol. 4286: 749-753 Vol. 257: 432-433
Werchan, Leroy E., A.C. Lowther, and Robert N. Ramsey
1974 Soil Survey of Travis County. Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Washington D.C.

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

29

References Cited

Archeological Survey – WTP #4 at Bullick Hollow – September 2008

30

APPENDIX A
COORDINATION LETTERS

