Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

January 31, 2015
Subject: Final Letter Report #2015-1: A Cultural Resources Survey of the 380-Meter Hopper Unit
Pipeline, Dimmit County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our cultural resources survey of the Hopper Unit Pipeline
(Figures 1-3).
The right-of-way (ROW) was examined by two archaeologists on January 30, 2015. Our
observations of the Project Area revealed that virtually the entire length of the pipeline has been
disturbed in historic times, and at the time of our survey the ROW was covered in secondary low
mesquite brush, other thorny brush, and prickly pear and tasajillo cactus (Figure 4).
A thorough pedestrian survey of the surface and cutbanks, as well as two shovel tests excavated in
potential terrace deposits on both sides of an upper tributary of Appurceon Creek revealed no
evidence of cultural material either on or below the surface. Although the northern end of this
pipeline intersects the Hopper A Pipeline and archaeological site 41DM47, we observed no artifacts
in that immediate area.
Accordingly, Tierras Antiguas recommends that construction of the Hopper Unit Pipeline as it is
currently planned be allowed to proceed with no further archaeological investigations. However,
Tierras Antiguas further recommends that if any undiscovered cultural resources are encountered
during development along the pipeline, such finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras
Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

Figure 1. Hopper Unit Pipeline on large topographic map.

Figure 2. Hopper Unit Pipeline on MacDonald Lake (1982) 7.5' USGS topographic map.

Figure 3. Soils map of the Project Area.

Figure 4. Shovel testing on the north edge of an upper tributary of Appurceon Creek; facing
south.

