BULLETIN
OF THE

Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society

Volumes One through Ten
1929 - 1938

Re-issued on CD
2007

Published
by the
Society

FOREWORD

TO THE

REPRINTED EDITIONS

OF

VOLUMES 1-10

In 1929 the first volume of the Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society was
published in Abilene by the Society. In 1999, the Texas Archeological Society published a reprint of this
volume. Since that time, we have added Volumes 2-10 to this list. This idea for this project originated
with a 1998 radio interview, where the interviewee made a claim that out-of-print books were now a
thing of the past. “All books”, he said, “could now be scanned and produced electronically.” If books,
then why not journals?
On this CD are electronic copies of the first 10 volumes of the Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological
and Paleontological Society (renamed the Texas Archeological Society in 1952). These were originally
produced from 1929 until 1938. This was an exciting time for North American archaeology and the
Texas Archaeological Society played an important role. These works are presented here as Adobe
Acrobat portable document files so that the interested reader can easily obtain and read all 10 issues,
and in a format that can easily be searched. Each issue is reproduced in its entirety including the title
page and front and back matter. Each volume is provided as a separate searchable file.
A number of people have contributed to this volume. First, all the board members of the Society
supported this project and are thanked for their patience. The board voted to sustain this project and
without their support, this effort could not have been completed. Second, Pam Wheat, executive director,
and Laura Beavers, administrative director, both assisted in numerous ways. Their assistance is fully
recognized and appreciated. A number of students at Texas State University-San Marcos worked on this
project and should get full credit for their hard work. These are Steven Schooler, Abby Weinstein, Kristi
Hibler, Shawn Soucie, and Erich Fisher. Steven played a particularly critical role when the project was
floundering, and he saw it to completion. Likewise, a number of other individuals volunteered to proofread
chapters and these people include Maureen Brown, Gerry Clampitt, Karen Gardner, Margaret Howard,
Carol Macaulay, Nelson Marek, Glynn Osburn, Tiffany Osburn, Ron Ralph, Elliot Richmond, Carolyn
Spock, and Marybeth Tomka. The general membership of the society is also noted for their continued
interest and encouragement. Finally, the original authors and society leaders should be given credit and
recognized for their historic contributions. Without their pioneering interest, contributions, and dynamic
leadership this society would not exist and the praiseworthy record of publication never would have
occurred.
It has been an honor to work on this project and hopefully the readership will appreciate the contribution
made by the original members of this society, and recognize the historical significance of these early
Bulletins.
June, 2007

C. Britt Bousman

Steven Schooler

