THE JOURNAL OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY

Dr. Todd M. Ahlman, Co-Editor-in-Chief
Dr. Mary Jo Galindo, Co-Editor-in-Chief
Steve Davis, Publisher
Volume 3 (2016/2017)
July 2017

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

THE JOURNAL OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY
Volume 3 (2016/2017)

Dr. Todd M. Ahlman, Co-Editor-in-Chief
Dr. Mary Jo Galindo, Co-Editor-in-Chief
Steve Davis, Publisher

Published
by the
Journal of Texas Archeology and History.org, Inc.
Austin, Texas
July 2017

i

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Copyright © 2017 by Journal of Texas Archeology and History.org, Inc.
All rights reserved.

Online/Digital publication: ISSN 2334-1874
Domestic print and Kindle publication: ISBN 1548538299
International print publication: ISBN 978-1548538293
The online and print versions of the publication “Journal of Texas Archeology and History” are published
by
Journal of Texas Archeology and History.org, Inc.,
a Texas nonprofit IRC Section 501(c)(3) corporation.
Reproduction, posting, transmission, or other distribution or use of the Journal volume, individual
article or any portion of the material therein, in any medium, is permitted strictly for personal, noncommercial purposes by a personal-use exemption under a Creative Commons license granted by
JTAH.org, Inc. This exemption requires, as a condition of granted permission, proper credit to
JTAH.org as copyright holder (e.g., Journal of Texas Archeology and History.org © 2017).
No part of this publication may be reproduced, posted, transmitted or otherwise utilized or distributed
in any form by any means or method for commercial purposes without the express written consent of
the Publisher. Inquiries should be addressed to JTAH Publisher, Suite 307, Box 361, 5114 Balcones
Woods Drive, Austin, Texas, 78759 or via email to Steve.Davis@JTAH.org.

The cover art border design for Volume 3 features masks and enigmatic figures from the historic
watercolors of prehistoric Trans-Pecos rock art that was documented by Forrest Kirkland from 1936–
1943. High-resolution digital copies of the original artwork were generously provided courtesy of
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
On the front cover: the photograph featured on the front cover is Figure 8, page 13 from Article 1: A
UAV was flown over the area surrounding Rancid Cactus (41VV2053). The USGS ortho-image (top
left) and contour map (bottom left) had 10-meter resolution. Flying only for 2 hours, the UAV was
able to photograph the area and produce ortho imagery (top right) and DEM/contour lines (bottom
right) with better than 5-centimeter resolution.

ii

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

INTRODUCTION: The Journal of Texas Archeology and History.org is an organization dedicated
to furthering research, education and public outreach in the fields of archeology and history
concerning Texas and its bordering states of Louisiana, Arkansas, Oklahoma, New Mexico and
Northern Mexico; a region we call the “Texas Borderlands.” This volume is comprised of articles of
original research that have been peer reviewed. We proudly present our signature publishing effort for
the year 2016/2017 – “The Journal of Texas Archeology and History, Volume 3.”

The Editorial Board of the Journal of Texas Archeology and History is comprised by these generous
volunteers who give their time and expertise in the pursuit of free and open access research:
Archeology Editorial Board
Dr. Stephen L. Black
Gustavo Ramirez Castilla, M.A.
Jeffrey S. Girard, M.A.
Dr. Chris Lintz
Dr. Mary Beth Trubitt
Dr. Bradley J. Vierra

sblack@txstate.edu
gustavoramirezc@gmail.com
girard@nsula.edu
chris.lintz@tpwd.gov
trubitm@hsu.edu
bvierra@sricrm.com

History Editorial Board
Dr. Jesús F. de la Teja
Dr. Neil Foley
Dr. F. Todd Smith
Dr. Omar Valerio-Jimenez

delateja@txstate.edu
foleyn@mail.smu.edu
ftsmith@unt.edu
omar-valerio@uiowa.edu

Dr. Todd M. Ahlman
Co-Editor-in-Chief

toddahlman@txstate.edu

Dr. Mary Jo Galindo
Co-Editor-in-Chief

MJGalindo@pape-dawson.com

Steve Davis
Publisher

Steve.Davis@JTAH.org

iii

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

iv

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Forward to Volume 3 (2016/2017)

vii

Steve Davis

List of Authors

ix

ARCHEOLOGICAL 3D MAPPING: THE STRUCTURE FROM MOTION
REVOLUTION

1

Mark D. Willis, Charles W. Koenig, Stephen L. Black, and Amanda M. Castañeda

AN UNUSUAL LATE ABORIGINAL ASSEMBLAGE FROM THE WILSON SITE
(41SS186), SAN SABA COUNTY, CENTRAL TEXAS

37

Charles A. Hixson and James K. Feathers

THEORIES ON THE BLUE WING ROAD BURIAL (41BX34)
IN THE CONTEXT OF THE GUTIÉRREZ MAGEE EXPEDITION

83

Brandon K. Richards

MILITARY DIET ON THE BORDER: BUTCHERY ANALYSIS AT FORT BROWN
(41CF96), CAMERON COUNTY, TEXAS

97

Crystal A. Dozier

Call for Authors – JTAH Volume 4

117

v

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

vi

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

FOREWORD TO VOLUME 3 (2016/2017):
PUBLISHER’S REFLECTIONS
For the third time, I look back on the past year (and a half) and realize that the mission and scope of
the JTAH continues to grow and advance. We look forward to the year ahead and anticipate
continued service to the archeology and history communities. As I pen this Foreword to our third
annual volume of peer reviewed research, it is the 241st anniversary of the birth of our country. While
controversy and uncertainty seems to overwhelm the national political scene, it occurs to me how
vitally important is the study of history and educating the public. Understanding our history puts
current events into proper perspective. Fact is that our people have been seriously at odds many times
prior to this point, beginning with the years of the very first Presidency. Granted, Thomas Jefferson
and Alexander Hamilton didn’t have social media and 24-hour news outlets to contend with, but for
their time, they were equally disparate in their positions. Other examples from our history include
political divides that led us into a very un-civil war between our people, prohibition, and our delayed
entry into the “War to End All Wars” (WWI), to name a few. All Americans can take heart; our
system of government is strong and resilient! History proves it!
This year we include, in Volume 3, four outstanding articles of original research writing that covers a
wide range of topics. We proudly add eight new authors to our list of contributors that now totals
twenty-seven individuals with some appearing twice. We are continually amazed at the creative
minds contributing to the JTAH effort. We thank our authors, past and present, for trusting us with
the sweat of their brow.
You may notice our new publication schedule, beginning with Volume 3, which is debuting in early
July rather than January. This is a programmed change to our prior schedule. Publishing after the first
of the year came with considerable distractions surrounding the holidays and the many other demands
of ending a year and beginning another. This year we closed-out the annual volume on June 30 and
opened the next one, Volume 4, on July 1st.
We are fortunate to announce an addition to our extraordinary, all-volunteer staff. Dr. Mary Jo
Galindo has joined Dr. Todd M. Ahlman as Co-Editor-in-Chief. Dr. Galindo also takes a seat on our
board of directors and serves as a corporate officer, Vice President. We welcome Mary Jo and look
forward to her seasoned voice in corporate conductance and fulfillment of our mission to “promote,
protect and preserve our precious cultural resources.”
The JTAH will once again sponsor and organize the “Texas Archeology and History Book Festival”
in collaboration with the T.A.S. Annual Meetings to be held in Grapevine, Texas during late October
2017. We are on an every-other-year schedule now and will reprise the book fest next in 2019. We
look forward to the year ahead and have begun planning for our 2017/2018 initiatives. Thanks to all
of you for your continued support.
Steve Davis, Publisher
Independence Day 2017

vii

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

viii

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

LIST OF AUTHORS
Stephen L. Black, Associate Professor, Department of Anthropology, Texas State University, San
Marcos, Texas. (sblack@txstate.edu).
Amanda M. Castañeda, Researcher, Ancient Southwest Texas Project, Texas State University, San
Marcos, Texas. (acastaneda10@txstate.edu).
Crystal A. Dozier, PhD Candidate, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas. (cdozier@tamu.edu) (ccroyl@gmail.com ).
James K. Feathers, Research Associate Professor, Department of Anthropology, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington. (jimf@uw.edu).
Charles
A.
Hixson,
Llano
(charles.hixson@gmail.com).

Uplift

Archeological

Society,

Kingsland,

Texas.

Charles W. Koenig, Project Archaeologist, Ancient Southwest Texas Project, Department of
Anthropology, Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas. (ck1286@txstate.edu).
Brandon K. Richards, Senior Project Manager / Archaeologist, Energy Renewal Partners, Austin,
Texas. (brichards@energyrenwalpartners.com).
Mark D. Willis, Principal Investigator, Sacred Sites Research, Inc. Albuquerque, New Mexico
(willis.arch@gmail.com).

ix

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

x

ARCHEO LO GICAL 3D MAPPING:
THE STRUCTURE FRO M MO TIO N REVO LUTIO N
Mark D. Willis 1, Charles W. Koenig2*, Stephen L. Black2, and Amanda M. Castañeda2

ABSTRACT
Mapping is a critical aspect of systematic documentation no matter where
archaeologists work. From hand-drawn maps of excavation units to maps
created with Total Data Stations or LiDAR scanning, today’s archaeologists
have a suite of mapping techniques and technologies to choose from when
documenting a site. Typically, spectacular sites often receive high resolution
mapping, whereas everyday sites rarely do. Recently, however, a
revolutionary technology and technique has been created that can produce
highly accurate and precise three-dimensional maps and orthophotos of
archaeological sites, features, and profiles at a fraction of the cost and time of
LiDAR and intensive TDS mapping: Structure from Motion (SfM). SfM is a
new digital photography processing technique for capturing highly detailed,
three-dimensional (3D) data from almost any surface using digital cameras.
This article introduces the various platforms SfM photographs can be
collected from (UAV, kites, balloons, poles, and groundbased) and provides
examples of different types of data SfM can provide. The Structure from
Motion Revolution is unfolding across the globe at a rapid pace, and we
encourage archaeologists to take advantage of this new recording method.

INTRODUCTION
Mapping is a cornerstone of systematic archeological excavation, documentation, and
interpretation. Site reports and articles characteristically include two-dimensional maps of excavation
units, profiles, features, artifact distributions, and other spatial data. Mapping using Total Data
Stations (TDS) is common and capable of producing very accurate site maps. But TDS mapping is
time consuming, and the larger and more topographically varied the site the more time required
particularly if high resolution is desired. The use of LiDAR has become commonplace within
archeology in the past decade, yet laser mapping is expensive, and most everyday archeological sites
never receive the same detailed mapping as sites with monumental architecture. At the scale of the
ordinary excavation unit and trench profile, most archeologists still either settle for a quick, minimally
detailed sketch and a few photos or, for critical subjects, laboriously create maps and section drawings
1

Blanton and Associates, Austin, TX 78734
Department of Anthropology, Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas 78666
*Corresponding Author (ck1286@txstate.edu)

2

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY
VOLUME 3:1–36

THE ONLINE

PUBLICATION JOURNAL OF

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY (ISSN 2334-1874)
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG.
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED .

IS PUBLISHED BY JOURNAL OF

COPYRIGHT (C) 2016 JOURNAL OF

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

using graph paper and taped measurements and/or stitch together photo mosaics that are unavoidably
distorted. Fortunately, there is a new technology and technique that can produce highly accurate and
precise (see Green et al. 2014) three-dimensional maps and orthophotos of archeological sites,
features, and sections (profiles) at a fraction of the cost and time of LiDAR and TDS mapping:
Structure from Motion photogrammetry.
Structure from Motion (SfM) photogrammetry is a new digital photography processing technique
for capturing highly detailed, three-dimensional (3D) data from almost any surface using digital
cameras. Using SfM, archeologists can produce topographic maps, orthophotos, digital elevation
models (DEMs), and 3D renderings of landscapes, features, excavation units, stratigraphic profiles,
buildings, cave walls, or countless other surfaces. Willis first demonstrated the usefulness of SfM in
producing 3D models in April 2009 when he posted a short video on YouTube of a 3D model of a
prehistoric stacked-stone circle in West Texas (http://youtu.be/TuHJUS2olyc). The video went viral
and over the following months Willis and other “geeks” from across the world refined the process
using archeological data (Willis 2010). Companies such as AutoDesk and AgiSoft quickly developed
commercial products that made the process more user friendly and widely applicable. Archeologists
soon after began to use SfM on various projects across Texas and around the world (e.g., Brown et al.
2010; De Reu et al. 2014; De Reu et al. 2013; Douglass et al. 2015; Kenmotsu et al. 2012; Liebman et
al 2013; Miller et al. 2012; Willis and Jalandoni 2011).
This article is intended to introduce SfM methodology to a wider audience, provide a variety of
case studies highlighting the different ways the method can be applied to archeological projects, and
urge archeologists in all field settings to immediately begin capturing the underlying input data—sets
of overlapping, multidirectional digital photographs. Regardless of the subject being mapped, from
landscapes to sites to small features, SfM represents an extraordinary revolution in archeological
documentation and the methods used are applicable wherever archeologists work. Even if you lack
the time, resources, or motivation to actually create SfM models, there is every reason to begin
collecting and archiving the basic input data, namely large sets of overlapping digital images.
Archeology is inherently destructive and technological innovations such as SfM will allow us to create
visual and 3D data archives of what we have destroyed (De Reu et al. 2013; De Reu et al. 2014).

STRUCTURE FROM MOTION
There are three general steps to the creation of a 3D model using SfM: 1) collect dozens to
hundreds of overlapping photographs of the subject using a digital camera; 2) load these photographs
into a specialized software that can match these photographs together to construct a 3D model; and
3) use coordinates from ground control points to reference the model in 3D space.

Taking Photographs for SfM
Sets of digital photographs serve as the underlying data for any Structure from Motion 3D model.
Depending on the size of the subject or desired resolution of the subsequent 3D model, SfM photo sets
can range from less than a dozen to several thousand. Individually, each of these photographs must

2

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

minimally overlap 30 percent vertically and horizontally to ensure the software can create the 3D
surface (Figure 1). For any single point to be modeled within a scene, it must be visible in a minimum
of three photographs. To maintain sufficient overlap and ensure everything is photographed, we prefer
the “snake” method of photographing, where the photographer begins at one point and moves back
and forth around the subject in a logical manner (Figure 2). In this way every photograph shares
content with photographs before and after, similar to creating a flip book. When using the snake
method it is also best to plan out the photographic route prior to beginning photography. Such
planning allows the photographer to physically move around the subject and take the photographs in
a logical succession.

Figure 1. 3D surface of the central stone alignment at Javelina Heights (41VV2005) generated from 25 overlapping
photographs collected using Pole Aerial Photography. The 3D surface of the central stone alignment (bottom) shown
with the superimposed locations of the top photographs.

3

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 2. Locations of photograph center points (blue squares) shown relative to the 3D surfaces from Skiles Shelter
(41VV165, top) and Javelina Heights (41VV2005, bottom) in AgiSoft Photoscan. The 3D model of Skiles Shelter was
generated from 250 photographs, and the 3D model of Javelina Heights from 25 photographs. Ground-based methods
(top) allow for photographing complex surfaces from the ground, and result in a dense overlapping set of photos. Aerial
methods (bottom) result in photographs that are more evenly distributed over the surface. Both sets of photographs
were collected in a logical manner and traverse the subject in a “snake” pattern, with each photograph maintaining 3060% overlap.

4

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

These are just basic principles to keep in mind when collecting SfM photographs. Modifications
to the basic technique for gathering photographs will be necessary depending on the size of the
subject, the orientation of the subject (e.g., horizontal versus vertical surfaces), the level of detail
needed from the final results, site conditions, and available platforms for taking photographs. For
instance, when photographing objects with complex geometry, like an excavation unit with large
rocks protruding from the walls, additional photographs of unit corners and around all sides of the
rocks will be necessary. This is because as the camera moves, the perspective of each shape or angle
changes significantly. With unit corners and jutting objects an increase in overlap from 30 to 50
percent is often required to ensure sufficient coverage. The most common problem with complex
surfaces is not taking enough photographs. Learning how many photographs to take and maintaining
sufficient overlap is the greatest challenge for those learning the method.
Other critical requirements when taking SfM photos are that the subject be mostly static and have
a natural texture. Glass or shiny metal does not model well because the surfaces are very reflectiv e,
hampering the program’s ability to match points within the photographs. In our experience, if a
puddle of water or highly reflective metal surface is included in the SfM sets, that surface will become
empty space in the resulting 3D model. SfM also requires relatively stable environments to create 3D
models. In other words, strong changes in lighting conditions (shadow to light) or movement within
the scene (vegetation or flagging tape blowing in the wind) will prevent the software from matching
the photographs in certain areas. By shading the subject, taking photographs when the lighting is even,
and not taking photographs when strong winds are creating movement, one can minimize the adverse
effects of lighting and changing vegetation. Thus, SfM may not work well for modeling individual
lithic tools, glass objects, or dense vegetation. While there are some techniques that can allow SfM to
model even these objects (see Willis et al. 2014), it is often more efficient to consider using a laser or
structure light scanner in such circumstances. One final imperative is that the SfM photographs
themselves should be clear (i.e., in focus). Blurry photos caused by poor camera settings, unstable
footing for the photographer, or rushed photography can cause distortions in the 3D model and/or
prevent the software from matching together the photos. The best way to minimize blurry photos is
become familiar with adjusting the camera’s settings to compensate for changing conditions, and by
taking photographs from a stable platform.
It may seem as though taking SfM photograph sets would be time consuming, but in reality with
experience and decent equipment the process is quite fast, especially compared to how long it takes to
create a measured drawing or map1. Once the photographer learns how many photographs are
required to map a given subject, the entire photographic process becomes quite fast. And, the more
sets of SfM photos a photographer takes, the better they become at planning out their photography
route and taking into account lighting, vegetation, and camera settings. As presented in the below case
studies, innovations in digital photography and aerial photographic systems allow SfM suitable
photographs to be taken from virtually any platform, from the ground or suspended above the ground
on a pole, kite, balloon, blimp, or unmanned aerial vehicles (e.g., Verhoeven 2009) (Figure 3). There

1

Published sources are available describing different methods for collecting SfM photographs (e.g.,
Douglass et al. 2015; De Reu et al. 2013; De Reu et al. 2014; Kjellman 2012).

5

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

is no one-size-fits-all platform for collecting SfM photographs. The archeologist must take into
consideration the size, shape, and desired resolution of the resulting 3D data in order to select the
platform that will provide the best data. For instance, using a handheld camera is not the most
effective way to photograph an entire drainage system, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are not
the best for photographing individual excavation units or profiles.

Figure 3. Different aerial platforms for collecting SfM photographs (from top left): Blimp, Kite, Pole, and UAV.

Processing the Photographs using AgiSoft Photoscan
Once a set of SfM photographs is collected, the images are loaded into a photo-processing
software program such as Agisoft Photoscan2 (Verhoeven 2011). The basic principles when generating
a 3D surface using SfM software is similar to traditional softcopy photogrammetry, but requires
significantly less positional control and does not require a detailed calibration report for the camera
used (Chandler 2005). Photoscan uses a scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) algorithm to detect
and match the locations of similar features in each image (Lowe 1999; see also McCarthy 2014).
These similarities are then used to determine the basic shape of the subject and the vantage point each
photograph was taken from. To dramatically increase the number of points in the resulting 3D model,
a patch-based multi-view stereo (PMVS) algorithm is applied to the dataset (Furukawa and Ponce
2

For our study we only use Agisoft Photoscan. There are additional software packages (for purchase
and as freeware) available (e.g., Green et al. 2014).

6

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

2007). This decomposes the input images into a set of image clusters of a manageable size for
processing.
Within Photoscan, a 3D model is created by processing the data through several different steps
(Figure 4). Agisoft Photoscan (Agisoft LLC 2014, 2015) offers a great advantage over other software
packages because the programmers have made this series of seemingly complex steps possible in just a
few mouse clicks 3. The first step is aligning photographs, where points from each photograph are
matched, and a sparse point cloud is generated (Figure 4a). From the sparse point cloud, a dense point
cloud is generated (Figure 4b), which results in data points similar to data collected via laser scanning.
After the point clouds are created, a 3D surface is generated by creating triangles between the
thousands (or millions) of points (Figure 4c). Once the 3D surface is computed, a texture can be
generated by creating a mosaic of all the photographs, which in turn can then be projected back onto
the model to create a high-resolution, seamless image (Figure 4d). Once the 3D models are finished
processing in Photoscan, the models themselves can be exported in a variety of 3D formats (e.g., OBJ,
3D PDF, PLY, and U3D). These exported files can then be viewed as fully textured 3D models in
MeshLab or similar 3D viewing software (Figure 5). In addition, 2D digital elevation models (DEMs)
and ortho imagery (e.g., De Reu et al. 2014) can be directly exported and virtually displayed,
manipulated, measured, compared, or enhanced using GIS, Dstretch or other processing software
(e.g., Adobe Photoshop).

Ground Control Points
SfM technology requires the use of Ground Control Points (GCPs) in order to georeference or
position the photos (and subsequently, the SfM model) in real space (e.g., Douglass et al. 2015; De
Rue et al. 2014; McCarthy 2014; Verhoeven et al. 2012). This is not to say 3D models without GCPs
are useless, they will just lack scale and cardinal orientation. GCPs are simply points within the scene
that have known coordinates. These coordinates can be real world values (like UTM or latitude and
longitude, and elevation above mean sea level) or arbitrary such as an excavation-specific grid system.
GCP points can range from temporary markers placed on the ground (e.g., paper plates or rocks
inscribed with “X’s”) to excavation unit nails or other datums (Figure 6). The coordinates can be
recorded with a TDS (e.g., De Reu et al. 2014:253; McCarthy 2014:Figure 3), GPS, or measured with
tapes and line levels (e.g., Douglass et al. 2015:145). A method which will be discussed below is using
a builder’s square (e.g., Castañeda 2015; Nadel et al. 2015) to give a 3D model scale. The only critical
requirement is that a minimum of three GCPs (several more are better, however) in each set of SfM
photographs, and each GCP must be visible in multiple photographs. Once the 3D model is created in
Photoscan, the user simply needs to find the GCPs in the photographs and digitally assign each GCP
(Figure 7). After at least three GCPs are placed in the model, the defined coordinates for the GCPs are
entered into Photoscan (Table 1), and the model is referenced to whatever coordinate system the
GCPs are recorded within.

3

Processing 3D models using AgiSoft Photoscan is explained in much greater detail by Douglass et al.
(2015:141-143).

7

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 4. The central stone alignment at Javelina Heights shown at different points in the
processing steps in AgiSoft Photoscan. From top to bottom: (a) sparse cloud, (b) dense
cloud, (c) 3D mesh, and (d) photo-realistic texture. In the bottom image ground control
points (blue flags) are also visible.

8

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 5. 3D model of the central stone alignment at Javelina Heights. This model can be measured, rotated, and
otherwise manipulated by clicking image. Due to size constraints, the texture resolution is only 25% of the original.
Click image to enable interactive content.

9

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 6. Examples of different GCPs in the field used to reference SfM 3D models. Clockwise from top right:
excavation unit corner, “X’s” drawn on rocks, large pink paper targets, and a purposefully positioned nail with an “X” on
nail head.

Figure 7. Example of GCPs digitally placed onto the Javelina Heights 3D model in Photoscan.

10

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Table 1. Ground Control Points used to reference the Javelina Heights 3D Model
Ground Control
Points*

Values from TDS
X (m)

Y (m)

Calculated Error in Photoscan

Z (m)

Error (mm) All GCPs

Error (mm) Selected GCPsŧ

GCP1216

995

995.001

99.967

9.9

3.8

GCP1533

997.001

995.999

100.01

4.6

3.4

GCP1662

993

993

99.994

21.2

--

GCP1670

991.002

997.001

99.975

27.9

--

GCP2025

995

993

100

36.1

--

GCP2101

993.001

994.001

99.94

53.7

--

GCP2494

994

998.001

99.93

9.7

2.4

Total Error^
28.4
*All GCPs are unit corners shot in with a TDS
ŧ Selecting different combinations of GCPs will decrease the total error across a given 3D model
^Error values are RMS values

3.3

CASE EXAMPLES
In the past several years we have used SfM methods and processing software to document a
variety of open and sheltered hunter-gatherer sites and site features including individual earth ovens
(e.g., Basham 2015; Campbell 2012), bedrock grinding features (e.g., Castañeda 2015), large plantbaking facilities (burned rock middens) (e.g., Graves et al. 2013; Koenig 2012; Roberts and Alvarado
2011), and rock art panels (e.g., Kenmotsu et al. 2012). The case examples presented here are all from
the semiarid landscapes of southwestern Texas and southeastern New Mexico. Willis and others have
applied the same technology in many other archeological contexts across the globe, from tropical
jungles (e.g., Willis et al. 2014) to Andean meadows (e.g., Athens et al. 2015) to deciduous forests
(e.g., Magnani and Schroder 2015) to underwater sites (e.g., Drap 2012). In the examples discussed
below, the subjects range in scale from landscape to sub-centimeter level, and are intended to
demonstrate the different ways SfM photographs are collected to address specific archeological
problems. We begin with landscape data collected from aerial platforms.

UAV
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), sometimes called drones, are new to archeological
reconnaissance and are the fastest way to produce high resolution 3D models of entire landscapes
(e.g., Liebman et al. 2013; Lin et al. 2011; Willis 2013). These camera-equipped machines range from
light-weight fixed-wing aircraft made of foam, to heavier multi-bladed helicopters. UAVs differ from
remote controlled devices in that they are autonomous robotic machines that navigate a pre-defined
flight plan using an onboard GPS by making internal, split-second decisions 4. This makes UAVs
4

If a UAV navigates with an onboard GPS, GCPs are not always necessary. However, we generally
have GCPs visible in the SfM sets to ensure the resulting 3D models can be referenced. This is especially
true if the UAV data is referenced to UTM or latitude/longitude, but the area/site being photographed is
documented using a local grid system.

11

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

extremely efficient for systematically documenting large areas. Data are typically collected from
heights ranging from 35 meters above the ground to well over 100 meters. The closer the UAV is to
the ground, the higher the resolution of the photographs. The lowest altitude flights (ca. 30 -40 m)
collect photographs with a ground resolution of about 2 cm—in other words, every 2 cm on the
ground is associated with a pixel in a photograph. Depending on the resolution required, the UAV
can document dozens of square kilometers a day.
A foam “flying wing” style UAV was used to document the landscape in and around the Rancid
Cactus site, 41VV2053 (Figure 8). The flying wing UAV weighs several ounces and is launched by
throwing it into the air and then it self-navigates using an onboard GPS and autopilot (see Willis
2013). Rancid Cactus is a small burned rock midden (BRM) located on an upland ridge in the Lower
Pecos Canyonlands of southwest Texas (Koenig 2012:78-79, 285-289). Small BRMs are often subtle
features on the landscape, marked mainly by a dense, low-relief concentration of fire-cracked rock
(FCR) that blends in with the native limestone bedrock. In other words, Rancid Cactus is not a
visually or topographically impressive site. Prior to UAV mapping, the highest resolution digital
elevation model (DEM) available for the site area was 10 meters, which did not provide near enough
detail to assist in finding additional features or even accurately map the site. The UAV flew 70
transects across the area of interest in approximately two hours. This generated 2000 photographs
covering a four square kilometer area with a ground resolution of 4 cm, adequate to identify burned
rock features in the landscape and produce a high quality site map.

KAP and BAP
Kite Aerial Photography (KAP) and Balloon Aerial Photography (BAP) have been in use for over
a century (Brandon 2012). Kites, of course, are best suited for windy conditions, while ball oons
require relatively calm conditions. Both are inexpensive methods for getting a camera in the air
(Reinhard 2012; Verhoeven 2009, 2011; Verhoeven et al. 2012). Unlike UAVs, KAP/BAP can collect
photographs from a greater range of altitudes. KAP/BAP can be flown from as low as a few meters
off the ground to well over 200 meters (Figure 9). Systematically collecting data via these platforms
can be difficult because of changing wind conditions and the fact that while flying the kite or blimp
the operator cannot know exactly where the camera is aimed. Nonetheless, with experience the
method can produce sub-centimeter resolution SfM models, and is suited for any budget. GCPs are
required to reference KAP/BAP data.
In May 2005, Willis used KAP to map Madera Quemada, a Jornada Mogollon pueblo site
located in southeastern New Mexico (Figure 10). At that time he was using traditional
photogrammetry techniques to create 3D models of archeological sites. The project involved flying a
KAP rig in a series of transects ranging from 5 to 40 meters above excavations of the nearly fully
exposed room block. In 2005, the data was processed using an expensive software package called
Leica Photogrammetry Suite™. The quality of the original models was satisfactory, but several years
later Willis reprocessed the imagery when Agisoft Photoscan became available and created a much
higher resolution model. This low-cost work provided an extremely high resolution photogrammetric

12

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 8. A UAV was flown over the area surrounding Rancid Cactus (41VV2053). The USGS ortho-image (top left)
and contour map (bottom left) had 10 meter resolution. Flying only for 2 hours, the UAV was able to photograph the
area and produce ortho imagery (top right) and DEM/contour lines (bottom right) with better than 5 centimeter
resolution.
model of the site’s core and revealed details of the site’s morphology, such as hard-to-see subfloor pits
and wall abutments, which were not apparent from ground level (Miller and Graves 2009).
Furthermore, this example shows the usefulness of reprocessing photographic data collected prior to
the advent of SfM.

PAP
Another very cost-effective method for producing SfM models is Pole Aerial Photography (PAP).
Like KAP, this method has been used at archeological sites for decades, but with the rise of SfM it has
much more utility (Campbell 2012; De Reu et al. 2014; Houk 2013; Verhoeven 2009). As the name
suggests, this technique involves attaching a camera to a long pole to take photographs from very low
altitude (3-5m). The pole most often used today is a telescoping extension pole found at hardware

13

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 9. Aerial photographs of archaeological work taken with KAP. Overview of excavation in progress (top), and the
feature fully exposed (bottom). KAP and other aerial platforms do not only provide excellent spatial data, but they also
take work photographs from unique perspectives.

14

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 10. An orthophoto (4a) and DEM/contour map (4b) of Madera Quemada pueblo (LA 91220) created using
photographs taken from a kite.
stores. For archeological documentation of relatively small areas, the camera pole is held out from the
photographer at about a 45 degree angle, and overlapping photographs are taken at even intervals as
transects are walked. As is the case with most of the other techniques, GCPs are required to be able to

15

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

georeference the data. Although PAP is very efficient for documenting discrete areas, Willis used the
technique to map a 20-acre petroglyph site in southwest Texas (see Manaugh 2013).
The PAP technique was used to good result on burned rock midden feature at the Guadalupe
Ridge Site in Southeastern New Mexico after a fortuitous wildfire had exposed features previously
hidden by vegetation (Figure 11). After clearing away some of the burned plants from the feature, the
PAP rig was slowly walked across the feature in a series of ten transects. A 10-x-10m area was
photographed in this fashion and 158 photographs were processed using SfM and high-resolution GIS
data was generated. The resulting orthophoto has a resolution of 1mm/pixel, and contours at 1 cm
intervals were generated from the DEM. Individual rocks are clearly visible in the imagery and
analysis of the DEM revealed subtle depressions in the feature that were not otherwise apparent
(Graves et al. 2013; Willis 2010).

Ground-Based
One of the most revolutionary aspects of SfM documentation is that in many circumstances only
a hand-held camera is needed to produce excellent data. A distinct advantage of this approach is that
much heavier and higher quality cameras can be used, as the other techniques lend themselves to the
lightest cameras possible. Ground-based SfM allows for the documentation of vertical surfaces and
can produce sub-millimeter resolution ortho-imagery and DEMs (Figure 12). Since the camera is
usually very close to the subject matter, this technique is well suited to documenting relatively small
areas, such as excavation units or features less than twenty meters in size. We have, however, also
used this technique to document large sites (Figure 13) and large vertical exposures (Figure 14).

Layer by Layer Excavation Using SfM
Currently, Koenig and Black are using ground-based SfM as the primary documentation method
to precisely document excavation units and stratigraphic exposures at several dry rockshelters in the
Lower Pecos Canyonlands (Koenig et al. 2016.; Rodriguez 2015; see http://aswtproject.wordpress.com/
). Our methods for documenting excavation units and profiles using SfM furthers the work presented
by De Reu et al. (2014). For each new horizontal and vertical exposure, a set of SfM photographs is
taken using hand-held digital cameras (Figure 15), making certain at least six GCPs (three being the
minimum) are visible within each overlapping set. Each GCP is shot in with a TDS, and most GCPs
are used in multiple SfM sets as excavations continue. The ground-based approach allows us to
eschew arbitrary metric excavation and use stratigraphic excavation methods and pragmatic units of
any configuration. Arbitrary square-hole methods are often perceived as necessary to be able to
maintain accurate provenience, but with SfM everything included in the photograph is then referenced
by the GCPs no matter the size, shape, or orientation of an excavated layer. And, because the 3D
models are referenced to a coordinate system, one can easily calculate unit layer volumes and artifact
density from the SfM data (Table 2).

16

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 11. The Guadalupe Village burned rock midden (LA 143472) was
photographed using a PAP setup. The resulting DEM and slope models in GIS
showed details that were not otherwise observed on site.

17

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 12. 3D surfaces of the main excavation trench at Skiles Shelter (41VV165) created using ground-based SfM.
The main trench (top) was modeled with 250 photographs, and the DEM (top right) was exported with a pixe l resolution
of 1mm and the orthographic image (top left) exported with .5mm resolution. The trench profile (bottom) was generated
from 750 photographs, and the orthophoto exported with .2mm pixel resolution.

18

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 13. The interior of Bonfire Shelter (41VV218) was mapped using ground-based SfM in fall of 2014. The 3D
model was generated from 3500 photographs, and the orthophoto has a pixel resolution of 1mm, and the DEM has a
3cm pixel resolution. The contour interval is 50cm.
Another great advantage of using SfM as a primary documentation method is the rapid
turnaround. Typically, each evening we download the SfM images taken during the field day, use
Photoscan to create 3D models, and the next morning return to the field site armed with color inkjet
orthophotos of the excavation unit, feature, or profile in question. We are then able to annotate the
images, noting subtle stratigraphic interfaces, sample locations, and various other data without the
time consuming process of producing measured hand-drawn documents. Admittedly we have the
great advantage of having a nearby digital field laboratory with several workstations including a
powerful desktop computer for rapid image processing and a color printer. Willis, however, has
achieved similar results in a motel room armed only with a decent laptop and access to a printer.
A final advantage to the routine use of hand-held cameras for daily SfM photo documentation is
that, as De Reu et al. (2013) point out, this creates a digital record of the archeological excavation
sequence that will be available for future researchers (Figure 16). With multiple sets of SfM
documentation of the same excavation area, one can later watch and re-watch successive excavated
surfaces come to light.

19

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 14. The main pictograph panel at Eagle Cave (41VV167) was mapped using ground-based SfM. The 3D model
was generated from 400 photographs, and the orthophoto has a pixel resolution of .2mm. The full-color orthophoto
(top) was loaded into D-Stretch (bottom) to bring out more details of the pictographs. Image courtesy Shumla
Archaeological Research and Education Center.

Table 2. Cut Fill volume calculation for Unit IL, Layers 4-8 from Horse
Trail Shelter with calculated FCR density.
Layer Sampled

Cut-Fill Volume calculation

FCR Mass (kg)

FCR Density
(kg/m3)

m3

L

Layer 4

0.0453

45.3

1.59

35.10

Layer 5

0.0057

5.7

2.02

354.39

Layer 6*

0.0191

19.1

14.09

737.70

Layer 7*

0.0192

19.2

14.32

745.83

Layer 8

0.0330

33

3.68

111.52

*Layers 6 and 7 appeared to be a largely intact heating element

20

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 15. Layer by layer SfM excavation of Unit IL, Layers 4-8 from Horse Trail Shelter (41VV166). Each image shows
the upper surfaces of the excavated layers. The images on the left are orthophotos exported with resolution of .5mm,
and the DEMs on the right exported with 1mm resolution with 5mm contour lines overlaid. These DEMs can be easily
used to calculate excavated volumes in GIS using the Cut Fill tool.

21

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 16. Animation showing the excavation of Unit IL, Layers 4-12 from Horse Trail Shelter (41VV166). Click image
to enable playback.

22

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Using Ground-based SfM for Documenting Bedrock Features
SfM is also being used for documenting permanent and semi-portable ground stone bedrock
features in various regions (e.g., Castañeda 2015; Dreyer-Lynch 2014; Nadel et al. 2015). However,
unlike recording excavation units, documenting bedrock features is usually done on the fly and
without the presence of a TDS for establishing GCPs. In order to establish a reference system for
bedrock features recorded at different sites without the use of a TDS, Castañeda (2015) used a
builder’s square (also called an “L” or right angle ruler) (Figure 17). Although a builder’s square
cannot georeference a model to UTM, Latitude/Longitude, or local grid coordinates, it can still be
used to internally reference each of the 3D models with appropriate scale (meters, centimeters, etc.)
and orientation (up, down, cardinal direction) (Figure 18).

Figure 17. Amanda Castañeda using a Builder's Square to establish a reference grid for a portable grinding
slab. The levels are used to be sure the builder's square is level across the entire surface.

23

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 18. A bedrock feature from Horse Trail Shelter (41VV166) referenced using a builder's square. Orthographic
image (left) and slope model generated from a DEM (right) exported from Photoscan.
When using a right-angle ruler to create GCPs for a SfM model, the ruler must be set up adjacent
to the targeted area and then photographed. The horizontal and vertical “arms” of the ruler serve as X
and Y axes. In order to add the third dimension (elevation), bubble levels are used to level each arm
of the ruler so the entire builder’s square has the same elevation (see Figure 17). Rocks or other small
items can be placed under the arms to level the ruler. After the ruler has been photographed, it can be
taken away and the subject can be photographed as normal. Because the ruler has markings in a
known scale, once the 3D model is finished processing in Photoscan GCPs can be digitally placed
directly onto the ruler to reference the model (Figure 19, Table 3). Using the right-angle ruler method
provides the ability to easily and accurately scale and reference SfM models, regardless of physical site
location, time, or access to a TDS. Although this technique of establishing GCPs has been used
mainly on permanent bedrock features, it also has far reaching applications for survey level data
collection and artifact documentation.

24

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 19. In Photoscan, GCPs are digitally placed directly onto the ruler. Because the units on the ruler correspond to
real-world measurements, GCPs can be converted easily from inches to meters.

Table 3. GCP coordinates placed on the Builder's Square in Photoscan and
Calculated Error
Ground Control Points

Arbitrary GCP Coordinates
X (m)

GCP1
100.0000
GCP2
100.0762
GCP3
100.2540
GCP4
100.0000
GCP5
100.0000
GCP6
100.1778
Total Error
*Error value represents a RMS value

Calculated Error in Photoscan

Y (m)

Z (m)

Error (mm)

100.0000
100.0000
100.0000
100.0508
100.1524
100.0000

100.0000
100.0000
100.0000
100.0000
100.0000
100.0000

0.9
0.5
0.3
0.6
0.3
0.3
0.5*

ANALYTICAL APPLICATIONS
The previous examples demonstrate SfM’s capabilities for producing highly accurate site, feature,
and stratigraphic maps from a variety of platforms. Yet, maps represent only one use of SfM data. Just
like recording sites and excavation areas using a TDS, SfM documentation allows archeologists to
collect accurate and very precise spatial data that can be used for spatial analyses (Draeyer and
Strecha 2014). Below several different analytical applications are considered

25

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Aerial Reconnaissance
Just as multi-spectral satellite imagery has been used to help identify archeological site locations
from outer space (Comer and Harrower 2013), the same techniques can be applied on a smaller scale
with UAVs. Aerial photography platforms can easily be equipped with Near Infra-red (NIR), thermal,
and other types of sensors (Verhoeven 2008) to identify archeological phenomena that are not visible
to the unaided eye. Borrowing from the existing body of work related to remote-sensing with
satellites, the same approaches can be applied to studying landscapes via UAVs. UAVs can fly a
survey area much quicker than a crew conducting pedestrian survey and have the potential to identify
features that may not be readily apparent from the ground. Feature identification may also be
enhanced by the three-dimensional data generated from the ground surface with SfM and further
augmented with multispectral data. While the use of UAVs will never replace the need for pedestrian
surveys, it can be used to inform and guide research so that archeologists can focus resources more
efficiently. The synergistic use of existing survey technologies with advances in 3D modeling and
UAV capabilities has great potential to broaden our understanding of prehistoric landscapes (Willis
2013).

Spatial Analyses
The higher the resolution of spatial data collected, the more detailed analyses can become. This is
especially true regarding modelling and analysis using GIS. In many cases, archeologists only have
access to a 10-meter resolution DEM; in other words, the height of the ground surface over a 100 m2
is averaged into a single “pixel” on the DEM. By using SfM to create DEMs with less than 10 cm
resolution, you increase the accuracy of spatial analyses and models. Below are several different
examples of spatial analyses that can be conducted using SfM data.

Volumetric Calculations
Because of the accuracy of SfM data, researchers can use different tools in GIS to accurately
calculate volumes. It can be used to calculate the total sediment removed from an excavation unit (see
Figure 15), or even calculate the volume of a feature. The use of GIS tools removes some of the error
associated with calculating the geometry of an amorphous 3D shape. We recently used SfM data to
calculate the volume of several burned rock middens in the Lower Pecos. Prior to aforementioned
UAV coverage of Rancid Cactus (see Figure 8), PAP was used to map the surface of the site, followed
by ground-based photography to document the completed excavation unit floors and walls. With 3D
models of these two surfaces, the volume of the BRM (Figure 20) was calculated us ing Cut Fill in
ArcGIS. Archeologists using such an approach can accurately calculate the volume of irregular
shapes, obviating the necessity of arbitrary metric excavation (see also Magnani and Schroder 2015).

26

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 20. Calculating the volume of a burned rock midden using SfM and GIS. The original ground surface of Rancid
Cactus (41VV2053) was photographed using PAP to finer than 2 cm resolution (top left). Once excavations were
completed, the bottom of the units were modeled to map base of the BRM feature (top center). The deep depression
visible in the DEM is where the central cooking pit of the BRM was located, and where our excavations went the
deepest (over a meter below surface). Using the Cut Fill tool in ArcMap 10.2 (top left), the volume of the BRM was
calculated to be approximately 24 m3 by measuring the difference between the ground surface and the bottom of the
BRM. The two surfaces are shown bisected in ArcScene (bottom) with 2x vertical exaggeration.

Change Detection
Following in the same vein as volumetric calculations, one of the more exciting aspects of SfM
data is the ability to track site, feature, or even artifact condition over time (Willis 2011). By creating
SfM models of subjects at different times, the change in surface topography can be monitored using
SfM. This can be applied to landscapes to monitor how much of a site is being eroded each year, or on
smaller scales like individual figures within a pictograph panel (Figure 21).

Morphological Studies
3D modeling has also been used to document and study artifacts. 3D scanners are more
commonly used, but SfM can provide similar data. For instance, a recent study of Caddo ceramics
used 3D scanning and 3D geometric morphometrics to determine the variation within Caddo
ceramics (Selden et al. 2014). Castañeda and Willis have been using SfM to document similar
morphological variations of bedrock grinding features in the Lower Pecos and the western United
States (Figure 22). These studies allow for shapes and sizes of the bedrock feature 3D models to be

27

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

compared statistically and without direct human categorization. This may lead to new typologies that
were impossible to recognize using traditional methods.

Figure 21. Change detection is able to show areas of loss/gain on surfaces ranging from rockshelter walls to entire
drainage basins. This figure is an animation of the change in a single pictographic figure from 41CX2. Click image to
enable playback.

Additional GIS Applications
Producing predictive models for site locations and using GIS to model existing site locations is
becoming common (e.g., Mehrer and Wescott 2005). The accuracy of any predictive model, however,
depends on the resolution of the spatial data. High-resolution SfM models can improve the results
because there is drastically less surface-averaging using a DEM with 3-centimeter accuracy rather than
10-meter. Erosion and soil loss modeling (e.g., Cochrane and Flanagan 1999; Jain and Kothyari 2000;
Lim et al. 2005; Mitasova et al. 1996), least-cost-pathway analyses (e.g., Byerly et al. 2005; Carlson
and Bement 2013), and view shed analysis can benefit from the higher-resolution landscape data SfM
can provide.

28

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 22. 3D model of a series of 27 bedrock features from Mountain Laurel Shelter (41VV2010). 3D model generated
from 80 photographs. This model can be rotated, measured, and otherwise manipulated by clicking the image.
Because it is in a 3D format, it can be used for morphological studies. Due to size constraints, the texture resolution is
only 25% of the original. Click image to enable interactive content.

29

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

EQUIPMENT CONSIDERATIONS
As should be apparent, there is no one-size-fits-all list of the necessary equipment. It varies
greatly dependent on the platform, setting, desired resolution, turnaround time, and so on. In
addition to ordinary field and research equipment (such as a TDS, computer, etc.), the minimal
requirement is a basic digital camera and the processing software. Increasingly there are open-source
programs that can do the processing, but Photoscan and other proprietary software better suit our
needs. While a decent 3D model can be generated from photographs taken from a cheap digital
camera, higher quality cameras are needed when SfM documentation is used daily. In the
challenging light conditions presented by rockshelter (or deep unit) excavation, we have found that a
digital SLR or mirrorless camera with a fast lens allows us to rapidly take SfM sets in poor
lighting. Similarly, processing large SfM sets can be done with only an ordinary laptop, but it can take
many hours of processing time. To expediently process multiple SfM sets, a powerful workstation
with high end graphics cards and lots of RAM (128 Gb and greater) is highly desirable. But, any
archaeologist can join the SfM revolution on the cheap and, down the road, add higher quality and
more powerful equipment

CONCLUSION
The SfM methodological revolution is unfolding at a breath-taking pace by a growing, yet still
small number of archeologists across the globe. Methodological innovations and new applications of
SfM technology are constantly being developed as knowledgeable individuals take the revolution to
many different archeological contexts and documentary challenges. Hopefully this article will alert
more archeologists to the as-yet scarcely tapped potential that the SfM revolution is bringing to
archeology. In our view, SfM should not be reserved for monumental and extraordinary archeological
discoveries, but instead applied to many different dimensions of routine archeological documentation.
However, like other techniques in archeology, SfM cannot be used in isolation. It should be regarded
much like other new innovations used to better understand, document, and preserve the past. In the
years to come ground-based SfM applications should allow North American archeologists to escape
the self-imposed bonds of arbitrary metric excavation. Small square holes have defined and confined
archeologists for far too long (Koenig et al. 2016).
We repeat our call to all field archeologists: start taking systematic sequential sets of digital
photographs of all critical and fleeting archeological exposures. You may not have the time, software,
or technological inclination to process the photographic data and create 3D models when you are in
the field, but these steps can be taken years or decades later if you capture and preserve the essential
data. The technology has the capacity to transform and improve many aspects of essential
archeological field (and laboratory) documentation and open new interpretive windows. We predict it
will do just that as SfM unfolds the way most digital technologies do: the necessary hardware and
software will become cheaper, more powerful, and easier to use, thus driving innovation and
incorporation with other technologies. Cultural resource managers and researchers will increasingly
employ SfM models to create compelling interpretive and public outreach graphics, to highlight
preservation efforts, and to monitor and quantify resource damage assessments. Archeological SfM

30

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

models are now being used to create augmented reality (AR) views of the real-world environment
(Rua and Alvito 2011), making it possible for us to walk through a previously excavated site while
holding a mobile computing device. Other SfM datasets are turned into animations that allow viewers
to watch as excavation exposures appear on the screen, just as they did while the work was being
done. The future of archeological documentation, analysis and interpretation is multi-dimensional
and graphically vivid.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Ancient Southwest Texas project case studies presented in this article would not have been
possible without the Thomas E. Miller Endowment. We would like to thank several colleagues and
organizations who have assisted us: Timothy Graves and Miles Miller of Versar, Inc., Carolyn Boyd
and the staff of Shumla Archaeological Research and Education Center, Andy Cloud and staff at the
Center for Big Bend Studies at Sul Ross University, and Brian Knight of the Environmental Division
of Directorate of Publics Works at Fort Bliss. We are grateful for the insightful comments provided by
JTAH editor, Todd Ahlman, and the anonymous reviewers who helped improve the article over
earlier versions.

REFERENCES CITED
Agisoft LLC
2014 Agisoft Photoscan User Manual: Professional Edition, Version 1.1.
http://www.agisoft.com/downloads/user-manuals/
2015

Agisoft Photoscan Professional Edition, Version 1.1.6.
http://www.agisoft.com/features/professional-edition/

Athens, J. Stephen, Alex Morrison, and Mark Willis
2015 Low Sitios con Tolas de la Hacienda Zuleta y de Cochasquí: Investigaciones 2013. International
Archaeological Research Institute, INC. Honolulu, Hawaii.
Basham, G. Matt
2015 Subsistence Strategies and Landscape Use in the Canyon Edge Zone: Eagle Nest Canyon, Langtry,
Texas. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas State University.
Brandon, R. Joe
2012 Kites for low cost near earth aerial archaeological photography. Unpublished Master’s Thesis,
Department of Anthropology, University of Arkansas.
Brown, David O, Camino Camino, and Mark D. Willis
2010 Algunas Observaciones a las Fortalezas Incas del Oeste montañoso del Ecuador. Instituto
Nacional de Parrimonio Cultural: INPC - Revista del Patrimonio Cultural del Ecuador. INPC
No. 2:43-56.

31

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Byerly, Ryan M., Judith R. Cooper, David J. Meltzer, Matthew E. Hill, and Jason M. LaBelle
2005 On Bonfire Shelter (Texas) as a Paleoindian Bison Jump: An Assessment Using GIS and
Zooarchaeology. American Antiquity 70(4):595-629.
Campbell, John.
2012 Modeling Burned Rock Features as Units of Subsistence Intensification. Unpublished Master’s
Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas State University.
Carlson, Kristen and Leland Bement
2013 Organization of bison hunting at the Pleistocene/Holocene transition on the Plains of North
America. Quaternary International 297: 93-99.
Castañeda, Amanda M.
2015 The Hole Story: Understanding Bedrock Feature Variation in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands.
Unpublished Master’s Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas State University, San
Marcos.
Chandler, Jim H. and Fryer, J.G.
2005 Recording aboriginal rock art using cheap digital cameras and digital photogrammetry.
CIPA 2005 XX International Symposium, 26. September – 01 October, 2005, Torino, Italy.
Cochrane, T. A. and D.C. Flanagan
1999 Assessing water erosion in small watersheds using WEPP with GIS and digital elevation
models. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation 54(4):678-685.
Comer, Douglas C. and Michael J. Harrower
2013 Mapping Archaeological Landscapes from Space. Springer Briefs in Archaeology. Archaeological
Heritage Management. International Committee on Archaeological Heritage Management
(ICAHM). Baltimore, MD, USA
De Reu, Jeroen, Gertjan Plets, Geert Verhoeven, Philippe De Smedt, Machteld Bats, Bart Cherretté,
Wouter De Maeyer, Jasper Deconynck, Davy Herremans, Pieter Laloo, Marc Van Meirvenne, and
Wim De Clercq
2013 Towards a three-dimensional cost-effective registration of the archaeological heritage. Journal
of Archaeological Science 40:1108-1121.
De Reu, Jeroen, Philippe De Smedt, Davy Herremans, Marc Van Meirvenne, Pieter Laloo, and Wim
De Clercq
2014 On introducing an image-based 3D reconstruction method in archaeological excavation
practice. Journal of Archaeological Science 41:251-262.
Douglass, Matthew, Sam Lin, and Michael Chodoronek
2015 The Application of 3D Photogrammetry for In-Field Documentation of Archaeological
Features. Advances in Archaeological Practice 3(2):136-152

32

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Draeyer, Bernhard and Christoph Strecha
2014 White paper: How accurate are UAV surveying methods?
Pix4D. Bern, Switzerland.
Drap, Pierre
2012 Underwater Photogrammetry for Archaeology. In Special Applications of Photogrammetry,
edited by Daniel Carneiro da Silva. pp. 111-136. InTech, DOI: 10.5772/33999. Retrieved
from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/special-applications-of-photogrammetry/underwaterphotogrammetry-for-archaeology , accessed, February 1, 2016.
Dreyer-Lynch, Elizabeth
2014 Prehistoric Grinding Landscapes of the Southern Plains: The Archaeology of Bedrock Ground Stone
Features in the Chaquaqua Plateau in Southeastern Colorado. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, The University of Wyoming, Laramie.
Furukawa, Yasutaka and Jean Ponce
2007 Accurate, Dense, and Robust Multi-View Stereopsis. IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Graves, Tim, Juan Arias, and Mark Willis
2013 Guadalupe Village (LA 143472), A Burned Rock Midden Site in Southeastern New Mexico
and the Use of Innovative and Inexpensive Mapping Techniques. In Advances in Jornada
Mogollon Archaeology: Papers from the 17th Jornada Mogollon Conference, edited by T.L.
VanPool, E.M. McCarthy, and C.S. Van Pool, pp. 17-40. El Paso Museum of Archaeology,
El Paso.
Green, Susie, Andrew Bavan, and Michael Shapland
2014 A comparative assessment of structure from motion methods for archaeological research.
Journal of Archaeological Science 46(2014):173-181.
Houk, Brett A. (editor)
2013 The 2013 Season of the Chan Chich Archaeological Project. Papers of the Chan Chich
Archaeological Project, Number 7. Department of Sociology, Anthropology, and Social
Work. Texas Tech University. Lubbock, Texas.
Jain, Manoj K. and Umesh C. Kothyari
2000 Estimation of soil erosion and sediment yield using GIS. Hydrological Sciences Journal
45(5):771-786.
Kenmotsu, Nancy A., Leonard Kemp, and Lawrence L. Loendorf
2012 Jornada Rockshelters as Special Places: Investigations of 13 Sites along the Otero Mesa Escarpment,
Fort Bliss Military Reservation, Otero County, New Mexico. Historic and Natural Resources
Reports Nos. 11-12 and 11-26, Environmental Division, Fort Bliss Garrison Command, Fort
Bliss, Texas.

33

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Kjellman, Erik
2012 From 2D to 3D – A photogrammetric revolution in archaeology? Unpublished Master’s Thesis,
Department of Archaeology and Social Anthropology, University of Tromsø.
Koenig, Charles W.
2012 Burned Rock Middens, Settlement Patterns, and Bias in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands of Texas.
Unpublished Master’s Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas State University.
Koenig, Charles W., Mark D. Willis, and Stephen L. Black
2016 Beyond the Square Hole: Application of Structure from Motion Photogrammetry to
Archaeological Excavation. Advances in Archaeological Practice, in press.
Liebman, Matt, Chester Walker, and Jennie Sturm
2013 Mapping Archaeological Sites Using an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle. Newsletter of the New
Mexico Archeological Council. Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Lim, Kyoung Jae, Myung Sagong, Bernard A. Engel, Zhenxu Tang, Joongdae Choi, and Ki-Sung
Kim
2005 GIS-based sediment assessment tool. Catena 64:61-80.
Lin, Albert Yu-Min, Alexandre Novo, Shay Har-Noy, Nathan D. Ricklin, and Kostas Stamatiou
2011 Combining GeoEye-1 Satellite Remote Sensing, UAV Aerial Imagin, and Geophysical
Surveys in Anomaly Detection Applied to Archaeology. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, in press.
Lowe, David G.
1999 Object recognition from local scale-invariant features. Proceedings of the International Conference
on Computer Vision 2:1150–1157. doi:10.1109/ICCV.1999.790410.
Magnani, Matthew and Wittaker Schroder
2015 New Approaches to Modeling the Volume of Earthen Archaeological Features: A CaseStudy from the Hopewell Culture Mounds. Journal of Archaeological Science 64:12-21.
Manaugh, Geoff
2013 36-Gigapixel Image Captures Ancient Petroglyphs in Texas. Gizmodo Retrieved from
http://gizmodo.com/36-gigapixel-image-captures-ancient-petroglyphs-in-texa-1410698528,
accessed, February 1, 2016.
McCarthy, John.
2014 Multi-image photogrammetry as a practical tool for cultural heritage survey and community
engagement. Journal of Archaeological Science 43:175-185.
Miller, Myles R., Lawrence L. Loendorf, and Leonard Kemp
2012 Picture Cave and Other Rock Art Sites on Fort Bliss. Historic and Natural Resources Report No.
13-36, Environmental Division, Fort Bliss Garrison Command, Fort Bliss, Texas.

34

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Miller, Myles R. and Tim B. Graves
2009 Madera Quemada Pueblo: Archaeological Investigations at a 14th Century Jornada Mogollon Pueblo.
Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 03-12, Environmental Division, Fort Bliss
Garrison Command, Fort Bliss, Texas.
Mitasova, Helena, Jaroslav Hofierka, Maros Zlocha, and Louis R. Iverson
1996 Modelling topographic potential for erosion and deposition using GIS. International Journal of
Geographical Information Systems 10(5):629-641.
Mehrer, Mark W. and Konnie L. Wescott
2005 GIS and Archaeological Site Modeling. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
Nadel, Dani, Sagi Filin, Danny Rosenberg, and Vera Miller
2015 Prehistoric Bedrock Features: Recent Advances in 3D Characterization and Geometrical
Analysis. Journal of Archaeological Science 53:331-344.
Reinhard, Jochen
2012 Things on strings and complex computer algorithms: Kite Aerial Photography and Structure
from Motion Photogrammetry at the Tulul adh-Dhahab, Jordan. AARGnews: The Newsletter of
the Aerial Archaeology Research Group 45:37-41.
Roberts, Tim and Luis Alvarado
2011 Terminal Archaic/Late Prehistoric Cooking Technology in the Lower Pecos: Excavation of the Lost
Midden Site (41VV1991), Seminole Canyon State Park and Historic Site, Val Verde County, Texas .
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4868. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Cultural
Resources Program, Austin, Texas.
Rodriguez, Daniel P.
2015 Patterns in the Use of the Rockshelters of Eagle Nest Canyon, Langtry, Texas. Unpublished Master’s
Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas State University.
Rua, Helena and Pedro Alvito
2011 Living the past: 3D models, virtual reality and game engines as tools for supporting
archaeology and the reconstruction of cultural heritage – the case study of the Roman villa of
Casal de Freiria. Journal of Archaeological Science 38:3296-3308.
Selden, Robert Z. Jr., Timothy K. Perttula, and Michael J. O’Brien
2014 Advances in Documentation, Digital Curation, Virtual Exhibition, and a Test of 3D
Geometric Morphometrics: A Case Study of the Vanderpool Vessels from the Ancestral
Caddo Territory. Advances in Archaeological Practice 2(2):64-79.
Verhoeven, Geert
2008 Imaging the Invisible. Using modified Digital Still Cameras for Straightforward and LowCost Archaeological Near-InfraRed Photography. Journal of Archaeological Science 35(12),
3087-3100.

35

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

2009

Providing an Archaeological Bird’s-eye View – an Overall Picture of Ground-based Means to
Execute Low-altitude Aerial Photography (LAAP) in Archaeology. Archaeological Prospection
16:233-249.

2011

Software Review: Taking Computer Vision Aloft – Archaeological Three-dimensional
Reconstructions from Aerial Photographs with PhotoScan. Archaeological Prospection 18:67-73.

Verhoeven, G., M. Doneus, Ch. Briese, and F. Vermeulen
2012 Mapping by matching: a computer vision-based approach to fast and accurate georeferencing
of archaeological aerial photographs. Journal of Archaeological Science 39:2060-2070.
Willis, Mark D.
2010 How to create a Digital Elevation Model from Photosynth Point Clouds. Markaeology.
Retrieved from http://palentier.blogspot.com/2010/12/how-to-create-digital-elevation-model.html
, accessed, February 1, 2016.
2011

Determining Rock Art Deterioration Through Time: Automatic Change Detection with SfM.
Markaeology. Retrieved from http://palentier.blogspot.com/2011/11/determining-rock-artdeterioration.html , accessed, February 1, 2016.

2013

Drone Mapping the Pyramids of Zuleta. Markeology. Retrieved from
http://palentier.blogspot.com/2013/10/drone-mapping-pyramids-of-zuleta.html , accessed,
February 1, 2016.

Willis, Mark D., Brett A. Houk, Kelsey Herndon, and Chet Walker
2014 Structure from Motion Mapping of Structure A-15 at Chan Chich. In The 2014 Season of the
Chan Chich Archaeological Project, edited by Brett A. Houk, pp. 21-30. Papers of the Chan
Chich Archaeological Project, Number 8. Department of Sociology, Anthropology, and
Social Work. Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Willis, Mark D. and Andrea Jalandoni
2011 The Pictographs of the Rock Islands of Koror, Palau: Advanced Enhancement and 3D
Modeling at Five Sites for UNESCO. Unpublished report submitted to Ministry of
Community & Cultural Affairs of Palau.

36

AN UNUSUAL LATE ABORIGINAL ASSEMBLAGE
FROM THE WILSON SITE (41SS186),
SAN SABA COUNTY, CENTRAL TEXAS
Charles A. Hixson
with a contribution by James K. Feathers

ABSTRACT
The late aboriginal component in the Wilson Site in San Saba County is
unusual in that most of the assemblage is consistent with that of Classic
Toyah, but the diagnostic projectile point is an unnotched triangular arrow
point instead of the typical Perdiz point. The absence of Perdiz points suggests
that this component is associated with non-Toyah people and possibly dates to
after 1700. Archaeological testing by the Llano Uplift Archeological Society
(LUAS) to find supporting evidence for a historic date identified an Austin
phase shell midden and a “Late Component” composed of triangular arrow
points, end scrapers, a beveled biface and bone-tempered sherds, but no items
of European manufacture. Complicating matters, the luminescence dating on
a ceramic sample opens the possibility that the Late Component predates the
currently accepted beginning of the Toyah phase.
Keywords: Toyah, Guerrero, Fresno, Perdiz, Harrell, Apache, Jumano,
luminescence

INTRODUCTION
The Perdiz point is the most common diagnostic arrow point of the Late Prehistoric II and early
historic Toyah phenomenon of central and south Texas. It is the “key element” of the Toyah toolkit
(Turner et al. 2011:194), which also includes beveled bifaces, flake drills, large end scrapers, and bonetempered ceramics (Prewitt 1981:83). While other arrow point forms occur in many Classic Toyah
components, Perdiz is the predominant arrow point type (Kenmotsu and Boyd 2012:10) and the one
arrow point style that is “distinctively” Toyah (Carpenter 2012:183). The Wilson site (41SS186),
located on the lower San Saba River well within Johnson’s (1994:Figure 106) Classic Toyah area, is
unusual in that it contains a late aboriginal component with an assemblage nearly indistinguishable
from Toyah, with all the diagnostics noted above, but no Perdiz points.
The only arrow points that have been recovered from the Late Component are thin, well-made
triangular forms without stems or notches. Similar arrow points have been reported in other Toyah
components, but they are usually far outnumbered by Perdiz points. For example at 41TG91, a

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY
VOLUME 3:37–82

THE ONLINE PUBLICATION JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY (ISSN 2334-1874)
IS PUBLISHED BY JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG.
COPYRIGHT (C) 2016 JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Classic Toyah component with an unusually large number of triangular points, 34 Perdiz points were
found compared to nine triangular forms (Creel 1990:90, 96). More typical is the Varga site, where
53 Perdiz points were recovered compared to two triangular arrow points (Quigg et al. 2008:238, 243).
Only at 41LL473, another site that will be described in this report, are the number of Perdiz and
triangular points even comparable, but this site has been minimally investigated with one example of
each point type recovered. Wilson is unusual for a well-investigated Late Prehistoric II/early historic
component on the Edwards Plateau in that all the recovered arrow points are triangular points.
Recent models of the Toyah phenomenon have attempted to explain the apparent homogeneity of
Toyah material culture and its seemingly rapid spread across the Edwards Plateau, South Texas, and
parts of adjacent regions. These models include Toyah as a “techno-complex” or specialized toolkit
for hunting and processing large game animals that diffused through existing groups (Ricklis
1994:301-304), as the in-migration of extra-regional people (Johnson 1994:271-281), as a social field
or risk-sharing network (Arnn 2012:35, 235-236), and as long-range logistical hunters from outside the
Classic Toyah area (Carpenter 2012:244-245). Johnson’s migration model includes the concept of a
“Classic Toyah area” where Late Prehistoric II components are expected to have the typical Toyah
toolkit mentioned in the opening paragraph, especially Perdiz points and bone-tempered ceramics.
Johnson posited that the Classic Toyah represented a single social group (“ethnic group”) that had
migrated into the area perhaps from the Mogollon region to the west. The “Classic Toyah” concept
has continued to be used by Toyah researchers although most would now argue for a more diverse
and dynamic social situation within this area (Kenmotsu and Arnn 2012:41), which probably
contained multiple linguistic/marriage groups (as used by Arnn 2012:34), based on the large number
of naciones documented by Spanish sources for the early historic period (Arnn 2012:113-116, 134-135;
Kenmotsu and Arnn 2012:26-27; Wade 2003:222).
The available archaeological evidence suggests that most if not all of the groups that resided in the
Classic Toyah area during the Late Prehistoric II and early historic period used Perdiz points to tip
their arrows. Other arrow point forms, including triangular points, are generally considered to have
originated from outside this area. For example, Arnn (2012:226) sees the large percentage of nonPerdiz points at 41TG91 as indicative of the permeable boundary between Classic Toyah groups and
those to the north where triangular and side-notched points are common in Late Prehistoric II
components. It should be pointed out that 41TG91 and most large Toyah sites that include non-Perdiz
points are most likely palimpsests with multiple Toyah occupations. Arnn (2012:225) considers this
site and other similarly large ones as residential base camps representing multiple occupations of
“community/band size” groups (“minimal bands” as defined by Kelly 1995:210-213). At such sites
individual social units are not easily discerned and there is no way to know how these “foreign”
points entered Toyah residential sites. Wilson is different in that the Late Component represents a
specialized site where a small-scale social unit, perhaps a family group or a few individuals engaged in
a short-term activity, possibly bison hide preparation as suggested by the high percentage of end
scrapers. There is also evidence that triangular arrow points were being manufactured at the site, so
these hunters not only used these triangular points but were the makers as well.

38

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

The Wilson site is located in a part of central Texas without large-scale excavations of Toyah
components, although one large Classic Toyah site 20 km to the northwest is known from surface
collections (Green and Hester 1973), and Toyah components have been investigated at two sites
immediately opposite the San Saba River from Wilson (Hixson et al. 2011; Prikryl et al. 2010). Perdiz
points are dominant in all these components with only small percentages (if any) of non-Perdiz points.
None of these Toyah components have been radiocarbon dated so a chronological separation between
them and Wilson is possible.
But if these components are more or less contemporaneous, then Wilson’s Late Component could
involve a small-scale social unit or even an individual who happen to use a style of arrow point
different others in their linguistic/marriage band. Their proximity to the Southern Plains would mean
they were routinely exposed to triangular arrow points through contact with groups to the north. The
use of triangular points could be an example of assertive style as formulated by Wiessner (1983:258259), where style is used to signal individuality without reference to any group membership. Assertive
style can have a random or clinal distribution (Wiessner 1983:259), which is the pattern we see with
these northern triangular points in Toyah lands.
Alternatively, these triangular arrow points could have been used by all hunters in a larger social
unit, such as a marriage/linguistic group, with the Late Component representing only a subgroup.
Such a large-scale group should be highly visible archaeologically because of its geographical and
population size, but sites with a predominance of triangular arrow points have not been reported in
this part of central Texas, or for that matter elsewhere in the Classic Toyah area. While this might be
due to small sample size, such a group might not have existed long enough to leave much of a record,
as would be the case for migrating peoples.
Whether newcomers or not, a large social unit could have used triangular points to communicate
their social identity and to maintain a social boundary between themselves and other groups in the
area (Wobst 1977:320-330). Wiessner’s (1983) ethnographic work on Kalahari San arrow points
shows that (metal) arrow point styles can carry social information, and in this particular study, signal
membership in large, risk-sharing social units (language groups). Wiessner (1983:257-258) used the
term emblemic style for formal variation in material culture that purposefully carries social information
on group identity, in contrast to her assertive style, which carries messages of individuality. She also
felt that both types of stylistic information could be carried by stone projectile points as well, so should
be applicable to many archaeological contexts where large game hunting was culturally important, as
was presumably the case with Toyah and Southern Plains societies. Weissner’s main critic has been
Sackett (1985, 1990:38-39) who argues that emblemic-type style (“iconological style”) is rare and that
most variation in material culture does not actively carry social messages but instead results from
“isochrestic” choices, where particular ways of making an artifact are chosen from functionallyequivalent options. Such choices can become ensconced in a social group and therefore will result in
an “ethnic style.” Whether purposefully carrying social messages or made out of habit, Perdiz points
and the Wilson arrow points were most likely produced by different peoples.
Following Wiessner’s emblemic style, Arnn (2012:140, 203-206) argues that the Perdiz point was
used as a marker for participation in a large social field that spanned most of the state and connected

39

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

many different groups and communities in the Late Prehistoric II and early historic periods. Drawing
on the work of Lesser (1961) and McBrinn (2005), Arnn put forth the idea that Toyah is a risk- and
information-sharing network composed of numerous cultural/linguistic groups in central, south, and
east Texas. In his view, Toyah is not an ethnic group or specific people, nor is it a techno-complex,
although this network did facilitate the spread of ideas and technologies. This social field was known
in the early historic period as the Tejas Alliance, but Arnn (2012:136-139) presents evidence that it
had prehistoric beginnings.
If Arnn is correct about the emblemic use of the Perdiz point, then the Wilson site occupants may
not have been members of the Tejas Alliance, or the site could date to the period after 1700 when this
social field had collapsed and a new marker of shared identity, the Guerrero point, came into
widespread use among aboriginal people living in south Texas Spanish missions (Arnn 2012:140-142).
The Wilson site triangular points do resemble Guerrero points because of their shape and fine oblique
pressure flaking (Turner et al. 2011:194), but it’s unlikely the Late Component represents missionized
people because of the distance (300 km) from the nearest missions in San Antonio. The Wilson site is
geographically much closer to a short-lived mission and Presidio 100 km upstream on the San Saba
River, the latter possibly housing some missionized Native Americans because two Guerrero points
were recovered during excavations (Walter 2004:103-104). However, the presidio was under virtual
siege by hostile norteño groups throughout its existence and these people probably wouldn’t dare
venture to hunt so far from the fort.
The Wilson site Late Component could possibly be a post-1700 aboriginal site occupied by former
members of the Tejas Alliance outside the area of Spanish settlement. It could show that the basic
Toyah toolkit persisted in at least one non-mission group on the northern Edwards Plateau after the
demise of the Perdiz point. Alternatively, Wilson could represent people who never were part of the
Tejas Alliance, and therefore the Late Component could date to anytime in the Late Prehistoric II or
early historic periods. Possibly, it was sometime during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries when
Southern Plains groups, whose hunters used triangular arrow points, were migrating southwards into
central Texas (Newcomb 1993;Wade 2003:160-215).

Environmental and Archaeological Setting
The Wilson site is located on the northern edge of the Edwards Plateau in the broad alluvial
valley of the San Saba River (Figure 1) with the Cross Timbers immediately to the north, the
Limestone Plains to the northwest, and the Limestone Cut Plain to the northeast (Griffith et al. 2007).
The site occupies a high terrace 300 m north of the river near the town of San Saba. The geology of
this high terrace is mapped as Pleistocene terrace, while the low-lying area from the terrace slope
southwards to the river is mapped as Holocene alluvium (Barnes 1976). The Wilson cultural material
extends from the high terrace edge northwards across the Pleistocene surface for a distance of about
200 meters. This area includes a main house, a guesthouse, animal pens, and a paved road; buildings
and roads cover roughly 12 percent of the site area. The house was built in 1913 (landowner, personal
communication), and most of the Wilson site area has probably been under cultivation for over
century.

40

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 1. Map showing the central Texas region with ecoregions in the vicinity of the Wilson site, Ecoregions are from
Griffith et al. 2007.
As would be expected in this geological setting, Wilson is essentially a surface site but with
considerable cultural material shallowly buried in the plowzone. It contains two recognizable
components in the sense of archeological cultures: an early Late Prehistoric (Austin phase)

41

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

component with Scallorn and Sabinal-like arrow points that appears to cover the entire site area but is
mainly concentrated in a mussel shell midden at the south end of the site; and a late aboriginal
component with triangular arrow points and ceramics occupying a discrete area in the northern part
of the site away from the terrace edge. Obviously, the late component completely overlaps and is
presumably mixed with the earlier one, although where the earlier cultural material appears sparse.
Charcoal from the shell midden was sent to Beta Analytic for radiocarbon dating to determine
when the Austin phase occupation took place, and if there is any conceivable relationship between
this component and the later component. Although it would seem a bit far-fetched, a very late Austin
phase occupation could overlap early Toyah and possibly mean that the two groups were camping
together. Such a scenario could explain the proximity of two occupations in an area where water is
not immediately available. However, the dating of the Austin component turned out to be early, with
the calibrated result being (95% probability) Cal AD 655 to 720 and Cal AD 740 to 765 (Beta-415724,
using INTCAL database [Reimer et al. 2013] and “A simplified Approach to Calibrating C14 Dates”
[Talma and Vogel 1993]). These periods place the Austin component to essentially the very
beginnings of the Late Prehistoric in central Texas, and even taking into account the “old wood”
problem (Schiffer 1986), well before any Toyah occupation, especially one that could be very late.
While the Austin phase component is interesting in its own right because of its early date and
because it contains a largely intact shell midden, this report will focus on what is here called the Late
Component with its unusual artifact assemblage related to Toyah and possibly dating to the early
historic period. The investigations reported here were carried out by volunteers from the Llano Uplift
Archeological Society (LUAS) in an attempt to find supporting evidence for the post-1700 dating. It
includes both fieldwork and subsequent analysis of the finds, as well as the results of the University of
Washington’s thermoluminescence dating of a sample of the ceramic material. A literature review was
also undertaken to look at the co-occurrence of Perdiz and unnotched triangular arrow points to better
place the Wilson site in a broader regional perspective.

BACKGROUND TO THE INVESTIGATIONS
Buddy Whitley, the Texas Archeological Stewardship Network (TASN) Steward for San Saba
County, first visited the site early in October 2012 at the invitation of the landowner, and noted
mussel shell and chert flakes in the garden area near the high terrace edge. He contacted me a few
days later to request assistance from LUAS in surveying the property for archaeological sites, which
was arranged for the following month. The LUAS volunteers walked over the floodplain but saw no
artifacts on the surface. This floodplain, or low terrace, appears to lie at the same elevation as the
terrace on the opposite side of the river, which had earlier been intensively shovel-tested for a park
development project (Prikryl et al. 2010). The shovel testing in the park recovered no cultural
material, which suggests that the sediments in the upper meter of the formation are too young to
contain intact prehistoric cultural material.
Aware of this situation, the LUAS volunteers concentrated their efforts on the surface of the high
terrace where they excavated eight shovel tests close to the terrace edge. One of the tests encountered

42

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

dense mussel shell and debitage near the surface in the garden area by the house, while the other tests
had fairly light recovery, generally a few pieces of debitage or less. Near the end of the day, a few
Toyah artifacts were noted on the surface in an animal pen north of the house. These artifacts
included three bone-tempered ceramic sherds and an end scraper, as well as an unnotched triangular
arrow point. The locations of these finds were recorded with a GPS (±3 m accuracy), and with
landowner’s permission, the point, scraper, and ceramics were collected for further analysis, which
was postponed for over a year.
My interest in the Wilson site and its research possibilities was rekindled after reading the report
on testing and data recovery from the Flatrock Road Site, 41KM69, in Kimble County that was done
by the Center for Archaeological Research (CAR) for the Texas Department of Transportation
(Thompson et al. 2012). The site is located about 161 km (100 miles) southwest of Wilson, and
contains Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric components buried in terraces on the South Llano River.
Of interest here is the latest aboriginal component on the lower terrace that possibly represents a
historic Toyah occupation (Thompson 2012:105-107). The excavations recovered bone-tempered
ceramics from this component, as well as Toyah-style end scrapers but no arrow points. The CAR
archaeologists submitted portions of the same six ceramic sherds to two dating laboratories, one set
for luminescence dating, the other for AMS radiocarbon dating. Four of the six luminescence dates
were historic in age and ranged from AD 1526±38 to AD 1749±43, while the AMS results on the
same samples were significantly earlier, ranging from AD 994-1023 to AD 1224-1263 (Thompson
2012:Table 10-1). The luminescence dates appear to be more accurate for the component than the
AMS dates, considering the stratigraphic position of the samples above an earlier Toyah component.
It is possible that the discrepancy between the two dating methods was caused by “old wood” used in
firing the ceramics (Thompson 2012:107), because luminescence dates the time when the pot was
fired, while AMS dates the time when the wood used as fuel, either for firing the pot or for cooking,
was actively growing. These two events could be centuries apart, although it would seem unlikely that
Toyah people would be using 300-year-old wood – in such a case, it would have to be heartwood - to
fire their pots. It should be pointed out that AMS is dating all the organic material in the sample,
including whatever was being cooked and organic material absolved from the soil. Interestingly, AMS
dating of Toyah sherds from the Varga site, Buckhollow, Mission San Lorenzo, and Mission San Juan
(San Antonio) also resulted in a high percentage of dates that were clearly too old (Quigg et al.
2008:280, 281).
Not only do CAR’s findings suggest that post-1700 Toyah-affiliated sites might exist in the region,
but that luminescence dating can offer better results for historically late sites than AMS, at least when
dating ceramic material. Luminescence also offers the best dating method for open sites like Wilson’s
Late Component that are confined to the surface or plowzone and lack organic materials that can be
radiocarbon dated (Feathers 2003:1500). Because luminescence dating could provide further evidence
for the post-1700 age of the Late Component, LUAS submitted a ceramic sample to the same lab that
CAR used, the University of Washington’s Luminescence Laboratory, which specializes in the dating
of archaeological samples. Before the sample was sent, LUAS made a return visit to the Wilson site to
collect a soil sample needed by the lab to measure background radiation.

43

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

INVESTIGATIONS
While collecting the soil sample, we happen to find more ceramic sherds and other surface Toyah
artifacts in addition to another triangular arrow point. It was then decided that a thorough
investigation of the site was necessary to address the follow questions:
1.

What are the areal extent and density of the late cultural material (what would be called the
Late Component)?

2.

Are European artifacts associated with the Toyah diagnostics?

3.

Are Perdiz or other arrow point types present, in addition to the triangular points?

4.

What is the connection, if any, of the Late Component to the dense shell accumulation at the
south end of the site?

Considering the shallow cultural deposits, all these questions could be addressed using intensive
surface inspection and shallow subsurface testing of the plowzone. The investigations were carried out
by LUAS volunteers in the fall and winter of 2014/15, during which more shovel tests were dug for a
total of 25 tests, along with seven 1-x-1-m test units excavated by trowel and skimming with a shovel
(Figure 2). The earlier shovel testing had shown that the cultural deposits on the high terrace surface
are shallow and confined to the plowzone, mostly in the upper 20 cm. The soil profile to a depth of a
meter is brown clay loam with no clear soil horizons although small calcium carbonate nodules are
present below 30 cm. Chert gravels outcrop on the terrace edge and slope, as well as the terrace
surface in the northwest corner of the property. These areas, along with the recently plowed area
north of the animal pen visible in Figure 2 were not shovel tested because of the excellent visibility.
Elsewhere the subsurface testing was done to collect a sample of the plowzone cultural material and
not necessarily to explore for buried features or discrete occupation zones, which if they had existed
would have been dispersed by plowing.
To address Question 1 above, a careful inspection was made of the terrace slope and terrace
surface areas of the Wilson property and the adjoining properties to the north and northwest,
encompassing 6.3 acres in all. Ground visibility was good within the pen areas because of superficial
erosion from animal traffic. In addition, a series of 14 shovel tests were placed at roughly 20-m
intervals across this area to determine artifact extent and density within the plowzone (upper 30 cm).
To address Questions 2 and 3, five 1-x-1-m test units were placed within the area where Late
Component diagnostics were found during the surface survey. The purpose of the tests was to recover
any items of European manufacture datable to the seventeenth or eighteenth century. Many aboriginal
groups in Texas had access to European trade goods through information networks tied to trade and
trade fairs (Wade 2003:228). Considering the value that must have been placed on such items by
aboriginal people, it’s unlikely that they were casually discarded to become part of the archaeological
record of small specialized sites such as Wilson. Still, a few large aboriginal sites with European

44

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 2. Aerial map showing subsurface testing done by LUAS volunteers, and limits of surface survey (blue line).
artifacts have been documented just outside the Classic Toyah area, including the Davis Hackberry
Spring site (41ST87) with glass beads and a metal arrow point (Riemenschneider 1996:17), and the
Shanklin site (41WH8), with a Spanish coin, an iron projectile point, and tools made from chipped
bottle glass (Hudgins 1986).

45

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

The original plan was to fine screen all of the fill from all the units in the Late Component area to
recover possible glass beads or other small artifacts, but that proved extremely difficult because of the
hard soil. Instead, one 10-cm level of Unit 1 was 1/16-inch screened and the entire fill of Units 2 and
3 were 1/8-inch screened, while a sample of Unit 5 fill was also 1/8-inch screened. The fine screening
was done in addition to the ¼-inch screening that was done on all fill from all units and shovel tests
during the investigations. A metal detector was briefly used in the Late Component area to locate
metal artifacts, but was soon stopped because of the large number of hits resulting from fence staples,
wire, and small metal fragments presumed to be modern. Another 1-x-1-m test unit was placed 20 m
to the north of the Late Component on the property fence line where a previous shovel test had
recovered somewhat more debitage than elsewhere in the animal pen.
To help address Question 4, a 1-x-1-m test unit was placed within the area where earlier shovel
testing encountered dense mussel shell and lithics. Additional shovel testing was done immediately to
the north to determine the extent of the shell midden.

TESTING RESULTS
The investigations found that all the Toyah artifacts are confined within a discrete 1,431-m2
(0.35 acre) area at the north end of the main animal pen (Figures 3 and 4). I consider this the Late
Component area, and assume that all these Toyah artifacts are the product of a single occupation or a
series of occupations by the same social unit over a narrow time spam. This assumption is based on
the tight horizontal clustering of artifacts that seem to belong together in a location that appears to be
unfavorable for repeated occupations because of the absence of water and other obvious resources. It
is not based on stratigraphic separation because the artifacts were retrieved from the disturbed
plowzone, and there is always the possibility that they did indeed accumulate from multiple Toyah
occupations over a longer span of time.
Most of these Toyah diagnostics were recovered from the surface, but two, a triangular point and
an end scraper, were recovered from separate test units. No Perdiz points were recovered, and no
items of non-aboriginal manufacture were found other than a few pieces of purple glass, whiteware
sherds, and small, unidentifiable corroded metal fragments, all of which probably date from the early
twentieth century. Also, no lithic tools resembling gunflints were found. Shovel testing showed that
the ¼-inch debitage density within the Late Component area was about the same as in the rest of the
animal pen, averaging about 3 pieces per test (see Figure 3).
Outside the Late Component area, LUAS recovered four stemmed arrow points. These include
an unfinished Scallorn point and a Sabinal-like point from the surface to the south of the Late
Component area and a probable Scallorn point from the test unit placed on the north fence line. A
third Scallorn point was recovered from the test unit over the shell midden in the southern part of the
property (see Figure 2).

46

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 3. Aerial map showing the ¼-inch debitage recovery (upper 20 cm) from the shovel test and test units using
graduated symbols, with Late Component area shaded in red.

47

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 4. Aerial of Late Component area showing locations of Toyah artifacts and triangular arrow points.
The unit placed in the shell midden area near the house encountered a dense mussel shell lens
comingled with many small burned limestone rocks and lithics. The lens is 10 cm thick and lies
between 10 and 20 cm below the surface. The only diagnostic artifact from the unit was a Scallorn
point (mentioned above) recovered from the upper part of the shell lens. A thin late-stage arrow point

48

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

preform with a concave base was also recovered from the same elevation as the arrow point. No
Toyah artifacts or triangular points were found in this unit. As stated in the Introduction, a calibrated
radiocarbon date (95 % probability) of Cal AD 655 to 720 and Cal AD 740 to 765 was obtained on
charcoal from the upper part of the shell lens (Beta-415724). Shovel testing near this unit shows that
the shell lens or midden gradually thins towards the north and east and probably covers an area of
400-600 m2 (see Figure 3).

Temporally Diagnostic Artifacts considered belonging to the Late Component
These artifacts were all recovered from the 1431 m2 Late Component area in the northern part of
the animal pen, and with the exception of the triangular arrow points, are artifact forms archaeologists
typically identify as Toyah phase when found within Johnson’s Classic Toyah area. No artifacts
diagnostic of other archaeological cultures were found in the Late Component area. However, some
non-diagnostic tools and unfinished tools were collected from this area and these are described in the
next section.

Unnotched Triangular Arrow Points N=3 (Figure 5)
Lot 1 represents the proximal fragment of a triangular arrow point missing its roughly distal third,
which was broken off in an oblique snap fracture, as well as one of its basal corners. The point is
bifacially worked with a somewhat plano-convex cross-section. In workmanship, it shows neat,
oblique parallel pressure flake scars on both faces. The edge margins are even with no serrations. The
base is moderately concave, with a maximum depth of 2 mm. The point is widest at its proximal end,
which measures 17 mm across, and if its basal corner were intact, might have measured 18 mm. The
existing part of this point has a maximum length of 26 mm. Its thickness is fairly uniform throughout
its length at 2.5 mm. The specimen is made of slightly translucent brown Edwards chert with cream
inclusions of similar texture. This artifact was found on the surface.
Lot 7 represents the proximal fragment
(perhaps proximal third) of a small triangular
arrow point. The distal part has broken off
through a straight bend fracture. It is nearly
paper-thin, with a uniform thickness of 1.5
mm, and appears plano-convex in crosssection. The point is essentially unifacial with
one side showing only minimal pressure
flaking with short, minute flake scars all along
the lateral edges and the base but leaving most
Figure 5.Unnotched triangular arrow points recovered from
of the interior flake blank surface intact.
Late Component, 41SS186. (left to right) Lot 1, Lot 7, and
Compression rings on this surface indicate Lot 24.
that the point’s distal tip lay at the proximal end of the original flake blank. Although the fragment is
small, the opposite face shows three rows of fine horizontal parallel flaking. It has a slightly concave
base less than 1 mm deep. The maximum width at the base is 14.5 mm and the length of the surviving

49

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

part is 10.5 mm. It is made of a fine-textured opaque chert in lightly mottled shades of gray. This point
was found on the surface.
Lot 24 represents the distal half of fairly wide but thin triangular arrow point. One face still shows
the interior side of the original flake blank with short trimming flakes removed along its lateral edges
and longer flakes along the basal edge. The other face shows the fine type of oblique parallel pressure
flaking seen on the Lot 1 specimen. As with the other two arrow points, the widest point it as its base,
which measures 21 mm. The surviving part measures 22 mm in length, and is uniform in thickness at
2.5 mm. The point is made from translucent brown Edwards-type chert. This point was recovered
from Level 2 (10 – 20 cm) in Test Pit 2.

Flake Drill N=1 (Figure 6)
This tool fragment represents the medial
section of a flake drill, including a substantial
part of the bit along with a section of the tool
immediately above the bit. The surviving part
of the bit is 13 mm long, 6 mm wide, and 4
mm thick. The surviving proximal part is too
small to say much except that this tool
probably isn’t a recycled arrow point. The drill
is made from a fine-textured opaque white
chert.

Beveled Biface N=1 (see Figure 6)

Figure 6. Lot 10 flake drill (left) and Lot 43 beveled biface
This is an end fragment of biface whose
fragment collected from Late Component, 41SS186.
lateral edges are alternately beveled. It is made
fine-textured medium gray chert with light gray mottling with no visible patina. The fragment
measures 33 mm in length and 28 mm at its widest point. Similar bifaces are also referred to as
“Harahey” knives (Johnson 1994:103).

End Scrapers N=6 (Figure 7, Table 1)
End scrapers represent the largest category of diagnostic lithic artifact found in the Late
Component area, and are similar to ones found in Toyah assemblages such as Buckhollow (Johnson
1994:Figure 60C) but a little less carefully made than most. All are unifaces close in size and flaking
technique, and were made from thick, hard hammer flakes. All but one of the scrapers have between
25 and 70 percent of their exterior surface covered by cortex. The scrapers range from 55 to 62 mm in
length, and 41 to 51 in width. They vary from 15 to 24 mm in maximum thickness, with the thickest
portion usually slightly proximal from the working edge. Using Johnson’s (1994:Figure 65)
terminology to describe the ventral surfaces at the bit, most are moderately to markedly curved with
slight hooks, but two are flat. All are made from fine-textured, Edwards chert except for Lot 11, which
is made of a black, coarse chert that might have originated in the San Saba area Paleozoic limestone.

50

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

All these artifacts were surface finds except for Lot 31, which was recovered from Level 2 (10-20 cm)
of Test Pit 3.

Figure 7. End scrapers recovered from Late Component,
41SS186. Upper row, left to right: Lot 4, Lot 11, Lot 12;
Bottom row, Left to right: Lot 13, Lot 31, Lot 44

Table 1. Metric and nonmetric data for end scrapers from 41SS186.
Lot

Length (mm)

Width (mm)

Thickness (mm)

4
11
12
13
31
44

61
62
61
59
55
62

43
41
51
41
51
46

17
16
24
16
15
24

Averages
60
45.50
1 After Johnson 1994:Figure 65.

Ventral Surface1
Flat
Moderately Curving
Moderately Curving
Moderately Curving
Markedly Curving
Flat

Cortex (%)
70
60
0
25
40
40

18.67

Ceramics (bone-tempered sherds) N=7 (Figure 8)
Seven small aboriginal bone-tempered sherds were collected from the surface, more or less
scattered across the Late Component area without any apparent concentration (see Figure 4). None of
the fragments could be fitted together. They represent body sherds from one or more vessels all having
the same basic attributes and probably representing a constricted form such as an olla because their
convex surfaces are more carefully smoothed and polished than their concave surfaces. Notably the
exterior (convex surface) of one sherd is partially covered with a brown polished slip, but the other
sherds could easily have come from the upslipped areas of the same vessel. No carbon deposits or
food residue was visible on the surfaces. The condition of the sherds is generally good with slight
surface erosion on two of the three sherds sent for luminescence dating. Their sizes range from the
smallest at 10 by 11 mm to the largest at 20 by 26 mm. Sherd thickness ranges from 4 to 6 mm.

51

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

The sherds’ exterior (convex) surfaces are
smooth with slight luster from polishing and
the interiors of two of the sherds (Lots 82 and
83) are almost as smooth as their exteriors.
The rest of the sherds have somewhat uneven
concave surfaces, having slight valleys and
troughs that are likely traces of coiling, but the
high areas show some polishing as well. Small
pits are frequent, especially on the interior
surfaces and around some of the bone temper
fragments, and might represent where the
Figure 8. Three ceramic sherds collected from the surface of
bone has dissolved or organic constituents
the Late Component area, 41SS186. The exterior (facing)
have burned away. No inclusions such as sand
side of the (Lot 3) sherd on the far left is particially covered
by a brown polished slip.
were visible through a 10-x hand lens on any
of the sherds other than moderate amounts of fine crushed bone.
Their exterior color is 5YR 6/6 (reddish yellow) for the more oxidized areas and 7.5YR 7/6
(reddish yellow) for the less oxidized areas. The interior surface has patches of oxidized areas with a
color of 5YR 6/8 (reddish yellow) and reduced areas of 7.5YR 6/2 (pinkish gray). The core is reduced
and is also 7.5YR 6/2 (pinkish gray) with some oxidized areas close to the surface and some slightly
darker areas of carbon staining. The slip on the exterior of the Lot 3 sherd is 7.5YR 4/6 (strong
brown) and has a slight sheen from polishing. The slip is fairly thickly applied and stands in clear
relief from the unslipped surface.

Artifacts that might belong to the Late Component
These artifacts were found in, or a short distance outside of, the Late Component area, but are not
necessarily diagnostic to any particular period although the arrow point preforms are obviously Late
Prehistoric. Their identity as possibly belonging to the Late Component rests in their proximity to the
late artifacts, but they could belong to the
Austin component or to earlier, unknown
occupations.

Arrow Point Preforms N=2 (Figure 9)

Figure 9. Arrow point blank (Lot 2 on left), and two
fragments from arrow point preforms (Lot 8 middle and Lot
9, right) from the Late Component area, 41SS186.

52

Lot 8 represents the distal part of a biface
whose thinness (3 mm) suggests that it is
probably an unfinished arrow point. One side
is only partially pressure-flaked with the
original flake blank interior exposed over most
of the surface, and the edges are still rough
and uneven. The other side has parallel
oblique pressure flaking similar to that on seen

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

on the Lot 1 and Lot 24 triangular arrow points. It is made from a pale gray, translucent chert with a
few white inclusions.
Lot 9 is another thin (4 mm) biface fragment that might be from an unfinished arrow point,
perhaps the proximal portion of a preform because the edge opposite the break is straight although
curiously at an angle. Both sides are completely covered by pressure flake scars, one side by random
flaking and the other with horizontal parallel flaking. It is made from a brown translucent chert
similar to Edwards with lighter brown mottling.

Arrow Point Blank N=1 (see Figure 9)
Lot 2 is an interior or tertiary flake with moderate retouch around its edges. It measures 30 mm in
length, 18 mm wide, and 4 mm in maximum thickness near its proximal end where the bulb of
percussion in still evident. One lateral edge shows bifacial retouch and the striking platform and some
of the bulb have been removed by pressure flaking. The blank was probably struck from the core using
a hard hammer because of the flake’s outline and prominent bulb, and terminated from the core with
a slight hinge fracture. The flake is made from a fine-grained, translucent brown chert, and is the right
size and shape to produce a triangular arrow point similar to those found in the Late Component area.
Still, it could also have been worked into a Scallorn or other style point.

Informal Unifaces N=5
These five unifaces are all made on thick flakes and have one or more steep working edges. Lot 5
is a thick primary flake with a steep working edge along both lateral edges and is made from a light
brownish gray chert with reddish brown cortex. Lot 6 is a thick tertiary flake with short, steep retouch
along one lateral edge and along the distal edge meeting at a right angle. The material is an opaque,
fine-grained chert primarily gray in color with lighter gray and light brown mottling. Lot 25 is a
roughly triangular uniface resembling in basic form the end scrapers described above but with three
separate working edges located on the corners. The interior surface of the original flake is completely
flat without visible compression rings. The tool is made from opaque purplish chert with white
mottling and no cortex. Lot 26 is a hard hammer secondary flake with steep retouch along one lateral
edge. The worked edge is slightly concave. It is made of fine-grained, dark gray chert with light gray
inclusions, and the cortex is brown. Lot 39 is a large, moderately thin primary flake whose distal edge
has been unifacially worked into a convex cutting or scraping tool. The material is a fine-grain dark
grayish brown Edwards-like chert with light gray mottles. The cortex is brown with white patches.
This tool was recovered from the upper 10 cm of Unit 5. Lot 45 is a non-cortical flake fragment with
one lateral edge worked into a steep bevel. It is possibly a fragment from a more formal-type side
scraper. The material is a translucent, light brown chert with white inclusions.

Edge Modified flakes N=3
These are hard hammer flakes, two tertiary and one secondary, with retouch along one lateral
edge. The modified edges of two these tools (Lots 48 and 49) are straight, while that of the third
(Lot 50) is concave. The two with straight worked edges are made from opaque light grayish brown

53

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

fine-grained chert with lighter mottles, and the
one with the concave edge is made from a
slightly translucent brown chert of medium
texture.

Red pigment stone (Figure 10)
This is a chunk of hematite-rich iron ore
measuring 40-x-37-x-18-mm. The stone has
clearly been modified in that large areas are
covered by shallow grooves and striations.
These striations are especially prominent
where the surface has a redder hue. The
surface color of the rock ranges from 10YR
4/6 (red) to 2.5YR 4/3 (reddish brown).

Core N=1

Figure 10. Red hematite pigment stone (Lot 14) with
striations and grooves collected from the Late Component
area, 41SS186.

A small, multi-directional core was recovered from Level 1 (0-10 cm) of Unit 1 measuring 4-x-3.5x-1.5-cm. It is made from fine-grained opaque chert that is heavily mottled in different shades of
brown and gray. The chert has a slight luster as though it has been heat-treated, and cortex is present
along one side. At least seven flake facets are visible running in different directions from three separate
striking surfaces.

Debitage
A small amount of debitage was observed on the surface of the Late Component area, but only
the debitage recovered from the test units was collected and counted. Most of the collected debitage
consisted of non-flake shatter and the distal portions of thick hard-hammer flakes. Complete and
proximal parts of flakes made up only a small percentage of the debitage and none of these are blades.
No thin, soft hammer flakes were recovered from the five units placed in the Late Component area.
Debitage recovered from the 1/8- and 1/16-inch screen generally consisted of shatter with flakes or
flake fragments representing less than half the count.
Debitage recovery for all subsurface tests from the 1/4-inch screen is shown in Figure 3 using
graduated symbols. The recovery shown is for the upper 20 cm of soil only from where most of the
debitage was recovered. Recovery (1/4-inch screen) from the 4 shovel tests placed in the Late
Component area ranged from 1 to 5 pieces of debitage with an average of 3 pieces. Recovery
(1/4-inch screen) from the 18 shovel tests placed outside the Late Component area, excluding the
three in the shell midden, ranged from none up to seven, with an average of 2.5. There appears to be
little difference in the amount of debitage from the 1/4-inch screen from the two areas. The five 1-x-1m units in the Late Component area recovered from 16 to 41 pieces of 1/4-inch screened debitage in
the upper 20 cm of soil, with an average of 29 pieces. Fairly low when compared to the 256 pieces of
debitage recovered from the upper 20 cm in the unit placed over the shell midden.

54

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

The upper level of Unit 1 in the Late Component area was screened through1/16-inch mesh, and
recovered 110 pieces of debitage. The 1/8-inch screening of two other units in the Late Component
area ranged from 11 to 20 pieces of debitage per level with an average of 16 pieces. The fine screening
was primarily done to collect any small historic-period artifacts like glass beads, but the lithic recovery
shows a fairly high frequency of debitage less than 1/16-inch.

Other Cultural Materials
Other non-lithic, non-ceramic cultural material observed in the Late Component area included
some widely scattered burned rocks and few mussel shell fragments. This is the kind of material that is
very common in the Austin component at Wilson, and may not belong to the later occupation.

Isolated Toyah Artifact
A Toyah end scraper was noted the surface of the terrace slope outside the southwestern edge of
the site, and about 100 m south of the Late Component area. It is a uniface made from brown
Edwards chert and, while similar in size, does not resemble any of the Late Component examples in
workmanship or material. The tool is more carefully knapped and has no trace of cortex on its
exterior surface. This is the only evidence that LUAS found of Toyah outside the Late Component
area.

LUMINESCENCE RESULTS
Three of the seven bone-tempered sherds were sent as a single sample to James Feathers of the
University of Washington’s Luminescence Laboratory for luminescence dating. The lab required the
ceramic samples to be at least 3 cm in diameter and 0.5 cm thick. This thickness is necessary because
0.2 cm from all outer surfaces must be removed to eliminate areas of the sample that were exposed to
light and beta radiation. The three sherds, each measuring about 1-x-2-x-0.5 cm, had to be combined
into one sample to provide the necessary volume for the analysis. The sherds were collected from the
surface in the central and northern parts of the Late Component area (see underlined sherd locations
in Figure 4).
Feather’s analysis included both thermoluminescence (TL), a technique that has long been used
to date ceramics, and optically stimulating luminescence (OSL), which is now being used to date
heated materials and has the added benefit of requiring a smaller sample size (Feathers 2003:1496).
Luminescence dating involves calculating the elapsed time since the samples were last heated to above
about 500°C (Feathers 2003:1495), a temperature that would have been exceeded when the pottery
was fired (Rice 1987:86), or in the case of OSL, when the sample was last exposed to light. Light and
heat have a zeroing effect on the sample, after which energy buildup starts all over again at a
estimable rate due to the bombardment of radiation from the soil and within the sample itself, as well
as from comic radiation. In the lab, the sample is reheated or exposed to light and this energy is
released in the form of light. The elapsed time in years since the zeroing effect is then calculated based

55

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

on the intensity of the light emitted. The analysis resulted in a TL calendar date of AD 1350±90 and
an OSL date of AD 1020±90.
Feather’s report is included in the Appendix, where he concedes that these dates are not in
agreement. He reconciles this by stating that the TL age is probably underrepresented (i.e., too young)
because the amount of anomalous fading could not be estimated due the small sample size.
Anomalous fading is the loss of stored electrons from minerals, particularly feldspars, at ambient
temperatures resulting in a younger date. On the other hand, Feathers states that the OSL is possibly
overrepresented (i.e., too old) because the dose recovery test used to validate the single-aliquot
regenerative dose (SAR) procedure showed that the recovered dose was a little higher than the given
dose. Therefore these dates must bracket the true date of the sample, placing it between AD 930 and
1430. The latter part of this range would place the Late Component in the early Toyah period,
considered to begin around AD1350 or later for the western Edwards Plateau and perhaps earlier to
the east (Carpenter 2012:212-213).
An accurate calculation of the dose rate, that is the amount of radiation the sample received per
year, is critical for getting accurate date. One source of error includes the estimate of the moisture
content of the sample (Duller 2008:19). The greater the water content of the sherd the more it is
shielded from radiation. Feathers estimated the sample's moisture content at 10 percent, which reflects
arid conditions, but the calculation was made as if it had 3 percent moisture. This would decrease the
OSL age by 70 years, making the calendar date AD 1090±90.
Another source of error comes from determining the average cosmic radiation dose the sample
received each year. If the sample was buried by sediment it would be protected from such radiation,
and not taking this into account will result in an age underestimation (Duller 2008:19). We can
assume that because of its geological position on an ancient land surface, the Wilson site sample was
either on the surface or buried by only a few centimeters of soil since it was discarded centuries ago.
However, we cannot be absolutely sure that the sample was not buried deeper over most of this time.
The cosmic radiation represents only a small percentage of the total radiation, so any miscalculation
does not usually result in large errors (Duller 2008:19). In any case, miscalculation of the cosmic
radiation dose doesn't really explain the early date on the Wilson site sample because deep burial of
the sample would create an underestimation, not overestimation of the age.

DISCUSSION
The Wilson site’s Late Component was investigated to find evidence to support a post-1700 date
inferred by the presence of Guerrero-like points, however the fieldwork found no articles of European
manufacture, gunflints, or other material identifiable to the seventeenth or eighteenth century.
Although we can’t rely on the luminescence dating of a single ceramic sample, the results do not
support a post-1700 date and in fact would place the Late Component in the early part of the Toyah
period, if not before.
At the same time, no Perdiz points were found, so Wilson does seem to be an anomaly as far as
Toyah sites go. Still, we only excavated a very small sample of the plowzone, less than one percent of

56

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

the Late Component area, and it is possible that Perdiz points are buried there. However, there is no
good explanation for why plowing and other disturbances would expose only triangular points and
not Perdiz points, if in fact they were ever there. It should also be noted that nearly all the diagnostic
artifacts were recovered from the surface, while subsurface artifact recovery was very light in the Late
Component area, with only two diagnostics being recovered from the five 1-x-1 m units and four
shovel tests. We would have had to excavate possibly 50 more test units to match the sample size
exposed on the surface.
The Late Component lithic assemblage appears to be associated with bison hide processing,
including the large end scrapers (Johnson 1994:117), the flake drill (Johnson 1994:139), and perhaps
the hematite pigment stone (Dubreuil and Grosman 2009). The data can be interpreted as representing
a small task force, presumably from a larger residential group, spending time on that spot defleshing
hides and repairing weapons. Perhaps they had an olla there to provide water so they would not have
to walk 400 m to the river for a drink. Their stay appears to have been brief, as indicated not only by
the small site area, but also the low frequencies of debitage and artifacts in general. The debitage
recovered from 1/4-inch screening consists mostly of small hard hammer flakes that could have
derived from fashioning the bits on the end scrapers. The material for the scrapers most likely came
from the nearby terrace slope where chert gravels of suitable size are abundant. Soft hammer flakes
are absent from the Late Component area, so no thin bifaces were being manufactured. It doesn’t
appear they lingered long at this location. This scenario presupposes that the Late Component is not
part of a single large aggregation of rancherias spread out along the San Saba River (see Kenmotsu and
Arnn 2012:33-37). Other offset contemporaneous camping areas in the immediate area cannot be
ruled out entirely because the LUAS survey was limited to the Wilson property and the adjacent
properties to the north.

The Luminescence Dating
The archaeological event we want to date is the occupation at Wilson by people using the
unnotched triangular arrow points, but luminescence is actually dating the manufacture of the pottery.
As Feathers (2003:1495) points out, the dating event and the event targeted by luminescence might be
widely separated in time. At Wilson, such a situation might have occurred if late aboriginal people
using triangular points happen to visit the exact spot where early Toyah people left ceramics.
However, the chance of this happening seems fairly remote because of the close spatial relationship
between the arrow points and sherds (see Figures 3 and 4).
There is also the possibility that post-1700 aboriginal people somehow acquired an old pot
manufactured by early Toyah people and brought it to Wilson where it was eventually broken. But the
chance of an earthenware pot surviving for 400 years in Late Prehistoric central Texas, by whatever
scenario that can be imaged, must be very slim. A more plausible scenario is that later people
collected sherds from an old Toyah campsite to repurpose them at Wilson, perhaps as hide scrapers.
However, there is no evidence of use-wear on any of the sherds.

57

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Guerrero Points and Wilson
The argument that Wilson is a Spanish Colonial-era site currently rests solely on the resemblance
of the Late Component’s arrow points to Guerrero points, but is there any way to be more confident
in this typing? The shape or outline of the Wilson arrow points is no real help because Guerrero points
are known to be quite variable in this regard even when excluding the lanceolate variety found
southeast of the Edwards Plateau (Turner et al. 2011:195). For this reason, Guerrero point typing is
heavily dependent on Spanish Colonial context, which we don’t have at Wilson.
In any case, it might be informative to see how the Wilson arrow points compare to Guerrero
points in width and thickness with the understanding that such factors are often influenced by material
and other non-cultural factors (Whittaker 1994:270). Another problem to consider with this analysis is
that unfinished Guerrero points are probably included in the samples, skewing the data towards wider
and thicker. Figure 11 shows a scatter-plot graph comparing maximum thickness and maximum
width of the Wilson examples with previously-reported metric data of arrow points from five Spanish
missions: San Jose (Tomka 1999:Table 1), San Antonio de Valero (Lohse 1999:Table 3), San
Bernardo North (Inman 1997:Table 7), Espiritu Santo in Goliad (Inman 1997:Table 20), and San
Juan Bautista (Inman 1997:Table 2).

Figure 11. Scatter plot with transparent graph points representing individual Guerrero points from five south Texas
Spanish missions along with the three Wilson arrow points plotted by width and thickness.
The Figure 11 graph visually shows that the Wilson arrow points fall at the extreme thin end of
the thickness range, and one Wilson example (Lot 7) is thinner than any of the measured mission
points. In maximum width, the Wilson examples tend to be rather wide, but there are a few mission
examples that are even wider. Considering just these two attributes, width and thickness, the Wilson

58

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

arrow points tend to cluster more with the San Antonio mission Guerrero points, especially those
from San Antonio de Valero. What we can take from this is that the Wilson examples for the most
part fall within the range of Guerrero points in terms of thickness and maximum width, but are
thinner and to some extent wider than most Guerrero points.

Triangular Arrow Points in Toyah Components
Triangular arrow points are known to occur in small percentages along with Perdiz points in
many Toyah components. In fact, an unnotched triangular form was included in the first conception
of the Toyah culture formulated by J. Charles Kelly (1947:122-124) using data from Lehmann
Rockshelter in Gillespie County. Kelly (1947:122) gave this arrow point form the type name of
“Fresno Triangular Blade” and triangular arrow points found in Toyah components are still often
referred to as Fresno points. The point Kelly (1947:Plate 13) illustrates as an example of this type
looks a lot like a preform, which brings up one of the problems with the Fresno type: it has been
assigned to unfinished arrow points (Turner et al. 2011:191), especially unfinished Scallorn (Shafer
2006:17) and Harrell/Washita points that had yet to be notched (Speth and Newlander 2012:166167). Despite this concern, the type name is used throughout the state (Prewitt 1995:Figure 20),
presumably for both unfinished points as well as finished triangular points, such as a form on the
Texas coast (Turner et al. 2011:191). Fresno is commonly used for triangular points in the Texas
Panhandle (Boyd 1997:427-428; Hughes and Willey 1978:29), even for forms that other researchers
would call Talco-like points (Boyd 1997:428). When archaeologists assign a type name to a particular
triangular arrow point form, it is based to a large degree on geographical location and whether or not
it has historic context. There are no clearly agreed on morphological traits that distinguish most
triangular arrow point types.
The Wilson site triangular points do not appear to be preforms because they are all extremely thin
with well-trimmed edges and have distinctive break patterns—bending fractures above the hafting
area—that suggest they broke while being used as projectile tips (see Figure 5). In the absence of clear
impact fractures, we can never be absolutely sure that any triangular form is not an unfinished point,
but the simplest interpretation for the Wilson site examples is that they are in a finished state.
While finished triangular arrow points have been found in many Classic Toyah components, they
have not been reported from some of the major Toyah excavations, including Kyle Rockshelter (Jelks
1962), Buckhollow (Johnson 1994), Rush (Quigg and Peck 1995), Flatrock Road (Thompson et al.
2012), and Little Paint (Carpenter et al. 2012). So just how common are Toyah components with
triangular arrow points? To get a rough idea of the frequency and distribution of such sites, keyword
searches on the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas were used to identify sites
where Perdiz points and triangular arrow points co-occur, keeping in mind that the latter could in
some cases be preforms for notched and stemmed points. It should also be pointed out that the Sites
Atlas data are almost exclusively from reconnaissance- and survey-level investigations and as such
they represent only a small sample of cultural material from these sites. The use of this database is
perhaps the only way to get a broad look at many sites over a broad geographical area.

59

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

The Boolean searches used were: triangular AND Perdiz; Fresno AND Perdiz; and Guerrero
AND Perdiz. These searches covered the three most common names used by archaeologists for
triangular arrow points in the Toyah region. The relevant sections of each of the selected site forms
were read to make sure that the keywords refer to arrow point types and not other usages of these
terms (e.g., Fresno Creek). “Leon Plain” and “bone tempered” were also used in similar searches in
place of “Perdiz” but had few matches.
The keyword searches found a total of 40 matches that identify sites where both triangular arrow
points and Perdiz points have been reported (Table 2). To this number seven more Toyah sites can be
added that are known to have triangular arrow points: 41JW8 (Black 1986); 41TG91 (Creel1990);
41WM437 (Prewitt 2012; Rush 2013); 41CC131, 41CN95 (Treece et al. 1993); 41ED28 (Quigg et al.
2008:238, 243) and 41MN33 (Arnn 2012:221). Figure 12 shows the locations of these 47 sites, 23 of
which occur within the Classic Toyah area and another six in Johnson’s (1994:Figure 105) shared
cultural region (called a “Shared Area”) immediately to the north. This is a relatively small number
considering that a search for “Perdiz” alone will have over 800 matches statewide, over half of those
being inside the Classic Toyah area. Therefore roughly five percent of Classic Toyah sites are reported
to contain triangular points. The actual percentage is probably higher because triangular forms
typically make up only a small fraction of the arrow points in Classic Toyah sites and are less likely to
be reported.
Still, Toyah sites with triangular arrow points (including Fresno and Guerrero) are widely
reported across the region but most have been recorded south of the Edwards Plateau (see Figure 12).
A concentration of such sites can be seen near the Rio Grande River, with the arrow points perhaps
representing Zapata, Guerrero, or unnamed south Texas triangular forms, and the southern coastal
region where Starr and McGoin arrow points are common types (Black 1986:64). Another, looser
cluster is seen in the northern half of the Classic Toyah area and to the north in the shared cultural
area. Presumably, these triangular points are related to types commonly found in Garza and perhaps
Henrietta complexes. Importantly, the southern half of the Edwards Plateau is nearly devoid of such
sites, with the exception of Varga and two sites on the Balcones Escarpment where the site forms state
that possible Guerrero points were identified in large artifact collections (see Figure 12).
While Perdiz and triangular points do often co-occur in the northern and southern areas of the
Toyah range, how common are sites like Wilson where triangular points are the only Late Prehistoric
II (post-AD 1200) arrow point types reported? Another Texas Archeological Sites Atlas search was made
using the following keyword search criteria for archaeological sites: Fresno AND NOT “Fresno
Creek” AND NOT Perdiz AND NOT Harrell AND NOT Harrel AND NOT Washita AND NOT
Garza AND NOT Lott. The search produced 137 matches statewide with duplicates removed (see
Table 2). As with the previous search, this one was done only to get an idea of the prevalence and
geographic distribution of such sites, particularly in the Classic Toyah area. Many of these reported
Fresno points are probably unfinished notched or stemmed points. Figure 13 shows the frequency of
such reported sites using graduated colors for the counties. As might be expected, concentrations of
these sites are found in south Texas and in the Panhandle.

60

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Table 2. Archaeological sites where Fresno is the only reported Late Prehistoric II
arrow point type, based on keyword searches on the Texas Historical
Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas.
41AD9
41AN26
41BI38
41BK37
41BL355
41BR222
41BR269
41BR332
41BR405
41BS78
41BT60
41BX626
41CAS18
41CAS19
41CAS26
41CB47
41CB77
41CE25
41CF147
41CI91
41CI94
41CJ48
41CJ69
41CN67
41CS88
41CU402
41CV1598
41DA1
41DA6
41DA8
41DN81
41DN188
41DN290
41DN310
41EA17
41EP5403
41FA52

41FL2
41FL5
41FY546
41GA57
41GL65
41GL98
41GR137
41GR432
41GR722
41HC11
41HF35
41HF37
41HF38
41HF117
41HG4
41HG5
41HG64
41HG179
41HP171
41HS15
41HT4
41HX4
41HY222
41KE44
41KM123
41KR85
41KR97
41KT42
41LE1
41LE5
41LE14
41LE17
41LL311
41LL321
41LL329
41LL349
41LS12

41LS13
41LU40
41MD41
41ML42
41MO35
41MO37
41MO96
41MO245
41MV332
41MY1
41MY5
41NU64
41NU103
41NU193
41NU235
41OC6
41OC32
41OL120
41OL243
41OL289
41OL293
41PS28
41PS36
41PS302
41PS1101
41PT50
41PT112
41PT194
41PT378
41PT379
41RB15
41RB64
41RB158
41RB161
41RD69
41RN90
41RN113

61

41RW19
41SE18
41SE294
41SF47
41SF56
41SP72
41SP118
41SR325
41SS14
41SW15
41TE577
41TE588
41TV199
41TY9
41VT4
41VV161
41WB126
41WB136
41WB361A
41WB414
41WB525
41WD464
41WD589
41WM1186
41ZP99
41ZP168

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 12. Map showing sites with the co-occurrence of Perdiz and triangular arrow points. Data are based on keyword
searches in the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas.

62

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 13. Texas counties color-graduated for frequency of sites where Fresno points are the only reported Late
Prehistoric II arrow points. Data are based on keyword searches in the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas.
Within the Classic Toyah area, there is an unexpected concentration near the center in Llano
County (see Figure 13). The previous search for the co-occurrence of Perdiz and triangular points did
not come up with many sites in this area (see Figure 12). Furthermore, no other Toyah diagnostic

63

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

artifacts were recovered from these sites, so it’s possible the Fresno points might actually be Scallorn
point preforms. Interestingly, all the Llano and Gillespie County sites with only Fresno points were
recorded during the survey for Enchanted Rock State Natural Area (Assad and Potter 1979), so
perhaps this unique natural feature attracted distant peoples on pilgrimages or for other ritual
purposes.
The concentration seen in Brown County (see Figure 13) on the northern edge of the Classic
Toyah area is more expected being closer to the Southern Plains where triangular arrow points are
common (Boyd 2012:135-136). However, none of these sites have other reported Toyah material so
perhaps here too the Fresno points are actually preforms. The concentration seen in Lee County east
of the Classic Toyah area has one site in particular, 41LE5 on West Yegua Creek, that might have an
assemblage similar to Wilson and possibly of historic age. Four Fresno points were reported there in
addition to a fair amount of ceramic sherds, some with bone temper and others with sand.

Harrell/Washita Points and Wilson-style Arrow Points
As discussed in the previous section, around five percent of sites with Perdiz points in the Classic
Toyah area also report triangular points. Some of these triangular points could be preforms but some
could be finished triangular arrow points similar to those at Wilson. Such triangular points are known
from at least two Classic Toyah sites: 41TG191 in Tom Green County (Creel 1990:Figure 43) and
41LL473 in Llano County. These arrow points have concave basal edges of varying depth, straight to
slightly concave or convex lateral edges, maximum width at the base, and often oblique parallel
flaking patterns. Notably, Harrell points were also recovered from 41TG91 and 41LL473, in addition
to Perdiz points.
If there is a strong association between Harrell points and triangular arrow points in Classic
Toyah sites, that might reinforce a northern origin for the Wilson site triangular points. At 41TG91,
the Toyah component probably represents multiple occupations, especially in Area A (Creel
1990:227) where two Harrell points were recovered from the upper Toyah zone of Unit 11 (Creel
1990:98). In the unit diagonally adjacent, three triangular arrow points were recovered from roughly
the same elevation. One of these triangular points was reconstructed from two fragments and is
perhaps the one shown in the photo (Creel 1990:Figure 3A). This particular point is very similar to the
Lot 1 Wilson site triangular point in outline and flaking pattern. From this we not only get a fairly
good association between a Wilson-like arrow point and Harrell points, but it is also noteworthy that
these points appear late in the Toyah sequence at 41TG91. Further evidence of the association
between a Wilson-like triangular arrow point and Harrell points can be seen at 41LL473, a small
Toyah camp 90 km (55 miles) south of Wilson in Llano County.
Site 41LL473 is located in a canyon near the confluence of the Llano and Colorado Rivers. It was
surveyed with shovel testing by LUAS in 1995 and 1996 and has never been reported on other than
the TexSite form. In addition to the triangular point, 41LL473 also yielded a Perdiz point (Figure 14),
and a side-and basal-notched arrow point (a typical Harrell point) that the foreman had found earlier.
No aboriginal ceramics were found, and the only other Toyah tool recovered was a beveled biface

64

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

fragment. The shovel tests recovered moderate
amounts of mussel shell but only a few small
bone fragments despite apparently good
conditions for preservation. The site probably
represents a single visit, or a few nearcontemporaneous visits, because of the low
artifact density and its remote location
halfway up the side of a steep escarpment.
Therefore, it would appear that these three
point styles were used contemporaneously.
The co-occurrence of Perdiz and
Figure 14. Arrow points recovered from 41LL473.
Harrell/Washita is not unusual in Johnson’s
shared cultural area and in Boyd’s (2012:134-136) northern Toyah area, but how about the Classic
Toyah area to the south? How far do such sites extend into this area? A keyword search (Perdiz AND
Harrell OR Perdiz AND Harrel OR Perdiz AND Washita) on the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas found
26 matches (Table 3). Figure 15 visually shows that these sites extend over the northern half of the
Classic Toyah region without the bifurcated distribution seen with the co-occurrence of Perdiz and
triangular points. Sites with all these arrow point forms (Perdiz AND Harrell AND Fresno OR Perdiz
AND Harrel AND Fresno OR Perdiz AND Washita AND Fresno) have not been reported as often
with only 6 matches in the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (Table 4). They have a more restricted range
as shown in Figure 15 with 41TG91 and 41LL473 included.

Table 3. Archaeological sites reported to have both Perdiz and Harrell/Washita
arrow points, based on keyword search on the Texas Historical Commission’s
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas.
41AN35
41BS3
41BS289
41CK238
41CK254
41HW7
41HW39
41HY20
41LL473
41MT2
41MY5
41OC93
41PP81

41PT383
41RR65
41RV5
41SE16
41SF57
41SF62
41SS20
41ST87
41SV60
41TA268
41TG569
41WK48
41WK78

65

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Table 4. Archaeological sites reported to have Perdiz, Harrell/Washita, and
Fresno arrow points, based on keyword search on the Texas Historical
Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas.
41BS289
41MY5
41SF62
41SS20
41ST87
41TA268
Considering their association with Harrell points in the northern part of the Classic Toyah region,
the Wilson site arrow points likely have connections to some Southern Plains cultures where both
side-notched and unnotched triangular points are common Late Prehistoric/early historic arrow point
forms. In the 1600s, groups that formally resided in present-day Kansas and Oklahoma were moving
south into Texas (Newcomb and Campbell 1982:36). These groups included Wichita-speakers, as well
as Athabaskan-speakers, and the spread of triangular and side-notched arrow points into the northern
Toyah region might be evidence of these migrations.

Figure 15. Distribution of sites with the co-occurrence of Perdiz and triangular arrow points (left), Perdiz and
Harrell/Washita (middle), and Perdiz, triangular, and Harrell/Washita (right) based on Texas Archeological Sites Atlas
keyword searches.

66

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Interestingly, two Spanish military expeditions from New Mexico into central Texas in the 1650s
may have encountered migrants from the Southern Plains near the Wilson site (Arnn, personal
communication, 2016). In 1650, the Martin-Castillo expedition visited the Jumano people in their
lands along the Concho River in what is now Tom Green County (Kenmotsu 2001:28-29, Wade
2003:74). The Spanish, who had had contact with the Jumano since 1583, were in part motivated by
trade, while the Jumano encouraged such Spanish visits in hopes of forming an alliance against hostile
neighbors (Kenmotsu 2001:29). During their stay, the Spanish discovered freshwater pearls in the
river and, more importantly, learned for the first time about the existence of the Tejas (Hasinai
Caddo), a powerful and populous nation in east Texas that, along with the Jumano, was part of the
Tejas Alliance (Arnn 2012:135). In an attempt to make contact with the Tejas, members of the
Martin-Castillo expedition possibly in company with some Jumanos continued eastwards and
southeastwards, a route that would have taken them through the lower San Saba River drainage area
and through lands belonging to three nations: the Cuitoa, the Excanxaque and the Ayjado (Wade
2003:74, Arnn 2012:91-92). After reaching the edge of the Tejas territory, the expedition turned back
without actually visiting any Tejas settlements, although they did meet a Tejas captain sent to learn
the Spanish intentions (Wade 2003:74).
Four years later, another expedition led by Diego de Guadalajara visited the Jumano homeland
to trade and collect freshwater pearls, and perhaps to make contact with the Tejas nation, who could
potentially benefit Spanish interests in the region (Arnn 2012:92). After reaching the Concho River,
the Spanish learned that the Jumanos were now at war with the three groups to their east, the Cuitoa,
Excanxaque, and Ayjado, who blocked the direct route to the Tejas. Guadalajara sent a detachment
of soldiers with some Jumano 125 km east of the Jumano lands, where they attacked a Cuitoa
rancheria (Wade 2003:74). This rancheria was probably located somewhere in what is now eastern
McCulloch or western San Saba County. After a day-long battle, the Spanish were forced to retreat
back to the Jumano when learning that the Cuitoa would soon to be reinforced by their allies,
the Excanxaque and the Ayjado, but they still managed to take over 200 Cuitoa captives and many
bison, deer and elk hides (Wade 2003:74). Arnn (2012:92) points out that the large number of Cuitoa
prisoners probably means they represented something larger than a band-sized social unit, and the
large number of hides must indicate a thriving trade in that commodity. Also it is clear from the
hostility between them and the Jumano that these three nations were not part of the Tejas Alliance.
The connection of the Cuitoa to the Southern Plains rests on their association with the
Excanxaque (also spelled Escanjaque and Excanjaque), who were first encountered in northwestern
Oklahoma by the 1601 Oñate expedition (Craddock and Polt 2013; Newcomb and Campbell
1982:30). Oñate’s official report and the testimony of his soldiers state that the word “Excanxaque”
was a peace greeting (Newcomb and Campbell 1982:30) and testimony from Miguel, an Excanxaque
captive, indicated that these people actually called themselves “Aguacane” (Newcomb and Campbell
1982:36). Economically, they were similar to the Apaches, at the time living mainly by hunting bison
and possibly practicing some agriculture, but unlike the Apaches they resided in unusually large
settlements of 4,000 to 6,000 inhabitants, at least at the time of year (summer) of their encounter with
Oñate. Campbell and Newcomb (1982:37) suggest that the Aguacane were Wichita speakers based on
the names of their settlements given by Miguel’s testimony. Archaeologically, the Wheeler phase of

67

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

western Kansas and Oklahoma is believed to represent in part the Aguacane/Excanxaque (Vehik
2002:40).
Campbell and Newcomb (1984) had strong reservations that the Cuitoa ever existed, noting that
their only mention is found in Fray Alonso Posada’s 1686 Report, which also happens to be the only
Spanish document that specifically references the Martin-Castillo and Guadalajara expeditions.
Posada’s report also includes a description of the earlier Oñate expedition, where he substitutes the
Ayjado for Excanxaque, and mentions the latter only in connection with the two 1650s expeditions.
Posada, who was writing his report from southern Mexico, must have been receiving poor or
misleading information on these expeditions (Newcomb and Campbell 1982). Campbell and
Newcomb considered the Ayjado also suspect—the term in Spanish (“ahijado”) means “adopted” and
apparently used only to designate individual captives, not social groups, in the original Oñate
documents.
Newcomb (1993:11-12) doubted any Spanish expedition ever reached central Texas during these
years. However, Wade (2003:74-77) does present other evidence of Spanish expeditions into central
Texas in the 1650s besides Posada, including statements by the Jumano leader, Juan Sabeata, and
legal testimony given by two participants of these expeditions, Christoval de Anaya and Juan
Dominguez Mendoza. Wade (2003:218) also suggests that the original documents concerning these
expeditions may have been lost during the 1680 Pueblo Revolt. It is possible the 1654 Martin-Castillo
expedition did initiate an attack on an aboriginal group east of the Jumano, but the participants may
have been uncertain of their identity or the correct information never reached Posada. Cuitoa might
be the actual name of these people since, unlike Excanxaque and Ayhado, this name doesn’t occur in
the Oñate documents. Only 30 years after the Martin-Castillo expedition, another Spanish expedition
led by Mendoza and Fr. Nicolas Lopez must have traveled through western parts of the Cuitoa
territory, yet accounts of this expedition make no mention of these people or their allies, the
Excanxaque or Ayjado (Wade 2003:113, Figure 4.4). This is particularly strange because the accounts
do name 55 other groups who either traveled with or were expected to meet up with the expedition
(Wade 2003:115-116). The Cuitoa and their allies either moved away from their former territory or
suffered a catastrophic population decline.
A more secure dating of the Late Component is needed before we can consider the Cuitoa or their
allies as having anything to do with the Wilson site Late Component. Although the Cuitoa may not
be from the same area as the Aguacane/Excanxaque, the Late Component lithic assemblage is similar
to that of the Wheeler phase but the ceramics differ in tempering agent and surface treatment (Baugh
1986). Any newcomers would have had to make adjustments to their ceramic technology considering
the different environments, but it seems more likely they would have obtained such vessels from
nearby Toyah groups. Some Aguacane groups did eventually move southwards into Texas and
possibly were known in latter historic times as the Tawakonis or Yscanis, or possibly the Yojuanes
(Newcomb and Campbell 1982:38). Their movements kept them well east and north of the San Saba
River drainage, probably to keep a safe distance from the Apache, who were moving south as well
(Newcomb 1993).

68

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

The Apache are another candidate for non-Toyah people who may have been responsible for the
Late Component artifacts. In 1691, Fray Francisco Casañas listed 17 native groups that were
considered enemies of the Hasinai, 14 or 15 of which lived to the west of the Caddo. Four of these
were Apache groups: Apache, Sadammo, Caaucozi, and Mani, and one was Tonkawa (Tanquaay).
All being enemies of the Tejas Alliance as well as being newcomers from the Southern Plains, they
would not have used Perdiz points but instead almost certainly tipped their arrows with triangular or
side-notched points.
During most of the eighteenth century, the Spanish frequently reported Apache groups
specifically along the San Saba River area. In 1723, a Spanish punitive expedition attacked an Apache
rancheria of 200 warriors 100 leagues north of San Antonio, which may have placed it on the San Saba
River (Wade 2003:171). Nine years later, Colonial Governor Bustillo led an attack on a large rancheria
on the San Saba River of 800 warriors belonging to at least three Apache nations: Apaches, Ypandi
(Pelones) and Yxandi (Wade 2003:173-175). This the first Spanish reference to the Lipan (Ypandi)
(Wade 2003:162). A third group present, the Chenti, were possibly Tejas because of the similarity to
Cenis, the French term for the Hasinai Caddo (Minor 2009:33). By this time the Jumanos had allied
themselves with their longtime enemy, the Apache, although no Jumanos were in the rancheria when
it was attacked (Wade 2003:173). If the Late Component represents an Apache group, perhaps the
bone-tempered pot was acquired from their Jumano allies. The San Saba River drainage remained one
of the favored hunting grounds of Apache groups until late in the eighteenth century (Wade
2003:215).

Concluding Remarks
If we accept the luminescence results, the Wilson site Late Component represents an early Late
Prehistoric II socio-cultural group that used triangular unnotched arrow points and not Perdiz points.
This might have been before the establishment of the Toyah/Tejas social field when local people were
just starting to adopt the Southern Plains toolkit. If this scenario is correct, then eventually the
descendants of these people, and most groups on the Edwards Plateau, switched to constrictedstemmed Perdiz points. Earlier stemmed arrow point forms to the west and north of the Toyah region,
either Deadmans (Boyd 1997:333-334) or Moran (Boyd 2012:148) are thought to be possible
precursors to the Perdiz point. Carpenter (2012:237, 260-262) sees more evidence for the Perdiz form
developing from the Bonham point, and for Toyah material culture to have first coalesced just east of
the northern Edwards Plateau before spreading westwards. Radiocarbon dates (Carpenter 2012:212)
may support this model, and the location of Wilson not especially far from this area is more reason
not to discount the early luminescence dates.
If we dismiss the luminescence dating entirely, then the Late Component could date anytime
during the Late Prehistoric II and Early historic periods. Getting a precise date is crucial if there is any
possibility of determining the identity of the social unit who briefly occupied the Wilson site. If the
component dates to the middle of the seventeenth century, we could possibly be dealing with
members of the Cuitoa (or their allies who Posada may have mistakenly referred to as Excanxaque or
Ayjado). If after 1700, then perhaps one of the Apache groups that were known to have hunted bison

69

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

along the San Saba River until late in the century. Unfortunately at this time we have no other
independent way of dating the site, but in the near future the RHX dating technique (Wilson et al.
2012) for low-fired ceramics might provide a more precise date that could lead us to the identity of the
people who left behind this unusual artifact assemblage.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The fieldwork would not have been possible without the hard-working volunteers from the Llano
Uplift who persevered through sometimes wet and cold conditions but always rock-hard soil. They
were Doris Howard (TASN), Pat Hatten, Lisa Weatherford, Chelsea Seiter-Weatherford, Jan
Huffstetler, Al Priest, Jim Taylor, Jim Wukasch, Paige Wukasch, Averi Wukasch, Corey Mullins
(TASN), Holden Mullins, David Boyd, Patti Boyd, and guests Rebecca Whitley, and Rozanna
Ruthuen. Buddy Whitley (TASN) was instrumental to the project, alerting us to the site’s existence
and acted as a go-between with the landowner in addition to assisting in the fieldwork. Of course
none of this would have happened without Anna Wilson who knew there was something
archaeologically important on her property and put up with us over many weekends.

REFERENCES
Arnn, John W.
2012
Land of the Tejas: Native American Identity and Interaction in Texas, A.D. 1300 to 1700. University
of Texas Press, Austin.
Assad, Cristi, and Daniel R. Potter
1979
An Intensive Archeological Survey of Enchanted Rock State Natural Area, Llano and Gillespie
Counties, Texas. Center for Archeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Archeological Survey Report No. 84.
Barnes, P.W.
1976
Geological Atlas of Texas: Brownwood Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Baugh, Timothy G.
1986
Culture History and Protohistoric Societies in The Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist
31(114) 167-187.
Black, Stephen L.
1986
The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site, 41JW8: A Toyah Horizon Campsite in Southern Texas.
Special Report 18. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

70

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Boyd, Douglas K.
1997
Caprock Canyonlands Archeology: A Synthesis of the Late Prehistory and History of Lake Alan Henry
and the Texas Panhandle-Plains, Vol. 2. Reports of Investigations, No. 110, Prewitt &
Associates, Inc.
2012

What Is Northern Toyah Phase? The Toyah Phenomenon on the Texas Southern Plains. In
The Toyah Phase of Central Texas, Late Prehistoric Economic and Social Processes, edited by Nancy
A. Kenmotsu and Douglas K. Boyd, pp. 128-151. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.

Carpenter, Stephen M.
2012
Style, Function, and Evolution or Perdiz Points; Context and Function; Synthesis and a
Revised Model of Toyah. In The Little Paint Site: A Classic Toyah Camp On The South Llano
River, Kimble County, Texas. Prepared by Stephen M. Carpenter, Kevin A. Miller, Charles D.
Frederick, Leslie G. Cecil,Mercedes C. Cody, and Abby Peyton. Texas Department of
Transportation Environmental Affairs Division Archeological Studies Program Scott Pletka,
Ph.D., Supervisor Archeological Studies Program Report No.148 and SWCA, Inc. SWCA
Cultural Resources Report No. 12-429
Craddock, Jerry R. and John H. R. Polt
2013
Juan de Oñate in Quivira, 1601: the "Relación cierta y verdadera" and the Valverde Interrogatory.
Cibola Project, University of California, Berkeley.
http://escholarship.org/uc/item/7162z2rp
Creel, Darrell
1990
Excavations at 41TG91, Tom Green County, 1978. Publications in Archeology, No. 38. Texas
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.
Dubreuil, Laure and Leore Grosman
2009
Ochre and Hide-Working at a Natufian Burial Place. Antiquity 83(322):935-954.
Duller, G. A. T.
2008
Luminescence Dating: Guidelines on Using Luminescence Dating in Archaeology. Swindon: English
Heritage
Feathers, James K.
2003
Use of luminescence dating in archaeology. Measurement Science and Technology 14:1493-1509.
Green, L. M. and Thomas R. Hester
1973
The Finis Frost Site: A Toyah Phase Occupation in San Saba County, Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 44:69–88.
Griffith, Glenn, Sandy Bryce, James Omernik, and Anne Rogers
2007
Ecoregions of Texas. Project report to Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.

71

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Hixson, Charles A., Daniel J. Prikryl, Glenn T. Goode, and Andrew F. Malof
2011
Archeological Test Excavations at 41SS178, LCRA San Saba River Nature Park, San Saba County,
Texas. Cultural Resource Report No. 15, Lower Colorado River Authority, Austin.
Hudgins, Joe D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55
(for 1984).
Hughes, Jack T. and Patrick S. Willey
1978
Archeology. In Archeology at MacKenzie Reservoir, edited by Jack T. Hughes and Patrick S.
Willey. Pp. 24-31. The Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist,
Report 24.
Inman, Betty J.
1997
Lithic Artifacts of the Native Americans at the Spanish Colonial Missions, Guerrero, Coahuila, Mexico.
MA Thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962
The Kyle Site, A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas. Department of
Anthropology Archaeology Series 5. The University of Texas at Austin.
Johnson, Lee, Jr.
1994
The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk: The Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16, Kimble
County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Report 38. Texas Department of
Transportation and Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Kelly, J. Charles
1947
The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:115-128.
Kelly, Robert L.
1995
The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer Lifeways. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington.
Kenmotsu, Nancy A.
2001
Seeking Friends, Avoiding Enemies: The Jumano Response to Spanish Colonization, A.D.
1580–1750. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 70:23–44.
Kenmotsu, Nancy A. and John W. Arnn
2012
The Toyah Phase and the Ethnohistorical Record: A Case for Population Aggregation. In
The Toyah Phase of Central Texas: Late Prehistoric Economic and Social Processes, edited by Nancy
A. Kenmotsu and Douglas K. Boyd, pp. 19-43. Texas A&M University Press. College
Station.

72

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Kenmotsu, Nancy A. and Douglas K. Boyd
2012
The Toyah Phase in Texas: An Introduction and Retrospective. In The Toyah Phase of Central
Texas: Late Prehistoric Economic and Social Processes, edited by Nancy A. Kenmotsu and
Douglas K. Boyd, pp. 1-18. Texas A&M University Press. College Station.
Lesser, Alexander
1961
Social Fields and the Evolution of Society. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 17:40-48.
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.
Lohse, Jon C.
1999
Lithics from San Antonio de Valero Mission: Analysis of Materials from 1979 Excavations at
the Alamo. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 70:265–279.
McBrinn, Maxine
2005
Social Identities Among Archaic Mobile Hunters and Gatherers in the American Southwest.
Archaeological Series 197, Arizona State Museum, University of Arizona, Tucson.
Minor, Nancy M.
2009
The Light Gray People: An Ethno-History of the Lipan Apaches of Texas and Northern Mexico.
University Press of America, Maryland.
Newcomb, William W.
1993
Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.
Newcomb, William W. and T. N. Campbell
1982
Southern Plains Ethnohistory: A Re-examination of the Escanjaques, Ahijados, and Cuitoas.
In Pathways to Plains Prehistory: Anthropological Perspectives of Plains Natives and Their Pasts,
edited by Don G. Wyckoff and Jack L. Hofman. Oklahoma Anthropological Society,
Memoir 3, The Cross Timbers Heritage Association, Contributions 1.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological Society 52:65-89.
1995

Distribution of Typed Projectile Points in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:83–174.

2012

Reflections on Evolving Perceptions. In The Toyah Phase of Central Texas: Late Prehistoric
Economic and Social Processes, edited by Nancy A. Kenmotsu and Douglas K. Boyd, pp. 181203. Texas A&M University Press. College Station.

Prikryl, D. Daniel, Andrew F. Malof, Charles A. Hixson, and Daniel K. Utley
2010
An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Lower Colorado River Authority’s Proposed
San Saba River Nature Park Project, San Saba County, Texas. In LCRA Annual Report of
Cultural Resources Investigations for 2010. Annual Report No. 20. Lower Colorado River
Authority, Austin.

73

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Quigg, J. Michael, and Jay Peck
1995
The Rush Site (41TG346) A Stratified Late Prehistoric Locale in Tom Green County, Texas.
Technical Report No. 816C. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.
Quigg, J. Michael, Jeffrey D. Owens, Paul M. Matchen, Grant D. Smith, Robert A. Ricklis, Mercedes
C. Cody, and Charles D. Frederick
2008
The Varga Site: A Multicomponent, Stratified Campsite in the Canyonlands of Edwards County, Texas
Vol. I. Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Department, Archeological
Studies Program, Report 110.
Reimer, Paula J., Edouard Bard, Alex Bayliss, J. Warren Beck, Paul G. Blackwell, Christopher Bronk
Ramsey, Caitlin E Buck, Hai Cheng, R. Lawrence Edwards, Michael Friedrich, Pieter M. Grootes,
Thomas P. Guilderson, Haflidi Haflidason, Irka Hajdas, Christine Hatté, Timothy J. Heaton, Dirk L
Hoffmann, Alan G Hogg, Konrad A. Hughen, K. Felix Kaiser, Bernd Kromer, Sturt W Manning, Mu
Niu, Ron W Reimer, David A. Richards, E. Marian Scott, John R. Southon, Richard A. Staff,
Christian S. M. Turney, Johannes van der Plicht
2013
IntCal13 and Marine 13 Radiocarbon Age Calibration Curves 90-50,00 Years Cal BP.
Radiocarbon 55(4):1869-1887
Rice, Pridence M.
1987
Pottery Analysis: A Sourcebook. The University of Chicago Press. Chicago and London.
Riemenschneider, Larry
1996
The Davis Hackberry Spring Site (41ST87), Sterling County, Texas. The Cache: Collected
Papers of Texas Archeology 3:13-26.
Ricklis, Robert A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence For Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter Part of
the Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek
Valley, Hays County, Texas, by Robert A. Ricklis and Michael B. Collins, pp. 207–316. Studies
in Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Rush, Haley
2013
The Rowe Valley Site (41wm437): A Study Of Toyah Period Subsistence Strategies In Central Texas.
MA Thesis, Texas State University.
Shafer, Harry J.
2006
People of the Prairie: A Possible Connection to the Davis Site Caddo. Texas Department of
Transportation and Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Sackett, James R.
1985
Style and Ethnicity in the Kalahari: A Reply to Wiessner. American Antiquity 50(1):154-159.

74

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

1990

Style and ethnicity in archaeology: the case for isochrestism, In The Uses of Style in
Archaeology, M. W. Conkey and C. A. Hastorf, Eds., pp. 32–43, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, 1990.

Schiffer, Michael B.
1986
Radiocarbon dating and the “old wood” problem: The case of the Hohokam chronology.
Journal of Archaeological Science, 13:13–30.
Speth, John D. and Khori Newlander
2012
Plains-Pueblo Interaction: A View from the “Middle.” In The Toyah Phase of Central Texas,
Late Prehistoric Economic and Social Processes, edited by Nancy A. Kenmotsu and Douglas K.
Boyd, pp. 152–180. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Talma, A. S. and J. C. Vogel
1993
A simplified Approach to Calibrating C14 Dares. Radiocarbon 35(2):317-322.
Thompson, Jennifer L., Raymond P. Mauldin, Steve A. Tomka, and Eric Oksanen
2012
Archeological Testing and Data Recovery at the Flatrock Road Site, 41KM69, Kimble County, Texas.
Center for Archaeological Research The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological
Report, No. 419. Prepared for Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of
Transportation, Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 133.
Tomka, Steve A.
1999
Historic Period Lithic Technology at Mission San Jose y San Miguel De Aguayo. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 70:241–263.
Treece, A.C., C. Lintz, W.N. Trierweiler, J.M. Quigg, and K.A. Miller
1993
Cultural Resources Investigations in the O.H. Ivie Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties,
Texas. Vol. IV Data Recovery from Ceramic Sites. Technical Report 346-IV, Austin, Texas
Mariah Associates.
Turner, Ellen S., Thomas. R. Hester, and Richard L. McReynolds
2011
Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Taylor Trade Publishing, New York.
Vehik, Susan C.
2002
Conflict, Trade, and Political Development on the Southern Plains. American Antiquity
67(1):37-64.
Wade, Mariah
2003
Native Americans of the Texas Edwards Plateau, 1582 - 1799. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Walter, Tamra L.
2004
The Archaeology of Presidio San Saba: A Preliminary Report. Historical Archaeology Vol. 38,
No. 3, Presidios of the North American Spanish Borderlands (2004), pp. 94-105.

75

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Weissner, Polly
1983
Style and Social Information in Kalahari San Projectile Points. American Antiquity 48:253–
276.
Whittaker, John C.
1994
Flintknapping: Making and Understanding Stone Tools. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Wilson, Moira A., Andrea Hamilton, Ceren Ince, Margaret A. Carter, and Christopher Hall
2012
Rehydroxylation (RHX) dating of archaeological pottery. Published 12 July 2012.DOI:
10.1098/rspa.2012.0109.
http://rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/early/2012/07/11/rspa.2012.0109
Wobst. H. Martin
1977
Stylistic Behavior and Information Exchange. In Papers for the Director: Research Essays in
Honor of James B. Griffin, edited by Charles E. Cleland. Anthropology Papers. 61:317-342.
Museum of Anthropology. University of Michigan. Ann Arbor.

APPENDIX:
LUMINESCENCE ANALYSIS OF POTTERY FROM CENTRAL TEXAS
By James K. Feathers
Luminescence Dating Laboratory
University of Washington
This report presents the results of luminescence analysis on 3 small ceramic pieces collected from
the surface of a small site on a high Pleistocene terrace of the San Saba River across the river from the
town of the same name. The samples were submitted by Charles Hixson of Kingsland, TX. Because
the samples were so small, they were combined as one sample for the purpose of luminescence
analysis, although it is not known if they came from the same original vessel. The sample (SanSaba
11.17.12.1) was given the lab number UW3087. Laboratory procedures are given in the concluding
section.

Dose Rate
The dose rate was measured on the bulk ceramics and on an associated sediment collected from
the center of the site within 15 m of the sherd locations. Dose rates were mainly determined using
alpha counting and flame photometry. The beta dose rate calculated from these measurements on the
ceramics was compared with the beta dose rate measured directly by beta counting. These were within
1-sigma error terms, 2.82±0.24 Gy/ka from beta counting, and 2.83±0.07 for alpha counting/flame
photometry. Moisture content was estimated at about 10% for the ceramic, reflecting arid conditions,
and 20% for the clay loam sediment. Table A-1 gives the radioactivity data and the dose rates.

76

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Table A-1. Radionuclide concentrations.
Sample
UW3087
sediment

238U

233Th (ppm)
(ppm)
K (%)
2.54±0.18
7.83±0.96
2.74±0.07
0.70±0.16
14.39±1.56
1.55±0.06
Alpha (Gy/ka)
Beta (Gy/ka)
Gamma (Gy/ka)
Cosmic (Gy/ka)
Total (Gy/ka)
UW3087
0.71±0.09
2.51±0.18
0.43±0.12
0.23±0.05
3.88±0.24
* Dose rate is calculated for OSL. They will be higher for TL and IRSL due to higher b-values. Also the beta dose rate
is lower than that mention in the previous paragraph due to moisture correction.

Equivalent Dose
Equivalent dose was measured for TL, OSL and IRSL as described in the appendix. The TL
plateau was relatively broad (250-320°C). There was no significant sensitivity change with heating. TL
anomalous fading was evident (g-value of about 3.4%), although not much data were available for
assessment because of the small size of the sherds.
OSL/IRSL was measured on 6 aliquots. Scatter was minimal (over-dispersion of only 12±6%).
The IRSL signal was weak, although the OSL signal was only twice as large in intensity. IRSL stems
from feldspars, which are prone to anomalous fading. A relatively large IRSL signal may suggest the
OSL signal partly stems from feldspars and therefore may fade, so a weak IRSL suggests the OSL is
dominated by quartz. The OSL b-value, which is a measure of the efficiency of alpha radiation in
producing luminescence as compared to beta and gamma radiation, is a little higher than normal for
quartz, however. As a test of the SAR procedures, a dose recovery test was performed. The recovered
dose (51.3±5.2 sß) was a little higher than the given dose (40 sß), so the OSL equivalent dose could be
a little over-estimated. Equivalent dose and b-values for TL and OSL are given in Table A-2.

Table A-2. Equivalent dose and b-value – fine grains.
Sample
UW3087

TL
2.54±0.28

Equivalent dose (Gy)
IRSL
OSL
8.95±2.26
3.88±0.24

TL
1.68±0.16

b-value (Gy µm2)
IRSL
OSL
1.53±0.21
1.00±0.09

Age
Ages for TL and OSL are given in Table A-3. Notice that they are not in agreement . The TL age
is under-estimated if anything, because the fading correction was not based on sufficient data. The
OSL age, on the other hand, is usually more reliable, but could possibly be over-estimated because the
dose recovery test over-estimated the given dose. The best estimate is somewhere between the two.
The age was also calculated using only 3% moisture for the ceramic and 10% for the sediment, but it
decrease the OSL age by only 70 years.

Table A-3. Age of UW3087.
Sample
TL
OSL

Age (ka)
0.67±0.09
1.00±0.09

% error
13.1
9.4

77

Calendar date
AD 1350 ± 90
AD 1020 ± 90

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Procedures for Thermoluminescence Analysis of Pottery
Sample Preparation—Fine Grain
The sherd is broken to expose a fresh profile. Material is drilled from the center of the crosssection, more than 2 mm from either surface, using a tungsten carbide drill tip. The material retrieved
is ground gently by an agate mortar and pestle, treated with HCl, and then settled in acetone for 2 and
20 minutes to separate the 1-8 µm fraction. This is settled onto a maximum of 72 stainless steel discs.

Glow-outs
Thermoluminescence is measured by a Daybreak reader using a 9635Q photomultiplier with a
Corning 7-59 blue filter, in N2 atmosphere at 1°C/s to 450°C. A preheat of 240°C with no hold time
precedes each measurement. Artificial irradiation is given with a 241Am alpha source and a 90Sr beta
source, the latter calibrated against a 137Cs gamma source. Discs are stored at room temperature for at
least one week after irradiation before glow out. Data are processed by Daybreak TLApplic software.

Fading Test
Several discs are used to test for anomalous fading. The natural luminescence is first measured by
heating to 450°C. The discs are then given an equal alpha irradiation and stored at room temperature
for varied times: 10 min, 2 hours, 1 day, 1 week and 8 weeks. The irradiations are staggered in time so
that all of the second glows are performed on the same day. The second glows are normalized by the
natural signal and then compared to determine any loss of signal with time (on a log scale). If the
sample shows fading and the signal versus time values can be reasonably fit to a logarithmic function,
an attempt is made to correct the age following procedures recommended by Huntley and Lamothe
(2001). The fading rate is calculated as the g-value, which is given in percent per decade, where
decade represents a power of 10.

Equivalent Dose
The equivalent dose is determined by a combination additive dose and regeneration (Aitken
1985). Additive dose involves administering incremental doses to natural material. A growth curve
plotting dose against luminescence can be extrapolated to the dose axis to estimate an equivalent dose,
but for pottery this estimate is usually inaccurate because of errors in extrapolation due to
nonlinearity. Regeneration involves zeroing natural material by heating to 450°C and then rebuilding
a growth curve with incremental doses. The problem here is sensitivity change caused by the heating.
By constructing both curves, the regeneration curve can be used to define the extrapolated area and
can be corrected for sensitivity change by comparing it with the additive dose curve. This works where
the shapes of the curves differ only in scale (i.e., the sensitivity change is independent of dose). The
curves are combined using the “Australian slide” method in a program developed by David Huntley
of Simon Fraser University (Prescott et al. 1993). The equivalent dose is taken as the horizontal
distance between the two curves after a scale adjustment for sensitivity change. Where the growth
curves are not linear, they are fit to quadratic functions. Dose increments (usually five) are determined
so that the maximum additive dose results in a signal about three times that of the natural and the
maximum regeneration dose about five times the natural. If the regeneration curve has a significant

78

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

negative intercept, which is not expected given current understanding, the additive dose intercept is
taken as the best, if not fully reliable approximation.
A plateau region is determined by calculating the equivalent dose at temperature increments
between 240° and 450°C and determining over which temperature range the values do not differ
significantly. This plateau region is compared with a similar one constructed for the b-value (alpha
efficiency), and the overlap defines the integrated range for final analysis.

Alpha Effectiveness
Alpha efficiency is determined by comparing additive dose curves using alpha and beta
irradiations. The slide program is also used in this regard, taking the scale factor (which is the ratio of
the two slopes) as the b-value (Aitken 1985).

Radioactivity
Radioactivity is measured by alpha counting in conjunction with atomic emission for 40K.
Samples for alpha counting are crushed in a mill to flour consistency, packed into plexiglass
containers with ZnS:Ag screens, and sealed for one month before counting. The pairs technique is
used to separate the U and Th decay series. For atomic emission measurements, samples are dissolved
in HF and other acids and analyzed by a Jenway flame photometer. K concentrations for each sample
are determined by bracketing between standards of known concentration. Conversion to 40K is by
natural atomic abundance. Radioactivity is also measured, as a check, by beta counting, using a Risø
low level beta GM multicounter system. About 0.5 g of crushed sample is placed on each of four
plastic sample holders. All are counted for 24 hours. The average is converted to dose rate following
Bøtter-Jensen and Mejdahl (1988) and compared with the beta dose rate calculated from the alpha
counting and flame photometer results.
Both the sherd and an associated soil sample are measured for radioactivity. Additional soil
samples are analyzed where the environment is complex, and gamma contributions determined by
gradients (after Aitken 1985: appendix H). Cosmic radiation is determined after Prescott and Hutton
(1988). Radioactivity concentrations are translated into dose rates following Guérin et al. (2011).

Moisture Contents
Water absorption values for the sherds are determined by comparing the saturated and dried
weights. For temperate climates, moisture in the pottery is taken to be 80±20 percent of total
absorption, unless otherwise indicated by the archaeologist. Again for temperate climates, soil
moisture contents are taken from typical moisture retention quantities for different textured soils
(Brady 1974: 196), unless otherwise measured. For drier climates, moisture values are determined in
consultation with the archaeologist.

79

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Procedures for Optically Stimulated or Infrared Stimulated Luminescence
of Fine-grained Pottery
Optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) and infrared stimulated luminescence (IRSL) on finegrain (1-8µm) pottery samples are carried out on single aliquots following procedures adapted from
Banerjee et al. (2001) and Roberts and Wintle (2001. Equivalent dose is determined by the singlealiquot regenerative dose (SAR) method (Murray and Wintle 2000).
The SAR method measures the natural signal and the signal from a series of regeneration doses
on a single aliquot. The method uses a small test dose to monitor and correct for sensitivity changes
brought about by preheating, irradiation or light stimulation. SAR consists of the following steps:
1) preheat, 2) measurement of natural signal (OSL or IRSL), L(1), 3) test dose, 4) cut heat,
5) measurement of test dose signal, T(1), 6) regeneration dose, 7) preheat, 8) measurement of signal
from regeneration, L(2), 9) test dose, 10) cut heat, 11) measurement of test dose signal, T(2),
12) repeat of steps 6 through 11 for various regeneration doses. A growth curve is constructed from
the L(i)/T(i) ratios and the equivalent dose is found by interpolation of L(1)/T(1). Usually a zero
regeneration dose and a repeated regeneration dose are employed to insure the procedure is working
properly. For fine-grained ceramics, a preheat of 240°C for 10s, a test dose of 3.1 Gy, and a cut heat of
200°C are currently being used, although these parameters may be modified from sample to sample.
The luminescence, L(i) and T(i), is measured on a Risø TL-DA-15 automated reader by a
succession of two stimulations: first 100 s at 60°C of IRSL (880nm diodes), and then 100s at 125°C of
OSL (470nm diodes). Detection is through 7.5mm of Hoya U340 (ultra-violet) filters. The two
stimulations are used to construct IRSL and OSL growth curves, so that two estimations of equivalent
dose are available. Anomalous fading usually involves feldspars and only feldspars are sensitive to
IRSL stimulation. The rationale for the IRSL stimulation is to remove most of the feldspar signal, so
that the subsequent OSL (post IR blue) signal is free from anomalous fading. However, feldspar is also
sensitive to blue light (470nm), and it is possible that IRSL does not remove all the feldspar signal.
Some preliminary tests in our laboratory have suggested that the OSL signal does not suffer from
fading, but this may be sample specific. The procedure is still undergoing study.
A dose recovery test is performed by first zeroing the sample by exposure to light and then
administering a known dose. The SAR protocol is then applied to see if the known dose can be
obtained.
Alpha efficiency will surely differ among IRSL, OSL and TL on fine-grained materials. It does
differ between coarse-grained feldspar and quartz (Aitken 1985). Research is currently underway in
the laboratory to determine how much b-value varies according to stimulation method. Results from
several samples from different geographic locations show that OSL b-value is less variable and centers
around 0.5. IRSL b-value is more variable and is higher than that for OSL. TL b-value tends to fall
between the OSL and IRSL values. We currently are measuring the b-value for IRSL and OSL by
giving an alpha dose to aliquots whose luminescence have been drained by exposure to light. An
equivalent dose is determined by SAR using beta irradiation, and the beta/alpha equivalent dose ratio

80

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

is taken as the b-value. A high OSL b-value is indicative that feldspars might be contributing to the
signal and thus subject to anomalous fading.

Age and Error Terms
The age and error for both OSL and TL are calculated by a laboratory constructed spreadsheet,
based on Aitken (1985). All error terms are reported at 1-sigma. The reference for ka (thousand years
before present) is 2010.

References
Aitken, M. J.
1985
Thermoluminescence Dating, Academic Press, London.
Banerjee, D., Murray, A. S., Bøtter-Jensen, L., and Lang, A.
2001
Equivalent dose estimation using a single aliquot of polymineral fine grains. Radiation
Measurements 33:73-93.
Bøtter-Jensen, L, and Mejdahl, V.
1988
Assessment of beta dose-rate using a GM multi-counter system. Nuclear Tracks and Radiation
Measurements 14:187-191.
Brady, N. C.
1974
The Nature and Properties of Soils, Macmillan, New York.
Galbraith, R. F., and Roberts, R. G.
2012
Statistical aspects of equivalent dose and error calculation and display in OSL dating: an
overview and some recommendations. Quaternary Geochronology 11:1-27
Guérin, G., Mercier, N., and Adamiec, G.
2011
Dose-rate converstion factors: update. Ancient TL 29:5-8.
Huntley, D. J., and Lamothe, M.
2001
Ubiquity of anomalous fading in K-feldspars, and measurement and correction for it in
optical dating. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences 38:1093-1106.
Murray, A. S., and Wintle, A. G.
2000
Luminescence dating of quartz using an improved single-aliquot regenerative-dose protocol.
Radiation Measurements 32:57-73.
Prescott, J. R., Huntley, D. J., and Hutton, J. T.
1993
Estimation of equivalent dose in thermoluminescence dating – the Australian slide method.
Ancient TL 11:1-5.

81

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Prescott, J. R., and Hutton, J. T.
1988
Cosmic ray and gamma ray dose dosimetry for TL and ESR. Nuclear Tracks and Radiation
Measurements 14:223-235.
Roberts, H. M., and Wintle, A. G.
2001
Equivalent dose determinations for polymineralic fine-grains using the SAR protocol:
application to a Holocene sequence of the Chinese Loess Plateau. Quaternary Science Reviews
20:859-863.
Wintle, A. G., and Murray, A. S.
2006
A review of quartz optically stimulated luminescence characteristics and their relevance in
single-aliquot regeneration dating protocols. Radiation Measurements 41:369-391.

82

THEORIES ON THE BLUE WING ROAD BURIAL (41BX34)
IN THE CONTEXT OF THE
GUTIÉRREZ-MAGEE EXPEDITION
Brandon K. Richards
Energy Renewal Partners

ABSTRACT
In 1968, the skeletal remains of an individual believed to have been involved
in the Gutiérrez-Magee expedition of 1812-1813 were exhumed south of San
Antonio. Since then, the circumstances surrounding what became known as
the “Blue Wing Road burial” have remained somewhat of a mystery. This
article introduces a new theory that posits that the burial is not directly related
to the major battles fought in the region (the Battles of Rosalis and Medina),
but more likely an incident involving a Republican detachment encountering
Royalists stationed along a well-travelled route.

INTRODUCTION
In 1968, a road grading crew stumbled across exposed human bones alongside Blue Wing Road
south of San Antonio (Figure 1). Archeologists Anne Fox and Helen Weeks of the Witte Museum
were brought in to exhume the skeletal remains, recovering a large lead ball that was lodged under the
individual’s chin, as well as seven, plain copper clothing buttons, in the process (Figure 2). Since the
isolated discovery, the circumstances surrounding the Blue Wing Road burial have remained
somewhat of a mystery. Some had speculated that the remains were those of Colonel Miguel
Menchaca (Schwarz and Thonhoff 1985:129-130; Eckhardt 1997:36), who, as the story goes, was
struck in the neck and killed during the Battle of Medina on August 18, 1813 (Schwarz and Thonhoff
1985:101; Matovina and de la Teja 2013:52; Folsom 2014:105). Although contemporary research has
provided evidence that the remains were not those of Menchaca (Munoz 2014), there have been few
published theories on the burial in the context of the historical backdrop and geographic landscape.
This article introduces new theories related to the circumstances surrounding Bexar County
archeological site 41BX34, better known as the Blue Wing Road burial.

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY
VOLUME 3:83–96

THE ONLINE PUBLICATION JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY (ISSN 2334-1874)
IS PUBLISHED BY JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG.
COPYRIGHT (C) 2017 JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 1. Blue Wing Road at the time of the burial discovery. Photo courtesy of UTSA
Center for Archaeological Research .

Figure 2. Sketch of the Blue Wing Road burial (41BX34) based on field
notes. Drawing by Matthew Richards and Brandon Richards.

84

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

SKELETAL ANALYSIS
Dr. Barbara Butler of North Texas State University analyzed the exhumed remains and presented
her findings to Dr. Anne Fox in a 1974 letter (Butler 1974). In her results summary, Dr. Butler
provided an age at death range of 22 to 28 years based on McKern and Stewart’s (1957) pubic
symphysis. A height of 5 ft 7 in was also determined using the Trotter and Gleser (1958) regression
formula. This calculation was made using the ulna, the only complete long bone, as the lower parts of
both legs were missing and the remaining leg bones fragmented due to post-mortem breakage. In
addition, she stated that the individual was male based on the robustness of the bones, the pronounced
muscle markings, the large size of the mastoid process, and the small angle of the pelvic sciatic notch.
Furthermore, it was noted that the incisors were not shovel shaped, introducing the likelihood that the
individual was of European descent or admixture (Dixon 1999:20-21).
The skeletal analysis revealed two healed bone fractures as well. The first was a Colles’ fracture,
the common result of one suffering a hard fall on outstretched hands. This injury was represented by
the deformed distal end of the right radius. Moreover, the anterior surface (palm side) was deflected
posteriorly, beginning about 4 mm from the distal end of the bone. A second healed fracture was
identified in the mid-shaft region of the right ulna. This fracture, a Parry fracture, is a common
defensive wound resulting from an arm being used to shield a blow (Larsen 2015:122-124). Although
both injuries together could have been suffered in an accident unrelated to interpersonal violence
(Knüsel and Smith 2014:102), they are nevertheless consistent with what a soldier might experience at
some point during a career.

ADDITIONAL SITE FINDINGS
One of the most significant discoveries relating to the burial was that a large lead ball, measuring
more than 30 mm (over an inch) in diameter (Figure 3) and weighing 4 ounces, was lodged just below
the right side of the individual’s chin. This suggests the individual died from wounds suffered in an
armed conflict. Because of the size of the ball, it could not have been fired from a musket (Haecker
and Mauck 1997:135; Tucker 2011:526-527). It would have to come from a grape or canister shot,
which is typically fired from a cannon at close range to be most effective (Farwell 2001:160, 367;
Bailey 2003:12; Tucker 2012:26-30).
Copper clothing buttons were also recovered from the site (Figures 4 and 5). Based on the size
and location of the buttons, it is highly probable that the individual had been wearing knee breeches, a
clothing style that was superseded by pantaloon trousers during the first few decades of the nineteenth
century (Brooke 2003:130; Moore, Jr. and Haynes 2003:93-94). The buttons were plain, which is
noteworthy because the Spanish government issued a royal decree in 1795 requiring the marking of
military buttons with identifying emblems (Fenenga et al 2012). Plain copper buttons were most
common prior to 1800; after this time, metal buttons possessing identifying marks such as stamps or
maker’s marks became more fashionable (Marcel 1994). The knee breeches and buttons suggest
41BX34 predates the Texas Revolution (1835-1836). The only earlier skirmishes between groups of

85

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

European descent known to have occurred in the San Antonio area were those events associated with
the Gutiérrez-Magee expedition of 1812-1813.

Figure 3. Four-ounce lead ball recovered at 41BX34. Photo courtesy of UTSA Center for
Archaeological Research.

Figure 4. Clothing buttons recovered at 41BX34. Photo courtesy of UTSA Center for Archaeological
Research.

86

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 5. Reverse side of clothing buttons recovered at 41BX34. Photo courtesy of UTSA Center for
Archaeological Research.

THE GUTIÉRREZ-MAGEE EXPEDITION
The Gutiérrez-Magee expedition of 1812-1813 was a filibustering expedition launched in an
attempt to free Texas from Spanish colonial rule. The filibuster was led by José Bernardo Gutiérrez de
Lara, a diplomat and revolutionary from the present-day Mexican state of Tamaulipas. While on a
mission to seek American support for his cause, he received the backing of a former US Army officer,
Augustus Magee. The two organized a force of 130 men in Natchitoches, Louisiana calling
themselves the “Republican Army of the North.” In August of 1812, the group crossed the Sabine
River into Spanish Texas.
After capturing Nacogdoches, the expedition proceeded on to La Bahía (Goliad), gaining
additional support along the way. In February of 1813, while the Spanish Royalists were laying siege
to La Bahía, Augustus Magee fell ill and died under mysterious circumstances. He was replaced by
another American, Samuel Kemper, who on March 29, 1813 led the Republican Army to its greatest
success: the defeat of the Spanish Royalist army in the Battle of Rosalis. On April 1, 1813, Spanish
Governor Manuel María de Salcedo surrendered San Antonio unconditionally. A few days after
falling to the filibusters, Salcedo and 13 Royalist officers were marched out of town and executed.
The executions particularly appalled the American contingent of the Republican Army. In
response, Kemper and over 100 American soldiers abandoned the cause and returned to the US. Over
time, others began to lack confidence in Gutiérrez and his provisional government as well.
Nevertheless, the Republicans were able to repel a Spanish invasion with a decisive victory on June
20, 1813 in the Battle of Alazán Creek (west of San Antonio). However, discontent with the new

87

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

government continued. Gutiérrez was eventually replaced in early August 1813 by José Álvarez de
Toledo y Dubois, a politician and revolutionary from Cuba. In the midst of Republican dissension
and instability, the Spanish were able to regroup and regain control of the territory by routing the
rebels on August 18, 1813 in the Battle of Medina (Thonhoff 2010a).

GEOGRAPHIC CONTEXT
To better understand 41BX34, it is important to assess the site in a geographic context. This
includes examining the site in relation to historical activity in the region. The following is a deeper
look into military engagements and historical routes in the area, for additional insight into what
circumstances may have led to a mortally wounded individual being buried at this location.

LOCAL MILITARY ENGAGEMENTS SOUTH OF SAN ANTONIO,
1812-1813
At the time of the discovery, the Bexar County archivist speculated that the Blue Wing Road
burial was associated with the Battle of Medina, one of two major battles that occurred in the general
vicinity (Fox and Weeks 1968). According to numerous sources, this battle took place south of the
Medina River in either southern Bexar or northern Atascosa County, near or along the Laredo Road
(Hatcher 1908:222-226; Schwarz and Thonhoff 1985; Fehrenbach 2000:125-126; Thonhoff 2010b;
Davis 2013; McDonald 2013:1809-1810; Folsom 2014:103-108). The engagement was primarily a
running battle, and consisted of five or more events widely separated across the landscape. These
included an initial encounter, the first engagement, a fighting retreat, the main battle, and a disorderly
retreat. Given the varying accounts, it is reasonable to assume that the main engagement, a cannon
battle, took place five or more miles south of the Medina River. This is at least seven to eight miles
south of 41BX34 (Figure 6).
A second major battle, the Battle of Rosalis (also known as the Battle of Rosales, Battle of Salado,
and the Battle of Rosillo), is said to have taken place on March 29, 1813 near the confluence of the
San Antonio River and Salado Creek. Historical accounts identify five important landscape features
associated with the battle (Cox 1990:3-5). These include the nearby La Bahía Road that the
Republican army travelled on its way from La Bahía to San Antonio; the Salado Creek crossing(s); a
western fork along the route that the Republican Army followed after crossing the creek; a ridge and
hill complex between the river and creek; and the route continuation along the unnamed road
northward (on the east bank and parallel to the San Antonio River). Based on the description, this
engagement may have occurred less than 3 mi northeast of 41BX34.

88

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 6. Approximate locations of battle sites in relation to 41BX34.

HISTORICAL ROUTES
During the Spanish colonial period, there were two major, post-1750 historical routes south of
San Antonio to Medina River crossings. The first was commonly referred to as Camino Abajo, or the
Lower Presidio Road (to Rio Grande). By 1800, the Lower Presidio Road appears to have fallen out
of use (McGraw et al 1998:15; NPS 1998:8-11) and may have merged with the Laredo Road. The
Laredo Road, the second route, linked San Antonio with Laredo. The Lower Presidio and Laredo
Roads were part of a complex transportation network (Figure 7), whose alignments shifted over time
in response to the changing needs of travelers (NPS 2011:20). Between the Medina River crossings
and San Antonio, several Laredo Road routes have been identified on historical maps as having
passed through the area at one time or another. A few even passed in the vicinity of the Blue Wing
Road burial location.

89

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

The Corpus Christi Road, depicted on the 1887 and 1897 maps of Bexar County produced by
John D. Rullman, is a particular route of note. When geographically referenced to contemporary
maps, the route passes near the west end of Blue Wing Road. Due to the age and countywide scale of
the map, the accuracy of the exact route location is questionable. However, with some minor lateral
shifting, this segment of the Corpus Christi Road (which generally paralleled known Laredo Road
routes between the Medina River and San Antonio) likely evolved from a Laredo Road route (Figure
8) into the modern alignment of South Flores Road. Incidentally, site 41BX34 was recorded several
hundred feet east of South Flores Road.

Figure 7. Regional map of historical routes .

90

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 8. Historical routes in relation to 41BX34

CONCLUDING THEORIES AND DISCUSSION
As previously mentioned, a 4-ounce lead ball was recovered from the burial and, because of the
size of the ball, it could not have been fired from a musket (Haecker and Mauck 1997:135; Tucker
2011:526-527). It would have to come from a grape or canister shot, which is typically fired from a
cannon at close range to be most effective (Farwell 2001:160, 367; Bailey 2003:12; Tucker 2012:2630). This type of less-mobile artillery was usually positioned and fired from strategic, pre-established
locations (Farwell 2001:52-54; Bailey 2003:9, 12, 15-19), a great possibility arises that an incident or
skirmish occurred in the vicinity, and along a well-travelled route. Historical maps place one of the
possible Laredo Road routes within several hundred feet of the site, further suggesting an incident
occurred in the area of the burial.

91

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Scouting parties and other military detachments were not uncommon during the Gutiérrez-Magee
expedition. Many of the early engagements between Royalist and Republican forces were initiated by
scouts and detachments (Bradley 2015:45-47). Following the siege of La Bahía, a Republican scouting
party sent ahead to San Antonio was successful in capturing 250 horses and taking 13 prisoners
(Bradley 2015:53). Prior to the Battle of Alazán, Royalist forces captured 40 horses and 9 prisoners at
a rebel outpost on Leon Creek. An additional 300 horses and 20 prisoners were captured later that
same day at another outpost, an event that left 3 Republicans dead (Marshall 2015:48). Therefore, it is
not unreasonable to assume that encounters involving exchanges of fire occurred outside of the
known, major recorded battles.
The recovered button types and their locations in situ are also of special significance. This points
toward the burial involving a Republican. Civilian volunteers (who were more likely to have worn
knee breeches and plain buttons) comprised a sizeable portion of the Republican Army, especially in
the early days when the rebellion was gaining traction (Edmondson 2000:38; McDonald 2013:18041805; Torget 2015:31).
There is still a question of the circumstances surrounding the death and burial. The Battle of
Medina is believed to have been fought on or along the Laredo Road, but several miles south of
41BX34. Less than 100 men out of the Republican force of about 1,500 were able to escape alive
(McDonald 2013:1809). The bodies of the fallen were left for 9 years before being collected and given
a proper burial under an oak tree on the battlefield (Thonhoff 2010b). Numerous accounts of the battle
noted the difficulty in travelling across the terrain (Schwarz and Thonhoff 1985; Thonhoff 2010b;
Folsom 2014:104; Bradley 2015:86) and, for this reason, it is not likely that an individual struck in the
neck with a canister shot could travel (even if carried) northward to 41BX34 without being overtaken
by the pursuit of Spanish cavalry. Moreover, it is not plausible for there to have been Royalist artillery
positioned that far north ahead of the initial encounter location for the wound to have been inflicted in
the immediate vicinity.
This leaves the Battle of Rosalis as the only other known major clash in the region south of San
Antonio between the Spanish Royalist forces and the rebel Republican Army of the North. The
Republicans lost 6 men in the battle and claimed victory. However, because of the geographic
positioning of the battle site (on a ridge a few miles away from 41BX34 and across the San Antonio
River), it seems unlikely that the Blue Wing Road burial is directly associated with this battle.
Nevertheless, the possibility exists that a Republican detachment could have been sent across the river
to scout an alternate route north to Mission Espada (Figure 9). According to accounts, the
Republicans had planned to camp at Mission Espada when flankers discovered the Royalist Army
setting an ambush (Cox 1990:3-5; Thonhoff 2010c.). These facts lead to the development of a new
hypothesis regarding the Blue Wing Road burial. A Republican detachment likely encountered
Royalists stationed along the route to Mission Espada, with an ensuing skirmish resulting in the death
of the soldier whose remains were exhumed at 41BX34. The act of digging a grave is time consuming
and would keep a soldier off his guard. Ample time and a relative sense of security are important
variables that allow for the burial of a fallen soldier. This needed time and security were available in
the wake of the Battle of Rosalis when the Republicans established control of the region.

92

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 9. Historical routes in relation to 41BX34 and a plausible detachment route to Mission Espada.

REFERENCES CITED
Bailey, J.B.A., ed
2003
Field Artillery and Firepower. The Military Press, Oxford, England.
Bradley, E.
2015
We Never Retreat: Filibustering Expeditions into Spanish Texas 1812-1822. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station, Texas.
Brooke, I.
2003
Illustrated Handbook of Western European Costume, Thirteenth to Mid-nineteenth Century. Dover
Publications, Mineola, New York.

93

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Butler, B.
1974
Letter to Anne A. Fox reporting the results skeletal analysis of Blue Wing Road burial,
January 18. On file at the Center for Archeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Cox, I.W.
1990
Field Survey and Archival Research for the Rosillo Creek Battleground Area, Southeast San Antonio,
Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, the University of San Antonio. Archaeological
Survey Report, No. 177.
Davis, V.T.
2013
“Remember the Battle of Medina,” San Antonio Express News, August 17, 2013.
Dixon, E.J.
1999
Bones, Boats, and Bison: Archeology and the First Colonization of Western North America. University
of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Eckhardt, C.F.
1997
Texas Tales Your Teacher Never Told You. Taylor Trade Publishing, Lanham, Maryland
Edmondson, J.R.
2000
The Alamo Story: From Early History to Current Conflicts. Republic of Texas Press, Plano, Texas.
Farwell, B.
2001
The Encyclopedia of Nineteenth Century Land Warfare: An Illustrated View. W.W. Norton and
Company, New York, New York.
Fehrenbach, T.R.
2000
Lone Star: A History of Texas and the Texans. Da Capo Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Fenenga, G., D.G. Foster, J.W. Foster, L.C. Pollack, and B.A. Crane
2012
A Military Button from Baja California. California Fire Archaeology Program Resource.
Folsom, B.
2014
Joaquín de Arredondo in Texas and Northeastern New Spain, 1811-1821. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation. University of North Texas, Denton, Texas.
Fox, A. and H. Weeks
1968
Site Record Form for 41BX34, in the Texas Historical Commission’s Archeological Sites Atlas.
Haecker, C.M. and J.G. Mauck
1997
On the Prairie of Palo Alto: Historical Archaeology of the U.S. Mexican War Battlefield. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station, Texas.

94

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Hatcher, M.A., trans.
1908
“Joaquin de Arredondo’s Report of the Battle of Medina, August 18, 1813.” Quarterly of the
Texas State Historical Association, Volume 11 (January): 220-236.
Knüsel, C and M.J. Smith, eds.
2014
The Routledge Handbook of the Bioarchaeology of Human Conflict. Routledge, New York, New
York.
Larsen, C.S.
2015
Bioarchaeology: Interpreting Behavior from the Human Skeleton. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, England.
Marcel, S.E.
1994
Buttoning Down the Past: A Look at Buttons as Indicators of Chronology and Material Culture.
University of Tennessee Honors Thesis Projects, Knoxville, Tennessee.
Marshall, R.P.
2015
The Battle of the Alazán: First Texas Republic Victorious. Southwestern Historical Quarterly
119(1): 44-57.
Matovina, T. and J. de la Teja, eds.
2013
Recollections of a Tejano Life: Antonio Menchaca in Texas History. University of Texas Press,
Austin, Texas.
McDonald, D.R.
2013
José Antonio Navarro: In search of the American Dream in Nineteenth-Century Texas. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station, Texas.
McGraw, A.J., J.W. Clark, Jr., and E.A. Robbins, eds.
1998
A Texas Legacy: The Old San Antonio Road and the Caminos Reales, a Tricentennial History, 16911991. Second printing. Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
Austin, Texas.
McKern, T.W. and T.D. Stewart
1957
Skeletal Age Changes in Young American Males. Quartermaster Research and Development
Command Technical Report, EP-45, Natick, Massachusetts.
Moore, R.J., Jr. and M. Haynes
2003
Lewis & Clark – Tailor Made, Trail Worn: Army Life, Clothing, and Weapons of the Corp of
Discovery. Faircountry Press, Helena, Montana.
Munoz, C.
2014
“A Probable Casualty of the First Texas Revolution, the Gutierrez-Magee Expedition of
1928-1813.” Presented at the Southern Texas Archeological Association Quarterly Meeting,
San Antonio, Texas, July 26.

95

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

National Park Service (NPS)
1998
National Historic Trail Feasibility Study and Environmental Assessment: El Camino Real de
los Tejas, Texas and Louisiana. Document on file at National Trails-Intermountain Office.
Santa Fe, New Mexico.
2011

El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail Final Comprehensive Management
Plan/Environmental Assessment, Louisiana and Texas. Document on file at National TrailsIntermountain Office. Santa Fe, New Mexico.

Schwarz, T., and R.H. Thonhoff
1985
Forgotten Battlefield of the First Texas Revolution: The Battle of Medina, August 18, 1813. Eakin
Press, Austin, Texas.
Thonhoff, R.H.
2010a Gutierrez-Magee Expedition. Handbook of Texas Online
(http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/qyg01), accessed February 05, 2016.
Published by the Texas State Historical Association.
2010b

Battle of Medina. Handbook of Texas Online.
(http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/qfmo1), accessed February 05, 2016.
Published by the Texas State Historical Association.

2010c

Battle of Rosillo. Handbook of Texas Online
(http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/qfr02), accessed February 05, 2016.
Published by the Texas State Historical Association.

Torget, A.J.
2015
Seeds of Empire: Cotton, Slavery, and the Transformation of the Texas Borderlands, 1800-1850. UNC
Press Books, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
Tucker, S.C., ed
2011
The Encyclopedia of North American Indian Wars, 1607-1890: A Political, Social and Military
History. ABC-CLIO, Santa Barbara, California.
2012

The Encyclopedia of the War of 1812: A Political, Social and Military History. ABC-CLIO, Santa
Barbara, California.

Trotter, M. and G.C. Gleser
1958
A Re-evaluation of Estimation of Stature based on Measurements of Stature taken during
Life and of Long Bones after Death. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 16(1): 79-123.

96

MILITARY DIET ON THE BORDER:
BUTCHERY ANALYSIS AT FORT BROWN (41CF96)
CAMERON COUNTY, TEXAS
Crystal A. Dozier
Department of Anthropology
Texas A&M University

ABSTRACT
Archaeological investigations at Fort Brown (41CF96) have provided a wealth
of information about military life in south Texas. This re-analysis of the faunal
material recovered by the Archaeological Research Laboratory’s survey efforts
in 1988 investigates butchering patterns found at the site. While evidence for
modern European American cuts are present, processing of beef os coxae and
sacrum are inconsistent with current European American butchery practices.
The assemblage is dominated by inexpensive cuts of meat that would have
allowed for easy cooking within stews or soups. The butchery patterns seen at
Fort Brown are compared to early twentieth century military standards as well
as local, and particularly Mexican, influences on Fort Brown foodways.

INTRODUCTION
Fort Brown is located on the Rio Grande in Cameron County, Texas, between the twin cities of
Brownsville, Texas and Matamoros, Tamaulipas, Mexico. Fort Brown was founded in 1846 and was
occupied by various companies of the US Army from 1865 to 1906 and again from 1914 to 1944. The
city of Brownsville was the civilian support for Fort Brown and has supported a diverse population of
Tejano, Mexican, and European American peoples since its founding concurrent with Fort Brown.
The Fort was temporarily relinquished to the Department of the Interior as an experimental garden
for spineless varieties of cacti in 1906 after the “Brownsville Incident”, when a white bartender was
shot and the African American regiment stationed at Fort Brown were falsely accused, resulting in the
dishonorable discharge of 167 enlisted men (Christian 1989). With the U.S. entrance into World War
I looming and tensions with Mexico mounting, in 1914 the Fort was reinstated for military use by the
Department of War; by 1916, 10 different companies of infantry and cavalry were garrisoned at Fort
Brown. Hurricanes in 1919 and 1930 caused massive destruction and reconstruction in both Fort
Brown and Brownsville. The Fort was deactivated in 1945, after which the Army deeded and sold the
Fort grounds to the City of Brownsville and Texas Southmost College (Marcum 1964; Sides 1942).
A considerable amount has been published on the military movements and occupations of Fort
Brown (Davenport 2010; Marcum 1964; Sides 1942), yet relatively little has been published about the

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY
VOLUME 3:97–116

THE ONLINE PUBLICATION JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY (ISSN 2334-1874)
IS PUBLISHED BY JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG.
COPYRIGHT (C) 2017 JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

lived experience of the individuals on this true border post. Two primary histories highlight the Fort
and its military activities, but no mention is made of how rations were prepared or distributed.
Within historical archaeology, faunal analysis has been utilized in efforts to talk about meat
consumption, diet breadth, ethnic backgrounds, and class divisions. In these approaches, diet reflects
the positionality of the consumers (Reitz 1987; Huelsbeck 1991); therefore, differences in ethnic
identity, class, and wealth are expected to be reflected in dietary choices. Zooarchaeological
methodologies through the past several decades have developed in complexity to address questions of
how meat consumption reflects social identities and inequalities (Crabtree 1985, 1990; Jolley 1983;
Landon 2005, 2009). Recent studies have accessed how diet breadth and butchering patterns differed
between indigenous and immigrant populations (Seetah 2006a; Seetah et al. 2014) and different ethnic
populations within cities (Gifford-Gonzalez 1991; Landon 1996). As Fort Brown and Brownsville
were home to a diverse set of military and local peoples, foodways should also reflect those influences.
To better understand how patterns of meat preparation and consumption reflect upon social
aspects (Dawdy 2010) of Fort Brown life the zooarchaeological evidence of butchering at Fort Brown
is analyzed, with attention to the cuts of meat, especially beef. As no published histories relate meat
acquisition and consumption from Fort Brown, I compare the archaeological evidence to published
military guidelines for meat preparation (Deitrick 1917; Rees 1998) and consider the local, Mexicaninfluenced butchery practices in Brownsville (Chatfield 1893). I explore the butchery techniques,
dietary choices, and socio-economic implications inherent in meat consumption choices from this
unique military outpost.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
In 1988, the Texas A&M University Archeological Research Laboratory (ARL) conducted
archaeological investigations at Fort Brown as new classrooms were constructed at Texas Southmost
College. Despite a rushed excavation schedule, ARL recovered almost 14,000 artifacts though
trenching and excavation test units (Carlson et al. 1990). Brian Shaffer (1990) conducted the only
faunal investigation of the Fort Brown excavations. Shaffer analyzed over 1,500 faunal remains, and
was able to identify 12% of the vertebrate fauna to the family level. His analysis was only presented in
aggregate form and the complete record of his analysis was electronically saved on a program that no
longer exists. Shaffer’s thorough analysis identified a variety of mammals, birds, canines, and many
non-domesticated fauna species. Shaffer recorded the presence of butchery marks on individual
specimens, but he did not record the types and patterns of the marks. To better understand the
butchery patterns at Fort Brown, I analyzed a subset of what Shaffer reported and only recorded
specimens that showed evidence of butchering.
Each individual specimen from the entire faunal assemblage housed at ARL was examined for
butchering evidence, a total of a total of 132 specimens. Shaffer identified 183 butchered specimens;
he identified some butchered taxa that I did not encounter but would have likely recognized (such as
bird bones). Shaffer provided a table of excavation unit data, but none of the artifact bags I received
had the proveniences he indicated. As such, the box(es) containing the faunal remains from the

98

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

excavation units must not be housed with the rest of the zooarchaeological materials and were not
examined.
To understand the butchering patterns made at Fort Brown, Lyman’s (1977) methodology was
adopted and each of the 132 specimens showing evidence for butchering (out of the 1,500 that Shaffer
examined) were coded for faunal element, element features, side, taxa identification, and information
about the type of butchery marks. Following Lyman (1977), I made complete drawings of specimens
and their respective butchery marks for specimens identifiable to element and taxa. The full data set
can be accessed online here and the drawings of butchered elements can be accessed here. For this
analysis, identification of faunal element and taxa was extremely important; therefore, the
comparative collection at Texas A&M University was consulted, and the University of Nebraska’s
Beef and Pork Myology websites were accessed for cross-sectional views.
Zooarchaeological studies have long demonstrated the importance of distinguishing the type of
implement/tool used to create butchering marks (Bunn and Kroll 1986; Domínguez-Rodrigo et al.
2009, 2010; Greenfield 2006; Lyman 1987a; Rixson 1989; Seetah 2006b, 2006a, 2008). Butchering
marks were quite evident in this collection as many bones retained clear striations from saw teeth
and/or clean, straight edges indicative of removal with a non-teethed metal knife, such as a cleaver.
Forensic studies have shown that saw marks are regularly identifiable to type of saw (Andahl 1978),
although not to an individual saw (Freas 2010; Saville et al. 2007). Saw marks are identifiable as the
motion of the saw and the arrangement of teeth are impressed within the cutting surface (called the
kerf). Distinctions were made between hand saw (which show linear, but non-regular, marks), electric
saw (which show regular, parallel linear marks), and chop marks (where cut marks show
directionality without striations caused by teeth). The opportunities for this methodology of
distinguishing between hand and electric saws to inform upon archaeological questions are just now
being applied (Dasovich and Vollman 2017). Figure 1 showcases examples of the three types of
identification made.
Cancellous (trabecular) bone generally does not preserve saw tooth marks as well as cortical bone;
some specimens were able to be identified as sawn but some were not. Using a cleaver to hack
through vertebrae is an extremely common butchery practice (Seetah 2008), which leaves sometimes
indeterminate marks on the bone; this indeterminacy was acknowledged in the coding scheme.
Degradation of bone also hindered identification; cases where the specimen was too degraded or kerf
features were indeterminate as to the type of tool used were labeled as unknown. Inspection of the
collection revealed a variety of fresh breaks and marks consistent with recent excavation. To reduce
conflation of excavation-marks and butchery practice in the absence of microscopic analysis, small
(<1 cm) cut marks were not recorded.
As the drawings indicate, 40 specimens were sawn or hacked on opposing sides of the element,
like slices of bread, so I refer to such as slicing. I recorded the thickness of the cut for sliced specimens
using a digital caliper. Three specimens showed a false start, where an electric blade started to cut but
was removed and repositioned to make a final cut, as shown in Figure 2; the width of the false start
was measured with a digital caliper to estimate the blade’s thickness.

99

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 1. Examples of butchering marks. A. Hand saw. B. Electric/machine saw. C. Chop marks.

100

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 2. Machine sawing false starts.

101

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Following Lyman (1987b), I use historical sources (Chatfield 1893; Deitrick 1917) to compare the
butchering patterns and relative cost of different cuts of meat. Exact cuts of meat at Fort Brown are
unknown, I only made distinctions between more universal cuts. For beef, the following distinctions
were made according to what aspect of each element was present: sirloin, short loin, round, rib,
chuck, and shank. Of course, much meat can be removed from these sections without leaving the
bones, but such distinctions are still useful to understand what cuts are made.

Context, Taphonomy, and Historical Documentation
None of the identified archaeological features from the 1988 Fort Brown archaeological
excavations suggest a context or feature only associated with butchery, food preparation, or
consumption. Therefore, detailed reconstruction of individual meal types or dishes are impossible,
although general patterns in diet may be accessed. It is unclear if the faunal remains are from meal
preparation or meal consumption. With advancements in bone taphonomy to distinguish between
cooked and uncooked bone (Koon et al. 2010), it may be one day possible to determine if these
remains had been part of consumed meals. The faunal remains within this collection likely were
deposited differentially and perhaps from different periods of the Fort’s occupation.
Within the limited sample (N=132), it is possible that different butchery practices are represented,
but the resolution of the assemblage will not allow for such evaluations. Issues of differential
taphonomy and preservation are confounding variables. Because this was a salvage excavation, full
description of the site was impossible. Prior to 1988, no archaeological work or preservation had been
done at Fort Brown and it is difficult to say if some areas of the site may have been more affected by
taphonomic processes than others (Carlson et al. 1990). For the purposes of this analysis, I have
assumed that taphonomic processes have not differentially affected the assemblage.

RESULTS
Taxa
As presented in Figure 3 and Table 1, a majority of the assemblage could not be assigned to taxa;
70 specimens were assigned to either mammal (of indeterminate size), large mammal (such as horse,
cattle, or large pig), medium mammal (such as goats or deer), or small mammal (such as dogs, cats, or
smaller). Forty-two percent of the assemblage could be determined as belonging to the genus Bos.
I adhere to Shaffer’s (1990) terminology; most skeletal elements cannot be distinguished between
Bison bison (American bison) and Bos taurus (domesticated cattle), though the historicity of the site (as
well as its geography) very strongly indicates that these specimens are domesticated cattle.
Nonetheless, in this text I shall keep to the terminology of Bos in efforts for consistency with previous
publication. All taxa recorded in my sample have a minimum number of individuals (MNI) of 1;
Shaffer (1990:143) calculated an MNI of two from the assemblage in its entirety for Bos. However, due
to the diverse archaeological contexts in which elements were recovered, it is highly unlikely that a
single animal is responsible for the multitude of meals reflected in the assemblage. Very few other taxa
were observed among the butchered assemblage. Four specimens belonging to Sus scrofa (domesticated

102

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

pig) were observed, as well as a single vertebra from the genus Odocoileus (deer) and a single radius
that cannot be distinguished between Ovis (sheep) and Capra (goat).

Figure 3. Distribution of butchered taxa. N = 132.

Table 1. Butchered elements by taxa.
Taxa
Mammal
Large Mammal
Medium Mammal
Small Mammal
Bos
Sus
Odocoileus
Ovis-Capra

N
55
11
3
1
56
4
1
1
Total: 132

Element
As shown in Figure 4, a third of the specimens (n=43) in the butchered assemblage could not be
assigned to element. Ribs made up 14% of the assemblage, followed by lumbar vertebrae (10%),
elements of the os coxae (9%), and indeterminate long bones (9%). Specimens identified to Bos
(N=56) constituted the majority of the identified elements, shown in Figure 5. Twelve specimens were
identified as lumbar vertebrae, 21% of Bos elements, followed by rib elements (20%) and portions of
the os coxae (16%). Table 2 compares the elemental composition of the overall assemblage to the Bos
assemblage.

103

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 4. Assemblage by element. N= 132.

Figure 5. Elements identified as Bos. N = 56.

Table 2. Comparison of elements in whole
butchered assemblage versus Bos assemblage.
Element
Unknown
Rib
Lumbar Vertebrae
Long bone
Ox Coxae
Radius
Vertebrae
Tibia
Femur
Humerus
Sacrum
Thoracic Vertebrae
Scapula
Fibula
Ulna

N, assemblage N, Bos
43
-19
11
13
12
12
-12
9
6
5
6
1
4
4
4
4
3
2
3
3
3
2
2
2
1
-1
1
Total: 132
Total: 56
*Whole assemblage includes Bos elements. All specimens
identified as Bos were identified to element.

104

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Cuts of Meat
Within the beef assemblage, the assemblage was dominated by the traditionally cheaper cuts of
meat: the round (29%), rib (25%), and shank (23%), though more expensive cuts, the sirloin and the
short loin make up a sizeable 20%, as shown in Figure 6.

Figure 6. Identified cuts of beef. N = 52.

Type of Saw
Good preservation of kerf walls in the assemblage made for a fairly high rate of identification, as
shown in Figure 7. Electric saw marks are present on nearly half of the identified butchered bones.
Chop marks were observed in conjunction with both electric and hand saws, as well as identified by
themselves. Only 6% of the assemblage was sawn by hand, though no patterns emerged of which
elements were hand sawn versus electrically sawn.

Figure 7. Types of butchering marks. N = 132.

105

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Thickness of Cuts
Forty specimens, representing just over 30% of the assemblage, were sawn into slices by removing
both proximate and distal portions of the bone; the distribution of the thicknesses are presented in
Figure 8. The mean thickness of specimens cut on both sides was 16.6 mm, with a standard deviation
of 4.65 mm. Only one outlier was observed at 31 mm. Three false starts were observed with three
different kerf widths, which indicate a three different saws (Saville et al. 2007).

Figure 8. Thickness of sliced specimens, in mm. x̄ = 16.66, N = 40.

Patterns in Butchery
The distribution of beef skeletal cuts is presented into Figure 9. Vertebrae showed consistency in
butchery; similar to modern European American butchery practice, the vertebral elements were split
through the body medially to section the carcass into right and left halves. While the vertebral dorsal
spine was broken in a majority of the observed elements, a few examples indicate that the spine (often
referred to as the “feather bone” by butchers) was sawn off at least for the thoracic vertebrae. In
addition to cuts through center of the vertebrae, some of the vertebrae were also cut proximatedistally, often sectioning the vertebrae into two or three slices. Sacral elements were also sawn in a
similar manner, although only three specimens were recovered. Similar to the vertebrae, the sacral
elements were split medially as well as sliced.
Aspects of the os coxae show consistent patterns in butchery as well. The specimens were cut into
slices, many through the arches connecting the ischium and ilium to the acetabulum. Two specimens
were cut through the acetabulum. Patterns in the rest of the axial skeleton are elusive due to the
smaller number of observed elements. While ribs were clearly sawn into proximal and medial
sections, the lack of consistent size and biological markers make the determination if a consistent cut
is preferred difficult to ascertain. It is clear, however, that ribs were consistency cut into proximate
sections with the head of the rib and medial sections. No rib ends were observed in the assemblage.
Both observed scapulae were sawn at the neck, though one into a slice and the other as a large single
piece.

106

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Figure 9. Beef butchering patterns. Red lines indicate areas of slicing; cervical and caudal vertebrae are greyed out as
none were observed.
Although identifiable aspects of the appendicular skeleton were quite large compared to the axial
elements, butchery patterns are difficult to discern due to small sample size. Numerous appendicular
elements were reconstructed from multiple pieces that had broken apart either in-situ or through
excavation. In the forelimb, only two humeri, one ulna, and five radii were observed. The radii were
mostly cut on an angle to the bone, though one example differs. In the hind limb only eight specimens
were recovered. The femur was sawn into proximal, distal, as well as medial sections. The tibia is also
sawn along the shaft; no proximal nor distal pieces were recovered.
Extrapolations in butchery of other taxa are impossible to reconstruct with such little evidence,
though the few cuts that are present are consistent with the cuts seen in beef. The Odocoileous vertebrae
is split down the center, like the beef cuts, and as is common modern practice. The Sus os coxae
specimens are cut along the superior ramus, comparable to the beef cuts. The single Sus humerus cut
is not similar to the humeri cuts of beef, as it is very thin. The Ovis-Capra radius is also unlike the beef
assemblage, if only because no Bos distal radii were observed; the single Ovis-Capra radius had
indeterminate marks to tell what tool was used to process the bone.

107

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

DISCUSSION
Temporality
The widespread use of electric saw in the assemblage gives some idea of temporality for the
zooarchaeological assemblage from Fort Brown. The first patent for a mechanical electric saw within
the US was distributed in 1917, though the first commercially available meat saws were not produced
until 1930 (Dasovich and Vollman 2017). The city of Brownsville built an electric plant in 1908
(Davenport 2010). Consistency in the thickness of sawn slices also suggests electric saw usage, as the
electric saw allows for more control and replicability than hand sawing. Most of the archaeological
contexts from where the materials analyzed here were recovered came from outside or near the
construction zones of buildings reconstructed after the hurricanes in 1919 or 1930, thereby consistent
with a post-1917 date for much of the assemblage (Carlson et al. 1990).

Consistency and Departure from
Modern European American Butchery Techniques
With contexts within the early to mid-twentieth century, comparison of the butchery practices at
Fort Brown and modern European American butchery techniques is warranted. As Bos was the
overwhelming component, and the only taxa with sufficient recovery to comment on butchery
patterns, I shall only discuss consistency and departure of beef butchery.
Some aspects of beef butchery seen in the Fort Brown assemblage are strikingly similar to modern
butchery practices. The splitting of the carcass down the vertebral column is an extremely common
cross-cultural pattern after the slaughter and removal of the head and meatless phalanges (Seetah
2006a; Seetah et al. 2014). The slicing of lumbar vertebrae is also consistent with the creation of
prized steaks, such as the T-bone or porterhouse. The treatment of the os coxae and sacrum, however,
are not at all consistent with modern European American butchery practice.
Modern western foodways prefer lean, boneless meats; today butchers remove the os coxae
(which has been halved into right and left through the pubic symphysis and which is referred to as the
“H bone”) from the rest of the rump and do not sell cuts of meat with the bone (Yeakey 2015,
personal communication). From the Fort Brown assemblage, however, it seems that cuts of beef
containing parts of the os coxae are common; this important distinction from current European
American butchery practice is explored in terms of military and local diets, as expanded below.

Consistency and Departure from Military Diets
Food and diets are highly regulated within military environments, especially where there is
communal or group dining. While rations have changed over time (Rees 1998), meat has remained
one of the most important components of martial diets. The Department of War released a series of
manuals for Army cooks; in 1917, the manual recommends daily rations of 20 ounces of fresh beef,
which could be substituted for various other meats (Deitrick 1917). The manual outlines the

108

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

expectations for meat procurement, sanitation, and butchering. Figures 10, 11, and 12 show
butchering patterns suggested by the U.S. Army. Animal carcasses were expected to be delivered after
primary butchery; the remains were killed and cleaned, with head and phalanges removed.
Unfortunately, comparing the butchery suggested in the Army’s manual to the butchery seen at Fort
Brown is difficult as drawings and descriptions in Deitrick (1917) only concern appendicular elements,
whereas the most distinctive butchering evidence seen in this assemblage was in the axial elements.
Neither the descriptions nor the diagrams make any reference to chopping of the os coxae and sacral
elements, instead implying that the round was to be kept whole. The available published history and
available records of Fort Brown do not indicate if secondary butchery was done on camp or if the
meat was bought fully butchered from Brownsville and prepared on camp. Fort Brown maintained a
kitchen and dining mess, in addition to private officer quarters; enlisted men would have likely kept
most of their meals in the Army-regulated dining hall, while officers could have more freedom to
maintain their own dining habits.

Figure 10. Suggested forequarter cuts of beef. Manual for Army Cooks, 1917: 69.

109

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Figure 11. Suggested splitting of beef carcass. Manual for
Army Cooks, 1917: 70.

Figure 12. Suggested cuts for beef hindquarter. Manual for Army Cooks, 1917: 68.

110

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Comparison of the meat cuts may provide more interesting insight. Figure 13 shows the
preferential selection of beef cuts by the Department of War (Deitrick 1917:61), which can be
compared to Figure 6, the types of cuts seen at Fort Brown. The cuts of beef prescribed in the Army
manual are not the predominate cuts seen in the Fort Brown assemblage; there is an overwhelming
number of round cuts at Fort Brown, due to the abundance of os coxae and sacral elements. The
assemblage almost closely resembles the suggestions for roasts, excepting the preponderance of shank
(lower fore/hindlimb) cuts.

Figure 13. Suggested selection of beef cuts. Manual for Army Cooks, 1917: 65.
The manual implies that the entire animal was prepared to be used; cuts of meat and bone that
were not used for primary steaks or roasts (such as prime rib or loin) were to be used as stew meat,
which was a daily fixture of the army diet. Meat for stew is suggested to be cut into half to full inch
cubes; broiled meat is advised to be cut into slices one inch thick, but as large as desired (Deitrick
1917:132). The preponderance of sliced meat cuts at Fort Brown suggests that beef was prepared for
stews; the average thickness of the sliced bone was just under one inch (a difference of 9 mm from the
average recorded at Fort Brown). Stews were likely prepared at Fort Brown according to the
Department of War recommendations; however, the cuts of beef used in the stews were not the
recommended cuts.

Consistency and Departure from Tejano/Mexican Diets
In early twentieth century Brownsville, cattle were slaughtered and butchered at the city market
downtown. A promotional booklet from the late nineteenth century (Chatfield 1893) relates that the
city slaughter pen would change $1.00US for the primary butchery of beef, which was four times the
rate to slaughter sheep or goats. Chatfield (1893) explains that butchers worked within the city market
and were primarily of Mexican descent, and the Mexican dollar was used as the primary currency to
buy meat, which was approximately worth 65% of US currency at the time. Meat was bought per the

111

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

pound; Table 3 presents the prices that Chatfield lists. At the turn of the twentieth century, Chatfield
relates that approximately half of Brownsville’s 7,000 residents were Mexicans. The Mexican
influence is seen in the diet of past and present Brownsville residents and may have crossed into the
military diet of Fort Brown through butchered meat. The cuts of large pieces of meat, such as those
represented in the Fort Brown assemblage (note the scales for specimens in Figures 1 and 2), are often
seen in Mexican soups, such as Caldo de Res or Carne guisada; as mentioned above, stews and soups
would have been well supported by the Department of War to meet ration quotas. Meat foodways at
Fort Brown, perhaps supplied by local butchers, likely reflected local Mexican-American preparation
techniques and flavors.

Table 3. Price of various cuts of meat, from
Chatfield (1893).
Cut of Meat
Rough cut
Round steak
Beef roast
Sirloin
Porterhouse
Tenderloin
Pork Roast
Pork chop
Mutton
Pork sausage
Beef tongue
Venison

Mexican cents per pound
04
06
07
07
07
08
10
10
08
18
18-25
05

CONCLUSIONS
Butchery patterns within the Fort Brown faunal assemblage diverge from both modern European
American butchery practices and early twentieth century military guidelines in the butchery and
consumption of beef os coxae. The majority of butchery marks were made with an electric saw,
indicating that the remains are post-1917, cuts of bone (and assumedly meat) from less desirable parts
of cattle indicate frugal choices by Fort Brown cooks. The large slices of meat and bone, particularly
from non-steak bearing regions such as the os coxae and the appendicular elements, suggest the use of
stews and soups as an integral part of Fort Brown’s foodways. While interpreting food patterns across
ethnic, class, or gender divisions using zooarchaeological remains can be difficult (Crabtree 1990;
Gifford-Gonzalez 1991, 1993; Huelsbeck 1991; Reitz 1987; Reitz et al. 2006; Seetah 2006a; Seetah et
al. 2014; Twiss 2012), it is clear that there are Mexican influences on border diets.
The departure of the butchery trends at Fort Brown from published and dominant European
American patterns speak to the importance of archaeological investigation within historical contexts.
Fort Brown and Brownsville were and are truly multi-cultural places, where Tejano, Mexican,
European American, and African American influences have met, conflicted, merged, and evolved
over the years. Foodways can be useful lenses for understanding cultural differences and change in
multi-cultural spaces (Crabtree 1990; Dawdy 2010; Gifford-Gonzalez 1993; Landon 1996; Twiss

112

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

2012) and archaeological investigation can allow for narratives and understandings of peoples underrepresented within the historical record (Deetz 1996). Further archival and archaeological
investigation may be able to reveal even greater detail about the dietary choices, patterns, and sociocultural influences experienced at Fort Brown.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank the Anthropology Research Laboratory, and particularly Elanor
Sonderman, for access to the materials from Fort Brown. This work would have been impossible
without the use of the faunal comparative collections from the Department of Anthropology at Texas
A&M University; many thanks to Dr. Darryl de Ruiter for access to and assistance with these
collections. The Cushing Memorial Library provided access to some of the historical documents
utilized in this paper and individuals from the Brownsville Historical Society helped to provide
historical context. Thanks to Kelly Graf for use of the digital calipers. This paper was much improved
by the thoughtful comments of reviewers and the great editors of JTAH, of which I am very grateful;
all persisting errors are my own.

REFERENCES CIED
Andahl, R.O.
1978
The Examination of Saw Marks. Journal of the Forensic Science Society 18(1): 31–46.
Bunn, Henry T, and Ellen M Kroll
1986
Systematic Butchery by Plio/Pleistocene Hominids at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. Current
Anthropology: 431–452.
Carlson, Shawn Bonath, Joe Saunders, Frank Winchell, and Bruce Aiken
1990
Archaeological Investigations at Fort Brown (41CF96), Cameron County, Texas. Unpublished
Reports of Investigations. Archaeological Research Laboratory Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX.
Chatfield, W.H.
1893
The Twin Cities of the Border and the County of the Lower Rio Grand: Brownsville, Texas and
Matamoros, Mexico. E.P. Brandao, New Orleans.
Christian, Garna L.
1989
The Brownsville Raid’s 168th Man: The Court-Martial of Corporal Knowles. The
Southwestern Historical Quarterly 93(1): 45–59.
Crabtree, Pam J.
1985
Historic Zooarchaeology: Some Methodological Considerations. Historical Archaeology 19(1):
76–78.

113

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

1990

Zooarchaeology and Complex Societies: Some Uses of Faunal Analysis for the Study of
Trade, Social Status, and Ethnicity. Archaeological Method and Theory 2: 155–205.

Dasovich, Steve J., and Gwyneth J. Vollman
2017
Human or Machine? An Analysis of Saw Marks on Animal Bones from Two Sites in St.
Charles, MO. Society for Historical Archaeology 50th Annual Conference on Historical and
Underwater Archaeology. Fort Worth, TX.
Davenport, Elizabeth P
2010
Fort Brown. Handbook of Texas Online. Texas State Historical Association.
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/qbf07, accessed 6 June 2017.
Dawdy, Shannon Lee
2010
“A Wild Taste”: Food and Colonialism in Eighteenth- Century Louisiana. Ethnohistory 57(3):
389–414.
Deetz, James
1996
In Small Things Forgotten: The Archaeology of Early American Life. Anchor Books.
Deitrick, Leonard Lyon
1917
Manual for army cooks. War Department, Office of the Quartermaster General. Government
Printing Office, Washington.
http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uiug.30112117719663;view=1up;seq=6, accessed 6
June 2017.
Domínguez-Rodrigo, M., S. de Juana, A.B. Galán, and M. Rodríguez
2009
A new protocol to differentiate trampling marks from butchery cut marks. Journal of
Archaeological Science 36(12): 2643–2654.
Domínguez-Rodrigo, Manuel, Travis Rayne Pickering, and Henry T Bunn
2010
Configurational approach to identifying the earliest hominin butchers. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 107(49): 20929–20934.
Freas, Laurel E.
2010
Assessment of Wear-Related Features of the Kerf Wall from Saw Marks in Bone. Journal of
Forensic Sciences 55(6): 1561–1569.
Gifford-Gonzalez, Diane
1991
Bones are not enough: Analogues, knowledge, and interpretive strategies in zooarchaeology.
Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 10(3): 215–254.
1993

Gaps in zooarchaeological analyses of butchery: Is gender an issue. In From Bones to Behavior:
Ethnoarchaeological and Experimental Contributions to the Interpretation of Faunal Remains, pp.
181–200. Occasional Paper 21. Center for Archaeological Investigations, Carbondale, IL.

114

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

Greenfield, Haskel J.
2006
Slicing Cut Marks on Animal Bones: Diagnostics for Identifying Stone Tool Type and Raw
Material. Journal of Field Archaeology 31(2): 147–163.
Huelsbeck, David R.
1991
Faunal Remains and Consumer Behavior: What Is Being Measured? Historical Archaeology
25(2): 62–76.
Jolley, Robert L.
1983
North American Historic Sites Zooarchaeology. Historical Archaeology 17(2): 64–79.
Koon, H.E.C., T.P. O’Connor, and M.J. Collins
2010
Sorting the butchered from the boiled. Journal of Archaeological Science 37(1): 62–69.
Landon, David B.
1996
Feeding Colonial Boston: A Zooarchaeological Study. Historical Archaeology 30(1): i-153.
2005

Zooarchaeology and Historical Archaeology: Progress and Prospects. Journal of Archaeological
Method and Theory 12(1): 1–36.

Landon, David B.
2009
An Update on Zooarchaeology and Historical Archaeology: Progress and Prospects. In
International Handbook of Historical Archaeology, edited by David Gaimster and Teresita
Majewski, pp. 77–104. Springer, New York.
Lyman, R. Lee
1977
Analysis of Historic Faunal Remains. Historical Archaeology 11: 67–73.
1987a

Archaeofaunas and Butchery Studies: A Taphonomic Perspective. Advances in Archaeological
Method and Theory 10: 249–337.

1987b

On Zooarchaeological Measures of Socioeconomic Position and Cost-Efficient Meat
Purchases. Historical Archaeology 21(1): 58–66.

Marcum, Richard Tandy
1964
Fort Brown, Texas: History of a Border Post. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Texas
Technological College, Lubbock, Texas.
Rees, John U
1998
The Foundation of an Army is the Belly: North American Soldiers’ Food, 1756-1945.
ALHFAM Proceedings of the 1998 Conference and Annual Meeting, 21:pp. 49–64.
http://www.revwar75.com/library/rees/belly.htm, accessed 6 December 2015.

115

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG

Reitz, Elizabeth J.
1987
Vertebrate Fauna and Socioeconomic Status. In Consumer Choice in Historical Archaeology,
edited by Suzanne M. Spencer-Wood, pp. 101–119. Springer US.
Reitz, Elizabeth J., Barbara L. Ruff, and Martha A. Zierden
2006
Pigs in Charleston, South Carolina: Using Specimen Counts to Consider Status. Historical
Archaeology 40(4): 104–124.
Rixson, D
1989
Butchery evidence on animal bones. Circaea 6(1): 49–62.
Saville, P.A., S.V. Hainsworth, and G.N. Rutty
2007
Cutting crime: the analysis of the “uniqueness” of saw marks on bone. International Journal of
Legal Medicine 121(5): 349–357.
Seetah, Krish
2006a Butchery as an analytical tool: a comparative study of the Romano-British and Medieval
periods. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
2006b

The importance of cut placement and implement signatures to butchery interpretation. ICAZ
Essay Prize Submission.

2008

Modern analogy, cultural theory and experimental replication: a merging point at the cutting
edge of archaeology. World Archaeology 40(1): 135–150.

Seetah, Krish, Aleksander Pluskowski, Daniel Makowiecki, and Linas Daugnora
2014
New technology or adaptation at the frontier? Butchery as a signifier of cultural transitions in
the medieval Eastern Baltic. Archaeologia Baltica 20: 59–76.
Shaffer, Brian S.
1990
Analysis of the Faunal Remains. In Archaeological Investigations at Fort Brown (41CF96) Cameron
County, Texas, edited by Shawn Bonath Carlson, Joe Saunders, Frank Winchell, and Bruce
Aiken, pp. 135–146. Reports of Investigations No. 11. Archaeological Research Laboratory
Texas A&M University.
Sides, Joseph C.
1942
Fort Brown Historical: History of Fort Brown, Texas Border Post on the Rio Grande. The Naylor
Company, San Antonio, TX.
Twiss, Katheryn
2012
The Archaeology of Food and Social Diversity. Journal of Archaeological Research 20(4): 357–
395.
Yeakey, Bill
2015
Butcher for over 30 years. Personal Communication.

116

VOLUME 3 (2016/2017)

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY
CALL FOR PAPERS – VOLUME 4 (2018)

The Journal of Texas Archeology and History.org has been established to protect, preserve, and promote
archeology and history through public outreach, publishing, and distribution. Our signature work is a
peer-reviewed publication that promotes professional and graduate academic level research in the
fields of archeology and history regarding a geographic region centered around the State of Texas that
includes Louisiana, Arkansas, Oklahoma, New Mexico, and the northern portions of Mexico. We
call this region the “Texas Borderlands.”
The JTAH journal is an open-access online publication whose text is discoverable via Google Scholar
and other prominent search engines. It is freely available to authors and readers worldwide. It is word
searchable in common Portable Document Format (.PDF) file format and indexed to be discoverable
on the internet. We have no deadline for authors to meet; simply submit the completed manuscript to
Co-Editors-in-Chief Todd M. Ahlman at toddahlman@txstate.edu and Mary Jo Galindo at
MJGalindo@pape-dawson.com. They will begin the peer review processes upon receipt. All
submissions should follow American Antiquity style:
(http://www.saa.org/Portals/0/SAA/Publications/StyleGuide/StyleGuide_Final_813.pdf).
Upon peer review and approval by our Co-Editors-in-Chief and final preparation for publication, the
article will be published in the online journal. Additionally, articles published online will appear in
our annual volume and the print version. Volumes close on June 30 and the next volume is begun on
July 1st of each year.
The online version of the Journal is a 100% digital publication, authors are encouraged to take full
advantage of technology to enhance their article through use of features not available in traditional
publications. These enhancements include: extensive color, high-resolution photography, video clips
and embedded sound bites, 3-D interactive renderings, and hypertext links to outside content and
websites. Authors are encouraged to include separate appendixes of supporting data that will be
published in the online version and available as a stand-alone digital download.
Additionally, the JTAH.org now publishes a high-quality, full-color, print version of its annual
volume of peer reviewed research. The print publication is made available through Amazon.com at
near direct cost as a service to the research community and authors.

117

JOURNAL OF TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORY.ORG, INC.
SUITE 307, BOX 361
5114 BALCONES WOODS DRIVE
AUSTIN, TEXAS 78759

