Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

May 21, 2016
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2016-1: A Cultural Resources Background Review of the 210-Meter
Kolinek Pipeline in North-central McMullen County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during a background review of the Kolinek
Pipeline right-of-way (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Location of the Kolinek Pipeline on large topographic map.

Figure 2. Kolinek Pipeline on Cross (1969) 7.5' USGS topographic map.

Background Review
McMullen County Prehistory and History
Indian artifacts found in McMullen County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable.
Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes, and
a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness of their
spears (Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery and to hunt
with bows and arrows. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians
native to McMullen County were squeezed out by other Indian who were migrating into the area and
by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San
Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in to take their place (Leffler 1996).
“In the earliest of written accounts, no permanent Spanish settlements seem to have been established
in the area now known as McMullen County. In 1828, the land was assigned to John McMullen and
James McGloin, who contracted to settle the area with 200 Catholic immigrants. By 1835 the
Mexican government had issued perhaps fifteen grants of land in the area of present McMullen

County to colonists associated with the McMullen-McGloin project. None of these grantees actually
settled on the land assigned to them, however. By 1836, when Texas seceded from Mexico, the area
remained populated almost entirely by the Indian bands that roamed through the area”.
“When William Bollaert, an English land speculator, traveled through the area between the Nueces
and Frio rivers in 1844, for example, the only people he encountered were convicts who had escaped
from a prison in Laredo. Even after the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo definitively assigned the
Nueces Strip to Texas, outlaws and unfriendly Indians delayed development of the area for years.
By 1860, there were perhaps 100 settlers in the county. By the late 1860s and early 1870s, a number
of ranches had been established, mostly in the northern part of the county. For protection, ranchers
often grouped their dwellings together” (Leffler 1996).
Archaeological Atlas and Historic Maps Research
As of May 19, 2016 there were 672 documented archaeological sites in McMullen County. Of those,
456 are prehistoric open campsites with evidence that as a whole, open campsites in the county have
been occupied from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods. As with most of the region, many
campsites are situated on stream terraces, but there are also some in the uplands. Two-hundrednineteen sites are classified as lithic scatters, and generally these are located in the uplands and along
stream cutbanks where gravels outcrop. They also exhibit evidence of being used for the past 11,000
years. Twenty-four lithic procurement sites have been recorded in the county, as has a single
sandstone burned rock midden. Three prehistoric human burials have been documented. Historic
sites consist of local family cemeteries, with just a few burials in each, house sites and farmsteads
from as early as the 1850s, and trash scatters (Atlas 2016)
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say
what bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of McMullen County before then.
Only cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and apparent
lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods. Archaeologists have
documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites, including large open campsites that are
most commonly located along stream or river terraces with numerous campfires, where a wide
variety of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal remains are found.
Where gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient
gravels are sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or
prehistoric quarries
Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the lack
of cultural resource surveys near the PA that would have located sites, rather than the probable nonexistence of sites. In fact, the Project Area lies to the west of a large archaeological survey conducted
in anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al. 1981).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both Live
Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000 years
ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and gathering
natural food resources available in the area. In addition, archaeologists from the Center for
Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted archaeological
investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir. A number of different types of
structures were investigated, the purpose being to extract as much information as possible about

architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns during the last half of the 19th century within the
reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met
the challenges of living in a frontier area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming
of law and order, railroads, and modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
A review of the Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites indicated that there have been multiple surveys
conducted within one mile of the Kolinek Pipeline. However, as shown in Figure 2, the
archaeological sites in close proximity to the proposed Kolinek Pipeline that have been documented
during these surveys are prehistoric surficial lithic scatters with little, or no potential to further our
understanding of Texas prehistory.
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the Kolinek Pipeline passes
through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. A standard source of review is
the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs available at the Perry Castañeda
Library at the University of Texas at Austin. This source would normally prove invaluable for
researching the possibility of, and potential for, historic sites and structures to exist within one mile
of a project area. In this case, the Kolinek Pipeline appears to be in a rural area of McMullen County
that either warranted little attention, or the area was void of historic structures. The only historic map
located was a 1942 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 1:62,500' topographic map of the Franklin
Settlement (Cross) area (Perry Castañeda Library 2016), which shows no structures within in or near
the proposed Kolinek Pipeline .
Nevertheless, the lack of comprehensive historic map and aerial information, coupled with the
paucity of cultural resources surveys within the area is possibly, and perhaps probably, why no
information is available regarding the presence of historic structures, ranching or industrial activities,
or persons of historic significance to the immediate area. Technically, any structures older than 45
years are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be
considered when the pipeline right-of-way is excavated. Historic sites recorded in McMullen County
consist of local family cemeteries with just a few burials in each, house sites and farmsteads from
as early as the 1850s, and trash scatters.

Soils
As shown in Figure 4, the Kolinek Pipeline will impact Dos Rios clay (DsB) and Montell clay
(MtB). These are shallow clay loam soils that exist on convex slopes, valley floors, and interfluves.
As such, the potential for intact and potentially significant archaeological deposits to be extant is
minimal to about 17 inches below the surface (Websoil Survey 2016).

Figure 3. Soils to be dissected by the Kolinek Pipeline.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Mr. Ronnie Glenewinkel, Environmental Program Manager for Williams, has stated that the Kolinek
right-of-way is already 90 percent disturbed. In addition, based upon the findings of known
archaeological sites within the immediate area, as well as the shallow soils, and our personal
observation of the general terrain during numerous surveys, and an at best minimal potential for
significant archaeological deposits to exist in the upland soils in the area, we recommend that
construction of the Kolinek Pipeline as currently aligned be allowed to proceed as planned, with no
further archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that if any previously undiscovered
cultural resources are encountered during development of the pipeline, such finds should be
examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas 2016

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
May 19, 2016].

Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon
Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Leffler, J.
1996

McMullen County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 4, pp. 437-440.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Map
2016

Cross, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Map, 1942. Perry Castañeda Library Map
Collection (Http://www.lib.utexas.edu) [Accessed May 19, 2016].

Perry Castañeda Library
2016 Perry Castañeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed May 19, 2016].
Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2016 McMullen County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed May 18,
2016].

