4.

' CULTURAL RESOURCE AND
GEOMORPHOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
AT THE POWELL BEND II LIGNITE PROSPECT,
BASTROP COUNTY, TEXAS

Bruce A. Nightengale
S. Christopher Caran
Dan K. Utley
H. G. Wooldridge

Principal Investigator:
Bruce A. Nightengale

Texas Antiquities Committee Archeology Permit #770
Cultural Resources Report No. 1
Lower Colorado River Authority
Environmental Services Department
August 1992

ABSTRACT
An intensive cultural resources survey of a 780-acre environmental baseline study area was
conducted by Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA) staff archaeologists at the Powell Bend
II lignite prospect in Bastrop County, Texas. Investigations were conducted under authority of
Texas Antiquities Committee Archeology Permit #770 issued on March 13, 1989.
Nine new cultural resource sites were documented during the Powell Bend II study. Seven sites
within the study area are prehistoric resources and two are historic. Five prehistoric sites are
located on an upland divide and two on the Harris Creek flood terraces. Land use and erosion
have heavily altered the context of cultural material at most of the sites. Sites are generally
surface exposures with minimal soil depth. The two flood terrace sites and one upland divide
site have been somewhat disturbed by land use and erosion but may retain integrity of deposit.
For this reason, they are recommended for additional work to determine National Register of
Historic Places (NRHP) eligibility. Archival research and documentation at the two historic
sites has determined that they do not satisfy criteria for nomination to the NRHP.
The study area includes acreage previously investigated for cultural resources (Robinson 1983).
Two previously recorded historic sites within that area were reevaluated as part of the current
investigations. Archival research at one site indicates it does not satisfy criteria for nomination
to the NRHP. The other site, a historic cemetery, is protected by state statute. The site is
recommended for avoidance.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A special thanks to those who contributed to the completion of the project. Without the
competent field work accomplished by previous LCRA staff archaeologists H. G. "Woody"
Wooldridge, Herbert Eling Jr., and Raul Troxler, this report would not have been possible.
Woody's draft report provided the foundation for the final report. Professional consultants like
S. Christopher Caran and Dan K. Utley are hard to find. The expertise and knowledge they
contribute to a project is beyond measure.
Ken Launius, Ken Kohler, Don Buddecke and the crew at the mine as well as the many
individuals at LCRA involved with the Powell Bend Mine are thanked for their cooperation and
assistance.
Many thanks to Sandy MacMurtrie and Don Warren for drafting the figures and Madison Searle
for editing the report.

lii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

iii

LIST OF FIGURES

vi

LIST OF TABLES

vii

INTRODUCTION

1

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
Environmental Setting
Geology
Hydrology
Soils
Flora and Fauna
Climate
5

1
1
2
2
2
4

METHODOLOGY
Research Design

6
7

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Cultural History
Previous Investigations

7
7
10

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

14

RESULTS OF SURVEY
Prehistoric Resources
Historic Resources

14
14
17

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Evaluation of Research Design Objectives

23
25

RECOMMENDATIONS

26

REFERENCES CITED

27

iv

APPENDIX A: GEOMORPHOLOGY OF THE POWELL BEND II LIGNITE PROSPECT,
BASTROP COUNTY, TEXAS
S. Christopher Caran
35
Introduction
36
Objectives and Methods
37
Location and Environmental Setting
37
Previous Investigations
38
Geomorphology of the Powell Bend II Prospect
41
Chronological Interpretation
64
Discussion and Summary
80
References Cited
84

LIST OF FIGURES
1. Project location map with geomorphic features

sleeve

2.

Photographs of depositional environment

39

3.

Topographic profile A-A' through the Stable Upland terrain

44

4.

Stratigraphic sections exposed in backhoe trenches 6 and 7 in the Stable Upland terrain
along topographic profile A-A'
45

5.

Stratigraphic sections exposed at localities 89062101 and 89062104 in the Denuded
Bedrock Slopes terrain
49

6.

Photographs of Riparian Corridor terrain features

53

7.

Topographic profile B-B' and C-C' through the Riparian Corridor terrain

54

8.

Stratigraphic sections exposed in backhoe trenches 4 and 5 in the Riparian Corridor terrain
along topographic profiles B-B' (trench 4) and C-C' (trench 5)
55

9.

Topographic profile D-D' through the Riparian Corridor terrain

59

10. Stratigraphic sections exposed in backhoe trenches 1, 2, and 3 in the Riparian Corridor
terrain along topographic profile D-D'
60
11. Photographs of chute-channel and flood-terrace profiles in the Riparian Corridor
terrain

62

12. Topographic profile of Colorado River terraces

72

vi

LIST OF TABLES

I.

Recommendations for cultural resources in the Powell Bend II lignite prospect

2.

Geomorphic terrains of the Powell Bend II lignite prospect

3.

Chronology of landscape evolution based on mean rates of denudation and
aggradation

4.

Chronology of calcium carbonates in the soils

vii

. . . . 26
43

66-67

74

INTRODUCTION
The Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA) proposes to expand the existing Powell Bend
Lignite Mine in Bastrop County. An environmental baseline study was conducted on a 780-acre
area east and north of the current permit boundary (Figure 1). The irregularly shaped study area
is bounded by State Highway 95 on the east, Bastrop County Road 48 on the west and south
and on the north by a diagonal boundary line approximately 1.2 km south of Sayersville, Texas.
This report is the fourth in a series of cultural resource investigations at the Powell Bend lignite
prospect. The Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, contracted with
the LCRA to complete initial survey and testing (Kenmotsu 1982), a follow-up survey and
testing (Robinson 1983), and mitigative excavations at 2 prehistoric sites (Bement 1984) under
the authority of Texas Antiquities Committee Archeology Permit Nos. 252, 291, 298, 308, and
350.
The current cultural resource survey was conducted under authority of Texas Antiquities
Committee Archeology Permit #770. Field work was conducted from 20 April to 12 May, 1989
by LCRA staff archaeologists Herbert H. Eling, Raul Troxler and H. G. Wooldridge. H. G.
Wooldridge served as Principal Investigator (PI). After Wooldridge departed the LCRA in
1990, the PI position was shifted to Bruce A. Nightengale. Historical research was conducted
by historian Dan K. Utley of Austin, Texas. Geomorphological investigation was conducted
by geologist S. Christopher Caran of Austin, Texas. Reports from these consultants, as well as
the archaeological findings are included in this report. Chapters of the report were drafted by
H. G. Wooldridge. Some of these chapters were completed by Bruce A. Nightengale who also
wrote chapters of the report. Illustrations were accomplished by S. Christopher Caran, Sandy
MacMurtrie, and Don Warren. Editing was accomplished by John Williams and Bruce A.
Nightengale of the LCRA and Madison Searle of UT Austin. Erwin Roemer, LCRA staff
archaeologist, reviewed drafts of the report.
The survey complies with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (as amended) and its
implementing regulations (36 CFR 800) as well as with terms and conditions of Texas
Antiquities Committee Archeology Permit #770. Field methods and report writing comply with
standards and guidelines proposed by the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA 1987).
In February 1992, the LCRA Board of Directors voted to cancel the Powell Bend II lignite
project. The LCRA has abrogated all lease agreements with landowners in the proposed Powell
Bend II area. When the lignite seam within the existing, permitted Powell Bend mining area
is depleted, mining operations will cease and the land reclaimed.

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

Environmental Setting
The project area is located within the eastern upland margins of the Colorado River valley.
Elevation ranges from 500 ft MSL at knolltops and interfluvial divides to 390 ft MSL along

1

streambanks. Land use in the project area has been for grazing land and pasturage. Lignite
mining in the 1920s has also impacted portions of the area.

Geology
The project area is situated within the inner portions of the West Gulf Coastal Plain (Fenneman
1938) which corresponds roughly with the surface exposure of Eocene strata of the Wilcox
Group (BEG 1981). The strata dip generally to the east-southeast at approximately one to two
degrees.
From oldest to youngest, the Wilcox Group, which ranges in age from Middle Paleocene to
Early Eocene, is composed of the Hooper, Simsboro, and Calvert Bluff Formations. Within the
project area, the surface geology consists mainly of the Calvert Bluff Formation. The formation
is composed of mudstone, clay, and silt with varying amounts of sandstone, lignite, and ironstone concretions. A few isolated gravel zones occur surficially and at depth. The mudstones
are massive to thin bedded with silt and very fine grained sand laminae and are pale brown to
yellowish brown. Weathered mudstones are generally yellowish brown. The sands and
sandstones are very fine to medium grained, moderately well sorted, often crossbedded, and
lenticular. They may be yellow, brown, gray, orange, or any combination of these and may
weather to various shades of brown (Morrison-Knudsen 1982:127-10).

Hydrology
The project area lies along the eastern uplands of the Big Sandy Creek valley within the
Colorado River basin. The drainage is predominantly from east to west across the study area.
Unnamed tributaries of Harris Creek gather headwater runoff from areas on interfluvial divides
within the study area. Harris Creek, an intermittent drainage, traverses the north central portion
of the study area. Harris Creek is a left bank tributary of Dogwood Creek, an intermittent
tributary which flows west approximately 400 m north of the study area boundary. Dogwood
Creek is a left bank tributary of the generally south-flowing Big Sandy Creek; the confluence
is approximately 1 km northwest of the study area. Big Sandy Creek is a perennial tributary
of the Colorado River; the confluence is just above the Powell Bend in the river.
Soils
The following information is based on information collected by the LCRA and Soil
Conservation Service (1979). Six soil series were identified within the project area and ground
checked by LCRA and SCS personnel. The following are brief descriptions of the six mapping
units:

Axtell Series. The series is described as deep, nearly level to strongly sloping, well-drained to
moderately well-drained, loamy soils. These soils are on stream terraces and uplands. They
formed in clayey sediment interbedded in places with shale and sandstone. The native
vegetation is post oak, blackjack oak, and bunchgrass.
In a representative profile, the surface layer is brown fine sandy loam about 5 inches thick. The
upper 10 inches of the subsoil is yellowish-red, mottled clay. The lower 30 inches of the
subsoil is mottled sandy clay that is yellowish red in the upper part and light brownish gray in
2

the lower part. The underlying material, to a depth of 60 inches, is gray, mottled sandy clay
loam; and to a depth of 76 inches, it is light-gray, mottled sandy clay.
Permeability is very slow. Runoff is slow to rapid. The available water capacity is high.
Axtell series soils are represented in the project area by: Axtell fine sandy loams with 1-5%
slopes, Axtell fine sandy loams with 2-5% slopes, Axtell fine sandy barns with 5-12% slopes
eroded, and Axtell-Tabor complex with 1-8% slopes.

Crockett Series. The series has been characterized as deep, gently sloping to strongly sloping,
well-drained, loamy upland soils. They formed in alkaline marine clay, sandy clay, or shale,
interbedded with sandy material. The native vegetation is mid and tall grasses and a few
scattered elm, hackberry, and mesquite trees.
In a representative profile the surface layer is brown loam about 4 inches thick. The subsoil,
to a depth of 40 inches, is reddish-brown, light olive-brown, and light yellowish-brown, mottled
clay. The next lower layer, to a depth of 60 inches, is mottled clay loam that is pale yellow in
the upper part and olive yellow in the lower part.
Permeability is very slow. Runoff is slow to rapid. The available water capacity is high.
The Crockett Series is represented in the project area by: Crockett fine sandy loams with 1-3%
slopes, Crockett fine sandy loams with 2-5% slopes eroded, Crockett fine sandy loams with 510% slopes eroded, and Crockett fine sandy !owns with 3-8% slopes severely eroded.

Tabor Series. The series is described as deep, nearly level-sloping, moderately well-drained,
loamy upland soils. They formed in acid or alkaline clay, or sandy clay, interbedded with sandy
material. The native vegetation is bunchgrass and post oak, blackjack oak, elm, and hackberry
trees.
In a representative profile the surface layer is grayish-brown fine sandy loam 6 inches thick.
The subsurface layer is pale brown fine sandy loam nine inches thick. The subsoil, to a depth
of 38 inches, is brownish-yellow clay. The next lower layer, to a depth of 63 inches, is mottled
clay that is yellow in the upper part and lignite gray in the lower part.
Permeability is very slow. Runoff is slow to medium. The available water capacity is high.
The Tabor Series is represented on the project area by the Tabor fine sandy loam on 1-3%
slopes.

Demona Series . The series is described as deep, gently sloping, moderately well-drained, sandy
soils formed in sandy and loam material. The native vegetation is blackjack oak, post oak, and
bunchgrass.
In a representative profile the surface layer is light brownish gray loamy fine sand about five
inches thick. The next layer is very pale brown loamy fine sand 23 inches thick. The next
lower layer, to a depth of 54 inches, is dark red and red, mottled sandy clay. The next lower
layer, to a depth of 62 inches, is brownish-yellow, mottled sandy clay [SCS 1979].
3

Permeability is slow. Runoff is slow to medium. The available water capacity is medium.
These soils have a perched water table at a depth of 24 to 36 inches after heavy rain.
The Demona Series is represented in the project area by the Demona loamy fine sand.

Patilo Series. The series is described as deep, gently sloping to strongly sloping, moderately
well-drained, sandy upland soils. They formed in thick, sandy and loamy material that appears
to be reworked by wind. The native vegetation is post oak, blackjack oak and coarse
bunchgrass.
In a representative profile the upper part of the surface layer is light brownish-gray, loose fine
sand about five inches thick. The next 47 inches of the surface layer is very pale brown, loose
fine sand. The next lower layer, to a depth of 70 inches, is light gray, mottled sandy clay loam.
Permeability is moderately slow. Runoff is slow. The available water capacity is low. These
soils have a perched water table at a depth of 48 to 72 inches for short periods after heavy
rains.
The series is represented in the project area by the Patilo complex on 1-12% slopes.

Sayers Series. The series is described as deep, nearly level, excessively drained, sandy soils,
found primarily in flood plains on bottom lands. They formed in recent sandy alluvium. The
native vegetation is tall grasses, elm and cottonwood.
In a representative profile the surface layer is brown fine sandy loam about 10 inches thick.
The next lower layer, to a depth of 24 inches, is pale brown, slightly stratified loamy fine sand.
The next lower layer, to a depth of 60 inches, is pale brown fine sand.
Permeability is rapid. Runoff is slow. The available water capacity is low. These soils exhibit
a perched water table at a depth of 60 to 120 inches during spring and fall.
The Sayers Series is represented at the project area by the Sayers fine sandy loam.

Flora and Fauna
The project area lies within the Texan Biotic Province (Blair 1950). This province is described
as an ecotone between the forests of eastern Texas and the grasslands of the west. The isolated
area of loblolly pine of Bastrop County is represented in the project area by scattered stands and
individual pines. The project area is dominated by species of oak woodlands consisting of post
oak, blackjack oak with mesquite, yaupon and eastern red cedar. Grasses are considered part
of an upland tall grass prairie community dominated by little bluestem, Indiangrass and
dropseed.
Examples of fauna found and potentially present within the project area include (Horizon 1990):

White-tailed deer
Nine-banded armadillo

Brown thrasher
Painted bunting
4

Coyote
Eastern cottontail
Hispid cotton rat
Fulvous harvest mouse
Gopher
Western slender grass lizard
Racer
Fox squirrel
Raccoon
White-footed mouse
Green anole
Round skink

Lack sparrow
Western meadowlark
Mockingbird
Scissor-tailed Plains pocket
Flycatcher
Mourning dove
Bobwhite
Red-tailed hawk
Turkey vulture
Red-bellied woodpecker
Cardinal
Carolina chickadee

Climate
The following climatological data was compiled by the LCRA (1982) for the Powell Bend
project. The project area is approximately 150 miles northwest of the Gulf of Mexico; its
climate is dominated by the onshore air flow from the Gulf during much of the year. During
the winter season, the area is also influenced by the continental land mass to the north as cold
fronts and dryer air move across the area.
The climate may be classified as sub-tropical. Winters are mild, with below freezing
temperatures occurring on an average less than 15 days each year (Austin). Summer daytime
temperatures are hot, but summer nights are usually pleasant with average daily minimum
temperatures in the low 70s. The project area is affected by warm, moist air from the south
almost the entire year, although southerly surface winds reach their maximum during the
summer. As the land mass cools relative to the Gulf in the fall and winter, the resultant surface
winds decrease and shift to easterly or northerly directions. Rather strong northerly winds,
accompanied by sharp drops in temperature, occasionally occur during the winter months in
connection with cold fronts, but cold spells are usually of short duration, rarely lasting more
than four days.
The northerly flow dominates from October to February while the Gulf flow dominates between
March and September. Although there is no distinct rainy season, the greatest normal rainfall
occurs from May to August. The heaviest amounts generally occur in late spring, with a
secondary rainfall peak in September. Precipitation from April through September usually
results from thundershowers, with fairly large amounts falling within short time periods. Winter
thunderstorms and heavy rains have occurred in all months of the year but most winter
precipitation occurs as light rain. Snow is an insignificant moisture source, usually melting as
rapidly as it falls. The region may experience several seasons in succession with no measurable
snowfall. The mean annual regional temperature and precipitation at the site is approximately
69°F and 37 inches, respectively.
Thunderstorms occur most frequently during the spring and summer with associated high winds,
heavy rains and occasionally hail. During the 1977-1981 operating period, the Fayette Power
Plant (FPP) meteorological station outside of La Grange, Texas recorded a 24-hour maximum
rainfall of 5.97 inches.
5

Snow and sleet at the site average less than one inch per year. Maximum monthly and single
storm snowfall over the last 75 years is estimated to be approximately 8 inches, based on Austin
and Houston weather data.
The Austin Weather Service Office (WSO) has monitored wind speed and direction since 1926.
The surface winds are dominated by southerly flows with wind speeds averaging 9.4 miles per
hour. Wind data available from FPP (period of record:1977-1981) indicate a maximum onehour average wind speed of 29.4 miles per hour from the north on March 1, 1980. With the
exception of June and July high wind episode, all the highest wind occurrences in the region
are from the northwest through northeast.

METHODOLOGY

The project area was surveyed by three LCRA staff archaeologists walking zigzag transects at
intervals not exceeding 20 m (depending on vegetation and terrain). Fieldwork began March
13, 1989 and was completed April 27, 1989. Both color and monochrome aerial photography,
U.S.G.S. 7.5' topographic maps, and in-house produced topographic maps of 1":400' were
utilized in refining site plotting and boundaries. The 1":400' maps were artificially gridded for
better ground control over field crew location. LCRA's exploratory drilling logs were checked
for indications of buried cultural materials, soil depth and potential high-probability areas not
assessable by normal hand-probing methods.
Shovel tests have proven in the past to be a valuable addition to the normal survey methodology
in locating subsurface sites. Shovel tests were randomly conducted across the landscape during
the transect. Additional tests were placed in high-probability areas as determined by past
research. Shovel tests were also used to determine deposit depth and site boundaries while
recording sites. All shovel tests were excavated in arbitrary 20-cm levels and screened through
1/4-inch mesh hardware cloth. A backhoe was also utilized to test for buried sites in areas of
deep sand deposits of high probability areas where no material was recovered by shovel tests.
Special attention was paid to exposures such as eroded areas, cutbanks, rodent holes, and ant
hills.
Sites were recorded on standard State of Texas Archaeological Site Data Forms, sketch mapped
and photographed. All recorded sites were assigned a field number and, after completion and
submission of the Site Data Forms, were assigned a formal State site number by the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin. Since the proposed area is
privately owned, artifacts were recorded, sketched, and photographed but were not collected.

Prehistoric findings have been placed within the context of upland settlement patterns as
described in the previously cited research in Bastrop County. Historic sites were similarly
documented along with the addition of archival research and informant interviews. Local
historical societies have been active in the project area and were consulted for information
regarding historic contexts and specific sites.

6

Research Design
The Powell Bend mine lies on the Inner West Gulf Coastal Plain in the upland environment
typical of the lignite belt. The present project area includes normally dry Harris Creek, and
other smaller ephemeral tributaries of Big Sandy Creek. Big Sandy Creek parallels the project
area from 1 to 2 km to the west, eventually flowing into the Colorado River approximately 5
km to the southwest. The sandy soils typical of this region are not conducive to the
preservation of organic materials and stratigraphic integrity. The most common prehistoric site
types found to date in the upland environment are hearth fields, burned rock and lithic scatters,
and small campsites containing lithic artifacts and other camping debris buried beneath a sandy
mantle and usually in proximity to an intermittent water source (Skelton 1977, Skelton and
Freeman 1979, Kenmotsu 1982, Bement 1984).
Due to the unconsolidated nature of the matrix, a major regional research problem remains the
definition of a cultural chronology. Bastrop County has usually been described as a transitional
zone, affected by cultural influences from the better-defined Central Texas, East Texas and
Coastal Texas regions. Based on research in Fayette and Bastrop Counties, Goode (1984 a&b)
proposed that indigenous developments may have taken place during the Early Archaic Period.
These perceptions have largely resulted from the analysis of lithic artifacts that bear strong
resemblances to already defined projectile point types from the major cultural areas, but vary
from established definitions. Excavations at two Bastrop County sites seem to support these
perceptions (Ensor and Mueller-Wille 1988, Bement 1989). Another interpretation recently has
been offered by Robinson (1988), who presents evidence for prehistoric trade in Bastrop
County. A major goal of continuing research in Bastrop County is to resolve these conflicting
opinions of cultural development.
The Powell Bend Expansion Project offers a unique opportunity to continue investigations in
upland areas on the divide between minor drainages. The assumption, given the data from
Camp Swift (Skelton and Freeman 1979) and Powell Bend (Kenmotsu 1982, Bement 1984)
investigations, would be that the expansion area would contain fewer, smaller, and less
intensively occupied sites of resource-specific purpose. As will be seen, the sites recorded
during the present study appear to follow this pattern. If sufficient intact cultural deposits are
uncovered, testing of selected sites may validate or negate this premise.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Cultural History
The study area is situated along the southeastern margins of the Central Texas archaeological
region (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954; Prewitt 1981, 1985). Topographically, portions of the
region are found within the confines of the Edwards Plateau and along low-lying areas
bordering the Balcones Escarpment to the southeast. These bordering areas or margins include
the Blackland Prairies and portions of the Post Oak Savannah.
Over the past 60 years, the accumulation of data from projects in the Central Texas region has
led to a refined chronological placement of cultural change spanning approximately 10,000
7

years. Though the study area lies in a marginal area that may well have been developing an
indigenous culture (Goode 1984a), for purposes of this study the better developed Central Texas
chronology is used for lack of a yet to be developed local chronology. Although the Central
Texas chronology is considered to be in need of refinement (Johnson 1987; Black 1989), it will
nonetheless be used because it offers the only framework for chronological interpretation.
Generally, the sequence of cultural change is divided into four stages - Paleo-Indian, Archaic,
Late Prehistoric and Historic.
Prehistoric settlement in the study area should reflect adaptation different from that of the
Edwards Plateau (Moore et al. 1978). Relevant to the understanding of prehistoric settlement
in the Bastrop County/Post Oak Savannah Region is the fact that the area is located in a
different physiographic zone. The underlying geologic formations are sandstone; the soils are
mainly sandy loarns; the vegetation is post oak savannah, and the terrain is generally not as
rugged nor as hilly as the Edwards Plateau. Each of these differences must have influenced
cultural use of the landscape.
Within the last ten years, large-scale projects have focused on the lignite belt that runs along
the divide east of Big Sandy Creek (Skelton and Freeman 1979; Kenmotsu 1982; Kelly and
Roemer 1981; Brown 1983; Robinson 1983; Bement 1984; Taylor, Cox and Fox 1986; Taylor
1987). Situated in predominantly upland areas, the research has helped to elucidate some
aspects of the prehistoric settlement in the area. Research indicates that sites were used as
probable seasonal encampments for the exploitation of various resources such as game,
vegetation and lithic procurement. Temporal diagnostics are few but those found indicate
encampments throughout prehistory. Unfortunately, lack of organic preservation at sites in the
generally acidic sandy soil has left only a small percentage of the material culture for
interpretation. Robinson (1987) has suggested multiple cultural influences from the east and
southeast. For a thorough examination of the cultural history of the county, the reader is
referred to Robinson's Bastrop County Survey Report (1987). It is probable that the Post Oak
Savannah offered a different subsistence base. Only the accumulation of quality data
(stratigraphically isolated and datable assemblages) for the region will help differentiate these
patterns.

Paleo-Indian Stage, ca 12000 - 8500 BP. The Paleo-Indian stage represents the first evidence
of human settlement on the North American continent by groups of hunters and gatherers
nomadically following species of megafauna. Dates of 30,000 BP from a site in Brazil evidence
some of the earliest pre-Clovis occupations in the New World (Guidon and Delibrias 1986).
Bryant and Holloway (1985:53) have suggested that by 10,000 BP vegetation along the
southeastern edges of Central Texas began to gradually change from Late Glacial deciduous
forests to oak savannah. This was precipitated by a climatic shift from cool and moist to warm
and dry. Willey (1966) has suggested this as a big game-hunting period when subsistence was
focused on Pleistocene megafauna such as mammoth, mastodon and bison. Bison are present
(Dillehay 1974). Bonfire Shelter, a bison jump site, contains the remains of extinct bison
(Bison antiquus or Bison occidentalis) in the lower bone beds (radiocarbon dated to 10,230 ±
160 yrs. B.P.) in association with Paleo-Indian lanceolate projectile points (Dibble and Lorrain
1968). Direct association of megafauna remains and temporally diagnostic projectile points
such as Clovis, Folsom and Plainview are rare in the Central Texas region. Therefore, it is
assumed that subsistence was based primarily on hunting and gathering, a mode that continued
until European contact.
8

Archaic Stage, 8500 - 1250 BP. The Central Texas Archaic has been divided into three
segments -Early, Middle and Late. Each represents change in the patterns of subsistence and
settlement of hunter and gatherer groups utilizing the varied landscape of Central Texas. Each
segment has been subdivided into phases of varying length (Prewitt 1981,1985; Weir 1976).
Black (1989: 22-23) suggests that the patterning proposed by Prewitt and Weir cannot be
applied to all areas within Central Texas because there are different physiographic zones within
the boundary of that cultural region. Climatic change such as long and short periods of drought
during the Archaic may have been a factor influencing changes in adaptation patterns (Story
1985:28). Time-diagnostic indicators of the various phases are projectile points, bifaces and
un ifaces.
The Early Archaic (8500 - 4600 BP) represents the probable continuation of subsistence
strategies developed during the Paleo-lndian stage. Prewitt (1985) has divided the Early
Archaic into four phases: from oldest to youngest Circleville, San Geronimo, Jarrell and
Oakalla. Bryant and Holloway (1985) suggest a less mesic climate during the post-glacial
period (10,000 BP - present) with a gradual decrease in woodlands. In a synthesis of archaic
adaptations on the West Gulf Coastal Plain, Story (1985) suggests that probably as a result of
drought during the Early Archaic, low populations composed of family groups were focusing
on water and a variety of resources along the Balcones Escarpment where spring waters flowed.
Bison are present during the first part and absent during the later years (Dillehay 1974). Tools
include dart points such as Uvalde, Angostura, Golondrina, Martindale and Nolan as well as
Clear Fork and Guadalupe tools.
The Middle Archaic (4600 - 2250 BP) has been divided into four phases, from oldest to
youngest Clear Fork, Marshall Ford, Round Rock, and San Marcos (Prewitt 1985). Black
(1989) has proposed subdividing the Middle Archaic into Early (Clear Fork) and Late (Round
Rock). Climate change has been suggested by some to have influenced population and
subsistence changes (Story 1985). Paleoclimatic studies do not indicate radical changes; the
climate continues its post-glacial trend toward dry and warm (Bryant and Holloway 1985).
Bison are present during the later half (Dillehay 1974). Burned rock middens, first appearing
during the later part of the Early Archaic, continue throughout the Middle Archaic (Prewitt
1985: Weir 1976). Midden function has been attributed to acorn processing sites (Weir 1976;
Creel 1986), remnants from stone-lined hearths or earth ovens (Peter 1982: 20.4). Peter (1982)
has suggested that the availability of limestone is a determining factor in placement of burned
rock midden sites. To date, none have been documented on the Post Oak Savannah where
sandstones predominate. Time-diagnostic Central Texas dart point forms are Nolan, Travis,
Bulverde, Marshall and Pedernales. The widespread distribution of sites with Central Texas
Middle Archaic dart points has led some researchers to suggest extensive subsistence ranges
(Story 1985:42-43). On-site manufacture of the Pedernales dart point at sites on the Post Oak
Savannah (Ensor and Mueller-Wille 1988; Nightengale and Turpin 1985) indicates diffusion
and/or use of the area by Central Texas groups. Story (1985:44-45) has suggested that the
beginnings of territoriality during the Middle Archaic can be inferred from cemeteries "since
they imply that a group had frequent and repeated access to a locality".
The Late Archaic (2250-1250 BP) has been divided into three phases from earliest to latest:
Uvalde, Twin Sisters and Driftwood (Prewitt 1985). Johnson et al. (1962) had divided it into
Late and Terminal. Pollen studies suggest an "open woodland dominated by oaks with some
open grassland areas" in existence from 2400-1500 BP. By 1500 BP, it was replaced with
9

present-day oak savannah (Bryant and Holloway 1985:63). The climate continued its postglacial trend of warmer and dryer conditions. Bison are present until 2450 BP (Dillehay 1974).
Story (1985:54) suggests continued territoriality with higher population densities. Prewitt (1985)
suggests population peaks by the Terminal Archaic. Burned rock middens continue into the
Twin Sisters Phase (Black 1989:30). Temporal diagnostics are dart points such as Marcos,
Montell, Castroville, Frio, Fairland, Ensor and Darl as well as finished bifaces.
Late Prehistoric Stage, 1250 - 200 BP. The Late Prehistoric has been consistently subdivided
into the Austin and Toyah Phases but referred to as the Neo-American (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks
1954) and the Neo-Archaic (Prewitt 1985). The stage represents a significant technological
change -- the introduction of the bow and arrow and in some areas of Texas the cultivation of
crops.
During the Austin Phase (1250 - 650 BP), population declines and settlement patterns change
(Black 1989). Bison are absent (Dillehay 1974). The predominant arrow point style is the
expanding-stem Scallorn. Hunting and gathering remain the pattern of subsistence. Burned
rock middens are no longer a part of the cultural milieu.
The Toyah Phase (650-200 BP) Perdiz arrow points and beveled knives are characteristic of
plains bison hunter tool kits. Bison return to the Central Texas area at approximately the same
time as the beginning of the Toyah Phase (Dillehay 1974). Bison remains in association with
the Toyah tool kit have been documented on the Post Oak Savannah in Fayette County (Skelton
1977). Black (1989:32) has pointed out that although bison were a major food source, deer
were still the predominant and more reliable resource. During the Toyah Phase, pottery is used.
Historic, 200 BP - present. The Historic is marked by European contact. The cultural evolution
of descendants of the Toyah Phase peoples and those before is not well understood in the
region. Campbell (1988:73) cautiously names at least 60 groups who were associated with the
Bastrop County area. Of these, a few could be considered native to the area. The Tonkawa,
long thought to be indigenous to the area, were immigrants from the north (Campbell 1988:75).
European encroachment decimated most of the native population prior to their removal to
reservations.
Previous Investigations
Currently, there are 370 archaeological sites recorded in Bastrop County (TARL Files). The
county measures approximately 2,320.4 square km. Through the years, archaeological studies
in Bastrop County have ranged from academic research studies to cultural resource investigations. The advent of historic preservation laws on both the Federal and State level in the 1960s
and 1970s has increased the research in the county.
Wilson (1930) conducted surveys in Travis, Bastrop and Fayette Counties. Six sites were
documented in Bastrop County. Lack of documentation prevents a good interpretation of the
sites. UT Austin, Department of Anthropology sponsored excavations at site 41 BP 1 (Campbell
and Jelks 1953). The site contained two burials in association with Late Prehistoric artifacts.
In the 1960s, excavations and site documentation were conducted by the UT Austin
Archeological Society. Two burials in association with Late Prehistoric material were excavated
10

at 41BP43 (Davis 1964). The first possible Paleo-Indian site was documented in 1966 at
41BP51 (TARL F i I es). Cultural materials excavated from 41BP55 indicate Late Prehistoric
encampments (Brown 1966). Clark (1966) documented three prehistoric sites that were
described as lithic burned rock scatters (41BP56,58) and quarry procurement sites (41BP57) on
the terraces of Big Sandy Creek in the north uplands of the Colorado River. Malone (1968)
excavated 41 BP62, 63, & 64. Cultural materials at the three sites indicate Archaic and Late
Prehistoric encampments.
In the 1970s, the first cultural resource investigations were conducted in response to federal and
state historic preservation laws requiring the inventory and evaluation of cultural resources on
properties requiring federal permitting or lands owned or leased by state agencies or agencies
of the state, such as the LCRA, that might be subject to land alteration, i.e., transmission
corridor clearing or lignite mining. Cultural resource investigations were first conducted in
Bastrop County by The Texas Archeological Survey, UT Austin. Fawcett (1975) recorded a
chert scatter (41BP68) during a 160-acre survey in the Camp Swift area in the northern uplands
of the Colorado River. Lack of diagnostic material precluded chronological placement. Dibble
(1976) conducted a reconnaissance survey in the Camp Swift area; no sites were documented.
Follow-up intensive survey and testing was conducted by Skelton and Freeman (1979) in the
4,000-acre Camp Swift lignite prospect. Forty-three prehistoric sites and 44 historic sites were
documented during the survey. Eight prehistoric sites were tested during the project. During
a site investigation elsewhere in the county, Prewitt and Skelton (1979) documented a cache of
13 bifacial blades at a prehistoric campsite (41BP89). Dillehay (1979) conducted a
reconnaissance survey for the LCRA along the Fayette to Lytton Springs Transmission Corridor
which traversed portions of Fayette, Caldwell and Bastrop Counties. Later follow-up
investigations by Kenmotsu and Freeman (1980) consisted of intensive survey and monitoring.
Eight prehistoric and three multi-component prehistoric/historic sites were documented in
Bastrop County in the southern uplands of the river valley. As part of continuing cultural
resource investigations along the transmission line, Brown and Kenmotsu (1980) conducted test
excavations at three prehistoric sites and one historic site. Prehistoric site 41BP176 was the
only site tested in Bastrop County. Excavations indicate a deep sandy terrace deposit with
evidence of probable short-term, intermittent encampments. The only time-diagnostic found
during excavations suggests a Late Prehistoric occupation. During an intensive survey of a
transmission line corridor along the upland margins and floodplain of Piney Creek north of the
Colorado River, Nightengale (1980) documented two prehistoric sites - 41BP197 and 198. Both
were lithic scatters. Avocational work during the decade included Paul L. Duke's (1977)
documentation of the Thunderbird Site (41BP78) in the northern uplands of the county. The
artifact assemblage indicates prehistoric occupations of Archaic through Late Prehistoric age.
A high incidence of Early Archaic artifacts was observed in the assemblage.
In the 1980s, major cultural resource investigations were conducted at the LCRA Powell Bend
Lignite Prospect in the northern uplands of the Colorado River. Kenmotsu (1982) conducted
intensive survey investigations in the Powell Bend Lignite Prospect for the LCRA. The
prospect lies immediately southwest of the Camp Swift prospect along the left bank and uplands
of Big Sandy Creek. During the survey of the 1,200-acre tract, 30 prehistoric and 22 historic
sites were documented. Bement (in Kenmotsu 1982: Appendix I) conducted test excavations
at four prehistoric sites in the prospect: 41 BP 191, 192, 218, and 229. Excavations at 41BP218
and 229 revealed heavily disturbed and shallow cultural deposits. By contrast, excavations at
41BP191 and 192 uncovered a diversity of lithic debris and intact features. 4IBP191 and 192
11

were recommended for mitigation. 41BP218 and 229 were not recommended for further work.
Robinson (in Kenmotsu 1982: Appendix II) reports on the intensive survey investigations of an
additional 80.5 acres in the prospect. No sites were documented during the survey. Robinson
(1983) describes further survey of additional acreage and testing in the prospect. The survey
resulted in the documentation of a historic cemetery and a historic locale. Testing of the
historic Calvin Community (41BP233), a historic mining community, resulted in a more
extensive understanding of lignite mining and life within the worker communities. Bement
(1984) reports on the results of mitigative excavation at 41BP191 and 192. Excavations at
41BP191 revealed evidence of 25 cooking/heating hearth-type features where food processing
and lithic reduction activities were accomplished by groups of prehistoric hunters and gathers
reoccupying the site intermittently over the last 5,000 years. 41BP192 contained a less
extensive array of cultural material. One intact cooking/heating hearth-type feature was found
in association with lithic reduction debris and tools. Two time-diagnostic dart points from the
Early and Late Archaic were the only chronological indicators.
On the southern uplands of the Colorado River, Brown (1984) documented one prehistoric and
one multi-component prehistoric/historic site during an intensive survey of a transmission line
corridor for the LCRA. The sites were described as lithic procurement/primary reduction sites.
No further action was recommended. During intensive survey and testing investigations of
portions of the county sponsored by the Bastrop County Sesquicentennial Project, Robinson
(1987) documented 32 prehistoric sites, two multi-component prehistoric/historic sites and one
historic site. Also, six previously recorded sites were revisited and two sites were tested.
Survey investigations were oriented toward a sampling of 19 tracts of land equaling about 3,400
acres in the lowlands of the Colorado River Valley. The lowlands along the river terraces and
floodplains had not been well documented prior to Robinson's investigations. As a result of
cultural resource investigations at lignite prospects in the northern uplands, a large body of data
has accumulated that reflects settlement patterns in upland areas. The focus on portions of the
lowlands was an attempt to balance the data so that relevant comparisons of settlement could
be attempted. To this end, two sites along the terraces of the river were excavated by crews
of avocationalists, volunteers and professionals. Robinson (1987:179) observed that when
compared to the rest of the county, data from investigations indicated a high resource
concentration along the river terraces which can in some respects be attributed to better organic
preservation. Lithic debris indicates primary reduction in the uplands and secondary/later stage
reduction in the lowlands. Robinson has given researchers in the county a body of data for
future comparison.
The Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation (SDHPT) contributed to
the archaeological record during the 1980s. Goode (1984a) conducted test excavations at
41BP19, a river terrace site on Highway 71. Goode (1984a:27) found two major zones in 80
cm of soils containing evidence of Early Archaic occupations in the lower zone and in the
upper, Middle Archaic through Late Prehistoric occupations. Based on the results of the testing,
the site was recommended for mitigation. Bement (1989) conducted mitigative excavations at
the site as part of a contract with the SDHPT. Bement (1989:58) found no evidence of
undisturbed Early Archaic deposits. A single C-14 date and a TL date place two features in the
Early Archaic. No time diagnostic artifacts were found in association with the features. The
site was interpreted as a favored locale for encampments from the Middle Archaic through the
Late Prehistoric with possible earlier encampments. Ensor and Mueller-Wille (1988) conducted
test excavations at 41 BP280, a site downslope from 41 BP 19. Excavations were conducted by
12

Texas A&M under contract with SDHPT. Results indicate a site occupied from Middle Archaic
through Late Prehistoric times where the production of Pedernales dart points was found to be
evident.
The Center for Archaeological Research (CAR), UT San Antonio conducted a series of cultural
resource investigations at the CPS Butler Lignite Prospect. The study area is located in the far
northern uplands of Bastrop County and into Lee County at the header tributary area of Big
Sandy Creek. The CAR investigations represent the northmost segment of archaeological
investigations in the county that have followed the Wilcox lignite belt. The work began with
TAS in the 1970s at Camp Swift and in the 1980s at Powell Bend. This has resulted in an
almost complete archaeological investigation of the left bank and uplands of Big Sandy Creek
from the header area to 2 km northeast of the confluence with the Colorado River. Kelly and
Roemer (1981) conducted a reconnaissance survey of portions of the CPS Butler Lignite
Prospect in Bastrop and Lee Counties. Four prehistoric sites and four historic sites were
documented at that time. Brown (1983) conducted intensive survey and testing. Two
prehistoric and one historic site were documented. The historic Morgan Chapel Cemetery
(41BP200) was mapped and a prehistoric site (41BP264) was tested. Taylor, Fox and Cox
(1986) describe investigations conducted in conjunction with the relocation of 21 burials from
the Morgan Chapel Cemetery. Taylor (1987) conducted an intensive survey in the prospect.
Two prehistoric and three historic sites were documented in Bastrop County.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc. conducted cultural resource investigations in Bastrop County at
Lake Bastrop for the LCRA. In the 1960s, water for Lake Bastrop was impounded for a
cooling pond for the LCRA Sim Gideon Steam Plant. The lake is the result of a dam placed
on Spicer Creek approximately 1 km upstream from its confluence with Piney Creek in the
north uplands. Kotter (1979) conducted intensive survey investigations along the south shore
grazing areas of Lake Bastrop. Six prehistoric sites were documented; four were recommended
for avoidance. Kotter (1980) conducted intensive survey-level investigations along a pipeline
right-of-way corridor to the Gideon Plant on the southeast shore of Lake Bastrop. Two
prehistoric sites were documented: no further work was recommended. Laurens-Day (1981)
conducted intensive survey-level documentation of grazing areas along the north shore of Lake
Bastrop. Eighteen prehistoric sites were documented: five sites were recommended for
avoidance. The majority of sites found in the area can be described as open campsites where
primary and later-stage lithic reduction was accomplished in conjunction with as-yet unspecified
resource procurement.
As part of a lease agreement between the LCRA and The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
(TPWD), the north and south shores of Lake Bastrop were intensively surveyed and previously
recorded sites were reassessed by TPWD. Tomka (1991) conducted intensive survey-level
investigations along the north and south shore of Lake Bastrop. Six prehistoric and two historic
sites were documented. Fourteen previously recorded sites were reassessed (Kotter 1979, 1980;
Laurens-Day 1981). 41BP348 and 354 are the first in a series of historic sites documented
within the World War II-era Camp Swift military area.
In-house LCRA cultural resource investigations were conducted at the 350-acre Camp Swift
Regional Wastewater Project along the right bank and uplands of Piney Creek approximately
1 km west of the north shore of Lake Bastrop (Nightengale and Moncure in prep). At the
Camp Swift Project area, 10 prehistoric sites and four historic sites were documented during an
13

intensive survey of the study area and 3.5-mile pipeline corridor. The historic sites 41BP355,
356, 357 and 368 are parts of Camp Swift. 41BP355 is the site of a prisoner-of-war camp used
to house German and Eastern European POWs. Prehistoric sites are open campsites in deep
sands in the uplands and deep sediments along Piney Creek. The sites contain lithics, burned
rock and in some cases tools. Shovel tests at these upland sites indicate continuous cultural
material to depths of between 30 - 100 cm. The lack of time diagnostics precludes chronological placement of the encampments. Upper deposits at each site have been heavily disturbed by
plowing, tree clearing and construction associated with camp construction. Two historic sites,
41BP355 and 368, were recommended for monitoring and further work. Historic site 41BP356
was recommended for avoidance. 4113P357, a Camp Swift-era medical trash dump, was
recommended for mapping, monitoring, controlled filling and hand-clearing of vegetation. Four
prehistoric sites were recommended for avoidance: 41 BP359, 360, 363 and 364.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

A more than adequate historical background was compiled for the Powell Bend Mine by
Kenmotsu (1982). It would be redundant to repeat the research required to compile another
background for the same general area; therefore, the reader is referred to that report for a
background of historic settlement in the area. Archival research has been conducted in the
Powell Bend II Mine prospect as part of this investigation. The results of archival research at
each of the historic sites recorded in the study area is presented in section: Results of Survey - Historic Resources.
RESULTS OF SURVEY

Prehistoric Resources
Seven prehistoric sites were documented during the Powell Bend II cultural resources survey.
They are described below.
41BP330. This prehistoric site is situated on a hilltop within the denuded bedrock slope
geomorphic terrain zone (Appendix I) overlooking the Harris Creek flood terraces between two
north flowing headwater tributaries. The area, originally in heavy timber, has undergone severe
erosion since being harvested for the local timber industry. Repeated root-plowing to remove
secondary mesquite and juniper growth has accelerated sheet-washing to the extent that
underlying red clay subsoil is exposed on the surface. The site consists of a thin scatter of
burned sandstone, chert and quartzite fragments and chert lithic reduction debris. Six shovel
tests revealed a maximum of 20 cm of sandy clay over red clay. Artifacts are scattered over
a 30-x 50-meter area. The site appears to have been primarily a lithic reduction locus where
locally exposed chert gravel deposits offered an available resource. The small amount of
burned lithic material may indicate encampments or heat-treating of the chert. Plowing and
erosion have destroyed the subsurface integrity of the cultural deposits.

14

Due to the observed destruction of subsurface integrity, the potential for the site to contribute
information beyond survey level-documentation is considered low. Further work to determine
eligibility for the National Register of Historic Places is not recommended.

41BP331. This site is located ca 500 meters northeast of site 41BP330 on the lobe of the same
interfluvial divide within the denuded bedrock slope geomorphic terrain zone (Appendix I). The
site overlooks the Harris Creek flood terraces. The location lies 15 meters above and ca 25
meters south of Harris Creek. Three of seven shovel tests recovered lithic debitage and burned
chert, sandstone and quartzite fragments to a maximum depth of 40 cm in a 75-X 75-meter area
currently used as pasture. Root plowing, discing and terracing have disturbed the subsurface
integrity within the plow zone. The site may have been tested in the past as a wooden stake
marked with "TP5" was observed in a rectangular-appearing depression. Other similar
depressions were observed but no records have been found indicating professional
archaeological work in the vicinity. The landowner also knows nothing about any investigations
near the site.
Based on the recovery of cultural debris from probable encampment(s) at depths below the plow
zone, the probability of intact subsurface features is considered moderately high. Therefore,
limited testing to determine National Register of Historic Places eligibility is recommended.

41 BP332. The site is situated on a lower flood terrace geomorphic terrain zone (Appendix I)
of Harris Creek near exposures of fluvial gravel deposits. The area near the creek has been
cleared and has little depth. The area north of the creek is a field currently planted in Bermuda.
Shovel tests in the field revealed 20 - 40 cm of sandy clay loam over red clay. Cultural
material found during shovel probing included: lithic debris and burned sandstone, chert and
quartzite fragments. Burned rock and lithic debitage were observed on the surface near the
creek and in the walls of the creek bank. Several eroding hearths were observed in a dirt road
that crosses the creek. Another was observed eroding from the same road 10 m to the north
of the creek. An Ensor projectile point was found on the surface near an exposed hearth north
of the creek. Site size is estimated to be approximately 50 square meters.
Based on the recovery of cultural debris at depths of 20 - 40 cm and surface observations of
hearths, the probability for intact subsurface deposits is considered high. Therefore, further
testing is recommended to determine National Register of Historic Places eligibility.

41BP333. This prehistoric campsite is situated on an upland knoll within the stable upland
geomorphic terrain zone (Appendix I) approximately 500 meters southwest of site 41BP330.
Burned chert and quartzite and lithic reduction debris is thinly scattered over a 50-square meter
area. Four shovel tests indicate 20 cm maximum soil depth. It appears that the site has been
destroyed by the same root plowing and subsequent erosional actions as 41 BP330. Though the
red clay is not exposed, it is only a few cm below the surface in most areas. No cultural
features or patterns were observed in the scatter.
Based on the shallow depth of cultural deposits and the observed disturbances to the integrity
of those deposits, the potential for further information beyond survey level documentation is
considered low. Therefore, testing to determine National Register of Historic Places eligibility
is not recommended.

]5

41BP334. The site is situated on an upland divide within the denuded bedrock slope
geomorphic terrain zone overlooking the left bank flood terrace of Harris Creek (Appendix I).
Only 20 cm of sandy clay soils mantle the area. Sterile red clays are exposed in several areas.
The exposed chert deposits were obviously exploited prehistorically. Several disturbed
hearths/heat-treating loci are visible on the surface of the red clay exposures at the southern
portion of the site. The artifact scatter covers approximately 300 X 100 meters of a root-plowed
pasture. Although lithic procurement/reduction and campfire or heat-treatment residue was
observed in erosional exposures, it is felt that cultural patterning from encampments in the thin
soil mantle has been destroyed or redeposited by erosion and clearing.
Based on the shallow nature of deposits and the extensive post-depositional disturbance that has
taken place over the years, the potential for further information beyond survey-level
documentation is considered low. Therefore, testing to determine National Register of Historic
Places eligibility is not recommended.
41BP335. This site is situated across Harris Creek and some 300 meters south of site 41 BP332
on the left bank flood terrace geomorphic terrain zone. Vegetation consists primarily of
Bermuda grasses with scattered mesquite and oak. Three of the four shovel tests in the upper
terrace deposits of sandy clay loam recovered burned chert and quartzite fragments to a depth
of 60 cm. Chert debitage was exposed in erosional areas to the north and west of the shovel
tested area. No temporally diagnostic material was observed on the surface or in the shovel
tests. The site may be a small encampment covering approximately 60 x 40 meters. Though
the area has been cleared and plowed, the potential remains high that at least some cultural
resource deposits may have escaped disturbance and are intact.
Based on observed material on the surface and in shovel tests, the site is recommended for
controlled testing to determine subsurface integrity and nomination to the National Register of
Historic Places.
41BP338. The site sits on an upland knoll within the stable upland geomorphic terrain zone
overlooking the Big Sandy/Harris Creek drainage system. The high point offers an excellent
view of the surrounding countryside. Mesquite and native grasses are the predominate
vegetation on the unimproved pasture; oak trees were observed along the drainage. Evidence
of root plowing was observed in the site area. The site appears to be a widely scattered lithic
procurement and reduction locus. Abundant chert cobbles are eroding from the thin sandy clay
mantle. A soil matrix of 5 - 30 cm of sandy clay over red clay was observed in shovel tests.
Primary reduction debitage, cores and rough bifaces are thinly scattered over an area of some
500 x 200 meters. No burned materials were observed at the site. The lack of burned or firecracked material does not support the heat-treating premise offered for other sites reported
herein. No temporally diagnostic material was located.
Based on the nature of the surface deposits and post-depositional disturbances from root
plowing and erosion, the potential for further information beyond survey-level documentation
is considered low. Therefore, testing to determine National Register of Historic Places
eligibility is not recommended.

16

Historic Resources
Two newly recorded historic sites and two previously recorded/reevaluated historic sites are
described below.
41 BP262: The Pain Cemetery. This cemetery site was originally recorded by the Texas
Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at Austin, during a cultural resource survey of
additional acreage at the Powell Bend Mine Project (Robinson 1983:53-57). The reader is
referred to that document for background on the cemetery. Recommendations at that time were:
Texas cemeteries are protected by statute and it goes without recommendation that the Pain
Cemetery (41BP262), known locally as the Lyman Cemetery (probably due to its proximity
to the Lyman Ranch), is to be avoided carefully by all development activities, following all
the prescriptions of the applicable body of law. Cemeteries are specifically excluded from
the National Register of Historic Places unless associated with notable historic personages
or events; thus the cemetery lacks National Register potential. Similarly, the cemetery fails
to meet Texas State Historic Landmark qualifying criteria [Robinson 1983:59-60].
Current mining operations call for construction of a pond nearby. To ensure the continued
protection of the cemetery, the location was field checked and plotted on 1"=400' contour maps.
The cemetery will not be disturbed by construction nor subsequent higher water levels. To
further ensure the protection of the site, a new fence will be constructed around the cemetery.
With the help of volunteers, the graves will be cleaned up and monitored on a regular basis.
41BP263: The Benjamin Lyman Housesite. The site was originally recorded by the Texas
Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at Austin, in 1983 during a cultural resource
survey of a buffer area north of the Powell Bend Mine Project (Robinson 1983). Known as the
Lyman Place, it was cautiously inferred (Robinson 1983:59) to be a ranchstead dating to no
earlier than 1880s according to the artifacts recovered.
Local historian and resident Fay Pannell added important data concerning the site:
It stood two stories high and was of cedar construction. Two cisterns were built to provide
enough water for stagecoach route, stage company unknown, which ran roughly east-west
from a crossing on the Colorado River to the Lyman Place and points east, avoiding
Bastrop. In the twentieth century, the Lyman Place was a popular setting for social
gatherings. The house burned, possibly in the 1950s and the rubble was removed with a
bulldozer. The house dates to "at least the 1880s"[sic], if not earlier [Robinson 1983:59].
When originally recorded in the early 1980s, the Lyman Place was characterized as a ranchstead
that served as a stagecoach stop. While subsequent research did not prove or disprove this
interpretation, it did result in additional information that instead associates the site with the
area's lumber industry.
The site is located on a 235-acre tract that was originally part of land granted to Leman Barker
by the Mexican government in 1832. In papers signed at San Felipe de Austin, Barker stated
that he and his wife were petitioning to become colonists under the authority of empresario
Stephen F. Austin, choosing as their homestead a tract of land above the settlement of Bastrop
17

(Bastrop County Deed Records: 108/369). Leman Barker died in 1847 and was survived by
his widow, Sarah F., and their only child, Margarett, the wife of Thomas Chambers. Settlement
of the estate included partition of the league, with the Barker homestead remaining in Sarah's
ownership while a separate farmstead was shown for the Chambers. Chattel included horses,
cattle, hogs, and, given the nature of the times, slaves. Among the slaves were: "Moses and
Jesse, two old negro men and Anna an old Negro woman and Franky a negro girl about
fourteen years old . . . ." (Bastrop County Deed Records: E/493).
Several references were made to the "plantation" and to "plantation tools" and crops, although
there is no further elaboration of the latter. Thomas and Margaret Chambers became sole
owners of the plantation, setting aside a separate area for her mother's personal use. The
specific location of the Barker and Chambers houses could not be determined from the records,
although it is assumed they were near the more fertile and arable land along the Colorado River
or its tributaries (Bastrop County Deed Records: E/493).
The Chamberses began selling large tracts of the plantation as early as the 1850s. What
followed, relative to 41BP263, was a complex series of legal proceedings that, although well
documented, fails to provide conclusive evidence of constructional phases on the site. The
transactions do, however, appear to corroborate the oral history of nearby resident Fay Pannell,
whose parents told her the property was the homesite of Benjamin Lyman. She recalled that
Lyman owned a cedar mill and that his home was a two-story residence built of cedar lumber
(Pannell 1990).
The 235-acre tract was included in a conveyance from Thomas W. Chambers to L.C.
Cunningham and others in 1853. Another deed dealing with different property in the Leman
Barker league, shows that Leander C. Cunningham operated a steam sawmill in association with
Henry Crocheron. It is believed the sawmill was the one mentioned in other transactions as
located along Sandy Creek (Bastrop County Records: K/334).
By 1857, Stephen Bishop was owner of the property that included site 41 BP263. Bishop was
a partner in O.H. Milligan and Company, along with Milligan, William Bryce, and Benjamin
Lyman. Bishop's subsequent sale of his interest in the land to the firm of Bryce and Lyman
in 1867 provides additional insight into the early land use and into the numerous legal
transactions involving the property. The 1867 deed mentions a legal case (Petty and Jones V.
Bishop, Bryce and Lyman) and a resulting judgment issued by the Supreme Court of Texas.
The property is described as "a certain tract of land situated in said county (Bastrop) containing
a thousand acres with sawmill and appurtenances thereon on which said Bryce & Lyman now
reside, it being the tract of land and premises sold to me and to Bryce & Lyman by said
Cunningham and Crocheron" (Bastrop County Deed Records: N/440).
The deed shows Benjamin Lyman resided on the property as early as the 1860s, and possibly
earlier. Little information, however, was available on Lyman. He was not listed in either the
1860 or 1870 census for Texas and the only Benjamin Lyman shown in 1880 is a resident of
Lampasas County. The 1890 census for the United States is not available, due to a fire that
severely damaged the records (Jackson 1989 1 and 2 Vols.: various pages). No death record
was found in the state records, but county records show that Lyman's last legal transaction in
Bastrop County came in 1889, the year the suit brought by Elijah P. Petty and G.W. Jones
against Bryce and Lyman (Bishop having been dropped from the original case) was finally
18

settled. The settlement papers show Bryce and Lyman were still operating a "steam saw and
grist mill" on the waters of Sandy Creek at the time. Since they had mortgaged the property
earlier and were in default, probably as a result of the lawsuit, J.C. Higgins became the new
owner (Bastrop County Deed Records: 14/65 and 68).
Col. Jacob Higgins (1815-1895) was a native of Vermont who came to Texas around the time
of the Texas Revolution. He settled in Bastrop County by 1840 and established a milling
enterprise that lasted until 1868, when he went into the mercantile business with Bastrop mayor
C.B. Garwood. In the 1880s, Higgins began devoting his time to real estate and investment
interests (Bastrop Advertiser 1895:1).
When he died in 1895, Col. J.C. Higgins was survived by several children from three marriages.
His estate included his homestead adjacent to the Methodist Church in Bastrop, a store and
warehouse on Main Street, and thousands of acres in Bastrop, Williamson, Lee, and Caldwell
counties (Bastrop County Probate Records: L/417, et seq.) As would be expected of such a
sizable estate, given the potential number of heirs and claimants, legal proceedings were
necessary to divide his holdings. Succession papers signed in 1896 state:
The court finds that Mrs. Lela T. Holland and Mary Fairbanks Higgins who reside in
DeKalb County, Georgia, are the legatees entitled to the residue of said estate in hands
of said Executor . . . . in equal shares (Bastrop County Probate Records: L417, et seq.)
It is interesting to note that the estate inventory lists the value of the Leman Barker 1,000-acre
tract as $1,500. One possible explanation for the low evaluation, although strictly conjecture,
could be that the property had been cleared of its major improvements, particularly the Lyman
house.
Mary Fairbanks Higgins was a single minor, represented by a guardian ad litem, at the time of
her father's death. By 1898 she was married to M.M. McCall. When the McCalls sold the
Leman Barker tract three years later, they gave their residence as Alabama. The land changed
hands again several times before 1904, when J.L. Wilbarger became the sole owner. At about
the same time, Wilbarger also acquired adjoining acreage (Bastrop County Probate Records:
L/417, et seq.; Bastrop County Deed Records: 34/465, 38/14, and 39/455).
Joseph Lee Wilbarger (d. 1942), like William Bryce, Benjamin Lyman, and Col. J.C. Higgins,
was associated with the lumber business in Bastrop County. His family, in fact, had established
a sawmill north of Bastrop in May 1860. Wilbarger died in 1942, having outlived his wife,
Emilie (Harris) (d. 1939). He was survived by his two daughters, Ivory W. Young, wife of J.K.
Young, and Lee W. Peterson, wife of New York attorney Edwin E. Peterson. They inherited
the entire estate, which included his lumber business, his residence in Bastrop, and the Leman
Barker tract. R.E. Rawls purchased the company and T.C. Steiner bought the Lyman home
property (Bastrop County Probate Records: X/279; Bastrop County Deed Records: 110/276 and
108/422).
While the complex land records associated with 41BP263 do not prove when a home was
constructed on the site, they do provide background information that complements the oral
tradition associated with the property. It is known that Benjamin Lyman resided on the land
by the 1860s and that he retained an interest in the ownership until 1889. What happened to
19

his house is not shown in legal records and tax rolls have proven inconclusive in determining
an accurate date of occupation for the property.
Fay Pannell remembers that her parents told her the Lyman House burned, although a specific
date for the fire is not known (Pannell 1990). The earliest available aerial photograph of the
area shows no structure on the site by 1937 (TNRIS 1937). It is possible that the house had
burned as early as 1896, when succession papers for the estate of Col. J.C. Higgins included
a low property evaluation. Regardless, even if the house survived into the twentieth century,
records indicate that it was never the residence of subsequent owners.
The additional research on 41BP263 has clarified earlier information on the Lyman house.
Although it was located on an early route known as the Young's Prairie Road and may have
been frequented by travelers, it was more closely associated with the lumber industry of Bastrop
County. For almost a century the property was owned by individuals who figured prominently
in sawmilling or retail lumber sales. Oral tradition holds that Lyman built his home of cedar
and records make reference to a cedar mill in the area.
The extensive review of land records and the use of oral history at 41 BP263 have resulted in
a substantial body of information about the site. Further testing or research would not likely
yield additional information. The site does not satisfy criteria for eligibility to the National
Register of Historic Places. No additional work is recommended.

41BP336. The site was recorded as a historic artifact scatter and was identified by Fay Pannell
as the Moore House. However, old topographic maps indicate at least five buildings were part
of the complex. The site sits on the highest point of elevation in the immediate vicinity. An
old dirt road connected the complex to the McDade Road but was removed when the state
constructed Highway 95. The Moore house burned to the ground in 1950 and the area was
subsequently bulldozed. The old cistern was filled in, though its outline is still visible as a
depression. Debris is scattered over some 300 meters due to plowing and furrowing activities
over the 40 years since the house burned. The area has been and is currently used for farming.
Artifacts discovered during the survey include melted glass, pottery and metal, and broken
fragments of blue, purple, green and clear glass and Depression-age pottery.
Site 41BP336 is located on a 15-acre tract of land west of State Highway 95, approximately
seven miles northwest of Bastrop. Originally, the property formed the southwest corner of a
labor (177 acres) granted to Jesse Barker by the Republic of Texas in 1841 (Bastrop County
Deed Records: 0/634). Probate records show that Barker died in Bastrop County in March
1846. He was survived by his second wife, Emily, whom he had married late in the previous
year. He also left six children from his previous marriage: Calvin (the administrator of his
estate), Elzina Daniel, Eleacor (also shown as Eleazor), Margaret, Jessee, and Amanda. The
latter four were minors at the time of Barker's death. In subsequent probate records, a seventh
child, Leman Barker (not to be confused with the pioneer settler by the same name), is
indicated. The only child of Jesse and Emily Barker, he was evidently born several months
after his father's death (Bastrop County Probate Minutes: B/226 et seq; C/9 and 32).
Jesse Barker left a sizable estate which included slaves and more than 2,000 acres of land in
Bastrop and Williamson Counties. The settlement of his estate was contested by Emily, shown
as Mrs. Henry Phillips in 1847, because she was originally denied an entitlement. She brought
20

suit against Calvin Barker that year, after the original partition papers had been approved by the
probate court. The outcome of the suit was not determined, but the recorded inventory shows
the estate included at least three slaves, 12 head of cattle, 50 head of sheep, 20 head of hogs,
and 3 yoke of oxen, two of which were sold soon after Jesse Barker's death to defray the living
expenses of his wife and children. The 300-acre homestead, which evidently did not include
the labor, was inherited by the infant son, Leman Barker. Calvin Barker, shown in later records
as "Dr.", was named guardian of the minor children, except Leman, and they moved with him
to Williamson County in the mid-1850s (Bastrop County Probate Records: B/222 and C/108109; Bastrop County Probate Minutes: 131226).
It is not clear when the Jesse Barker labor was sold out of the family, but Morgan C. Hamilton,
a resident of Travis County, is shown as the owner in 1872. In December of that year he sold
the 177-acre tract, through attorney R.A. Smith, to William C. Moore. It is possible that Moore
had been living on the land prior to the sale; the 1872 tax records show him paying on 177
acres in the L. (sic) Barker grant. The property valuation of less than $3 an acre was an
average price for land in Bastrop County at that time. Undeveloped land was selling for a
dollar or less per acre. In 1873, the tax valuation jumped to $4 an acre and, although there
were subsequent fluctuations, the valuation on the same acreage had almost doubled by 1882,
indicating that Moore was making considerable improvements to the land. In comparison, the
1882 tax rolls show Moore as owner of 121 acres in another abstract with a total value of $87
(State Tax Records, 1872-1893).
William C. Moore was a native of Tennessee and his wife, Mississippi, was born in the state
for which she was named. The 1900 census shows him as 50 years of age and her as 36. Their
children are listed as sons William F. (10), James W. (9), Leoniday (sic) (6), Walter (3), and
daughter Natty I. (1). All were born in Texas. In addition to the children, Nancy Campbell,
Mississippi's mother, also lived with the family (Soundex 1900).
Fay Pannell, a nearby resident and active local historian, remembered that her mother referred
to the property as the Moore farm. She also recalled that a Moore descendant visited the area
about 20 years ago, seeking information on the homestead (Pannell 1990).
William C. and Mississippi Moore were dead by 1910, when W.F., L.P., and J.W. Moore
deeded their interest in the family farm to their brother, W.C. (probably Walter). The following
year, he conveyed the land to Perry Hennington. Perry and Josephine Hennington raised their
family there until around the time of World War II, although they gave up legal ownership in
1921. In that year, they conveyed the property to Joe Flory, A.L. Moon, H.M. Handshy, and
J.T. Hall in return for stock in a "proposed corporation to be known as Consumers Coal Co."
Flory, Moon, and Hall, of Bexar County, and Handshy of Bastrop County were principals in
the company, one of several in the area seeking lignite leases (Bastrop County Deed Records:
49/105, 49/593, and 741537).
Fay Pannell remembered that the Moore-Hennington house was a small (probably four-room),
south-facing frame structure with a stone fireplace on the north side. In addition to the home,
the site included barns, a corn crib, a cistern or well, and possibly a chicken house. The house
did not face the highway, which was constructed as a new route in 1939. In 1943, during the
early part of World War II, the U.S. Army began development of Camp Swift, a nearby infantry
training base. As part of the development, the government took control of the property east of
21

Highway 95, leaving the Moore-Hennington house on the current tract of 15 acres. The house
was vacant when it was destroyed by fire around 1950. The site was later cleared of structural
materials, leaving only the cistern that was eventually filled in (Pannell 1990; Texas Natural
Resources Information System (TNRIS) 1937).
Construction of the original home on the Moore-Hennington property probably dates from the
1870s, although archaeological investigations uncovered mostly Depression-era artifacts. The
home was vacated shortly after World War 11, when a division of the property transferred most
of the original farmstead to Camp Swift. The residence burned around 1950 and the site was
subsequently cleared. Bulldozing and plowing or discing has spread the remaining artifacts,
resulting in a substantial loss of integrity for the site. The filled-in cistern is the only remaining
historical feature on the property. If the area, now in a mining buffer zone, cannot be avoided,
then the cistern should be evaluated with a backhoe to further complete the identification of the
feature. Based on archival research, the site does not satisfy criteria for eligibility to the
National Register of Historic Places. No further archival work is recommended.

41BP343. The site is the location of an old lignite mining complex. Though not as large or
as extensive a complex as the mines just south at the mining community of Calvin (Robinson
1983), the mine may have been in operation from the 1870s. An excellent in-depth
documentary on early lignite mining in Bastrop County can be found in the initial cultural
resource survey report of the Powell Bend prospect (Kenmotsu 1982). No structural remains
are present other than the three filled-in circular ponds believed to be mine shafts and the
abandoned bed of the railroad spur remain. Sixty years of farming activity have removed all
other traces of the mine complex. The results of archival research into the history of the mine
is included below.
In the northern part of the 235-acre tract that includes 41BP263 are three small circular ponds,
believed to be flooded shafts of an early coal mine. Several mining companies were known to
have operated in the area, some of them associated with the community of Calvin, a twentiethcentury mining settlement immediately south of the project area and west of the railroad line.
it is possible, however, that the shafts date from nineteenth-century coal exploration and
production in Bastrop County. Coal was first discovered in the area in the 1830s, not long after
settlers began moving into Stephen F. Austin's "Little Colony." Although commercial
production on a profitable scale began in the 1880s in Texas, plans for exploitation of Bastrop
County coal deposits started even earlier. Much of the early speculation centered around the
Edwin Goodman farm, three miles west of Bastrop. There is also evidence that deposits north
of town were known at the time. B.L. Jones, a railroad engineer, noted in 1872:
I took on Engine F.A. Rice no. 20, at McDade, on the Central Railroad, about 15
bushels of coal taken from the farm of Messrs. Bryce and Lyman, in Bastrop County,
5 miles from McDade, and used such coal for fuel on the up trip to Austin today. It
burned well and made an abundance of steam, burning clean and leaving no (illegible).
I am satisfied if the grates had been adapted to the use of coal, it would have run
double the distance with the same amount of coal (Beyer n.d.: 5).
The location given, while not specific, could place it in the vicinity of the property that includes
the Lyman house (see historical background for 41BP263). Regardless, coal deposits east of
22

the Colorado River remained secondary in importance to those on the west side until after the
Missouri, Kansas and Texas Railroad built through Bastrop in the mid-1880s. Constructed on
a route east of the river, the line made the deposits in that area more accessible to markets. As
a result, coal production in the county entered a new phase, one in which "the knowledge of its
existence was at last combined with the needed transportation and capital" (Beyer n.d.:26). The
eastern side of the river became the preferred location for the development of mines and for the
establishment of new mining companies.
Among those firms known to have operated in the vicinity of the Leman Barker league were:
the Calvin Coal Company, organized in 1912; the Dennison Coal Company, established in 1916,
which opened mines at both Sayers and Calvin; and Our Coal Company of Calvin (Beyer n.d.:
27). Production was intense through the latter part of the 1910s, due in part to the increased
demands of a war economy. It continued past World War I, with new companies forming in
the 1920s. One of those was the Consumers Coal Company, a partnership established by Joe
Flory, A.L. Moon, and J.T. Hall of San Antonio, and H.M. Handshy of Bastrop. From a 1921
land transaction with Perry Hennington (see 41BP336), it appears the company formed that
year. Subsequent records indicate the enterprise was short-lived, probably a victim of the rising
competition from the oil and gas industry in the 1930s (Bastrop County Deed Records: 74/537;
Beyer n.d.: 26-28).
A review of land records for the 235-acre tract revealed no early mineral leases that include the
mine shafts. The adjoining tract to the south, however, shows leases to Consumers Coal
Company principals J.T. Hall (1920) and H.M. Handshy (1921), as well as to the firm directly
(1922 and 1923) (Bastrop County Deed Records: 72/115 and 153; 73/473; and 751363). It
should be remembered also, that the Consumers Coal Company leased the Hennington property
east of the mine shafts (see 41BP336).
As they exist now, the flooded mine shafts lack the integrity to be eligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places. No related structures, disposal piles, or diagnostic
materials are present to provide dates for the features, although it is believed they date to the
significant period of coal production in Bastrop County, from the post-railroad era in the mid1880s to the 1920s. At least 13 mining companies operated in the immediate vicinity of
Bastrop during those years, and any one of them, or several of them, may have utilized the
shafts. The surrounding land appears to have been plowed, disced, and planted for pasturage
over the years, increasing the probability that no diagnostic material will be found. The
drawings and measurements completed by the LCRA archaeologists for future comparative
studies combined with the archival research are felt to be sufficient effort at this site. Based
on the results of historic research at the site and at mining sites in the area (Kenmotsu 1982;
Robinson 1983), the site does not meet criteria for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places. No additional work is recommended.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Intensive survey-level investigations were conducted at the Powell Bend II lignite prospect in
Bastrop County by LCRA staff archaeologists and consultants. The purpose of the survey was
to provide the LCRA with an inventory and evaluation of the cultural resources within a 78023

acre environmental baseline study area to be impacted by strip-mining operations. The current
survey is the fourth in a series of reports documenting cultural resources in the Powell Bend
Mine area (Kenmotsu 1982; Robinson 1983; Bement 1984).
The project area lies within the Post Oak Savannah on the Inner Gulf Coastal Plain. Soils are
sandy foams over red clays. Underlying geology is sandstone and mudstone of the Wilcox
Group. The study area is drained by Harris Creek, a third-order tributary of Big Sandy Creek,
a left-bank tributary of the Colorado River.
A total of nine cultural resources were documented during the Powell Bend II survey. Seven
are prehistoric (41 BP330-335, 338) and two are historic (41 BP336 & 343). In addition, two
historic sites (41BP262 & 263), documented during a previous survey (Robinson 1983), were
reevaluated. Three of the newly recorded prehistoric sites (41BP331, 332 & 335) are
recommended for controlled archaeological testing to determine their eligibility for nomination
to the National Register of Historic Places. Two historic sites (41 BP262 & 336) are
recommended for avoidance.
In general, the prehistoric sites documented in the Powell Bend II study area have been heavily
impacted by land use and erosion. Root plowing, timber cutting and ranching have all
contributed to the post-depositional disturbance of prehistoric materials.
Four sites -- 41BP330, 333, 334 and 338 -- are situated on an upland divide within the stable
upland and denuded bedrock slope geomorphic terrain zones between two minor tributaries of
Harris Creek. Deflation and water erosion have exposed underlying red sandy clays leaving a
thin ± 20 cm mantle of sandy soils over portions of the surface. The chert-bearing gravel
deposits found in these areas lie exposed on the erosional surfaces. Observed cultural
materials found at these sites include debitage and burned rock. It is probable that the sites
were used for lithic procurement and initial reduction. Due to the observed destruction of
subsurface integrity at these sites, the potential for the sites to yield information beyond surveylevel documentation is considered low. Therefore, further work to determine National Register
Historic Places eligibility is not recommended at any of the sites on the upland divide proper.
The sites recommended for additional work retain some soil depth and a potential for intact
subsurface features. Two sites (41 BP332 & 335) are located on the Harris Creek flood terrace
geomorphic terrain zone and one (41BP331) is situated on the lobe of an upland divide within
the denuded bedrock slope geomorphic terrain zone overlooking the Harris Creek flood terraces.
Surface indications at the sites are sparse to nonexistent. Shovel tests indicate burned rock
fragments and debitage to maximum depths of 40 and 60 cm. One time diagnostic, a Late
Archaic Ensor dart point, was found on the surface at 41BP332.
Two historic sites were documented during the Powell Bend II investigations and two
previously recorded historic sites were re-evaluated. Archival research was conducted on the
properties. One property (41BP343), which appeared to be an abandoned mining complex with
only the mine shafts still visible, was researched. No conclusive information was found to
identify the complex, who mined it or when. One historic site (41BP336) was a farming
complex which has been razed. It is in a proposed buffer zone and out of the project impact
area. If mining operations affect the site, then backhoe testing of the cistern is recommended
to provide additional information about the site and feature. In addition, previously recorded
24

historic site 41BP263, thought to be an early ranching complex and alleged stagecoach stop, has
been reinvestigated. Archival research indicates that the site was more closely associated with
the lumber industry of Bastrop County. The previously recorded Pain Cemetery (41 BP262) was
relocated and plotted on 1":400' contour maps. Since the cemetery is protected by state law,
avoidance and protection of the site area are recommended. To ensure site protection, the
cemetery will be refenced. LCRA will request the assistance of local historical groups for
cleanup and further documentation of the site. Archival research has determined that none of
the historic sites retain sufficient criteria for a determination of eligibility to the National
Register of Historic Places.

Evaluation of Research Design Objectives
Research questions addressed in the research design include: the need to define a regional
cultural chronology, the need to resolve conflicting opinions of cultural development in the
region, and that in comparison to sites recorded by other researchers in similar upland areas
(Skelton and Freeman 1979; Kenmotsu 1982; Bement 1984), Powell Bend H would contain
fewer, smaller and less intensively occupied sites of resource-specific purpose.
Chronology is a problem in the region. The cultural region, as yet undefined, is in the databuilding stage. Archaeological evidence for the "temporal dimension" is a cumulative effort that
will require sites with good datable stratigraphic context. Researchers in upland areas of Leon
County (Fields et al. 1986) and Fayette County (Nightengale and Turpin 1985) have found
intact subsurface features in deep sandy soils within gross but datable stratigraphic context. That
charcoal can be found in sandy soils has been demonstrated by Bement (1984:88). Therefore,
it is conceivable that charcoal may be preserved at one or more of the sites recommended for
additional work in the Powell Bend II lignite prospect. Shovel tests indicate 40-60 cm of sandy
soil over clay at these sites. Additional work to test the depth of these sites will help answer
questions pertaining to stratigraphic context and as a result address the issue of chronology.
Conflicting opinions regarding cultural development will not be answered by testing three
upland sites. The question will be resolved through continued research in the region. Work
should focus on the definition of the Post Oak Savannah as a region where the probable
existence of similar subsistence strategies being pursued by groups from neighboring cultural
regions and where indigenous cultures may have developed. Additional work at Powell Bend
II sites will hopefully increase the general understanding of the region.
Prehistoric settlement in upland environments has been the subject of previous research in the
area. Sites found and tested by Skelton and Freeman (1979), Kenmotsu (1982), Brown (1983)
and Bement (1984) are situated in upland environments where soil deposits range from 20 - 100
cm in depth. Excavations have ranged from singular test pits (Skelton and Freeman 1979) to
multiple test pits (Kenmotsu 1982; Brown 1983) and block excavations (Bement 1984).
Cultural material from excavations indicate hunting (projectile points), lithic procurement (tested
cobbles and initial reduction debitage), lithic reduction (stage bifaces), and food processing
(grinding implements, gouges and utilized flakes and cores and pavement hearths and shallow
basin hearths). Sites investigated during these projects are situated along minor drainages in
the eastern uplands of Big Sandy Creek. Temporal diagnostics, though not from stratigraphic
context, indicate use and probable re-use of campsites over much of prehistory.

25

In part, survey-level documentation of the sites has validated a part of the research design; there
are fewer sites located on upland divides (Skelton and Freeman 1979). The size of the sites on
the upland divide, though heavily altered by post-depositional disturbances, would suggest
utilization of large areas. In contrast, sites on the flood terraces and lobes are smaller in size.
Whether or not the sites were less intensively occupied is a question proposed for the testing
phase -- that artifacts from different stages of prehistory found in stratigraphic context should
prove or disprove the intensity of occupation in the uplands. Whether the sites are resource
specific is also a question to be pursued during additional work. Surface indications suggest
lithic procurement, initial and later-stage reduction and orientation on now-intermittent water
sources. What other resources were being procured from these sites? Bement (1984) suggests
acorn-processing at sites on the flood terraces. Further excavation of recommended sites may
supply some answers.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Recommendations for cultural resources in the Powell Bend II Lignite Prospect are based on
the potential of the resource to yield information pertinent to criteria for a determination of
eligibility for listing on the National Register of Historic Places and as State Archeological
Landmarks (SAL). For ease of reference, sites and recommendations are presented in tabular
form. Since the LCRA Board of Directors has cancelled the Powell Bend II lignite project and
abrogated all lease agreements with area landowners, the recommendations are no longer
applicable. However, these recommendations should not be discarded as unusable. They can
used as comparative data for future cultural resource projects in the area.
Table 1. Recommendations for Cultural Resources in the Powell Bend II Lignite Prospect
Site No.

Site Type

Geomorphic
Terrain

Recommendations

41BP262

Historic

Denuded Bedrock
Slopes

The cemetery is protected by state statute.
Recommend avoidance and preservation.

41BP263

Historic

Stable Uplands

No additional work.

41BP330

Prehistoric

Denuded Bedrock
Slopes

No additional work.

41BP331

Prehistoric

Denuded Bedrock
Slopes

Additional work to include shovel tests, test
pits, backhoe trenches, and scrapes.

41BP332

Prehistoric

Flood Terrace

Additional work to include shovel tests, test
pits, backhoe trenches, and scrapes.

41BP333

Prehistoric

Stable Uplands

No additional work.

41BP334

Prehistoric

Denuded Bedrock
Slopes

No additional work.

26

Site No.

Site Type

Geomorphic
Terrain

Recommendations

41BP335

Prehistoric

Flood Terrace

Additional work to include shovel tests, test
pits, backhoe trenches, and scrapes.

4I BP336

Historic

Stable Uplands

Avoidance. Additional work at the cistern if
mining operations threaten to impact the
site.

41BP338

Prehistoric

Stable Uplands

No additional work.

41 BP343

Historic

Denuded Bedrock
slopes

No additional work.

REFERENCES CITED

Bastrop County
Deed Records, County Clerk's Office, Bastrop County Courthouse, Bastrop, Texas.
ms.
Bastrop County
Probate Minutes and Records, County Clerk's Office, Bastrop County Courthouse,
ms.
Bastrop, Texas.
Bastrop Advertiser.
1895 Obituary of J.C. Higgins, November 2, 1895, P.1.
Bement, Leland C.
1982 Appendix I. Subsurface Testing and Evaluation. In Cultural Resource Investigations
at the Powell Bend Prospect, Bastrop County, Texas, by Ray D. Kenmotsu, pp. 6190. Research Report 84. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
1984 Intensive Investigations of 41BP191 and 41BP192, The Powell Bend Prospect,
Bastrop County, Texas. Research Report 87. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1989 Intensive Excavations at 41BP19, The Kennedy Bluffs Site. Research Report 96.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Beyer, Eliza Lee
Coal and Lignite Mining in Bastrop County. Unpublished manuscript in possession
n.d.
of Fay Pannell, Bastrop County.
Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117
27

Black, Stephen L.
1989 Central Texas Plateau Prairie. In From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in Central, South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by Thomas R. Hester et al.,
pp. 5-38. Research Series 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville,
Arkansas.
Brown, David 0.
1984 A Cultural Resource Survey and Assessment of the Proposed Wolf Lane Substation
and Transmission Corridor, Bastrop County, Texas. Technical Bulletin 75. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Brown, David 0. and Ray D. Kenmotsu
1980 Test Excavations in the Fayette to Lytton Springs Transmission Corridor, Bastrop
and Fayette Counties, Texas. Research Report 76. Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Brown, Kenneth M.
1966 Notes on 41BP55 on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Brown, Kenneth M.
1983 Archaeological Studies at the CPS Butler Lignite Prospect, Bastrop County, Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report 140. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Bryant, Vaughn M. and Richard G. Holloway
1985 A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation.
-

Bureau of Economic Geology
1981 Geologic Atlas of Texas - Austin Sheet. The University of Texas at Austin.
Campbell, T.N.
1988 Name All the Indians in the Bastrop Area. In The Indians of Southern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico: Selected Writings of Thomas Nolan Campbell, pp. 71 77.
Texas Archeological Research Lab, The University of Texas at Austin.
-

Campbell, T.N. and E.B. Jelks
1953 Excavations at 41BP1-The Goodwin Site. Notes on File. Texas Archeological
Research Lab.
Clark, John
1966 Notes on 41BP56, 57, 58 on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

28

Council of Texas Archeologists
1987 Council of Texas Archeologists Guidelines for Performance, Curation, and Reports.
Creel, Darrell G.
1986 The Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas. Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation. The University of Arizona.
Davis, E. Mott
1964 investigations of McCormick Site near McDade, Bastrop County, Texas. Notes on
file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Dibble, David S.
1976 Results of an Archeological Survey of Areas to be Affected by a Proposed Sanitary
Landfill, Camp Swift, Texas. Technical Bulletin 11. Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Dibble, David S. and Dessamae Lorrain
1968 Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
Miscellaneous Papers 1. Texas Memorial Museum, Austin, Texas.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(65):180 196.
-

1979 An Archeological Reconnaissance of the Fayette Power Plant to Lytton Springs
Transmission Line. Research Report 73. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Duke, Paul L.
1977 Lake Thunderbird Site (41BP78), Bastrop, Texas. La Tierra: The Newsletter of the
South Texas Archaeological Society 4(3):15 26.
-

Ensor, H. Blaine and Catherine S. Mueller Wille
1988 Excavations at the Bull Pen Site 41BP280, Colorado River Drainage, Bastrop
County, Texas. Contract Reports in Archaeology, Report No. 3. Texas State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division,
Austin.
-

Fawcett, William B. Jr.
1975 An Archaeological Survey of the Proposed Federal Youth Center, Bastrop County,
Texas. Technical Bulletin 10. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938 Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw Hill, New York.

29

Gentry, Bruce
1920 Annual Reports of the State Mine Inspector for the Years 1919 and 1920. State
Printing Office, Austin.
Fields, Ross C., Susan V. Lisk, Jack M. Jackson, Martha Doty Freeman and Gail Bailey
1986 National Register Assessments of Archeological and Historical Resources at the
Jewett Mine, Leon County, Texas. Reports of Investigation 48. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Goode, Glen T.
I 984a A Report of Testing at Archaeological Sites 41FY421, 41 FY422, and 41 FY424 in
Fayette County, Texas. Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Austin.
1984b Archeological Testing and Recommendations for the Kennedy Bluffs. Site, 41BP19,
in Bastrop County, Texas. Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Austin, Texas.
Gould, Frank W.
1975 The Grasses of Texas. Texas A&M University, College Station.
Hale, C.S.
1848 The Geology of South Alabama. American Journal of Sciences and Arts 56:3 56.
Horizon Environmental
1990 Environmental Consultant for the Powell Bend Permit Renewal.
Guidon, N. and G. Delibrias
1986 Carbon-14 Dates Point to Man in Americas 32,000 Years Ago. Nature 321
(6072):769-771.
Jackson, Ronald Vern, ed.
1989 Texas Federal Census Index, Vols. 1 and 2. Accelerated Indexing System, Salt
Lake City, Utah.
Johnson, LeRoy Jr.
1987 A Plague of Phases. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:1-26.
Johnson, LeRoy Jr., D.A. Suhm, and C.D. Tunnel
1962 Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge and Oblate
Sites. Bulletin 5. Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.
Kelly, Thomas C. and Erwin Roemer Jr.
1981 Archaeological and Historical Investigations in Bastrop and Lee Counties, Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report 101. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

30

Kenmotsu, R.D.
1982 Cultural Resource Investigations at the Powell Bend Prospect, Bastrop County,
Texas. Research Report 84. Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas at
Austin.
Kenmotsu, Ray D. and Martha Doty Freeman
1980 Cultural Resource Survey and Monitoring in the Fayette to Lytton Springs
Transmission Corridor, Bastrop, Caldwell, and Fayette Counties, Texas. Research
Report 76. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Kotter, Steven M.
1979 An Archeological Survey of LCRA South Shore Grazing Area, Bastrop County,
Texas. Letter Report 7. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
1980 An Archeological Survey of Proposed Pipeline Adjacent to Sim Gideon Steam Plant
on Lower Colorado River Authority Property, Bastrop County, Texas. Letter Report
39. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Laurens-Day, Jane
1981 An Archeological Survey of the North Shore Grazing Areas, Bastrop County, Texas.
Letter Report 120. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Laurens, Jane C., J.A. Guy and E.R. Prewitt
1979 Archeological Survey and Assessment along Portions of Fayette Electric
Cooperative Power Lines, Fayette, Bastrop and Lavaca Counties, Texas. Reports
of Investigations 1. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Lower Colorado River Authority
1982 Climatological-Air Quality Assessment for the Powell Bend Project. LCRA, Austin,
Texas.
Malone, Jim
1968 Archeological Site Survey Work in Bastrop County. Ms. on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.
Moore, Gary L., Harry J. Shafer and Carol S. Weed
1978 Archeological Surveys of Granger and North Fork Reservoirs, Volume 1: The
Granger Report. Report 38a. Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University.
Morrison-Knudsen Company, Inc.
1982 Geological Evaluation-Powell Bend Project. Consulting report prepared for LCRA.
Nightengale, Bruce A.
1980 An Archeological Survey of a Transmission Line, Bastrop County, Texas. Technical
Bulletin 39. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

31

Nightengale, Bruce A. and Solveig A. Turpin
1985 Limited Testing at Seventeen Prehistoric Sites in the Cummins Creek Prospect,
Fayette County, Texas. Ms. on file, Texas Archeological Research Lab, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Nightengale, Bruce A. and Henry B. Moncure
n.d. Cultural Resource Investigations at the Proposed Camp Swift Regional Wastewater
Facility and Pipeline, Bastrop County, Texas. Lower Colorado River Authority,
Austin, Texas.
Pannell, Fay
1990 Resident of Bastrop County, interviewed by Dan K. Utley, May 1, 1990.
Peter, Duane E.
1982 Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens.
In Archaeological
Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, edited by T.R.
Hays, Vol. 2, pp. 20-1-20-15. Archaeology Program, Institute of Applied Sciences,
North Texas State University, Denton.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve Fox Site, Williamson County, Texas.
Research Report 49. The Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
-

1981 A Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52: 65-89.
1985 From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 54:201 238.
-

Prewitt Elton R. and Duford W. Skelton
1979 4113P89. Unpublished field notes on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Robinson, David G.
1982 Appendix II. Additional Survey on the Powell Bend Lignite Prospect. In Cultural
Resource Investigations at the Powell Bend Prospect, Bastrop County, Texas by Ray
D. Kenmotsu, pp. 61-90. Research Report 84. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1983 Additional Cultural Resource Investigations on the Powell Bend Prospect, Bastrop
County, Texas. Research Report 61. Texas Archeological Survey, The University
of Texas at Austin.
1987 Bastrop County Historical Commission Sesquicentennial Project: Cultural Resource
Investigations Along the Colorado River, Bastrop County, Texas. Archeology
Series 2. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

32

1988 Prehistoric trade in Bastrop County. Sayersville Historical Association Bulletin
No.8. Bastrop County, Texas.
Skelton, Duford W.
1977 Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power Project, Fayette County, Texas.
Research Report 50. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Skelton, Duford and Martha Doty Freeman
1979 A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment at Camp Swift, Texas. Research
Report 72. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Soil Conservation Service
1979 Soil Survey of Bastrop County, Texas.
Soundex
1900 Finding aid for U.S. Federal Census, 1900. State Archives, Austin, Texas.
State Tax Records
ms
Ad valorem tax records on microfilm. Bastrop County, 1872-1893.
Story, Dee Ann
1985 Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by Richard I. Ford, pp. 1956. Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 25.
Taylor, Anna J., Anne A. Fox and I. Wayne Cox
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Morgan Chapel Cemetery (41BP200), A Historic
Cemetery in Bastrop County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 146. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Taylor, Anna J.
1987 Archaeological Survey of the CPS Butler Lignite Prospect, Bastrop and Lee
Counties, Texas, 1984. Archaeological Survey Report 151. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
TNRIS
1937 Aerial photos of Bastrop. In the collection of the Texas Natural Resources
Information System, Texas Water Development Board, Austin.

33

Tomka, Marybeth S.F.
1991 Interim Letter Report: Archeological Overview of the Lake Bastrop State
Park/Conservation Training Center. Letter Report 7. Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department, Austin, Texas.
Weir, Frank A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Washington State
University, Pullman.
Willey, G. R.
1966 An Introduction to American Archaeology, Vol. 1. Prentice-Hall. Englewoods Cliff,
New Jersey.
Wilson, A.M.
1930 Areal Survey of Travis, Bastrop, and Fayette Counties. File Report, Texas
Archaeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

34

APPENDIX A: GEOMORPHOLOGY OF THE POWELL BEND II LIGNITE
PROSPECT, BASTROP COUNTY, TEXAS

S. Christopher Caran

35

INTRODUCTION

Geomorphology and stratigraphy of the extended Powell Bend Lignite Prospect, Bastrop
County, Texas, were briefly investigated in conjunction with the current assessment of cultural
resources and resource potential. Geomorphic fieldwork, including initial reconnaissance, was
conducted on 03 and 07 April, 10 to 12 April, and 21 June, 1989 (4 to 8 hours on each date).
Investigation of the cultural resources and geomorphology of this area was necessitated by
proposed northward expansion of the Powell Bend Lignite Mine.
The extended Powell Bend Lignite Prospect is located within the drainage basin of Big Sandy
Creek, a minor tributary of the Colorado River, in Bastrop County, Texas. Geomorphic
investigations have disclosed results relevant to the Lower Colorado River Authority's
(LCRA's) current and ongoing cultural-resource assessments in the Prospect area. Initial
geomorphic findings are based on (1) brief pedestrian reconnaissance of most of the — 312 ha
(780 ac) extended Prospect, (2) examination of existing outcrops throughout the project area,
and (3) excavation of backhoe trenches at selected localities within the Charles Evans Estate,
a division of the Prospect. Excavation was not permitted on other tracts. Stratigraphic sections
at seven backhoe trenches and two outcrops were sampled, photographed, and described in
detail.
Although immediate discovery of anthropogenic materials was not a prime consideration in
selecting localities for the geomorphic investigation, all trenches and outcrops were examined
for artifacts or other archeological remains. The present author and LCRA staff archeologists
were present when trenches were excavated, studied, and back filled, but no cultural resources
of any kind were noted. A few isolated projectile points were reportedly found on the surface
during the current archeological survey (Herb Eling personal communication April, 1989), and
Bement (1984) described artifacts recovered from both surficial and shallow stratigraphic
contexts in the Powell Bend Lignite Mine area directly south of the present Prospect.
Geomorphic processes affect potential preservation and stratigraphic integrity of the material
record of occupation and land use. Available data indicate distinct differences in sedimentation,
erosion, and soil development among geomorphic terrains within the Prospect. Localities
discussed here were chosen because they are representative of all major terrains that, in
aggregate, compose the local landscape. Geomorphic investigations at these localities (1) have
clear implications for cultural-resource assessment, (2) establish a three-dimensional
stratigraphic framework for archeological testing, and (3) provide a partial basis for
reconstructing late Quaternary landscape evolution.
Current concepts of landscape development in the western Gulf Coastal Plains are predicated
almost entirely on relative temporal indicators, with little supporting chronometric data.
Unfortunately, the present investigation adds little to this scant data base because no samples
from the extended Powell Bend Prospect were submitted for radiocarbon-age determination and
no artifacts or fossil remains were recovered from local strata. Bement (1984) had earlier
obtained two radiocarbon assays and three "reliable" thermoluminescence (TL) estimates of the
age of deposits enclosing cultural materials at a site, 41BP191, at the adjacent Powell Bend
Mine. Bement's dated stratigraphic sections and diagnostic artifacts provide a depositional

36

record spanning the past 5000 yr. These data have been incorporated in the present study where
applicable.
Geomorphic studies within the Prospect focussed on description of representative stratigraphic
sections in each of the major terrains. Because of the importance of these results for
cultural-resource assessment, special emphasis was placed on areas adjacent to stream channels,
where apparent Holocene deposits are thickest and laterally extensive. The style and sequence
of deposition in these terrains have been documented, but chronologic control was needed to
place geomorphic events in an environmentally and archaeologically significant perspective.
No radiocarbon assays were obtained, however, and no cultural materials were discovered in
useful stratigraphic contexts. For these reasons, the present inquiry was forced to rely primarily
on poorly constrained, indirect temporal indicators based on geomorphic criteria. Where
appropriate, semiquantitative data regarding rates of denudation, aggradation, and pedogenesis
elsewhere have been extrapolated to the Powell Bend Prospect in an attempt to devise a local
chronosequence. Estimates of the time dependency of stratigraphic, pedologic, and geomorphic
processes were used to suggest a crude history of landscape development. This scenario is
compatible with results of previous investigations at archeological sites and other localities in
the vicinity where reliable radiocarbon ages and/or landform chronologies have been compiled.
On this basis, limited field investigations in the extended Powell Bend Prospect have defined
the genetic and temporal stratigraphy of principal depositional units, enabling reconstruction of
landscape evolution in the upper Big Sandy Creek drainage basin.

OBJECTIVES AND METHODS

Objectives of the present geomorphic inquiry at Powell Bend Prospect are to characterize and
interpret: (1) the vertical and lateral extent of strata from which cultural materials might
potentially be recovered; (2) stratigraphy and geomorphic context of Holocene and late(?)
Pleistocene deposits throughout the Prospect area; and (3) geomorphic history of local
landforms. These objectives were addressed by reviewing relevant literature, conducting
geomorphic investigations throughout the Prospect, and integrating available stratigraphic and
chronologic data pertaining to Big Sandy Creek, the Colorado River, and their physiographic
context. Field methods included brief reconnaissance of the entire project area, detailed
description of selected stratigraphic sections exposed in backhoe trenches and existing outcrops,
and collection of a limited suite of samples for examination in the laboratory. In the field,
major depositional units were identified and their associated soil horizons were differentiated.
Soil/sediment samples were collected at closely spaced, stratigraphically defined intervals.
These samples were sealed in plastic bags to retain field moisture conditions. Later, the
samples were examined microscopically to confirm textural determinations and to inspect
pedogenic and biogenic structures.

LOCATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

Extended Powell Bend Lignite Prospect is located between —7.5 and 10.8 km due north of the
municipality of Bastrop in north-central Bastrop County, Texas (Figure 1). The —312 ha (780
37

ac) Prospect area includes portions of the channels, banks, and narrow flood terraces of Harris
Creek, an unnamed tributary of Dogwood Branch, and other, unnamed tributaries of upper Big
Sandy Creek, a generally southward-draining intermittent stream entering the Colorado River
—5.3 km southwest of the southern end of the Prospect. Other major topographic features
include broad, low-relief drainage divides as much as 27 m higher than adjacent tributary
channels, and irregularly dissected, gently to strongly sloping uplands. The entire Prospect lies
within the western Gulf Coastal Plains physiographic province (Hill 1901; Fenneman 1946),
specifically that part known as the Post Oak Savannah (Gould 1969; Ferguson 1986) or Texas
Claypan land-resource area (Soil Conservation Service 1985).
Throughout the project area, moderately thick deposits of Quaternary alluvium and thin deposits
of slope wash overlie an irregular unconformity on Eocene bedrock. A maximum —3 m of
Holocene deposits are exposed in the banks of Harris Creek, whereas Quaternary deposits in
other geomorphic contexts are significantly thinner. Where there are no outcrops, backhoe
trenches exposed the upper —I to >3 m of local stratigraphic sections. In addition to Quaternary
strata, most excavations revealed weathered and unweathered Eocene bedrock consisting of silty
and clayey sandstones of the lower Calvert Bluff Formation (Wilcox Group), which crop out
along streams (Proctor et al. 1981). Seams of lignite —I to >4 m thick are mined from the
Calvert Bluff Formation at the Powell Bend Lignite Mine immediately south of the current
Prospect (Lower Colorado River Authority, undated). Comparable seams underlie the Prospect
at depths of 25 m or less; in fact, thin seams (not the targets of proposed mining operations)
crop out along streams throughout the Prospect (Figure 2A).

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS

Environment
Few published references pertain directly to the environmental setting of Powell Bend Prospect.
Local and regional climatic data were summarized by Russell (1945); Carr (1967); Orton (1969,
1979); Griffiths and Ainsworth (1981); Larkin and Bomar (1983) and Natural Fibers
Information Center (1987). Effects of drought in Central Texas and other areas were reviewed
by Hoyt (1936, 1938), and Thomas et al. (1963); Nace and Pluhowski (1965); Riggio et al.
(1987). Godfrey et al. (1973) and Baker (1979) described and mapped soils throughout Bastrop
County and Mandel (1980) recognized relationships among modern soils and paleosols on
Colorado River terraces in Bastrop and adjacent counties. Pederson (1979) briefly characterized
major plant communities of both the Prospect and the rest of Bastrop County. Pre-Quaternary
geology of the Prospect and vicinity was discussed and/or mapped by numerous investigators,
including Hill (1901); Deussen (1924); Pattarozzi (1975), and Proctor et al. (1981). Sellards
(1929); Pence (1951); Dietrich and Lonsdale (1958); Pattarozzi (1975), and Kaiser et al. (1980)
described mineral resources of the local area, particularly lignite. Ground-water resources of
Bastrop County were treated by Austin (1954), Swartz (1957), and Follett (1970). Buckner et
al. (1987) reported surface-water discharge and water-quality data for the Colorado River
system, although no records for Big Sandy Creek or its tributaries have been published. Effects
of extreme floods in the Colorado River drainage basin -- including that of June 16, 1935, the
highest flood during this century -- were compiled by Ellsworth (1923), Dalrymple et al. (1939);
Breeding and Dalrymple (1944), and Buckner et al. (1987). Patterson (1963); Baker (1975),
38

A. Thin seam of Eocene lignite (part
of the Calvert Bluff Formation, Wilcox
Group) exposed along channel of
upper Harris Creek at locality
89062102 in the southeastern part of
the Prospect. View is generally
northward (downstream).

r
B. Eolian landforms (sand sheets
and low dunes) modified by tillage
agriculture in the Stable Upland
terrain. Area shown is in the
northeastern part of the Prospect.
View is southwestward.

S

C. Veneer of Quaternary sediment and
soil cover over weathered Eocene
bedrock (Calvert Bluff Formation) at
locality 89062101, a roadcut near
upper Harris Creek in the southeastern
part of the Prospect. View is
northeastward.

Figure 2. Photographs of depositional environment.
39

and Caran and Baker (1986) discussed factors affecting Central Texas flooding and flood
hazards.

Quaternary Stratigraphy and Geomorphology
For purposes of this discussion, the Quaternary Period is the interval from 1.6 million years ago
to the present, which is subdivided into the Pleistocene Epoch, 1.6 million to 10,000 years
before present (yr B.P.), and the Holocene Epoch, 10,000 yr B.P. to the present (Palmer 1983).
The Holocene Epoch is here informally divided into three equal time intervals, "early,"
"middle," and "late," in addition to the "modern" interval corresponding to the period of intense
settlement during the late 19th through 20th centuries. Human occupation of the Powell Bend
Prospect area on an occasional or persistent basis probably spans the past 11,000 yr (Hester
1986).
The present geomorphic and stratigraphic study has emphasized the period of potential
occupation, primarily the Holocene Epoch, although aspects of pre-Holocene geology are
discussed as appropriate. Quaternary deposits of the Prospect area, including those pre-dating
human occupation, were mapped and briefly described by Proctor et al. (1981). These authors
provided few details and their map is very generalized. No comprehensive review of
Quaternary geology, paleobiota, or paleoenvironment of the western Gulf Coastal Plains in the
vicinity of the Prospect has been published. Numerous investigators have touched on these
topics, however, primarily focussing on the middle Colorado River drainage basin and, to a
lesser extent, the neighboring Brazos River valley. Relevant discussions include those of Hill
and Vaughan (1898); Hill (1901); Deussen (1924); Weeks (1945); Urbanec (1963); Weber
(1968); Byrd (1971); Epps (1973); Edwards (1974); Sorenson et al. (1976); Wallis (1976);
Baker and Penteado-Orellana (1977, 1978); Bryant and Shafer (1977); Jessen (1977); Looney
and Baker (1977); Henry and Basciano (1979); Henry et al. (1980); Mandel (1980); Bryant and
Holloway (1985); Lundelius (1986, 1991); Frederick (1987, 1988); Caran (1989:in review), and
Caran and Mandel (1988). Examination of these references reveals a clear need for improved
chronologic control, paleoenvironmental data, geologic mapping, and deep borehole testing of
Quaternary deposits throughout this region.
A few studies have produced radiocarbon assays and tephrochronologic, cultural, or
biostratigraphic evidence useful in establishing the chronology of regional landscape evolution.
Caran and Mandel (1988) briefly described a particularly important locality in the Colorado
River valley near Smithville, in eastern Bastrop County, —30 km southeast of Powell Bend
Prospect. At this site, a one-meter thick bed of middle Pleistocene Lava Creek B volcanic ash
is exposed in the vicinity of Colorado River fill-terrace gravels. In the nomenclature of Weber
(1968), this fill terrace appears to correlate with the Montopolis or perhaps the Capitol terrace
of the Colorado River near Austin. The ash is >28 m above the river bed and —42 to 55 m
below the Colorado River drainage divides to the southwest and northeast, respectively, along
the strike of subjacent Tertiary bedrock. Lava Creek B ash is 620,000 yr old and was
transported to the Central Texas area by high-altitude winds following a major eruption of the
Yellowstone Caldera in Wyoming (Izett 1981; Izett and Wilcox 1982, their map locality Texas
2). The Smithville site provides the only quantitative chronostratigraphic datum beyond the
range of radiocarbon age determination from any Quaternary deposit or landform in the Gulf
Coastal Plains. At this locality, the Lava Creek B ash is contaminated with a small proportion
of subangular medium sand, indicating that the ash-rich sediment had been redeposited after
40

erosion stripped the original eolian ash from adjacent uplands. The ash was then transported
only a short distance, because contamination is minimal and the ash appears to have
accumulated rapidly. From this evidence, as well as the proximity of the volcanic ash to
exposures of terrace gravels, it is reasonable to conclude that the ash was ultimately deposited
in the paleochannel of the Colorado River in what is now part of the terrace fill, which would
therefore be 620,000 yr old. This interpretation conflicts with the chronology proposed by
Baker and Penteado-Orellana (1977:Table 3), who concluded, on the basis of very limited data,
that deposition of the Capitol and Montopolis fills began 350,000 and 120,000 yr B.P.,
respectively. Unfortunately, exposures at the Smithville locality are poor, thus far concealing
the true stratigraphic relationship between the bed of volcanic ash and nearby river-terrace
gravels. The age of the ash deposit is known, however, and therefore provides a chronologic
benchmark for gauging regional rates of landform development.
Other temporal indicators include fossil pollen and vertebrate assemblages and material records
of human occupation. There are only a few late Pleistocene palynological records from the
western Gulf Coastal Plains, however, and no significant Holocene records (Bryant and
Holloway 1985). Scattered remains of Rancholabrean (middle Pleistocene to early Holocene)
and Holocene vertebrates are known from a number of sites throughout the region, particularly
along streams (Lundelius 1986, 1991). Unfortunately, few of these sites have yielded
radiocarbon assays or other quantitative temporal data with which to refine the history of
landscape evolution. No post-Miocene, pre-Rancholabrean vertebrate faunas have been found
in the Gulf Coastal Plains west of Florida. Recently, an extensive middle Pleistocene
Irvingtonian fauna was discovered in cave sediments with reversed magnetic polarity
(Matuyama Polarity Chron) in Travis County within the Balcones Fault Zone bordering the
Coastal Plains on the west (Taylor 1982; Holman and Winkler 1987). Temporal ranges of the
Irvingtonian fauna and Matuyama Chron overlap, indicating that the age of the faunal remains
and their enclosing sediment is between 1,800,000 yr and 788,000 yr (Mankinen and
Dalrymple 1979; Lundelius et al. 1987).
Cultural remains recovered in the Big Sandy Creek drainage basin and vicinity span the middle
Holocene to present, and known occupation of the western Gulf Coastal Plains and adjacent
areas ranges from very late Pleistocene to the present (Prewitt 1974; Dibble 1976; Kenmotsu
1982; Robinson 1983; Bement 1984; Hester 1986). Sellards (1935) presented one of the first
reports of cultural materials in a stratigraphic context in this region.
At Round Rock in central Williamson County, —55 km northwest of Powell Bend Prospect,
Sellards found two discrete stream terraces along Brushy Creek(?) that contained cultural
materials, including intact hearths, throughout the thickness of the terrace deposits. Possible
relationships among terrace deposits at selected localities in the western Gulf Coastal Plains
were discussed by Caran (in review).

GEOMORPHOLOGY OF THE POWELL BEND II PROSPECT

Stratigraphy and geomorphology of the extended Powell Bend Lignite Prospect provide a
physical record of Quaternary paleoenvironmental conditions and the chronology of landscape
evolution. Environmental factors strongly influenced prehistoric through modern lifeways of
41

both permanent and transient residents of this area and affected subsequent preservation and
stratigraphic integrity of archeological sites and materials.
Geomorphic Terrains and Associated Strata
Within the extended Powell Bend Prospect, three discrete geomorphic terrains are defined on
the basis of topographic expression, soil type, internal stratigraphy, active geomorphic processes,
elevation above and distance from the channel of the local trunk stream. Major terrains of the
project area include: (1) stable uplands as much as —27 m higher than adjacent stream channels;
(2) denuded bedrock slopes —4 to 21 m higher than the stream; and (3) riparian corridors,
consisting of flood terraces, stream banks, and channels 0 to —4 m above the channel bottoms
(Figure 1). Principal characteristics of these terrains are summarized in Table 2. Terrains are
primarily distinguished by their position in the landscape, type and thickness of sediment cover,
and degree of soil development. Selected, representative stratigraphic sections were described
at exposures in each of these settings. These sections are discussed in order of decreasing
elevation.
Nine stratigraphic sections in terrains throughout the Prospect are described in this report.
Seven of these sections were in backhoe trenches and two were at existing exposures.
Description of each of the sections began at the base of the exposure and continued upward to
the ground surface. Terminology used to describe the deposits is consistent with current
standard stratigraphic and/or pedologic usage. Stratigraphically relevant units consist of
individual soil horizons, lithologic beds, or related bedding sequences, which were numbered
uniquely, in series, from the bottom to the top of each local section. The convention for
numbering stratigraphic units is as follows: the unique trench number (1-7) or exposure number
(101 and 104, corresponding to locality numbers 89062101 and 89062104, respectively) is
followed by a period then a sequential numeral corresponding to the relative position of the unit
within that stratigraphic section, with numeral one reserved for the unit at the base of each
section. Unless otherwise stated, there is no implied correlation among units of the same or
different numeral designation in different sections. If bedrock was exposed at the base of the
section it was designated Unit 1.
Stable Uplands. The stable uplands terrain includes the highest points in the local landscape
-- broad, low-relief drainage divides and isolated hills between —21 and 27 m above adjacent
stream reaches (Table 2). These relict landforms are essentially undissected, with slope
gradients generally ranging from —3.0 to 3.3%. Trenches 6 and 7 were excavated in this terrain
near the northern boundary of the Prospect on the interfluve separating the watershed of Harris
Creek (trunk stream) to the south from that of Dogwood Branch, a tributary of Harris Creek
(Figures 1, 3, and 4). Trench 7 was placed just below the apex of one of the highest hills in
the project area at —146 m elevation above mean sea level. Bedrock at this locality consists of
faintly laminated, calcareous, slightly silty and clayey, very fine to fine sandstone (Unit 7.1) of
the Eocene Calvert Bluff Formation, which was reached at 75 cm depth and was exposed to a
total depth of 1.5 m. Living roots and clay-filled root conduits penetrate the entire exposed
thickness of this relatively weakly consolidated bedrock, but are most concentrated in the upper
5 cm. Translocation of clay along root conduits was sufficient to extend the Bt horizon of the
overlying soil as much as 5 cm below the stratigraphic contact with bedrock, which is slightly
to extensively weathered. This zone of illuviation has weak, fine, angular, blocky soil structure.
Oxidation of disseminated iron minerals in the upper 5 cm of sandstone produced a
42

•

•

•

▪

-16 to

O ,

'S

0
.......
2,. 0
-g. u 0
_sg
0 . ig, .,scd 0 = u
C.) €4-4. o

0
O
,-, •0
4) = s

'F = .

0 S 0 t."

G
0
a..1
N4.1
0
1.1.] ti .1"):
u

2

a ezt
= ^
c 0
0 0" =

. g0
.
> 0 g
O
,...- .
= 4 v
=.=

0
0 .°
0 5 0 0
•
2
z
0 .., g
U 0 = '-'7‘

co

7.: 0,2

E

0 _

8
g .g
a,
0
0 ... 0

0 0

.1:n

Ise o
= =

I.. .0 0 0 0

›,
a e 04
- ..o
0 g 8 ..4-,.
40 .
2
0. -8

i •-•

u o

..st •=

0 0 0 0 p.,..
7,
.,..,
6'1
.0 p.
'''
7
6

° 7, -i. TA

- 0.)

-to

`^ *0
O., 1O

0

,.... 5 =
c- 0 .,3 0

F2

0
Z
0

03

'''' -?. , 0

4.- CO e.-. ,cei

g

co

-

.V1

S 0CO c..) ›..,

, a 5 .e o 4, cd 0

0

0
a ,
o
001 c:.
N
E0
Ez
rcs, c:,
In---,::.
.0

01 ..W

0 i • 7,,
..-.
.1..„.., a)
o

F.

0

g

0.
ts.
00

VU
›
p.
2 cl ,
e'l
as w) =
_ i
= ...
4u
,-.....=
c.-4 ..se r...)

4..
.)

..:1- V

0
g
. ,„, -0

E c) 0E cz

-E"E
ca

E
..., m

l rn
..._, e 0._

4.)

No .P iv;
.4- =„,.......
, = E
co
0 1
..er'1".

X
-4- c...,
---• o
o T,
el 0
CD

g
.._ .0t-4
,...,
--.0
t . ,--,
t0

ea

rn = ,1,.
ev 0. i.c.4(NI c.-. v-1

.-. 0

•-n 0 C>

ei

j."
E
ON 1
G co

.,-71 g t-4..00

E

R.

2 -•
:-.
2 ,U
.Z", •0
= a>

.s 8

r.0 0,_

7

aa 6.
>,.-S0

rn 03

....., e
"t 0
„,

- .., ,,,
(-4 ..s,
0 in

.5

o E

.o o 2. .0
01 Ca t)
, )-• * -o

as ("")
_ t
= ...
..i. ..g.
„, 4)

EG.
x

E

-0

g
0

° o - "CI 0 ...... .z E
= :,..2
zz - ;c1 -r
..'
-1.,
E F...
5 t E
EmI' 3 c.
...... 0 c.)
--. al E._.
ID_
u.)o CAI
, .5 is 2 2 > no
„, :. 0
- Ti o 2 -. 0 .E, 0 e 2
3 c..) e s v p.. . E o..-'4 v all tit 2 -IQ E

>

.I
Y,

-7.0c.)

a)

.0

-0
co
i
1 'Sa

Jo = .2 z .08
5 °' E 0
E ii .:=
n .0
9.
0 el 'a .5.9 rj.
u• -o = 00.C.-.
-0 g
= E
0 . es o
0 Q. _N,G
Ti e .x V .0
cs 4f) - -

c....,o
0c.,-.
cn
.= es
O

g

ON

E - " us F- 11
f II
= 0

ro CO 11) 0 0CotCO

CA

o

4..)
,

4.)

.s
-0

o. ..r
T
Ca
=
r- 0.1

0 ..-... ›, 0,,

16 Ts V .°
ugrothgE
c.)
u _ 2 _
.c..."-; ,L, 1:5 = t
a.,
E I L
•
T
1) = 0 C ‘,.. cn ... >

-SG 0

0.)
). IO

2
0

0 0 0
0 0. E
. vi
...

• t

a
-0
S

< *g

e . - 0.. , , 0- - ill
i . 't
c !12 , '..
:
S 1 0 0° 61
47 co =
>'. : 6 '1
4.' E
.6
9
.n
Ii
g
"0
0
t... -o = ::
0
_
g : a)
g
a.)
$,.,
-a
.2
0 o o
0 „E
4,1
= =
. ...,.1..
-.72,
e
,.
.
• co g E
o .--' „.,
O

'al!
4)

I•

-2 E

0.
0. ,.._
O ea -r) Ili
c..)

Ta .:::
o_
e E"'
O
.

in

0 o
II7 •,.
..

> ,.._ C
0
g
632
r.8
11 2 .---.
o
a•Ct
---.•0.•o
O
CP > ce >, 0 • 5 0
0
e
.
VI
CO
71
0-,
CO
R
2

..0
>...
..,
. .,,, y,

•

• 8
= 0
O .0
0
.- ..1*
,....-• c

0 0
.0

0
0 =
0= c...
a
o
0
0
2
o
-0 . „ u
O
ea
..= .... g iii 15 cc oo=
2..
...... -a•C
' 0E
cd = *.. 00

Z
4) ..-....

8

L2

o 4 co 0
LO 'EA -., g

21";°3
a. ..-, ._
•e. ,.....
2 .P*
.r..,-o.

-o c--

c0

a.) =

7.3
17E
4-) ,ccl

2 cl,,

0
c0 o

= a,

-0

.1.-•-i.-.....
e-w8 2 0 ......
0
,- ›., .0 1,.s
..
0 cd
0
0
C

0 ..., 0 .'_., e r..-..w
07 a)
4..) co
i0)
-8
0 .0

-0
= 0.
.... 4.3
cn
0 -cF1 a
I-. o..co
a>
Lm

r..,

o .= 0,

t.).4 = .= a,

-

0 °

1..

CO 73

co

•

•

r .`41

t..- .=sc

=

oil .g
= c.)
›, -E

•

U

o

O

be

to

.5 2

2 -2

0
TA

Id 0

E2
0,o G_
.

K
0 .
.z3 i

03 10
CO

cp,

5

,

a
..e. s a
0
r..) = •E

..J 8. 0
o) =
g e c.
co I-. •-•

DI 0ON 0
0 0..--, 0
'67. cfl
toi
a.) d.)
t .c =

g

,... ›. .5
0

5 4.0
441 0

a c7) o
crs e vi

7g
5 ..g
co o

O,

1
• a
0.
= I0

[f;

0=
.c vt
tA .F.

- E rg

o, ,„
ki 0
o. .5
es
(..) C..

.0 s _....50
0
bp

.2 "

0 al' =

,t. i
-al
9 #
›0 =
o
u .8
ea 2 ,_
0 0. ..-.
CI) e

g., g..
8 ..
2
E

a.) E
o -c
.c. 0
co
us 0

iso

2

= .= n
0 cn '..."
g -09 -.=
'..=
ce aa
OS

a.)

CO

01.

0

o 2
3
0 .g

=
• t.
O. 0

03
P.
00
4,

tu

7,' 0 0
E=
c 0
.g 1 ::4)

c>
0
G ca );
0
-0
g ,A 0
•1:7
6 i.c) u
E ' 8
E .
• T 0.
.
.0 .,-, E
E .e
O
a
O ci.

0
0

gg .?:,

g

7
.....04.,
o'
0 ,s
8 .2 ki. o. i.
c.) ..-. 0

4 .) u
E
O

..=
e

ICI .o

z .e.
• 0§
0
.c 0.
a) a.)

N

cil
. -0
ci)
..-.
,0 8 I
o CD
0 =
Z

.0

co

F43

00

a

0

§> g •-•I:L.
14 , .1
.0
,-• 0=
•-•• 0 V

0
40
I
I
Relief*
NW
(m)

I

1

I

80

I

2?0 lm
I
Highest point
in prospect SE
BHT7
( -146m MSL)

10

I

c

0—

0

Stable
Uplands

described
section
1.5m
local
depth

2—

BHT6

4—

ground , .
toward
Dogwood
Branch

6—

BHT7 is 673m north of Harris Creek,
where eiev. is -121m MSL

described
section
1.1m
local
depth

Vertical exaggeration: 20x

Denuded
Bedrock
Slope

8—

*Relief relative to local vertical datum.
10

—

Figure 3. Topographic profile A-A' through the stable upland terrain. See Figure 1 for the line
of section.
44

NW
Relief

41Ik

toward stream

SE

92m --11Pfol--5111-01

14-3m

Not to Scale (horizontal)

(m)

BEIT7

Elevation

ground

...AM:3m msi_

Unit 7.3
Unit 7.2

Unit 7.1

1

bedrock
•

•

• .....

./
Limit of exposure
1.5m local depth

c/R
z.yck

2

0

J

Y.k.

3

BHT6
4

ground

/
Elev.
,.142m /
MS1.-

Unit 6 4

Stratigraphic units
exposed in these trenches
not necessarily correlative

Unit 6.3
Unit 6.2
Unit 6.1

5

bedrock

Limit of
exposure

1.1m local depth

6

* Relief relative to local vertical datum.

Explan•tiort

bedrock

FT

unconsolidated seelboent or loll
clay

I
231°.7,1t..̀7,`rdr.1""'
‘"

iind•tone

Sand

:

ittclananlary structures

11 PEI

I

I

CW110116 or shale

lannInalion
COncretione
bross bedding

•

ealclum caabonste

e

iron oxide
lerriCrell

bed011enic strucrurea
prism•tle

4111,1=:::.^0,V.1)

blocky

NO.

1111111:PrugAlgVagricFigure 4. Stratigraphic sections exposed in
backhoe trenches 6 and 7 in the Stable Upland
terrain along topographic profile A-A'.

Padog•mc boundary or
oedottinktaby-roodIfled •tratIgraphlo
,,,,, Genteel
line root lr•re

MM. above mean sea level

45

yellow-orange coloration with distinctly higher color values than those of unweathered bedrock
(Munsell colors were not determined). The upper boundary of the pedogenically modified
bedrock is clear and smooth, but distinctly transitional with the base of the overlying soil.
In general, the soil exposed in trench 7 appears to be compatible with a typical profile of the
Crockett series, the nominal soil type at this site as mapped by Baker (1979:Map sheet 10).
Because of heavy rains during the current field investigation, soils were water-saturated at the
time of examination, preventing formal description. The 5-cm thick zone of pedogenically
modified bedrock is overlain by 50 cm of orange-red, very fine to fine sandy clay (Unit 7.2, a
clay or clay loam in pedologic nomenclature) with weak, fine to medium, angular, blocky
structure and thin to thick, continuous argillans on ped faces. This interval has root traces
throughout and constitutes a well developed Bt horizon. The upper boundary of the Bt horizon
is gradual and smooth, merging with the base of a 25-cm thick dark brown, silty, very fine to
fine sand (Unit 7.3, a loam or sandy loam). Development of soil structure in Unit 7.3 increases
downward from granular to weak, coarse, angular blocky. Living roots and root traces are
abundant throughout, particularly in the top few centimeters, as are invertebrate pellets (worm
casts, etc.). This interval includes a thin (>10 cm) A horizon and thicker BA or Bw horizon.
Aside from minor discrepancies in horizon thickness and structural expression, this profile is
very similar to that of the Crockett soil, an Udertic Paleustalf, although the Crockett contains
small concretions of calcium carbonate and iron and manganese oxides that the soil in trench
7 lacks. The local soil appears to have developed through slow aggradation of sandy slope
wash and silty sand derived through in situ weathering of the Eocene bedrock.
The section exposed in trench 6 bears many similarities to that of trench 7. Trench 6 was
excavated —125 m northwest (down slope) of trench 7 at —142 m elevation near the lower
boundary of the stable uplands terrain. The Calvert Bluff Formation is locally overlain by <1
m of pedogenically modified slope wash and in situ weathering products generally comparable
to those seen in trench 7. There are, however, striking differences in the soil profiles at these
two sites. These distinctions appear to be most directly linked to variations in the lithology of
bedrock and the texture of locally derived soil parent materials. At trench 6, bedrock consists
of calcareous shale (Unit 6.1), which was exposed between 81 and 110 cm depth. The
uppermost 5 cm of shale are irregularly variegated, ranging from greenish gray to white.
Variegation probably resulted from incomplete oxidation and accumulation of pedogenic
calcium carbonate (threads and small pedoconcretions) along root traces and bedding planes.
Directly overlying the partially weathered shale exposed in trench 6 there is a laterally
discontinuous, laminated, limonitic ferricrete that is deep red in color and —9 cm thick (Unit
6.2). Consistence of this material varies from highly indurated to fissile and brittle. Layering
within the fine grained ferricrete is parallel to bedding in the shale. The ferricrete may have
formed through either progressive ferric enrichment of the shaley bedrock or gradual
iron-mineral replacement of shale laminae that were geochemically unstable at shallow depths.
Shale beds served as a permeability barrier or aquitard, enhancing development of the ferricrete
by creating a local perched water table that impeded diffusion of atmospheric oxygen.
Reducing conditions persisted below the perched water table over an extended period, resulting
in concentration of pH-sensitive ferrous iron in solution. More recently, erosion may have
disrupted the lateral continuity of the aquitard, thereby enhancing drainage of the shallow
ground water. This process allowed partial oxidation of the underlying shale and subsequent

46

local precipitation of ferric-iron minerals, particularly goethite. Calcium carbonate also
precipitated after oxidation of the shale.
The ferricrete forms an abrupt, smooth, pedogenic boundary or "petroferric contact" (Soil
Survey Staff 1975:50-51) overlain by the Bt horizon of a soil developed in slope-wash deposits
of silty, very fine to fine sandy clay (Unit 6.3, a clay loam or sandy clay). Lying between 10
and 70 cm depth, the Bt horizon has moderate, fine to medium (coarsens upward), angular,
blocky structure and continuous argillans on peds. A few living roots and root traces are found
throughout. Near the base of this horizon is an irregular, variegated zone of iron staining,
calcification, and incipient formation of iron oxide concretions. The iron stains are yellow-gray
and there are small, soft concretions of red iron oxide within the upper 2 cm of the zone.
Locally, the zone of staining is laterally bounded by ped faces. Beneath this zone, soil parent
materials are weakly cemented with diffuse calcium carbonate, giving this part of the Bt horizon
a white to light gray color. The clear,smooth, upper boundary of the horizon grades into a
10-cm thick, clayey, silty, fine to medium sand (Unit 6.4, a loam or sandy loam) with
irregularly distributed quartzite pebbles and granule-size, ironstone (hematitic?) concretions.
The quartzite pebbles are reworked remnants of formerly extensive terrace deposits (Capitol
terrace?) of the Colorado River. There is a thin (-4 cm) root mat and A horizon at the ground
surface, whereas the lower part of Unit 6.4 is a BA or B horizon with moderate, coarse, angular,
blocky structure.
The soil profile exposed in trench 6 is similar in many respects to that of the Crockett series,
the nominal soil type at this locality. Yet Baker (1979) made no mention of a ferricrete at the
base of the solum of the Crockett or any other soil series in Bastrop County. Ferricretes are,
however, extremely common in oxidized sandstones of this region (Proctor et al. 1981). In
addition, Mandel (1980) and Caran and Mandel (1988) noted moderately to extremely well
developed ferricretes in fluvial terrace deposits at a number of sites in the Colorado River
valley, including petroferric zones in lateritic paleosols <4 m thick near Smithville. Ferricretes
often represent end products of extensive, prolonged leaching of cation bases such as calcium
and potassium from both soluble and "exchangeable" minerals, leaving iron and aluminum as
the principal, residual cations.
Advanced leaching is characteristic of Oxisols (formerly known as laterites, in part), which are
most often found in humid, tropical environments, usually on stable landforms. Sorensen et al.
(1976), Wallis (1976), and Mandel (1980) argued that Paleustalfs (a class of Alfisols) and
lateritic paleosols closely resembling Oxisols exist at many sites in the Colorado valley, but
could not have formed under climatic and pedogenic conditions like those of today. Instead,
these authors concluded that such soils must be relicts of the Pleistocene or an earlier epoch
when Central Texas was significantly wetter, supporting pine-oak gallery forests that contributed
to the development of Alfisols. Although the nature and degree of Neogene and Quaternary
environmental changes have not been fully demonstrated, there is little question that the Alfisols
and Oxisol-like soils and paleosols of Bastrop County are pre-Holocene in age.
It is possible, however, that development of the ferricrete observed in trench 6 may have
followed a pedogenic pathway different from that of some other soils, one that did not require
an extremely long period of leaching. At trench 6, the fluctuating, perched water table at
shallow depth may have afforded conditions that would readily enhance concentration and
precipitation of iron minerals, effectively diminishing the time needed to produce a thin,
47

laterally discontinuous ferricrete. In addition, this process probably could have ensued without
significant climatic or other environmental changes, although changes may have occurred.
Mandel (1980:135-136) concluded that at least —100,000 yr may have been required to produce
a Paleustalf in this region. This rough estimate may apply as well to the time needed to
produce a Crockett-like soil with an associated ferricrete like that in trench 6.
Trenches 6 and 7 were deliberately placed in undisturbed settings where soils are well
developed to "supermature" (ferricretes) and are indicative of prolonged landscape stability with
very slow net aggradation of sediment. Other areas in the stable uplands have been disturbed
by tillage agriculture, brush clearing, and historic underground lignite mining. Besides their
direct impact on soils, these activities disrupted the vegetative cover, enhancing slope wash and
deflation potential and providing ideal conditions for the Southern Pocket Gopher and other
fossorial mammals that destroy or inhibit soil horizonation through intense bioturbation. Eolian
landforms -- low dunes and sheet deposits of sand -- characterize this terrain in parts of the
Prospect, but have been partly subdued by recent agriculture (Figure 2B). The Patilo series is
a soil that develops in eolian deposits and has been mapped on terraces and bedrock slopes
along Dogwood Branch and Big Sandy Creek near the project area (Baker 1979:Map sheets 10
and 16). Eolian deposits within the Prospect itself appear to have few of the diagnostic
properties of the Patilo, however, and this series is not recognized locally.
Denuded Bedrock Slopes. At elevations generally —4 to 21 m above stream channels, along the
slopes of hills and on narrow divides separating low-order tributaries, bedrock crops out locally
or is covered with a veneer of slope wash typically <1 m thick (Table 2). Throughout the
denuded bedrock slopes, slope gradients are moderate to steep, ranging from 2.0 to 8.3%,
thereby minimizing opportunities for deposition while maximizing erosion potential. Numerous
exposures are afforded by streams, gullies, borrow pits, roadcuts, and stock tanks. For this
reason, no backhoe trenches were excavated in this terrain, although trench 3 was placed at the
distal edge of a flood terrace at the foot of a bedrock slope. This and other slopes in this terrain
appear to be undergoing net denudation, primarily through sheet erosion and gullying, at least
under the present land-use regime. The minor tributaries of upper Harris Creek are incised into
Eocene bedrock, and lack significant alluvial deposits. With so little sediment cover, soil
development is minimal except in isolated swales and over poorly consolidated sandstones and
mudstones. There, thin soils with weak to moderate horizonation have developed on slope-wash
deposits and weathered bedrock. Only a few of the sites observed during the present
investigation have soils corresponding to the nominal soil series, principally the Axtell, which
Baker (1979:map sheet 10) mapped throughout this terrain. Exhumed to thinly mantled bedrock
surfaces with or without pedogenic modification are exposed at a number of localities on
denuded bedrock slopes (Figure 2C). The roadcut for a private road at site 89062101 reveals
the full, local thickness of Quaternary sediment, soil, and weathered bedrock (Figures 2C and
5). This site is located in the eastern part of the Prospect near a small, unnamed, intermittent
tributary immediately above its confluence with upper Harris Creek at —137 m elevation or, —5
m higher than the stream channel (Figure 1). Site 89062101 was the highest point in the
drainage basin at which appreciable sediment cover was observed in this terrain. At the base
of the exposed portion of the stratigraphic section at locality 89062101 are —60 cm of very silty,
very fine to fine sandstone of the Calvert Bluff Formation (Unit 101.1) (Figure 5). The upper
40 cm of sandstone, particularly the uppermost 10 cm, are mottled red-orange (Munsell color
not determined), as a result of preferential iron oxidation, whereas unoxidized areas are light
gray. The mottled sandstone is bounded above by a slightly irregular erosional unconformity.
48

Site
89062101

Site
89062104
toward stream

toward stream

Depth*
(m)
0—

NW

N

SE

S

-JElevation 137m

A/Elevation 142m

PAS!

MSL
Unit 104.2

ground

Unit 101.2
to•
•
041Inflili:1101111s
aW•111,1iiiint

Erosional
unconformity
Unit 101.1 on Eocene
aZIEMZICHIERI
bedrock
bedrock
IMEEMEZEI
(Wilcox Group)

1-

Unit 104.1
bedrock

mosiMMESE1

Limit of
exposure
Limit of
exposure

2

Stratigraphic units exposed in these trenches
are not necessarily correlative.

*Depth relative to local ground surface.

tattlanatien
bedrock

unconsolidated sediment or soil
-clay

clayslone or shale

n amid

sandstone

q

lr.'71V,ee uaVki"° . " .

sedimentary structures

1=9 1=1

M

Figure 5. Stratigraphic sections exposed
at localities 89062101 and 89062104 in
the Denuded Bedrock Slopes terrain.
Locality 89062101 is in the southeastern
part of the Prospect. Locality 89062104
is immediately southwest of the extended
Prospect in the permitted Powell Bend
Mine area.

lentinailon
aencretions
cross bedding

▪

oalonrin carbonels

•

Iron oxide

leffierele

ormleaente effecter**
Ern prismatic

slratlgNOhlC 0001001$

iU!i

J" plilmftMe

ITITTigrrov.tgra.atla"12M1 Imp* root or root conduli
1E1

pearnsonle bounders or

PedOgenicany-madilied strationaphic
„..w...contect

rool Use.

M8L above mean sea level

49

Overlying the bedrock unconformity there is a thin (one clast thick) scatter of widely dispersed
pebbles and cobbles of chert, ironstone, and quartzite, and 40 cm of orange-brown, silty, very
fine to fine and rare medium sandy slope-wash deposits (Unit 101.2). The pebbles and cobbles
probably were reworked from fluvial terrace deposits high in the landscape, although the
ironstone clasts could have eroded from ferricretes that formed in either the terrace deposits or
Eocene sandstone. Unit 101.2 lacks any indication of significant soil development except for
a slight rubification (coloration resulting from accumulation of oxidized iron) and a thin mat
of living roots and organic detritus at the surface. Even the weak rubification may not have
developed in situ, however, but instead was inherited from oxidized sandstones from which
most of the slope wash derived. If the coloration is indeed inherited, the soil has an A-C
profile; otherwise, the profile is A-Bw-C. Neither horizon sequence corresponds to the typical
Axtell series, which has an A-Bt-C profile (Baker 1979:6-7).
Site 89062104 is located near the headwaters of an unnamed, intermittent tributary of Big Sandy
Creek outside the southwestern border of the current project area, just east of the county road
(Figure 1). Local elevation is -442 m, or —2 m higher than the approximate upper boundary
of the denuded bedrock slopes in the central part of the Prospect (Table 2). Elevations along
the southwestern and southern edges of the property reach maximum elevations of 150 to 153
m, 4 to 7 m higher than in the central part. Therefore, the relative range in elevation of the
denuded bedrock terrain in both areas is the same, 6 to 23 m below the drainage divides. The
stratigraphic section at locality 89062104 is exposed in a deeply gullied excavation below a
small, artificial drainage-control structure. This section is very similar to that at 89062101: light
gray, silty, clayey, very fine to fine sandstone of the Calvert Bluff Formation (Unit 104.1)
unconformably overlain by —50 cm of orange-brown, very fine to fine sandy slope wash with
a thin root mat and organic accumulation at the surface (Unit 104.2) (Figure 5). Like their
counterparts at 89062101, the deposits at 89062104 lack obvious indications of extensive
pedogenic horizonation and have an A-C profile. The nominal soil series at 89062104 is the
Crockett, which typically has a well developed A-Bt-C profile (Baker 1979:12, mapsheet 16).
The actual soil profile at 89062104 bears no resemblance to that of the Crockett.
Both the Axtell and Crockett series are Udertic Paleustalfs. No exposures of Crockett-type soils
were observed in this terrain within the Prospect. A few areas of probable Axtell soil were
found in swales where slope-wash deposits were thickest. These Axtell-type profiles were,
however, markedly thinner than the typical Axtell, which has an —20 cm thick A horizon of
brown to pale brown fine sandy loam with granular structure. From —20 to 122 cm depth, the
Axtell proper has a Bt horizon of yellowish red to light brownish gray clay to sandy clay with
all or most of the following characteristics: yellowish brown to yellowish red mottles; weak,
coarse to medium, blocky structure; continuous argillans on ped faces; and a few, small,
iron/manganese and calcium carbonate concretions. The C horizon, from —122 to 193 cm
depth, is a gray to light gray sandy clay loam to sandy clay with reddish yellow, yellowish
brown, and/or reddish brown mottles and a few, small concretions of calcium carbonate. None
of the Axtell-type profiles observed in the denuded bedrock terrain appeared to be more than
-.1 m thick, and none had Bt horizons with continuous argillans. Concretions of iron and
manganese oxides were relatively common, but calcium carbonate concretions were noted at
only a few localities. In general, the soils of the denuded bedrock slopes in the Powell Bend
Prospect were less well developed than were the nominal soils. Whether this discrepancy is the
result of increased erosion resulting from historic land use is unclear but probable.

50

Riparian Corridor: Flood Terraces, Stream Banks, and Channels. Riparian corridors border the
trunk streams and their larger tributaries throughout the Prospect (Figure 1). The riparian
corridor terrain comprises three major landforms, the flood terraces, stream banks, and channels.
These landforms are here treated as parts of a single terrain primarily for convenience in
mapping at a small scale. Individual landforms are easily distinguished in the field; they also
differ in terms of the types and rates of dominant geomorphic processes (erosion, deposition,
and pedogenesis). General characteristics of each landform are summarized below and in Table
2.
Flood Terraces. The term "flood terrace" denotes a geomorphic surface with typical, low-relief
(2.2% gradient), terrace morphology that is physically separated from the stream channel, often
by high, steep banks, but that is subject to at least episodic inundation. A flood plain, if also
present, lies at elevations lower than those of the flood terrace, below the elevation of bank-full
stage if the bank defines the proximal edge of the flood terrace. For this reason, the flood plain
may be inundated far more frequently than is the higher, more isolated flood terrace. During
any major discharge event large enough to submerge both the flood plain and the flood terrace,
the coarseness of sediment deposited on these landforms would be inversely proportional to the
height of inundation. There are only a few, small areas of true flood plain within the Prospect,
and these are virtually indistinguishable from the active stream channel; whereas flood terraces
occupy the inner parts of valleys throughout most stream reaches. This relationship is consistent
with other geomorphic evidence indicating that the landscape of this area has undergone net
denudation during most of the Quaternary Period.
Flood-terrace fill is composed of several, distinct types of deposits. Slope-wash deposits are
common at the distal margin of a flood terrace and, in some settings, much of the terrace may
be mantled by a veneer of eolian sediment. Most of the sediment capping a flood-terrace
landform is, however, the product of overbank deposition during occasional floods. Overbank
deposits are usually thinly bedded and "upward fining," grading upward from relatively coarse
to relatively fine sediment. This diagnostic pattern of textural variation may be expressed
within individual beds or among a series of closely spaced beds. A similar pattern may extend
vertically through the entire thickness of flood-terrace fill. The base of the fill is usually made
up of coarse sediment directly overlying bedrock. This coarse sediment was transported along
the former axis of the channel, where flow velocities were greatest. As the channel shifts
laterally, the locus of deposition of coarse sediment also shifts, eventually producing an
extensive bed of medium to coarse sand and gravel. At the original position of the channel, the
style of sedimentation changes as distance from the active channel increases. Overbank
deposition eventually becomes dominant, burying the coarse channel sediment beneath finer
sands, silts, and clays.
Strata composing a flood terrace are time transgressive, meaning that sediment composing
different parts of a single, apparently continuous bed may have been deposited at different
times, with a discrepancy of perhaps several thousand years overall. For example, the oldest
channel deposits generally would be those underlying the distal margin of the flood terrace
farthest from the active channel, and progressively younger channel sediment would be found
closer to the present channel. This sequence may have been interrupted locally by ephemeral
"chute" channels produced by past floods that cut through older parts of the basal coarse
sediment, leaving relatively young chute-channel fill "inset" among these older deposits.

51

Stream Banks and Channels. Stream banks are primarily erosional landforms rising abruptly
from the distal edges of fluvial channels. Banks separate the channels from their associated
flood plains or flood terraces. The internal stratigraphy of flood-plain deposits or terrace fill
is often exposed in the banks. Slope gradients of local stream banks are highly variable,
exceeding 100% (i.e., >45° or 1:1 slope) through some short reaches of upper Harris Creek.
Most reaches are cut to bedrock, such that the channels themselves contain little sediment
(Figure 6A). Channel gradients are low, however, averaging only 0.52% or —0.5 m/km in the
central part of the Prospect. All local streams are intermittent and channel widths, depths, and
cross-sectional profiles differ from reach to reach. Ephemeral chute channels cross the flood
terraces on the insides of meander bends at a few localities. At least one small bend of Harris
Creek was completely evulsed by a chute channel that then became the main channel. More
often, chutes gradually fill with fine grained, organic-rich overbank deposits. Except for the
relict chutes, none of the channels of this area contain significant quantities of sediment. There
are, therefore, no descriptions of stratigraphic sections within the modern channels.
Stratigraphic Sections. As is the case throughout much of Central Texas, the thickest, most
complex Quaternary deposits in Powell Bend Prospect are found in the lowest parts of the
landscape, the riparian corridors. Most of these deposits, particularly Holocene sediments, are
confined to the flood terraces of principal streams. Flood terraces afforded proximity to water,
cover, game, and a variety of raw materials that were undoubtedly utilized by both prehistoric
and historic inhabitants. Intensive resource exploitation, coupled with relatively rapid Holocene
sediment accretion, make flood terraces the most significant potential cultural-resource areas in
the Prospect. No buried anthropic remains were discovered, however, despite examination of
a number of natural and artificial exposures. None of the outcrops revealed long or otherwise
noteworthy stratigraphic sequences, and none were described formally. Instead, five backhoe
trenches were excavated on the flood terraces and contiguous stream banks, and these sections
were described in detail. Sites chosen for trenching include all parts of the riparian corridor
terrain except the main channels, which lack extensive sedimentary sequences. Trench
placement was intended to provide a comprehensive stratigraphic record linking deposits and
their specific geomorphic context.
Some stream reaches are relatively straight and deeply incised. In such areas, the flood terrace
is broad and continuous and especially high relative to the adjacent channel. Flooding is
therefore uncommon and the rate of overbank deposition is anomalously low. Because of the
width of these terraces, slope-wash deposition is confined to extreme distal terrace margins.
Sediment aggrades slowly on infrequently flooded terraces and the section may be thinner
overall than in other terrace areas, allowing pedogenesis to progress unimpeded. Trench 5 was
placed in this type of setting (Figures 1 and 7). Local elevation is —122 m, —4 m higher than
the adjacent channel floor. Exposed in trench 5 is an —1.5-m section extending —0.7 m into thin
bedded, clayey, silty, very fine to fine sandstone of the Calvert Bluff Formation (Unit 5.1)
(Figure 8). The upper 60 cm of sandstone are pedogenically modified, particularly the
uppermost 20 cm. Moderate, fine to medium, angular, blocky soil structure extends to within
10 cm of the limit of exposure, coarsening downward below the 20-cm zone of most extensive
pedogenesis. Within this zone, root traces are common and ped faces are rubified (10YR4/4,
dark yellowish brown) with continuous argillans. Color of the matrix is 10YR4/3, dark brown.
The uppermost 20 cm is part of the Bt horizon of the overlying soil, whereas the next lower 40
cm is a Bw horizon and the lowest 10 cm is an R horizon of unmodified bedrock. The

52

A. Channel and stream banks of Harris Creek in the Riparian Corridor terrain
in the central part of the Prospect. View is westward (downstream). Note
exposed tree roots on banks.

C. Slope-wash and flood-terrace deposits exposed in
backhoe trench 3 on the flood terrace of Harris Creek
in the Riparian Corridor terrain. View is toward the
south (upslope).

B. Fluvial-channel deposits exposed in backhoe
trench 5 on the flood terrace of Harris Creek in the
Riparian Corridor terrain. View is toward the
northeast (streamward). Scale bar is marked in
centimeters (left side) and inches (right side).

Figure 6. Riparian Corridor terrain.
53

10
Relief*
(m)
0-

310

210

40

5 0m
1
SW

NE

flood terrace

0

BHT5

ground, Elevation —122m
MSL

1described
section

stream

ban

1.4m
local
depth

2-

Harris
Creek

Vertical
exaggeration: lox

3channel

4

* Relief relative to local vertical datum.
0
Relief
(m)
0-T

10

20

30

40 m

NE

SW

flood terrace
BHT4

1Elevation -118m
groun51/ ' msL
stream
bank

2Harris
Creek

described
section

3channel

Vertical
exaggeration: 10x

4-

3.6m
local

5-

depth

* Relief relative to local vertical datum.
Figure 7. Topographic profile B-B' and C-C' through the Riparian Corridor terrain. See Figure
1 for lines of section.

54

vtoward stream
NE
Depth*
(m)
0--

tow a rd stream

SW
Elevation -118m

BHT4

NE

MSL

SW

BHT5

Elevation -122m

Unit 4.4

Unit 5.3
Unit 5.2

Unit 4.3

1

Unit 5.1
bedrock

-

7

Limit of
exposure

o o*

r 41-

b

.c?

- 2-

415

Stratigraphic units exposed
in these trenches are not
necessarily correlative.

Unit 4.2

3-

Unit 4.1
bedrock

4-

Limit of
exposure

* Depth relative to local ground surface.

Eastenellon

bedrock

unconsolidated sediment ot soil

cley•tono or shale

EE

n Cies

Bandelier.

aedimentary structures

1-1 11

gerit.girdark) "(041

Imminerion
concretions
cross bedding

EL

calcium csabonale

0

trOh ca We
lerricrete

pedogenic air tick...
prIsrn•lic

i=trIntig:=1)

11111112

I:1:1 bloc ky

Figure 8. Stratigraphic sections exposed in
backhoe trenches 4 and 5 in the Riparian
Corridor terrain along topographic profiles B-B'
(trench 4) and C-C' (trench 5).

rr1 11

\ye mew...

p 11,l

rrog ealto
b
gegigrik."

RZA

larg• real or reel condull

pig]

line root tr•c•

MCI •B0110 mean sea level

55

beund•ry or
Merlopenically-moddied stratioraphic
eon-Isar

stratigraphic contact between bedrock and the superjacent soil has been blurred by pedogenesis
to a gradual, smooth horizon boundary.
Overlying the pedogenically modified sandstone in trench 5 is —60 cm of clayey to very clayey,
fine to medium sand with rare, very coarse sand and granules of lignite (Unit 5.2, a clay to
sandy clay). These channel deposits have been extensively modified by pedogenesis, producing
strong, medium, angular, prismatic soil structure with thick but discontinuous argillans on ped
faces, strong to moderate rubification (5YR4/6, yellowish red in upper half, 7.5YR4/6, strong
brown in lower half), and root traces (Figure 6B). Maximum clay content is found in the
interval from —35 to 55 cm depth (-15 to 35 cm below the top of Unit 5.2), coinciding with the
strongest rubification. The entire unit is a Bt horizon, differentiable into Btl and Bt2 at 55 cm
depth. Silty sand from overlying Unit 5.3 has moved downward along peds and root conduits
into the upper 10 cm of Unit 5.2, producing an abrupt, irregular boundary.
Unit 5.3, the uppermost 20 cm of the local section, is a silty, slightly clayey, very fine to fine
sand grading upward to a silty very fine to fine sand (sandy loam to loamy sand). Clay
illuviation in the lower part of this unit has been insufficient to produce a Bt horizon, but
approaches it in the lowest 5 to 10 cm, which have moderate, medium, angular, blocky
structure. There is a thin mat of fine roots at the ground surface and larger roots grow
horizontally along the lower boundary of the unit. Colors vary upward from 10YR3/2, very
dark grayish brown, to 10YR4/2, dark grayish brown. Unit 5.3 is an overbank deposit with an
A-AB-Bw soil profile. The moderate structure at the base of Unit 5.3 probably results from
upward propagation of the zone of illuviation due to the low permeability of the underlying,
strongly developed Bt horizon, in which porosity has been occluded.
Baker (1979:Map sheet 10) mapped the soil at this locality as the Axtell series. Taken as a
whole, the upper section overlying bedrock in trench 5 could be classified as Axtell, an Udertic
Paleustalf, in accordance with the description of this soil by Baker (1979:6-7). Most of Unit
5.3 would correspond to the A horizon and Unit 5.2 to the Bt horizon of the nominal Axtell
profile. This may be an oversimplification, however. In pedologic nomenclature, the upper half
of Unit 5.2 is clay and the lower half is sandy clay. Yet the dominant textural class throughout
this stratum is actually fine to medium sand, with a small percentage of coarser grains. This
was the immobile matrix within which clay accumulated through differential illuviation. in
contrast, Unit 5.3 is silty, very fine to fine sand (loamy sand) with a slightly clayey interval
(sandy loam) in the lower 5 to 10 cm. Parent material of the soil in Unit 5.2 was channel
sediment, whereas Unit 5.3 appears to have been an overbank deposit. This interpretation is
consistent with the low-relief morphology of the area of trench 5 and its position in the
landscape. Soil development in Unit 5.2 may have already been well underway before Unit 53
was deposited.
The site of trench 5 is a thinly mantled, relict cut terrace on eroded Eocene bedrock and is
perhaps one of the most stable surfaces in this terrain. Unit 5.2, the channel sediment directly
overlying bedrock, has undergone extensive pedogenesis and probably was deposited during the
very late Pleistocene. A flood during the middle(?) to late(?) Holocene apparently scoured and
buried the original Axtell-like soil of Unit 5.2 with a veneer of fine grained overbank sediment,
Unit 5.3. Maximum clay content is almost at the top of the structurally defined B horizon in
Unit 5.2, indicating possible partial truncation of the original profile. Following deposition of
Unit 5.3, conditions favored clay illuviation above the existing Bt horizon. Yet Unit 5.3 is just
56

beginning to develop an argillic horizon, indicating that it probably is no more than a few
thousand years old. The soil developed in "recently" buried Unit 5.2 has a moderately thick
argillic horizon, pronounced rubification, and strongly developed structure, and may be more
than ten thousand years old.
Backhoe trench 4 was excavated >90 m northwest (down valley) of trench 5 at a point where
the flood terrace is relatively broad and undissected, extending southward to the valley wall
without interruption. Although this terrace is similar to that in which trench 5 was excavated,
the specific geomorphic context of trench 4 is very different. Trench 4 was sited on the steep,
left (southern) stream bank of Harris Creek on the inside of a meander bend (Figures 1 and 9).
The bank is the proximal edge of the adjacent flood terrace. Elevation at the top of the bank
is —118 m, >2.5 m higher than the channel. The trench, however, is 3.6 m deep and therefore
extends —1.1 m lower than the elevation of the channel floor. Trench 4 penetrates —3 cm into
laminated, clayey, fine to medium sandstone of the Calvert Bluff Formation (Unit 4.1) (Figure
8). The sandstone is oxidized and iron-stained along bedding planes and is bounded above by
a sharp, wavy unconformity scoured subparallel to bedding.
Overlying the unconformity is a 97-cm thick, fine to coarse sandy gravel consisting of granules
and pebbles of limonitic, concretionary sandstone, chert, claystone, lignite, silicified wood, and
rare quartzite (Unit 4.2). Large-scale trough cross beds within the gravel preserve relict channel
forms as much as 2 m wide. Individual beds dip —10° toward the modem channel and can be
traced for 7 m, the entire length of the trench. Unit 4.2 is a point-bar deposit that accumulated
along the inner channel margin under conditions very similar to those existing in this reach of
Harris Creek today. There is no evidence of pedogenesis or any other post-depositional
modification of the sediment composing Unit 4.2. The absence of such changes and the
proximity of this deposit to the modern channel indicates that little time has elapsed since
aggradation of these deposits. Unit 4.2 is almost certainly no older than late Holocene and may
be historic.
The top of Unit 4.2 is defined by a sharp, undulating, depositional surface conformably overlain
by Unit 4.3. Unit 4.3 is an —1.9-m thick, ripple-laminated, silty, fine to medium sand with rare
very coarse sand. Spaced at —20-cm intervals throughout the unit are thin beds containing
granules to small pebbles of lignite and relatively high percentages of coarse to very coarse
sand. Climbing ripples are well preserved in all beds, indicating very rapid aggradation of these
deposits. Unit 4.3 represents a downstream extension of the point bar existing at the time of
deposition of unit 4.2. Differences between these units resulted from a minor shift in the axis
of the channel, rather than a change in the environment, and deposition was essentially
continuous.
The upper boundary of Unit 4.3 is a sharp, smooth, steeply inclined, erosional unconformity
overlain by Unit 4.4, an overbank deposit. Along the contact there is a thin layer of
undecomposed leaf matter. Unit 4.4 is a maximum —70-cm thick silty, slightly clayey, very fine
to fine sand grading upward to silty very fine sand. The lower part of the unit retains faint
tabular cross beds and is moderately cohesive because of the admixed clay. The upper part is
massive with abundant living roots, including a dense mat of fine roots at the surface. Larger
roots grow horizontally through the lower part of the unit, particularly along the subjacent
contact. Unit 4.4 is a flood deposit of variable thickness extending down the bank subparallel
to the flanking unconformity. The presence of undecomposed leaf matter indicates that lateral
57

accretion of Unit 4.4 occurred very recently, probably within the previous year or two, during
which plants were able to take root. Baker's (1979:Map sheet 10) soil mapping indicates the
Sayers series at this locality. The Sayers is an Entisol (Typic Ustifluvent), implying minimal
horizonation and an A-C profile. The sediment exposed in trench 4 is, in fact, almost pristine,
but for purposes of this investigation may be considered an incipient example of the Sayers.
Geomorphic history of the trench 4 area can be inferred from the exposed sedimentary
sequence. Relatively coarse, steeply cross-bedded channel sediment overlies bedrock at the base
of the local section. This sediment could only have been deposited by swiftly flowing water,
which typically follows the retreating outside margin of a meander bend, forming a point bar
on the advancing inside margin. With continued aggradation, the bar began to build upstream,
where the coarsest sediment was then trapped. As a result, deposits in the middle of the section
at the trench site were somewhat finer grained than those at the base. Through time, the
paleochannel migrated laterally, away from the site, as did the axis of maximum flow velocity
along which coarse sediment was transported. The site was then no longer within the channel
proper. Finer-grained deposits and low-angle or poorly defined sedimentary structures
characterize the upper part of the local section, reflecting waning flow velocities. With further
lateral migration of the channel, local deposition would be reduced to increasingly infrequent
pulses of overbank sediment. Soils would develop on the resulting, comparatively stable
surfaces. There is, however, no indication of significant soil development within the section
exposed in trench 4 because of the evident recency of deposition of this sediment and only
partial isolation of the site from rapid sediment influx.
Deposits composing the flood terrace of Harris Creek were also exposed in trenches 1, 2, and
3, —0.5 km east- southeast of trench 4. Trenches 1, 2, and 3 are closely spaced along a line
spanning the full width of the terrace from the denuded bedrock slope to the modem channel
(Figures 1 and 9). This transect was intended to disclose the internal stratigraphy of a
representative flood terrace, including transitions among depositional facies. Trench 3 is located
at the distal margin of the terrace at the foot of a north-facing bedrock slope with a gradient of
—3.6%. Local elevation is —124 m, —4.5 m above the stream channel. Relief relative to the
channel floor is slightly greater here than in other flood-terrace settings because the normal
terrace deposits are overlain by almost 1/2 m of slope-wash deposits (Figure 10). The trench
is —2 m deep and penetrates 1.1 m into bedrock. At this locality, bedrock consists of
interbedded silty very fine to fine and rare medium sandy claystone and slightly clayey to
nonclayey fine to medium sandstone (Unit 3.1). Claystone beds 0.35- and 0.25-m thick lie at
the top and base of the exposure, respectively, with a 0.5-m thick sandstone bed between. The
upper claystone is pedogenically modified to a C horizon with abundant, iron- stained root
mottles and a few granule-size pedoconcretions of calcium carbonate. Pedogenesis has modified
the stratigraphic contact at the top of the unit, as well, to a clear, smooth soil boundary.
Overlying bedrock contact is Unit 3.2, a silty, very fine sandy clay (clay) with the following
characteristics: weak to moderate, coarse, angular, prismatic structure; thin, discontinuous
argillans and calcans on ped faces; slight rubification; and root traces throughout (Figure 6C).
These properties identify the unit as a Btk horizon. The top of this horizon is an erosional
contact sloping irregularly toward the channel at an angle oblique to the underlying, roughly
horizontal bedrock contact, but subparallel to the sloping ground surface. Unit 3.2 is part of
a buried soil that includes the upper part of underlying Unit 3.1. This buried soil is similar in
several respects to the nominal series at this site, the Axtell. In particular, both the buried soil
58

0

20

10

Relief* N
(m)
0—

40

30

50

60m
S

denuded
bedrock<0
slope

flood terrace

natural
levee

-

BHT1;Elev.-123m

BHT2

1—

ground/

‘--11

51
described
section

swale
(chute
channel)

stream

bank

Elev.-123m

natural
levee

MSL

2—
described section

BHT3,"
n
∎

Elevation
—124m
mst.
described
section
•

V--)
"- 1.1m
local
depth

2.0m
Local
depth

3—
Harris
Creek

4—

Vertical
exaggeration:10x

channel
3.3m
local
depth

*Relief relative to local vertical datum.

Figure 9. Topographic profile D-D' through the Riparian Corridor terrain. See Figure 1 for the
line of section.
59

▪

toward stream

S

stream
7m --4114— 17 m —414--- 3m —44_ 16m ..444-- 6m --)1
bank I.—
Depth *
Elevation
Not to scale ( horizontal )
BHT 3
---124m MSL
(m)

0

BHT 2

BHT 1

1

Elevation
—123m MSL
Unit 2.5

ground

Elevation
ground — 123m MSL

Unit 3.3
(AC)

ground

Unit 1.3

Unit 3.2
(Bwkb)

Unit 2.4
Unit 2.$

Unit 3.1
(bed rock)

Unit 2.2 /
Unit 1.2
Limit of
exposure

2

Unit2.1/
112 cm/
local /
depth

Limit of
exposure

2.0m
local depth

.100 01
00'
00'
•-•""

3

etl

.0•06
•

0 62'

1.
0

oct
'

043°

ve

hoc
..-41,1111011

4

rrril" L LIZ f 1111 lift
CZ= IN CE1 MI 1 LI

Unit 1.1
(bed rock)

Stratigraphic units exposed in these
trenches are not necessarily correlative.

3.3m
Limit of
exposure

local depth

5

Explonalion

* Depth relative to
local vertical datum.

b•Orock

11

alleorraplIdated padlosani or mall

eleystone or .halo

claY

1100111100•

•aact

r'
.,1.:^.°tddaim'°—

s•Onsent•ry structures

1=1

terminal!.
concretions

M

cross bOrldino

61,calcium carbonate
Iron oxide.

terrioreie

p•doponlc •tructUraa
ITHE primallc

bloabO

PMAlgrgaigr "*"
Figure 10. Stratigraphic sections exposed in
backhoe trenches 1, 2, and 3 in the Riparian
Corridor terrain along topographic profile D-D'.

Ey71

largo root or roof condull

node Q.nl0eay'mpditled stralloraphic

,,„• 1. 001 Irate
1,151. blood mean sea 'rural

60

.441sja•

and the Axtell have moderately thick, well developed Bt horizons, although the buried soil in
trench 3 is not so well developed as is the soil in trench 5. The erosional contact at the top of
Unit 3.2 in trench 3 has been pedogenically modified to a clear, irregular soil boundary
generally 35 cm beneath the sloping ground surface, but ranging to 50 cm depth locally. Unit
3.2 is a truncated late Pleistocene(?)/early Holocene(?) deposit and soil.
Unit 3.2 is unconformably overlain by Unit 3.3, a 35- to 50-cm thick, silty, clayey, very fine
to fine sand, grading upward to a silty, very fine to fine sand (sandy loam to loamy sand).
Although limited clay illuviation is evident, it is insufficient to create a Bt horizon and there is
no evidence of soil structure or other indications of pedogenesis. Minor textural breaks and
relict bedding are preserved throughout, essentially parallel to ground surface, indicating
multiple depositional events. The unit is thickest at the upslope (southern) end of the exposure,
closest to the denuded bedrock slope. Unit 3.3 is a late Holocene slope-wash deposit with an
incipient soil corresponding to none of the soil series recognized by Baker (1979) in Bastrop
County.
Approximately 16 m northwest of the northern end of trench 3 is trench 2 (southern end), which
lies at —123 m elevation, —3.5 m above the channel. At trench 2, the otherwise featureless
surface of the flood terrace is locally marked by a chute channel (Figure 9). Chutes are
common erosional features on flood plains and flood terraces. Most chutes, including that at
trench 2, cross the inside of a meander bend at an elevation higher than that of the floor of the
main channel. As flood waters rise they are no longer confined to the former meandering
channelway and may bypass the bend entirely by cutting a straighter channel segment, the
chute. Chutes usually do not replace the main channel segment, however. Instead, they are
ephemeral, occupied only at high stream stages, and gradually become infilled with relatively
fine-grained overbank deposits. Often, chutes form closed depressions in which soil
development is inhibited by the frequency of inundation and the persistence of standing water,
allowing only incipient pedogenic modification of soil parent materials. With continued
infilling, overbank deposition and inundation become less common and pedogenesis may
progress in the relict chute.
Trench 2 was placed at the upslope edge of the flood-terrace chute and extended —3 m
northwestward across part of the chute perpendicular to its long axis. The trench bisects a low,
narrow levee along the chute margin, extending as much as 112 cm through the chute deposits
into the underlying terrace fill, but does not reach bedrock (Figures 10 and 11A). At the base
of the section is a massive, silty, very fine sand with a maximum exposed thickness of 13-cm
(Unit 2.1). This unit is very firm and sufficiently cohesive to resist root penetration, because
although living roots and root traces are common along the upper surface of the unit, only a few
extend 2 to 4 cm into it. There is no other evidence of pedogenesis. The top of Unit 2.1 is
sharp and irregular, sloping downward toward the chute. This unit appears to be the uppermost
terrace deposit into which the chute was eroded. Unit 2.1 is overlain by a maximum 37-cm
thick, massive, slightly clayey, silty, very fine sand with pockets of clayey, silty, very fine sand
within root conduits as much as 1.5 cm in diameter (Unit 2.2). The top of Unit 2.2 is sharp and
irregular, with a smooth, concave depression <7-cm deep cut into it. It is overlain by a
maximum 15-cm thick, massive, clayey, silty, very fine sand penetrated by a few living roots
(Unit 2.3). The top of this unit is sharply defined and wavy. Units 2.2 and 2.3 are overbank
chute-fill deposits lacking indications of pedogenesis.

61

A. Chute-channel and flood-terrace deposits exposed in backhoe trench 2 on the
flood terrace of Harris Creek in the Riparian Corridor terrain. View is toward the
west along the axis of the chute channel. Folding rule is bent at I m.

B. Cross-bedded fluvial-channel deposits (including lignite particles) exposed in
backhoe trench I on the flood terrace of Harris Creek in the Riparian Corridor
terrain. Scale bar is marked in centimeters (left side) and inches (right side).

Figure I I. Photographs of chute-channel and flood-terrace profiles in the Riparian Corridor
terrain.
62

The upper part of the local section, above 47 cm depth, appears to have been deposited by two
major floods during which significant flow was diverted through the chute. Unit 2.3 is overlain
by a silty, very fine to fine sand with rare medium sand composed of lignite particles, grading
upward to clayey, silty, very fine sand (Unit 2.4). Unit 2.4 is massive and reaches a maximum
thickness of 25-cm. Living roots and abundant, clay-filled root conduits give this unit a mottled
appearance. The top of Unit 2.4 is sharp and wavy and is overlain by a silty, very fine to
medium sand, grading upward to silty, very fine to fine and rare medium sand (Unit 2.5). Unit
2.5 is a levee deposit as much as 22-cm thick with a thin mat of fine roots at the surface. The
levee is out of the field of view (to the left) in the photograph of the western wall of this trench
(Figure 11 A). Neither Unit 2.4 nor 2.5 is pedogenically modified. Both of these units are
graded, ranging from relatively coarse at the base to relatively fine at the top. An upward fining
sequence is the result of waning flow velocity. In this instance, the trend toward finer grained
sediment through time indicates that, when a flood reached peak discharge, it had the
competence to transport and deposit the coarse sediment at the base of a given sequence. As
flow subsided, eventually to zero, stream competence gradually decreased, as well. In its final
phase, the flood carried and deposited only the very fine grained sediment composing the upper
part of each sequence. Two superposed upward fining sequences, Units 2.4 and 2.5, are evident
in trench 2. Aggradation of these units probably resulted from two discrete flood events, each
capable of transporting a variable sediment load through the chute. The same bedding sequence
could perhaps have resulted from a more complex series of events, but direct evidence indicates
two major local floods following deposition of Unit 2.3.
Trench 1 was excavated on the steep, left (southern) bank of Harris Creek on the inside of a
broad, complex meander loop —17 m northwest of the northern end of trench 2. Elevation at the
top of the bank is —123 m, —3.5 m higher than the adjacent channel floor. The section exposed
in this trench is 3.3 m long, extending a minimum —0.25 m into bedrock. Bedrock consists of
calcareous, low-angle cross bedded, very fine to fine sandstone, with common, sand-size
particles of opaque minerals and white mica, and common rip-up clasts of sandy clay in a bed
near the top of the subcrop (Unit 1.1). Oxidation and iron staining are nearly continuous within
a maximum 3-cm thick zone along the sharp, irregular, erosional unconformity at the top of the
unit, but are localized and discontinuous below this zone.
Approximately 3 m of Quaternary deposits are exposed in this section, as well. Bedrock is
immediately overlain by Unit 1.2, which is <2.25 m in total thickness, but consists of a series
of upward fining beds, each 20 to 40 cm thick, that grade from gravelly, very fine to medium
sand to very fine to fine and rare medium sand (Figures 10 and 11 B). The gravel includes
granule- to pebble-size particles of lignite, sandstone, chert, ironstone, and white shale
(bentonite?). Unit 1.2 is a point-bar deposit with high-angle trough cross beds sloping toward
the channel. The unit is bounded above by a sharply defined, irregular, erosional contact.
Overlying this eroded surface is Unit 1.3, an —80-cm thick, massive, silty, very fine to
uncommon fine sand, with scattered granules and pebbles of lignite along its contact with Unit
1.2. There are abundant living roots throughout Unit 1.3, which is distinctly less cohesive than
are underlying strata. Unit 1.3 is an overbank deposit that thickens irregularly toward Harris
Creek, forming a low, natural levee. In this exposure, neither the Quaternary deposits nor the
underlying bedrock have been pedogenically modified. Based on their pristine appearance and
their position in the landscape, Units 1.2 and 1.3 are almost certainly late Holocene age. Unit
1.3, which is virtually unconsolidated, may be historic, possibly modern.

63

CHRONOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION

Nine representative stratigraphic sections have been described in detail, providing a record of
the evolution of all major geomorphic terrains within the Powell Bend Prospect. Previous
investigators have employed a variety of physical, chemical, paleontological, and archeological
methods to devise quantitative chronologies of landscape development. Radiocarbon assays and
related analytical procedures are routinely performed on soil/sediment, charcoal, bone, and other
materials removed from specific stratigraphic or geomorphic contexts in order to estimate the
age of those deposits and their associated landforms. Age relationships can also be inferred
from included, diagnostic paleofaunas, paleofloras, and artifact assemblages. In addition,
time-dependent geomorphic processes may be calibrated numerically using applicable
radiometric ages, diagnostic artifacts, or other chronologic references. Mean rates of erosion,
deposition, soil development, or other processes appropriate for use in a given region can then
be calculated and used to estimate the overall age or developmental chronology of stratigraphic
sequences and landforms. The result is a "proxy" time scale based on geomorphic rates.
Another method for devising a first-order approximation of landscape chronology involves
correlation of local geomorphic features with landforms of an area for which a temporal
sequence has already been established. Correlation of landforms, or allostratigraphic correlation,
is based on the degree of similarity among landforms with respect to one or more specific traits.
For example, terraces of the Colorado River have been correlated on the basis of local relief
relative to the river channel, micromorphology of terrace surfaces, and the type and extent of
soil development, all of which are allostratigraphic characteristics (Looney and Baker 1977;
Baker and Penteado-Orellana 1977, 1978). These findings are then reconciled with
lithostratigraphic traits such as the texture and lithology of sediment composing the terrace fill.
Work to date provides few direct indications of landscape chronology at Powell Bend Prospect.
Neither the present archeological survey nor the geomorphic investigation yielded radiocarbon
assays, fossils, or diagnostic artifacts in stratigraphic context. Bement (1984), however, reported
an extensive artifact assemblage, two radiocarbon assays, and three thermoluminescence age
determinations from site 418P191 at the current Powell Bend Lignite Mine immediately south
of the Prospect. These data, along with independent, qualitative chronologies based on
geomorphic rates and allostratigraphic correlation, have been used to infer the age of deposits
and landforms within Powell Bend Prospect.
Site 41BP191
Findings of the archeological surveys, testing, and mitigation in the area now covered by Powell
Bend Lignite Mine are insightful in relation to the chronology of Holocene deposition and
landform development in the current Prospect, as well. Several investigators reported various
aspects of the cultural-resource assessments, but the most extensive suite of diagnostic artifacts
from a chronologically controlled, geomorphically significant provenience was discussed by
Bement (1984). Bement described two sites, 41BP191 and 41BP192, both of which were
located high above the riparian corridors on bedrock slopes with moderately thick slope-wash
deposits. Site 41BP191 will be discussed here because, of the two sites, 41BP191 produced the
more extensive artifact assemblage and provided samples for both radiocarbon (14C) and
thermoluminescence (TL) age determination.
64

At site 41BP191, diagnostic Middle to Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric artifacts were
recovered from a partly mixed stratigraphic context at depths <I m. These artifacts help to
establish the approximate time of deposition of some of the strata from which they were
recovered. In Central Texas, the Middle and Late Archaic periods lasted from —5000 to 3000
yr B.P. and —3000 to 1200 yr B.P., respectively, whereas the Late Prehistoric period spanned
the interval from —1200 yr B.P. to the time of European contact, —500 to 300 yr B.P. (Hester
1986). Evidence of erosion and conspicuous, near-surface bioturbation (burrowing, tree-throw,
and modern earth-moving activities) in part of this site indicates that deposits enclosing the
Middle Archaic artifacts were redeposited. At least partial stratigraphic integrity of younger
deposits is indicated by a coherent series of I 4C and TL dates that was consistent with the
temporal ranges of associated, diagnostic artifacts. The I4C ages are 900 ± 220 yr and 1690
± 80 yr and the TL ages are 920 ± 90 yr, 1660 ± 160 to 1860 ± 180 yr (estimated range, based
on probable extremes of moisture content throughout burial history of sample, which affects the
age interpretation), and 1890 ± 350 yr B.P. (Bement 1984:Table 7). Two additional samples
yielded TL ages of —27,000 and —26,000 yr, but both were considered erroneous.
Site 41 BP 191 is located on a denuded bedrock slope with a mantle of slope-wash deposits.
Bement (1984:Table 8) used the reliable 14C and TL ages to calculate mean rates of sediment
aggradation. These rates ranged from 0.028 to 0.033 cm/yr, but averaged 0.29 cm/yr (Table 3).
All of the cultural materials at this site were recovered from slope-wash deposits consisting of
<1 m of "sandy loam" overlying an irregular, erosional truncation surface on a laterally
extensive layer of "culturally sterile (sandy) clay." The discussion by Bement provides few
stratigraphic details, but the sandy clay probably represents the B horizon of the Axtell soil or
an Axtell-like paleosol developed on older slope-wash deposits or weathered Eocene bedrock.
Indeed, Baker (1979:Map sheet 16) mapped the soil at both 41BP191 and 4IBP192 as the
Axtell, allowing pedostratigraphic correlation of these sections with those at sites in comparable
geomorphic settings within the Prospect. The association of (1) diagnostic late Holocene
artifacts and samples yielding late Holocene 14C and TL ages with (2) slope-wash deposits
overlying the truncated Axtell soil has important implications for pedostratigraphic
interpretations in Powell Bend Prospect, as discussed later in this report.

Geomorphic Rates
Quaternary stratigraphy and geomorphology of the extended Powell Bend Prospect afford
chronologically implicit data concerning landscape evolution. Although few of these indirect
temporal indicators may be considered determinative, a preliminary chronology of local
landscape evolution has been compiled (Table 2), based in part on these calculated geomorphic
rates. Tables 3 and 4 provide a series of geomorphic calibrations appropriate for use in this
area, including local and regional rates of sediment aggradation and denudation and
representative rates of soil development, principally pedogenic accumulation of calcium
carbonate. None of these rates provides an ideal "proxy" time scale, however, because all of
the processes are vertically and temporally discontinuous and fail to account for lateral
differences related to facies variations. Therefore, several independent age estimates are needed
to establish a range of variation, and estimated ages of deposits and landforms must be
compared for apparent inconsistencies or omissions.

Denudation. Stratigraphic sections and topographic profiles discussed previously illustrate the
limited volume of Quaternary deposits relative to the extent of the bedrock-confined portion of
65

r.0
.
0
Q
c

-.=
,.
._0

..„,
g

es

as

e
0
0

z U

x
0

al

04-.
0
ti
=en
cr
't
en
as
0
.E
0.
c).
CO
e..-.
a)
0
o

.=
as
C.)

Oo

0,
co
O.
co

0.

0

0

2

rn"

2
G.)
..,
a
.0

a.)

' 17.

CA

-,c

0 7,3al
rn
=
u
a.)
al
e0

=
co
-0

0

r.

rn. ... lA .
2 u,
0 = 2 ...,-0 1-, 0

CA

CA

Q.
CO

''.1 .••• ∎

V)

U

2
c

gr2

0 0 - =
=
.,A
..c
0
en
so en fi

.75

6

?..I. .0
=
03 0 as

=
es

" '.,+'

,,, 4>

re

2 .9 -o
0
9
.0 . 4.
.0
.0

2G.)

.0

"0

=
es

=
m
0.

oo
....)

0

g 2 i
0 a.) 0
b
..t

= F2
'0

0 „;
0 ....
1' 4 6
.5. t

g
.0 =
.9

E
0
c
.0
Q
'N
7,
e
2 a)

•0

..=
es

VI 01

oo 0 bo 0

EN EgEc•-)2c.,
0 e j 0 0 0 csj 0

E to E UE .c E
2=x.v.2.-gM
._
c cz _
o

2 8 2 Ea* .> 2

a.
u
y
-a
.
U

U -ti
0

Cu
2
V
a Fz! 3
o
E - a.
N
-6 Ity
=
0
0=IC .0
,0
ca ....
In =
a
E 0 2 2 4.)
en .....
0
5 te
m 2 0
c.)
cf3 -o .0
-7, :0
0
o
O.
E
2
E 0
. - 0
2 =. 2 g s....
2 &
co
000 = -o -a
c ', E es

.0
T.) --„I
=
'0 tr .1)

O-5
:so s 7, a) 50
1...
4,, 0c -.cc- 2
E E.-.c"
c,-,

=
2
....

=

..2

0.)

0

co
2 '0

0 ._.1

.:16;

00

ea

•%0

V
.0 .0

N
00

o.

es
(
v-n

es
k":
eel

Cr)
(..)

Cr)

CO 00
as

"01 "'
CO

U,

Ci0
•0
0
el)

, -ti. od11.)

1 z z

E>
0%

.0

Op
CC
0

5
:'O

"0 r

-0

2

E

la

4)sn
01
u

0

LA ..,0
ea
.... 0v
co el
Z NC 2

ea

0

cce

0 T 0 0 gn ›* )".

U

CO

Eli
x
0

N

17;

0+.
N C)
.at
o
t0
tN

N

Z

et
rn
..
en

<

CI

CZ 00
0%
S r".1r"...

Z

•er

N

<

< <
Z Z

<
Z

0 VD

In

<

<

Z Z

<

Z

O
%0
00

aJ
0+

01
00
00
CO

0

Cv

NO
..1.
- 0

.-.
r)

0
er

.-,

C)

tr.

co

-.-.

,....

co 00
N N
.c. 0

0...

O% p%
r-ce
co N
00

en

oo
00

1.1

E
0
O

-o
es

.0
0
.=

co 1E
Go 0

.st

N
•nn

O

en
M

0

0

0
0)
N
0 00
- R q

0

C 6 o o

L.

to

F
0.
•0

0

0
00
O

O

.=
U

0
O
.r; .0

<

0

0 0
•
0 6
1' CO
.0 0

0 =
L

C.)
'0

C.>

6'1g >:„
CL
a.) 0 se 0
ca

EE
o

0 0 0

a)

to

2
2 C.> 0 0
L1-1 ••=

ci

0
(...)

E

0

0
CA

0

U

"0
a.)

-a

2

-o
al co)
0

ea
at

at
2 0.

COO a)
E
N
-cc
CA 0
L

.0 00

ai

U

2

CO

E
co =
e .2

L.13 F

E.Q e

es

41'3

66

6 6

N

et
in N
esi

6

6 6

0

0 ,-,

0

e,)

CR

•-,

= :5);
a.) r"

on . >

t)

b

F. g :-5

=
.
0 I/ 0 1.--,

o

-2

c
N '''
r, 2
0 d) t
C.) ''-' .":. ,4

0

tfl

z-,.

0
........

.c
.

LI

.
.
2

.0

C6
.....
t4 61 co
=
In '..,
4.) 0

C.)

=

43 0
P' ea

=.
E 5 ori
0. E1

lb-:
2
.H

'a

e
2
- m
ccoa 5

,-o

,_ea

..

c.)
1.3
=
a.)

it)

v .....
'

6. 0 0.4) E = '134

v)

:0

0

C.) x LI "CA

=

›,
i .
•0 0

41

.0
I-,g
'0
V)

"6

C6 4-0

0

.,„

6

0

-s N
g

06 .........
en ca

2 N
,

1:0 g
, v
, .0

..... ,.

-0 8 ' 2
17 ' A TO

0es
-0

'8 ft, 2 cl, c
v, uE
c
6
o 2 v 0
..er
.,...
0

eg

03

6

5

.t

10 • )4
"" = c,., x

-0 .,7; -0

9
E
-.
0.54 ....
0 '-' • ^ 0

0 'E -5 >s -1=1....r.II

8

.›.: -1 f
a.) Q :'-' "0

e °

s t....._,0eng.4
U
w . .0 0.,

OD 0 0.-% >..
El'
4.
o
= a
ellt
0
on
0eir c'0
V
VC6
0
'''' 0 1m' t..)
a
a.)
cn
v
0
2 (..) v
0 * •
en
-0
cn
0
as
es 00
c
..-...
cio o E 2
„ .o co
00 ., _ 0
E
o
(-4
.....
27
.„ -6L_..)
8 67-E
w
7
s
0 .tn
r
S.
°
1.5
v
..c
-to 6^ 2 ›, ›, =
en
es 7,
.En
.
-0
en
-4) = 0 7crs r, .5
(...) 2 1
,,,
.0
>, .S-1 ..,,, .= G.Ta
a
420 .. 0
0

a.)

5 0•

.

...... ti, ti. .0a , - 0
r, = ea c E 0

g

0.
uu
0

EE.?-.° 04,

.9
-Cr))
>
00

1J 0 C
=
•.., .0 ....
•^
1E7 71) E0
-0 (13 6

i"

O P., ri', 8 -E
°I u t '' .5 ti
,...
E t) g
-E
t.. t .-.6

0 a-. rn 0
'0 ...?.. u, 7,5 0
a.)
... , - .0

II

CU

co
.

.0

.,

6n E

T. 06
1
01..

-0
4) MI
0
0
m .0

e :zinE-0 I' ..0- z
0 ,-.
0

.> ,
kr:, as
pi) . al
ct)
..-, co - 0. 4.4 0

0

0 0 V) T3
0 6. 0

... .- ,,,, f..) =
..).e
-0 4.)

E ›

4/ y4
V on
.-,
.=
c eS -= _a
tn

..7-r.. ,,,
° ": 7

76
-.
7c)0

0
"

0

.... 0

0.

E

.c Vs E s

6
0
.31. 2
0

c. e,

co 0

0
0

0
•-•
>

Q.

-.

5 ti
u
,g
0
6

.r

8

..

C6
•0E
re
pc^0

o ;:Z E .•°
C0

0
0.
S

ipiri p
0.0.

E . C

._, 00
0
e -c
"0 0
0

5 4 a:-

co

's 2

0- 0
2 I

L. cn.

0 ,_
>, =
C ...n. c71 2 c_
%0
0=
eel en 0 e$
0 '
0
,.... .0
-

..- i -8 .., °°
. e 0 = uEti .g-

0 -E

lo, r. ,.

0
Z

....",
E .c
... .=
0
CIS
.......

w

0.)
L.
I9

E-• 1

N2
0

0

E . 13 1

ve,.

N 11

e

00 e

... <

V

cl E C..)

44

...%4 7 4.7.'

.0 0 i.
6... ca Ch
0 "ci
e .11'
5 c

2 t 73,1

ao . c's
13 '17;

g

a

s 0 eu
x 0

-. ,:,̀ E.-. 0
e0 6., 0 Z
'0

a
. ei 5 8
....,

'0 4...,

00 .0 5 >,

g
.E 2 R
0 2
1 a -0 •,.
is
2E
il- ›.

o /- o
4.) .,
-0
., .a. -0
g

71 1.)

.g
g
e0
.o 0 ix
=
g u3 '5
e
e -0 5
. I:"
,...0 ....F..w
a, V el
e e
0 -0
-0 , , E

5 o c2,

CZ

Hg 0 2 ..
E-,

N vE
fn C
1
0 ',Is

e :, -6 7,
a.) -EL
..
a
c. 8 r=1
0
. 40. Mi 4,_,
U _Nd
V:. -0 '-'
ag
,= 15
04 -2 8 tl-f;
0 v
.., 0. >
o -0e

0 4-0
"2 u 0 0o-ic
= e..)
=0"-e 0

-z.L'. '07 u -1 t .--.
›, cs.
0. 4..) ..r

gs

2
.- u o
a 0
o 0
g .73 1 0 =
- Ci) 'II

-1 :- 1 4. < .

'.- o,c
4.)
0 •C
0 0
0
S.U°
....
•.-.,
.0 C.) .,..,
0 o _e 0 . .0

o a

2 z
e.
1-' f...)
0
.=
0

a

.- =
..-..0
E -5 4 0
E . 60 R g
0 z c a 0 , O

b
,.., w
0 .73 '-' E v ,,,.,
E

C

t).
.a
..

z. • a "Ci
E IF;mgil
o•Mi
t) 0
1"4,4
N .4-0
00 ie)
ew
u .5:: ;41
i4..
2 E
z LI S. MI 0.
0
I,
o

0 r.
2 ,,.
,,,
., a
2p
oo

4.)0
•-,

2

0.
C.) ,`-. ....
'".
,
.0 ..-." 0.0 E -.:1"
0
c 73 4
0w
2
E -_,
7.... 75t,
,
-.4...74
0 ,0,.... ene„) 0 0

- >'
C
....00
4.)x, 0
....CA.
0 C 6,
"0 Ty
0

E6.. .7t 'a )
00

.5
g=
• 4.) g3
.0
-0 .n E 0
›, e, g z
u
3 6. .5

Tisas
..-..
,..
V.,
.a.)
2

Z Fl<'

7 u I'
. -'
..:".

:2

n

0

ou 03
,C .'

e<

°
...

CNI

1-6

"S ..o

:,
8E8
7
v
.
0 0 T,
C

4.) 01) E

7

c c 1:00
-c
0
2
V,
E'
. a 2 c -0
eg

a, >,
TA

0.)
le
= c,
I 2 .1cpi)
'
1
4.) •
en eel t,.., 3=
o
= C V
c
0
cn
.it
*
V)
a.)
0

0

2

u
0.0
0

0 03

0

0

TS

>, C.) ••••••'
6.
C00

'- 3 4-

,.; ._, =

t' '?

00US
0..
..1
0 in - ....5 1:4 .8
S. a.„ E

.0
E
p e4 g
• 00 ....
q 1 1 i8
t"
0
"1",
. ....
I-. ON
.-. C.)
.
a. -° 01
.
....-.
di
0 .c
0
Li
0
15'.‘ . E
E 40 't g :i21
_
E o
E E g 't
-E ° , ....... -x
N a 0 a)
e C
6rl C4 AC V3
i%
C.) E Cam: n.n.
. C)
.„.., '0
...-. Gi.
03
.......
--...

• P.

....-..

67

s...,

4.)
....,

the valley. Maximum relief from the top of the highest drainage divide to the bed of the
modern trunk channel is —27 m, compared to <4 m of channel and flood-terrace fill in the
riparian corridor and <2 m of slope-wash deposits and in situ weathering products in the
uplands. Most of the history of Harris Creek and other local streams has clearly been dominated
by downcutting and lateral erosion (sheet erosion and headward incision by minor tributaries).
Although channel and upland erosion also results in local aggradation, landscape development
throughout the Prospect must have included long intervals of incision for which there is no
stratigraphic record. Net denudation rates provide a means of estimating the duration of these
periods of net loss of sediment. Careful evaluation of modern regional and local rates should
provide a reasonable first approximation of denudation rates in the prehistoric past, when most
of the incision occurred. Denudation is, however, discontinuous in space and time. For
example, intervals dominated by erosion may be separated by periods of aggradation or stability,
so that the total duration of erosional episodes necessarily provides only a partial basis for
estimating the actual age of erosional landforms. Projections of the time required for incision
to a given depth must be placed in an independently derived chronologic framework. For this
reason, additional temporal indicators are discussed later in this report.
Erosion of the —4 m deep bedrock paleo-channel beneath the flood terraces, stream bank, and
modern stream channel of Harris Creek would have required —3279 to 114,286 yr at the
maximum and minimum rates of modern denudation shown in Table 3. The obvious disparity
in these estimates indicates that considerable refinement is needed in order to derive a
meaningful chronology. Denudation rates were calculated from local and regional sediment
yields, as well as from statewide maximum and minimum sediment yields (Greiner 1982; Soil
Conservation Service 1985). Net sediment yield in a given drainage basin or region is the mean
annual dry weight of sediment eroded per unit area. Yields reflect the annual sediment load
reaching specified monitoring stations on major waterways. Sediment yield is reported in
ton/ac/yr, which can be restated volumetrically using the average density of dry sediment,
—1,280 kg/cu m (80 lb/cu ft) and appropriate metric conversion factors. Annual sediment
volume is then converted to the thickness of sediment eroded from a unit area per year, which
is the mean rate of denudation. Because the latter figure is directly proportional to total annual
sediment load it provides a reasonable first approximation of the load-dependent mean annual
aggradation rate, as well. Sediment throughput is highly variable in both volume and frequency,
but when averaged over periods on the order of years or decades, mean annual loss and storage
of sediment along most inland waterways may approach parity. Local mean aggradation rates
are thus similar to mean denudation rates. Over much longer periods, however, denudation
exceeds aggradation across most of the Prospect, resulting in net incision.
With respect to a given locality, denudation rates based on local and regional observations in
particular should provide reasonable estimates of the time needed to create erosional landforms.
Statewide maximum and minimum rates are included in Table 3 primarily for comparative
purposes. The —3279 to 114,000 yr estimates are based on modern sediment yields at several
monitoring stations. Unfortunately, neither Harris Creek nor any other stream in the Prospect
area is monitored. Yields from the Prospect are an indistinguishable part of the composite
record of sediment contributions from an entire subbasin of the Colorado River from —9.1 km
above the mouth of Onion Creek, Travis County, to Columbus, Colorado County, an area that
includes the Powell Bend Prospect (Greiner 1982:Table 1; Buckner et al.1987:143, 165). Total
sediment load generated within this subbasin undoubtedly differs from that of the Harris Creek
watershed, on a proportional basis, due to differences in size, land use, relief, and other factors.
68

Although procedures used to calculate sediment yield per unit area may significantly reduce
effects of these discrepancies, records from the Colorado River subbasin should not be the
primary source of information for determining representative denudation rates. For example,
—99.5% of the sediment carried by the Colorado River has been trapped in Town Lake, —18.3
km above the subbasin, and in lakes farther upstream, thereby limiting sediment loads within
the local subbasin (Greiner 1982:30; Buckner et al. 1987:130). Also, runoff and —90% of the
sediment load from more than 6% of the subbasin may be trapped behind small flow-retarding
structures such as the earthen dams of stock tanks (Greiner 1982:12, 30). Because sediment
load at the monitoring station has been reduced artificially, data from this subbasin
systematically underestimate potential sediment yield, and do not provide an acceptable
approximation of prehistoric denudation.
Statistical effects of local disruption of sediment throughput can be minimized by referring
instead to calculated regional or statewide yields. Of seven estimates of the time required to
incise 4 m, the most reasonable approximation probably falls within the range from —8900
to-4600 yr. Respectively, these figures are based on (1) yields produced by sheet and rill
erosion of rangelands in the Texas Claypan land-resource area and (2) the highest reported yield
produced by gully and stream-bank erosion statewide (Table 3). Quantitative soil-loss data have
been tabulated for several land-use categories (Soil Conservation Service 1985), among which
rangeland would most closely represent pre-modem conditions (i.e., prior to agriculture and
historic mining) within the Prospect. Rates of erosion in cultivated croplands may approximate
extreme conditions during the period of settlement, but pertain to a small fraction of the history
of landscape development. Yet the time estimate based on yields from regional rangelands is
based on sheet and rill erosion only, whereas much or all of the 4 m of paleo-channel incision
may be attributable to stream-bank and channel erosion. If the ratio of gully and stream-bank
erosion to sheet and rill erosion in the Colorado River subbasin is used as a guide, gully and
stream-bank erosion in the Texas Claypan area would be —28% greater than sheet and rill
erosion there, or roughly 0.058 cm/yr. At this rate, 4 m of erosion could be accomplished in
6897 yr. These estimates fall within the range bounded by the maximum statewide rate and
therefore offer an acceptable first-order approximation.
Table 3 also provides estimates of the time needed to cut the entire —27 m deep
bedrock-confined valley. As noted above, estimates based on sediment yield in the Colorado
River subbasin should be excluded. Applying calculated rates of regional denudation, including
the inferred rate of gully and stream-bank erosion in the Texas Claypan area, Harris Creek
valley would have formed over 60,000 to 46,552 yr. Depending on the relative contributions
of sheet and rill erosion versus gully and stream-bank erosion, the actual time needed to
complete incision would lie between these two estimates, which include the time required to cut
the —4 m deep bedrock paleo-channel beneath the flood terraces. Most of the paleo-channel is
filled with sediment deposited by lateral accretion. For this reason, erosion of the paleo-channel
was contemporaneous with deposition of at least some of the existing fill. The time needed to
incise —27 m may therefore approach the total period of valley development.

Aggradation. Mean aggradation rates provide an indirect indication of depositional history and
landforrn development. If a stratigraphic section of known thickness had been deposited
continuously to the present, the mean rate of deposition could be used to accurately determine
both the total time of sediment accumulation and the age of deposits at the base of that section.
If, however, deposition were not continuous or did not continue to the present, the time of
69

accumulation and age of the deposits could only be estimated and both estimates would
represent minima. Mean aggradation rates do not necessarily account for periods of
nondeposition or for reductions in the thickness of a section due to erosion or compaction.
Such discrepancies result in underestimation of the period of aggradation. The degree of
inaccuracy depends on the extent to which the stratigraphic record has been disrupted.
A suite of modem and prehistoric aggradation rates provides a basis for estimating the period
of accumulation of the —4 m thick, unconsolidated, flood-terrace fill of Harris Creek. Estimates
based on aggradation rates alone range over three orders of magnitude, from 388 to 20,000 yr
(Table 3). The two extreme estimates, 388 and 20,000 yr, are based respectively on the
maximum and minimum rates of Holocene fluvial aggradation reported by Ferring (1986:Table
1). Ferring's compilation includes aggradation rates at only 17 localities in the eastern
two-thirds of the United States, none of which were in Texas, but does suggest a wide range
of variation. An intermediate estimate, 14,286 yr, is based on the aggradation rate calculated
from sediment yield in the Colorado River subbasin that includes the Prospect. As discussed
previously, these data and rates of aggradation calculated from them must be used with caution,
but can be compared to rates derived independently.
Perhaps the best approximation of the minimum age of —4 m of flood-terrace fill lies in the
range of —13,793 to 6897 yr (Table 3). These estimates were calculated using Bement's
aggradation rate at site 41BP191 and the inferred net sediment yield (gully and stream-bank
erosion) from rangelands in the Texas Claypan land-resource area, respectively. Bement's
(1984) figure applies primarily to slope-wash deposition in an upland setting and probably
underestimates fluvial deposition on terraces. The 6897-yr estimate corresponds precisely with
the calculated period of gully and stream-bank erosion required to incise the —4 m deep bedrock
paleo-channel beneath the fill. This is because the inferred rates of denudation and aggradation
were derived from the same data set. Implicit in estimates of the period of aggradation is the
assumption that vertical accretion, rather than lateral accretion, was the dominant style of
flood-terrace aggradation in Harris Creek valley. Lateral accretion was an important process
in some reaches, however, particularly in the areas of backhoe trenches 1 and 4, which lie along
the channel. Unfortunately, chronologic control is particularly poor in those parts of the local
stratigraphic section reflecting lateral accretion. In contrast, overbank deposits indicative of
vertical accretion appear to comprise much of the flood-terrace fill at slightly higher elevations
farther from the channel. There, soil development provides a secondary indication of relative
age. For purposes of this discussion, we may ignore differences in the rates at which vertical
and lateral accretion filled the inner valley. Therefore, a reasonable preliminary estimate of the
period of accretion of the fill at any given locality is —7000 yr.
If all of the paleo-channel incision had occurred prior to deposition of the roughly 7000-yr old
fill, incision would have begun at least 14,000 yrs ago. These time estimates are based solely
on the thickness of sediment, regardless of the style of deposition. Morphologic and
stratigraphic evidence indicate that the inner valley of Harris Creek filled through both lateral
and vertical accretion. Consequently, erosion and deposition occurred simultaneously at
different points along a given valley cross section. As the stream eroded the outside (concave
side as seen in plan view) of a meander bend, the locus of channel deposition was displaced in
the same direction by a comparable distance. As a result, the age of deposits varies not only
vertically but horizontally, as well. incision and filling of the paleo-channel could therefore
have occurred simultaneously over a period of —7000 yr. Allowing for intervals of stability or
70

reduced deposition and for lateral variations in deposition rates, accretion may have occurred
throughout the Holocene, from at least 10,000 yr B.P. to the present.
Overbank deposits cap the lateral accretionary sequences at all localities, accounting for much
of the thickness of the flood-terrace fill. During floods, water rises above the stream banks,
inundating adjacent terraces and depositing a layer of generally fine grained sediment. Figure
12 shows the elevation of the highest recorded flood stage on the Colorado River at Bastrop.
That flood was well below the lowest point in Powell Bend Prospect and it is unlikely that
floods of the Colorado ever reached the Prospect. When the Colorado attains flood stage,
however, drainage from its tributaries may be retarded, causing water levels to rise in tributary
valleys. Flooding on the Colorado may thus have a indirect effect above the elevation of its
maximum stage. Intense rainstorms are common in Central Texas .and have produced severe
flooding in many small streams simply by overwhelming local drainage capacity, regardless of
whether larger streams are affected (Caran and Baker 1986). Another factor that may
exacerbate flooding on small streams is accumulation of debris, particularly downed limbs and
trees, which may obstruct narrow, shallow channels. These processes increase flood potential
throughout the region. Relatively frequent, high-magnitude flooding has produced extensive
overbank deposits in many areas.
There is little information regarding local rates of overbank deposition, although upward-fining
flood deposits observed in backhoe trench 2 ranged from 22 to 25 cm in thickness. Each of
these upward-fining sequences represents the effects of an individual flood. In both cases,
sediment accretion probably occurred over a period of several hours to a few days. Many years
might pass between flood events at this site, so that the long-term mean rate of sediment
aggradation may be comparable to rates in other settings. Unpublished records compiled by the
Soil Conservation Service in 1954 indicate that recent floods in lower Brushy Creek valley in
the Brazos River basin had deposited 7.6 to 61 cm of fine grained sediment per year. No
long-term mean rates were determined and the accuracy of the Brushy Creek records and their
relation to deposition along Harris Creek are unknown. It is clear, however, that overbank
sedimentation reflects brief, discrete depositional events. Major floods probably are infrequent
and with continued downcutting or lateral channel migration, higher parts of a flood terrace may
be inundated less regularly through time.

Pedogenesis. Pedogenesis is, in part, a time-dependent process, such that the extent of
modification of soil parent materials provides yet another surrogate chronology. Soils may
acquire, lose, or modify specific pedologic characteristics in a systematic manner. The type and
degree of soil development in Quaternary deposits are widely used as proxy indicators of
relative age, usually with no specific time connotation. A few investigators (e.g., Harden and
Taylor 1983; Machette 1985) have gone beyond interpretation of relative age by using
radiocarbon assays or other temporal data to assess rates at which some pedogenic processes
occur. Measurable variations in the corresponding physical properties of these soils have thus
been calibrated numerically and can be used to infer approximate age. Moreover, as these
time-dependent properties are attained they may eventually define a specific soil type, and the
soil itself may be considered temporally diagnostic. Where such soils are adequately
constrained by an independent chronology they can be very useful in interpreting landscape
evolution. In application, however, use of soils as quantitative chronologic indicators is often
controversial and, in some instances, conceptually unfounded.

71

iaquiaoaa uo puo Luv -L

"u-T'91

'91 aunt uo pap1038J SREID1S 4EN .101.00
L I. 1:(921'cl . L961 'siaLoo puo laumone)
6921 9 Jo L 41nr 'tit:J.1150g ID JaNd ODDJ 0 1 0 0

pool; papoda, Iseq6N

U0n1)"13

E

c
00 0
_c
5Cal
LA7.

=
-0

—

3 0- 0

o c

E E
o 0
pacwa4

snodowoyi

f!dD D

JRAIH

az)

0

CO

:113

N

In 0 CE)
0,1
CNI

413 ••••-•.
"-- _C 41)
N

I
I0q
co u-)

1‘)

u

I

_cN 0

_c

0
113

•

E •-

r's

C
0 000 a)

E

S6

ri—
co

YIU01 )1301.S
MUD' )1 301S

a) -0
O' o
0 —
ao

4,
0,
3
1 to 0 =

6IV

--

N c

0

E o

70

0 W CE
:C
CL c

)1a8J3 SIJJD H

In

N

ADDIS

—

6 ,._
0
0_ 0
0 47, I L_w
„,_ >
0 3 4) a)

0

•p•oo puo
218 DIM

C
Wo

in I c
'13 _Y
0
Eo E m
{r) 4)
r.:

maa..13 Apuos
fuorqpi pewouun—.-

0 i—

C O

o_

0

H

Jy In 0
,„

C2 4.;

ca)

.01
0 a) 0 P

o

Z
t' E 0,
e
0
Y
w
—
-a 0

1:13 e6

MUD1 j30

C 0
C 0 N
0

0;1
C

"1 lg
••

M

2 12

.0
0 MI .c
c
4.-•

a) 0 'E.:.

2- 0
-*
aL E
_v 0
o
laaJD Apuos
maaJD Apuos

E -0
W
0 C

132t1' 0D r

-

Janw

pups8

Pa% M a!A
1P Da
ian18

I El

1

I

(Lu)Jam8 opoioloo
RAOQD jaHaN

i

L1 x s

o
°'
m

opt:Lk:moo

O

wm m3

0 0

alonpd

0
-U co
a) —

_c C 0

N
O

m
em
in
= --a
a5

ID
1._

a) c
—
a) 0
0
< a) Q_

0
til
..-

0
0
.4-Pr)
.-

0
N
.-

72

cn a .c
±- m

, 7,

0

> 0 g 0

ca x
0

0

0
0

0

Extrapolating pedochronologies from one area to another for comparative purposes is also
problematic, no matter how well the reference soils have been studied. Soils are inherently time
transgressive and apparently similar soils may have entirely different origins or developmental
histories. Other data must be found to confirm chronologies based on pedology or
pedostratigraphy.
Few investigators have attempted to develop soil chronologies for the Central Texas area.
Looney (1976), Wallis (1976), and Mandel (1980) related apparent differences in the maturity
of Colorado River terrace soils to the relative age of the terraces, as indicated by their respective
positions in the landscape. These studies were severely hampered by poor temporal control and
therefore relied on allostratigraphic relationships among terraces. Although soil development
was clearly shown to be progressive along definable pedogenic pathways, rates of change could
not be calculated quantitatively. Blum (1987) and Blum and Valastro (1989) studied fluvial
terraces of the upper Pedernales River, a major tributary of the Colorado, including the soils on
these terraces. Blum described several stratigraphic sections and obtained a series of
radiocarbon assays of humates in surficial and buried soils and fluvial deposits at these
localities. Although pedogenic rates were not calculated, trends evident in the data include a
systematic increase in secondary carbonate (through pedogenic and/or diagenetic enrichment)
and apparent, but irregular increases in illuvial clay, coloration, and structural development.
Calcification progresses through well defined stages like those recognized by Machette
(1985:Table 1). These data show that in the Central Texas region, accumulation of calcium
carbonate may provide benchmarks allowing comparisons among soils and estimation of age.
Caran (in review) compiled radiocarbon assays of calcic soils from many areas, which had
attained identifiable stages of carbonate accumulation. A modified version of that compilation
is included as Table 4 in the present report. Table 4 focusses on Stages I and II, in which
calcification is least advanced. In Stage 1, calcium carbonate forms discrete filaments and/or
thin, discontinuous coatings on ped faces or pebbles, usually on their undersides. Coatings are
common, thicker, and more continuous at Stage II and may form on top of pebbles. Soft
nodules 0.5 to 4 cm in diameter may develop, as well, but the matrix remains noncalcareous
to slightly calcareous and loose (assuming a noncalcareous parent material). Higher stages (III
through VI) correspond to increasing carbonate content, induration of the matrix, and
development of laminated or more complex carbonate structures. Holocene deposits generally
do not develop features characteristic of Stage HI or higher.
In terms of local rates of pedogenesis, direct temporal control is limited to the mid to late
Holocene. Diagnostic Middle Archaic to Late Prehistoric artifacts were recovered at sites
41BP191 and 41BP192 at depths of <1 m (Bement 1984). The Middle Archaic materials (5000
to 3000 yr old) appear to have been redeposited, whereas Late Archaic and younger types (3000
to <500 yr old) are preserved in their original, anthropogenic context. Slope-wash deposits at
these sites probably are <3000 yr old. In fact, 14C and TL age analysis indicate that the
deposits may be no more than 2000 yr old. Artifact assemblages included intact, stone-lined
hearths that clearly had not been redeposited. Samples for 14C and TL age determination were
collected from these hearths, thereby firmly linking the samples to a cultural provenience. Five
samples gave reliable ages, all of which were <2000 yr. Artifacts were fairly evenly distributed
from the surface to the base of the slope-wash deposit. Underlying the slope wash is an

73

Table 4. Chronology of calcium carbonate accumulation in soils.
(a) Accumulation Period

(b) Source

(c) Comment

10,000 to-90,000 yr

Machete (1985:Table 1)

Stage I carbonate
accumulation. Period varies
with carbonate content of soil
parent materials, influx of
additional carbonate, drainage,
and climate.

<12,000 yr

Blum (1987:87)

—12,000 yr for Stage II
carbonate accumulation in
carbon-rich sandy loam.

<5,000 to 3,000 yr

Caran (in review)

Age of Middle Archaic
cultural materials (Hester
1986:56) in silty, very fine to
fine sandy clay (clay of soil
nomenclature) with strong
Stage I carbonate
accumulation.

4,970* yr

Caran (1990)

Radiocarbon age of humates in
slightly silty, rare fine sandy
clay (clay) with strong Stage I
and II carbonate accumulation.

<1,870* yr

Ferring (1988:17, Table 1)

Radiocarbon age of humates in
clay loam with Stage I and
weak Stage II carbonate
accumulation.

<1,560* yr

Caran (1989:40-44)

Radiocarbon age of charcoal
from hearth buried in silty,
clayey, fine sand (sandy loam
or loam) with weak Stage I
carbonate accumulation.

NOTES
(a) Accumulation period--Time required for attainment of carbonate-accumulation Stages 1
and/or II, as defined by Machette (1985, Table 1). Stage I: sparse to common, thin,
discontinuous filaments or coatings on ped faces or pebbles, usually on their undersides. Stage
II: common, continuous, thin to thick coatings on tops and undersides of pebbles; common soft
nodules 0.5 to 4 cm in diameter; and noncalcareous to slightly calcareous yet loose matrix.
Asterisk (*) denotes uncorrected radiocarbon age before present.
(b) Source--Citation for chronology of calcium carbonate accumulation.
(c) Comment--Explanatory information regarding nature of soil parent material, radiocarbon age,
etc.
74

apparent argillic soil horizon (Bt) from which no cultural materials were recovered. Bement
concluded that the top of the Bt horizon (his "clay" or "sandy clay") is a sharply defined
erosional unconform ity.
Similar stratigraphic sequences were observed in trenches 3 and 5 at Powell Bend Prospect
along the distal margins of flood terraces near denuded bedrock slopes. At these localities, Bt
horizons of truncated buried soils closely resembling the Axtell series are overlain by
slope-wash and overbank deposits, respectively. Upper boundaries of the Bt horizons are
sharply defined and obviously erosional. In addition, there are conspicuous differences in the
texture of the nonilluvial matrix of slope-wash and overbank deposits and their underlying
truncated Bt horizons. Because of clay translocation, overall texture of eluvial horizons (A
horizons in Paleustalfs) is generally coarser than that of illuvial (Bt) horizons. If the
illuvial-clay fraction is omitted, the textures of sediments composing the immobile matrix of the
A and Bt horizons should be the same or, because of upward fining tendencies in water-lain
deposits, matrix grain size should gradually decrease upward. In contrast, matrix texture at the
contact between the Bt horizon and overlying deposits changes abruptly, indicating a real
difference in the parent materials of these horizons and in their mode and time of deposition.
The original A horizons of one or more Axtell-like buried soils were stripped off during or prior
to deposition of the sediment composing the upper parts of most local sections in the denuded
bedrock and distal flood terrace terrains. Deposits overlying the truncated Bt horizons met the
criteria of A horizons of typical Axtell soils, even though the "new" A's were genetically
unrelated to the "old" Bt's. This explains the age discrepancy between slope-wash deposits
containing Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric cultural materials and the presumably late
Pleistocene relict soils mapped at Powell Bend Mine. The nominal soil series at sites 41BP191
and 41 BP 192 and in many of the trenches at Powell Bend Prospect is the Axtell, an Udertic
Paleustalf. Axtell soils are moderately rubified and have thick A and Bt horizons, strong to
moderate structure in the Bt, and small carbonate nodules (indicating carbonate-accumulation
stage II) in both the Bt and C horizons below 70 cm depth. The top of the Bt is often abrupt.
This soil is assumed to have formed over an extended period through gradual translocation of
clays and iron from the A horizon to the Bt horizon. Carbonates are leached from the A
horizon and possibly the upper B horizon and accumulate below. Axtell and other Paleustalfs
of the Colorado River valley are considered relict, Pleistocene soils by most investigators
(Sorenson et al. 1976; Wallis 1976; Mandel 1980).
The Axtell soil profile resembles stratigraphic sections at trenches 3 and 5 and sites 41BP191
and 41BP192. Upper parts of these sections consist of slope-wash or overbank deposits that
appear to correspond to the A horizon of the typical Axtell Paleustalf. This interpretation is,
however, inconsistent with the irrefutable chronologic record assembled by Bement at site
41 BP 191. Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric artifacts were found throughout the slope-wash
deposits at that site. These cultural materials and the deposits that enclose them must be <3000
yr old, a time frame corroborated by 14C and TL dates, and are therefore significantly younger
than the expected age of the Axtell. The A horizon is the primary source of illuvial clay and
iron forming the Bt horizon and of calcium carbonate forming nodules in the Bt and C horizons.
Because constituents of the Bt horizon are derived from the A, an Axtell profile can only
develop during or after deposition of soil parent materials that form the upper part of the section
and eventually become the A horizon. Yet, deposits overlying the Bt horizon of the local

75

section are less than 3000 yr old, a period that would severely restrict soil development of this
type. The discrepancy indicates that the soils at these localities are not typical Axtell soils.
Rates at which pedogenic processes operate in this area are poorly known. At backhoe trench
3, a few, granule-size pedoconcretions of calcium carbonate formed within the weathered zone
at the top of the bedrock subcrop (Unit 3.1) and thin, discontinuous films of calcium carbonate
known as "calcans" covered ped faces in the lower part of the soil profile (Unit 3.2). Small,
calcareous pedoconcretions were noted in partly weathered bedrock beneath the ferricrete in
trench 6, as well. Discontinuous calcans are intermediate between Stages I and II in the
progressive, six-step classification scheme of Machette (1985:Table 1), whereas small
pedoconcretions represent Stage II (Table 4). Carbonate accumulation may be very slow in arid
regions with noncalcareous parent materials and limited influx of carbonates through aerosolic
transmission as dust and/or weak ionic solutions in rain. Under such conditions, attainment of
Stage I may require 10,000 yr to as long as —90,000 yr (Machette 1985:Table 2).
In contrast, the climate of Central Texas is subhumid and sources of calcium carbonate are
abundant. Calcareous sandstone provides most of the sedimentary parent materials of local soils
and shallow ground water is hard. Data from subhumid areas across the state indicate that
carbonate accumulation Stages I and II may develop in <1600 yr to —12,000 yr, depending on
the environmental setting and other factors. Table 4 includes several records of Stage I
carbonate accumulation in middle to late Holocene soils and Stage II in late Pleistocene to
middle Holocene deposits. In each of the recent studies cited in this compilation, chronologic
control was afforded by one or more radiocarbon assays and cultural materials were found in
at least two of these stratigraphic sections. Blum (1987:87) observed Stage 11 accumulation in
coarse grained alluvial deposits of the Pedernales River of Central Texas, which had a
radiocarbon age of —12,000 yr. Presumably, development of Stage I morphology would have
required only a fraction of this period, but the actual time of Stage I accumulation was not
determined in Blum's study.
Better chronologic control allowed Ferring (1988:17, Table 1) and Caran (1989:40-44, 1990,
in review) to report morphologic development of Stage I or Stages I and H in alluvial deposits
within <1,560 to 4,970 yr. Stage 11 accumulation in <5000 yr may require water saturation
alternating with unsaturated conditions in an oxidized clay soil (Caran 1990). Conditions at
trenches 3 and 6 in the current project area were less favorable, indicating that rates there
probably were slower. The calcic buried soil at trench 3 may have formed over 5000 to 12,000
yr. Calcic pedoconcretions at trench 6 likely post-date formation of the ferricrete, and their age
may be comparable to that of carbonate nodules at trench 3. Few other sections examined
during the present investigation revealed significant carbonate accumulation. Where soils are
primarily developed in slope-wash and fluvial deposits of the denuded bedrock and riparian
corridor terrains, respectively, the absence of obvious carbonate accumulation provides indirect
evidence that the soil parent materials probably were deposited less than 5000 ago.
Stratigraphic sections provide additional evidence regarding the age of soils and unconsolidated
sediment within Powell Bend Prospect. A few of the sections revealed soils or buried soils with
well developed argillic horizons. Argillic horizons develop at widely differing rates, ranging
from 350(?) yr to 140,000 yr, depending on the composition of parent materials and the
conditions to which they are subjected during and following deposition (Birkeland
1984:208-902). The Axtell soil series is mapped across most of the denuded bedrock terrain.
76

Both the Axtell and similar, buried soils described in trenches 3 and 5 and at sites 41BP191 and
41BP192 have thick Bt horizons with continuous argillans on peds. Based on clay-accumulation
rates elsewhere, parent materials of Bt horizons in the project area may have been deposited
>10,000 yr ago and soil development must have begun soon after.
Rubification has also been used as a proxy indicator of soil age (Harden 1982). The degree of
rubification is inferred from color of the soil when dry. Dry color of the Bt horizon of the
Axtell soil is 10YR4/6 to 10YR6/2, with 5YR to 2.5YR mottles. The Bt horizon at trench 5
attains 7.5YR to 5YR moist hues probably corresponding to 10YR to 7.5YR hues when dry.
Birkeland (1984:Table 8-2) reported 10YR hues in soils <10,000 yr old and 7.5YR hues in soils
>10,000 yr old. Freshly deposited sediment in the Powell Bend area generally is less red than
10YR, indicating that a period of rubification is required to produce soils of this hue. Axtell
and buried Axtell-like soils are therefore likely to be —10,000 yr old. These conclusions leave
little doubt that the soils at trenches 3 and 5 and sites 41BP191 and 41BP192 consist of late(?)
Holocene slope-wash or overbank deposits overlying truncated Bt horizons of late Pleistocene
Paleustalfs.
Allostratigraphic Record
A number of investigators have proposed partial chronologies for development of paired and
unpaired fluvial fill terraces (allostratigraphic units) in the middle Colorado River valley and
at least one of its major tributaries. Chronology of all or part of the Colorado River terrace
sequence has been discussed most recently by Baker and Penteado-Orellana (1977), Frederick
(1987, 1988), and Caran and Mandel (1988), whereas Blum (1987) and Blum and Valastro
(1989) determined or estimated the age of terrace deposits along the upper Pedernales River,
a tributary of the Colorado >130 km west-northwest of Powell Bend Prospect. Figure 12 is a
topographic profile through the Prospect perpendicular to the Colorado River (see Figure 1 for
line of section). It is clear from this cross section that the highest elevations in the Prospect lie
at the approximate level of the Capitol terrace, —40 to 48 m above the river. Incision that
produced the existing local topography clearly post-dates the Capitol terrace by a long, but
undetermined period. Although the channel of Harris Creek is now at the relative elevation of
the Montopolis terrace, 23 to 28 m above the river, the Colorado must have cut well below that
level before incision of minor tributaries such as Harris Creek began. The Montopolis terrace
is therefore much older than all or most of the incision of Harris Creek and the allostratigraphy
of these drainage systems are essentially unrelated. Capitol terrace may be allostratigraphically
correlative with the stable uplands terrain of Powell Bend Prospect.
The ordinal sequence of fluvial-terrace development and abandonment in the middle Colorado
valley is reasonably well established. Asylum, the highest Colorado River terrace, is the oldest
and lower terraces are successively younger. The Uvalde Formation, as much as 20 m above
the Asylum, is sometimes erroneously referred to as a Colorado River terrace deposit although
it mantles the drainage divides of the Colorado and other rivers and is therefore not discretely
associated with any existing river system. Published archeological reports concerning the
Powell Bend Lignite Mine identify upland gravel deposits in that area as the Uvalde Formation,
but provide no evidence or descriptions to support this conclusion. Proctor et al. (1974) did not
map the Uvalde Formation or any other post-Eocene deposits at that locality. Based solely on
gross allostratigraphic relations, it is most probable that the unmapped gravels are either part
of the Asylum terrace complex or represent secondary deposits reworked from the Uvalde
77

Formation proper. Both the Asylum and Capitol terraces are lithologically similar to the Uvalde
Formation, which does not appear to be represented in the Prospect.
Although the age of terraces generally appears to increase with relief above the river channel,
actual numerical ages of terrace landforms and their associated deposits have not been fully
demonstrated. Quantitative temporal data remain scarce and existing chronologies are poorly
to very poorly constrained. As noted above, the highest and lowest topographic surfaces within
the Prospect have approximately the same relief as the Capitol and Montopolis terraces,
respectively. The Capitol is the second highest terrace recognized in the Colorado River
valley-fill sequence, lying —16 to 25 m lower than the Asylum surface. Based on very limited
temporal data, Baker and Penteado-Orellana (1977: Tables 1 and 3) suggested that the Asylum
terrace is perhaps 1,700,000 to 350,000 yr old and that the Capitol terrace is between 350,000
and 120,000 yr old. These authors also concluded that the next lower terrace, the Montopolis,
was 120,000 to 30,000 yr old. These estimates are problematic, for reasons given below.
In many areas, the Capitol terrace has been overprinted with a strongly developed calcrete
mostly diagenetic in origin (i.e., precipitated within the saturated zone, below the water table),
but possibly pedogenic (i.e., precipitated within the vadose zone, above the water table), in part.
This calcrete corresponds to Stage IV in the morphologic classification by Machette (1985:Table
1). Blum (1987:71-75) reported that the uppermost terrace of the upper Pedernales River valley,
which he designated "Unit A," also has developed a Stage IV calcrete. Based on Machette's
(1985:Table 2) summary of the time required to produce Stage IV pedogenic calcification,
>100,000 yr, Blum concluded that the Unit A terrace fill may have been deposited during the
middle or perhaps early Pleistocene, between 132,000 yr and as much as 1,700,000 yr ago
(Palmer 1983; Richmond and Fullerton 1987). This estimate is necessarily broad and imprecise,
ranging over more than an order of magnitude, but probably represents a reasonable first
approximation of the age of Unit A of the Pedernales River valley. The age of the Capitol
terrace may be comparable to that of Unit A.
Caran and Mandel (1988) provided the only truly quantitative evidence of the age of any of the
upper terraces of the Colorado or other rivers of the western Gulf Coastal Plains. As discussed
previously, a bed of 620,000-yr old Lava Creek B volcanic ash near Smithville, Bastrop County,
lies —28 m above the Colorado, adjacent to an exposure of mostly coarse-grained terrace gravels
probably correlative with deposits of the Montopolis terrace.' Stratigraphic relationships at this
site are unclear, but the ash appears to be part of the Montopolis terrace fill.' If so, this would
indicate that the ancestral Colorado was depositing sediment —28 m above its present bed
620,000 yr ago. The ash bed occurs near the top of the local section. Deposits composing the
Montopolis terrace would therefore be >620,000 yr old. The higher Capitol terrace ' would
necessarily be even older, perhaps on the order of 1,000,000. These estimates conflict sharply
with those of Baker and Penteado-Orellana (1977), yet may conceivably fall within the broad
time range inferred through analogy to the poorly dated upper terrace of the Pedernales River.
Relief of the Lava Creek B volcanic ash bed relative to the Colorado River provides a partial
basis for comparison with other landforms in the region, as well, although direct,

Editorial note added July 1992: Recent research by S. C. Caran and R. D. Mandel has shown
that the bed of Lava Creek B volcanic ash is actually part of the Capitol terrace.
78

allostratigraphic correlation among these landforms may be premature. Caran (in review)
reported that the base of a widespread alluvial-fan deposit known as the Taylor Fan complex
lies —28 to 30 m above the channel of Brushy Creek, a tributary of the Brazos River in
Williamson County —50 km northwest of Powell Bend Prospect. This is approximately the
same relief, with respect to the Colorado channel, as that of the landform (Montopolis terrace?)
' associated with the Lava Creek B ash at Smithville. This landform might therefore appear to
be correlative with the Taylor Fan. The fan covers a bedrock surface of low relief in eastern
Williamson and western Milam Counties (Edwards 1974; Proctor et al. 1981). Fan deposits are
6.4 m in mean thickness and consist of sand and gravel largely derived from chert and
limestone bedrock of the Lower Cretaceous Edwards Formation west of the Balcones Fault
Zone. Age of the Taylor Fan is poorly constrained. Edwards (1974:48) noted that the fan was
clearly post-Miocene, possibly Pleistocene, but provided no definitive chronologic evidence.
Applying reasonable mean denudation rates, Caran (in review:Table 2) concluded that
downcutting of Brushy Creek valley may have required 81,000 to 100,000 yr. In the absence
of direct indicators, this extrapolation provides an acceptable estimate of the overall age of the
valley. The Taylor Fan must therefore be significantly older than —100,000 yr.
Although Taylor Fan does not extend into the Colorado River basin, an eroded fan remnant may
occupy the Brazos-Colorado drainage divide on the Williamson-Travis County border (Caran
in review). In contrast, the Lava Creek B volcanic ash at Smithville lies well within the deeply
incised Colorado valley, —55 m below the nearest point on the Brazos-Colorado divide. For this
reason, Taylor Fan probably is not allostratigraphically correlative with the Montopolis ' terrace
or other geomorphic surface associated with the ashbed. The Colorado drainage network had
already been established by the time the ash fell. Taylor Fan occupies a significantly higher
position in the landscape than does the ash, indicating that the fan may pre-date both the ash
and its associated landform. The fan is a relatively small feature, however, which may never
have extended much beyond its present boundaries. Small areal extent inhibits allostratigraphic
correlation. Along the Balcones Fault Zone, the Colorado and Brazos Rivers are separated by
a high, broad, relatively undissected, relict terrain. It is on this bedrock surface that the Taylor
Fan aggraded. Fan deposits may have begun to accumulate long after initial development of
the Colorado and Brazos systems. Evolution of the Taylor Fan was therefore essentially
independent of these rivers and its age cannot be determined by allostratigraphic correlation
alone. In addition, there may have been a long interval following aggradation of the fan before
initial incision by Brushy Creek and other tributaries now draining that area.
Landform correlation requires certain assumptions about coupled behavior of geomorphic
terrains. Allostratigraphic correlation in this region is therefore an imperfect basis for
establishing a landscape chronology. In the absence of direct temporal control, a better initial
approach is to evaluate indirect chronologic indicators based on the rates at which landforms
are created or modified. These rates vary, but generally fall within a finite range, so that the
age of terrains in a given area can be estimated from mean rates of geomorphic processes
operating in similar settings. These results can then be compared to previously suggested
landscape chronologies elsewhere.

79

DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY

The present geomorphic investigation was intended to address three primary issues related to
cultural resource assessment at the extended Powell Bend Prospect: (1) the vertical and lateral
extent and continuity of deposits from which cultural materials might reasonably be recovered;
(2) stratigraphy, integrity, and geomorphic context of Holocene and late Pleistocene strata within
the project area; and (3) geomorphic evolution of the landscape during the Quaternary Period.
Attention has focussed on the stratigraphy, chronology, and geomorphic context of late
Pleistocene and Holocene deposits. Major terrains and landforms have been characterized and
environments of deposition have been interpreted. Although no samples were submitted for
radiocarbon assay and no time-diagnostic artifacts were found, it has been possible to establish
the general history of deposition and landform development using geomorphic indicators.
Where possible, results of the present investigation were supplemented with findings from
previous geological, pedological, and archeological studies nearby. A model of landscape
evolution in the Powell Bend Prospect is offered as a partial guide for cultural-resource
assessment.

Ouaternary Stratigraphy and Geomorphology
Deposits of late Pleistocene to Holocene age are found in geomorphic terrains throughout the
Prospect. The present investigation has shown, however, that Quaternary strata are most
extensive within the riparian corridors, particularly beneath the flood terraces. Other deposits
include accumulations of slope wash on otherwise denuded bedrock slopes and relict Pleistocene
deposits with mature soils on the highest divides and hills. Table 2 summarizes available data
concerning the type, thickness, age, and distribution of deposits in each major geomorphic
setting and presents a preliminary reconstruction of landscape evolution.

Pleistocene (Stable Uplands). The oldest Quaternary strata in the Prospect are found in the
stable uplands terrain, occupying the highest elevations of isolated hills and drainage divides
separating tributaries of Big Sandy Creek. Formerly extensive Colorado River terrace deposits
have been completely eroded, leaving only a sparse residue of lag gravel draping the uplands
irregularly. Thicker gravel residues and perhaps intact terrace remnants are preserved in stable
uplands of the Powell Bend Mine area to the south, where maximum elevations are 3 to 10 m
higher than in the Prospect. Within the Prospect, the stable uplands are mantled with relict
slope-wash deposits and in situ weathering products with mature soils. All sediment was
derived from former local outcrops of Eocene sandstone and shale and older Pleistocene fluvial
deposits of the Capitol terrace, which were gradually reduced by erosion. The Quaternary
deposits include silty very fine to fine sands pedogenically enriched with illuvial clays and, at
one site (trench 6), with small pedoconcretions of calcium carbonate and ferric oxide. Bedrock
at trench 6 is capped by an —9 cm thick, laminated ferricrete. The section exposed in trench
7 shares many of the features noted in trench 6, but lacks discrete bodies of secondary calcium
carbonate and oxidized iron. Discrepancies between these soil profiles may be attributed to
differences in local composition and permeability of bedrock. Aggradation of soil parent
materials composing both sections was apparently slow, at rates commensurate with
pedogenesis. Most exposed soil profiles in the stable uplands terrain are essentially consistent
with the Crockett series, an Udertic Paleustalf, which is the nominal soil mapped there.

80

Presumed late Pleistocene age of these deposits and associated soils is inferred from their
position high in the degrading landscape and by the advanced stage of soil development. Based
on estimated rates of denudation and pedogenesis, the landform on which deposits accumulated
in the stable uplands terrain may be >45,000 to 60,000 yr old, whereas the deposits themselves
and their Crockett or Crockett-like soils almost certainly are >10,000 yr old to a maximum
hypothetical age of that of the landform. This chronology is consistent with available, albeit
limited, allostratigraphic age control, indicating that the stable uplands may post-date the Capitol
terrace and that incision of Harris Creek probably post-dates the Montopolis terrace. Cultural
materials, if present in this landscape setting, would be found at the surface or within the upper
few centimeters of soil.
Late Pleistocene/Early Holocene (Flood Terraces). Perhaps the next oldest deposits at Powell
Bend Prospect are those underlying the flood terraces, particularly along their distal margins,
within the riparian corridors. Age of the flood-terrace deposits generally increases with distance
from the active channel, although exceptions to this trend are common. The distal part of the
flood terrace also typically has the greatest relief relative to the stream channel. Relief of flood
terraces typically results from: addition of slope-wash deposits from the valley walls; vertical
accretion of overbank deposits; continued downcutting by the stream, which isolates older
fluvial deposits at progressively higher levels on the valley walls); or a combination of these
processes. At Powell Bend, most of the flood-terrace strata consist of overbank deposits locally
capped by or interfingered with slope-wash sediment, as in trench 3. Virtually all of the
slope-wash sediment is trapped in a narrow zone (apron) along the base of the denuded bedrock
slopes. Slope-wash deposits are absent closer to the channel.
Overbank deposits along the distal margin of the flood terrace may overlie thin beds of relict
fluvial-channel sediment, as in trench 5. Trench 5 was placed near the distal margin of the
terrace, but outside the zone of obvious slope-wash deposition. Channel deposits usually
thicken toward the channel, where they are the dominant lithofacies, as in trenches 1 and 4.
If chute channels have dissected the terrace, as in trench 2, channel and overbank deposits may
be inset and interbedded in a complex manner. At trench 5, an Axtell-like paleosol developed
in thin chute(?)-channel deposits and extended a few centimeters into the underlying, weathered,
Eocene sandstone. Axtell series is an Udertic Paleustalf similar to the Crockett. The paleosol
is heavily rubified and has a well developed Bt horizon. The A horizon of the now buried soil
in trench 5 probably was stripped away by one or more exceptional floods and the resulting
unconformity was overlain by overbank deposits. Net aggradation and pedogenesis at this
locality probably began during the latest Pleistocene or perhaps the early Holocene. The Bt
horizon had already formed by the time the Axtell-like soil was truncated by flood scour.
Overbank deposits mantling the truncation surface are likely middle(?) to late Holocene and
could contain cultural materials. The potential for recovery of cultural materials from these
overbank deposits is low, however, because they accumulated rapidly, possibly during a single
extreme flood event, and their lateral continuity is limited.
Middle-Late Holocene (Denuded Slopes and Riparian Corridors). The youngest deposits in the
project area include: middle(?) to late Holocene slope-wash deposits on and below denuded
bedrock slopes; and middle(?) Holocene to modem overbank and channel sediments composing
the active-channel fills, stream banks, and at least the proximal portions of flood terraces.
Slope-wash and fluvial deposits of this area have undergone little pedogenic modification,
confirming the relative recency of sediment aggradation. The incised valleys of Harris Creek
8I

and its tributaries have gentle to locally steep, concave slopes denuded by rapid sheet and rill
erosion. Calcareous sandstones and mudstones of the Eocene Calvert Bluff Formation (upper
Wilcox Group) crop out or underlie a thin layer of locally derived slope-wash deposits.
Slope-wash deposits have accumulated at the base of some hill slopes, as well, forming a thin,
accretionary wedge that interfingers with overbank sediment of the flood terraces. Locally, the
slope-wash deposits include a small amount of siliceous gravel that presumably washed off local
drainage divides up slope. Slope-wash deposits are often poorly stratified and, where present,
individual strata have limited horizontal extent. These deposits tend to accumulate at the base
of a slope or in local depressions on denuding slopes. Nowhere in the current project area do
slope-wash deposits appear to represent a long or continuous record of deposition. Topographic
surfaces on which slope-wash sediment accumulates generally have a moderate to steep
streamward gradient. The comparatively steep slope and recurring influx of sheet runoff in
these areas may have discouraged prolonged or intensive human activity. In addition, much of
the accreting sediment is reworked and may occasionally incorporate cultural materials
displaced from eroded sites up slope. These factors restrict the probability that cultural
materials may be found in their original, anthropogenic context in slope-wash deposits. In the
Powell Bend Mine area, Bement (1984) found Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric artifacts in a
coherent sequence of slope-wash sediments, but such occurrences probably are rare.
Riparian corridors likely were heavily utilized by hunters and gatherers because of the biological
diversity of stream-side woodlands and proximity to seasonal water supplies. Sediment
deposition was comparatively rapid in this setting, however, thereby diluting the potential
concentration of artifacts. All of the test pits in this part of the landscape revealed similar
stratigraphic sections, consisting of cross bedded channel sediment overlain by thin, horizontally
laminated overbank deposits. The same general sequence was also observed in outcrops along
the channel, but overbank deposits were absent locally. Although the pattern of deposition was
comparable at localities throughout the riparian corridors, few beds could be traced laterally and
there was considerable cutting and filling, chute incision, and sediment insetting along
abandoned chutes. Growth of tree roots also resulted in local bioturbation, causing progressive
disruption of stratigraphic continuity. No cultural materials were recovered and the potential
for future recovery appears low.
Implications for Cultural Resource Management
Objectives of the geomorphic investigation included characterization of the stratigraphic section
and determination of the vertical and horizontal continuity of strata potentially containing
cultural resources. The study addressed both points, providing data pertinent to cultural
resource management. Quaternary deposits at Powell Bend Prospect probably span the entire
Holocene and much of the late Pleistocene, with gaps of undetermined duration. Reconstruction
of the early history of landscape evolution is based on limited chronologic control afforded by
geomorphic indicators of age and by correlation with comparable landforms of known age
elsewhere.
Cultural-material content of Quaternary deposits has not been demonstrated. Quaternary
deposits extend throughout most of the Prospect but are thick and continuous only on the flood
terraces. Proximity to at least seasonal water and riparian woodlands may have been attractive
to prehistoric as well as later inhabitants, including those peoples for whom there is a clear
material record from the Powell Bend Mine south of the Prospect. Two sites in the mine area,
82

41BP191 and 41BP192, yielded Early and Middle Archaic and Late Prehistoric artifacts, as well
as samples dated by radiocarbon assay and thermoluminescence analysis. Unfortunately, the
stratigraphic contexts of these sites were not reported in sufficient detail to allow close
correlation with deposits in the Prospect.
Geomorphic processes, acting singly or in combination, may disperse, bury, or mix cultural
remains soon or even long after accumulation of those materials. The most important
geomorphic processes in this regard are erosion, deposition, and pedogenesis, which, in turn,
are related to channel stability, discharge fluctuation, and, perhaps, climatic change. At
localities throughout the Prospect, erosion appears to have stripped away part of the stratigraphic
section, truncating channel and overbank deposits and exhuming Eocene bedrock. Erosion
created most of the paleo-landforms on which slope wash and fluvial sediment have
accumulated.
The variety, intensity, and continuity of human activities were perhaps primarily controlled,
directly or indirectly, by the availability of water. Rainfall is distinctly seasonal, concentrated
in spring and early summer (April through June) and early autumn (September) (Orten 1979).
Rainfall during these four months accounts for —45% of mean annual precipitation, 944 mm.
Ephemeral ground-water seepage is common throughout the Prospect and vicinity but there are
no significant springs. Therefore, stream discharge is intermittent and largely confined to the
period during and immediately following individual rain showers. Until the historic introduction
of hand-dug or drilled wells, the Prospect probably sustained only temporary habitation since
at least the middle Holocene and possibly throughout the Holocene. Even today, most tillage
agriculture in the area is based on dryland farming.
Properties of the substrate also are important in terms of the native plant communities and
agricultural practices they support. These characteristics also may have affected the potential
lifeways of temporary and permanent occupants. Uplands consist of prairies and savannahs on
well drained to moderately well drained soils of the Crockett and Axtell series, whereas
bottomlands are dominated by open riparian woodlands on excessively drained soils of the
Sayers series (Baker 1979; Pederson 1979). Hunting and gathering activities could have been
conducted anywhere in the Prospect but were perhaps most intensive within the riparian
corridors. Small cultivated plots might have been maintained along streams if the
shade-producing tree canopy were cleared, yet most stream terraces are so narrow that tillage
of these landforms likely was never significant. Most uplands were cultivated historically but
are now rangeland for cattle. Underground lignite mining was also practiced historically in the
eastern part of the Prospect and a railroad spur north of Harris Creek transported lignite from
the mine area to the main rail line to the west (Ken Koehler personal communication April,
1989). Mined areas and the spur were abandoned in the 1930's and 1940's and have partly
reverted to native plant cover, although both the rail bed and irregular topography (subsidence
depressions and spoil mounds) at the mine site are still evident.
Geomorphic investigations to date have identified areas of landscape stability and instability,
have suggested a relative chronology among deposits in various geomorphic terrains, and have
established a rationale for archeological surveying and testing. Deposits in the stable uplands
may largely pre-date human occupation of the region. In addition, these sedimentary sections
are highly attenuated. If cultural materials had accumulated, the slow rate of sediment
aggradation would have produced "condensed zones" in which temporally discrete materials are
83

collegial. In disturbed areas within this terrain, fossorial mammals and historic agricultural
practices may have deranged preexisting sedimentary and cultural stratification. Stratification
may be severely compromised on denuded bedrock slopes. Sedimentary cover is generally thin
or absent and dominated by slope wash. Gullying is common in formerly cultivated fields, in
areas where cattle grazing is most intense, and in areas of historic underground lignite mining.
Slope-wash deposits are moderately thick (generally <1 m) in some areas and may contain well
developed soils, including Alfisols. Conditions are markedly different in the stream-channel and
flood-terrace terrains. Along major streams, channel migration has produced particularly thick
accumulations of Quaternary (exclusively Holocene?) alluvium. To date, reconnaissance and
trenching have failed to disclose examples of buried soils or other relict stable surfaces within
the active channel fill. Nor were there any indications of cultural materials. Perhaps the most
promising areas for discovery of prehistoric artifacts or features in coherent, stratigraphic
contexts are the distal margins of flood terraces. There, surficial soils may be well developed
within relatively thin overbank deposits, or are locally overlain by or interfinger with thin
tongues of slope wash, much of which may post-date introduction of cultivation and grazing.

REFERENCES CITED

Austin, G. M.
1995 Records of Wells in Bastrop County, Texas. Bulletin 5413. Texas Board of Water
Engineers Austin, Texas.
Baker, F. E.
1979 Soil Survey of Bastrop County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service, United States
Department of Agriculture.
Baker, V. R.
1975 Flood Hazards along the Balcones Escarpment in Central Texas--Alternative
Approaches to Their Recognition, Mapping, and Management. Geological Circular
75-5. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Baker, V. R., and M. M. Penteado-Orellana
1977 Adjustment to Quaternary Climatic Change by the Colorado River in Central Texas.
Journal of Geology 85(4):395-422.
1978 Fluvial Sedimentation Conditioned by Quaternary Climatic Change in Central
Texas. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 48(2):433 -451.

Bement, L. C.
1984 Intensive Investigations of 41 BP191 and 4 IBP192, the Powell Bend Prospect,
Bastrop County, Texas. Research Report No. 87. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Birkeland, P. W.
1984 Soils and Geomorphology. Oxford University Press, New York.

84

Blum, M. D.
1987 Late Quaternary Sedimentation in the Upper Pedernales River, Texas. Masters thesis,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Blum, M. D., and Salvatore Valastro Jr.
1989 Response of the Pedernales River of Central Texas to Late Holocene Climatic Change.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 79(3):435 456.
-

Breeding, S. D., and Tate Dalrymple
1944 Texas Floods of 1938 and 1939. Paper 914. Geological Survey Water Supply.
United States Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985 A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas--An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V. M. Bryant, Jr. and R. G. Holloway pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation.
-

Bryant, V. M., Jr., and H. J. Shafer
1977 The Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironments of Texas--A Model for the Archeologist.
Texas Archeological Society Bulletin 48:1 25.
-

Buckner, H. D., E. R. Carrillo, and H.J.Davidson
1987 Water Resources Data, Texas, Water Year 1987. Water Data Report TX 87 11:443.
Geological Survey. United States Department of the Interior, Austin, Texas
-

-

-

Byrd, C. L.
1971 Origin and History of the Uvalde Gravel of Central Texas. Baylor Geological Studies
Bulletin 20. Waco, Texas.
Caran, S. C.
1989 Chapter 4--Geomorphology of Part of the San Miguel Lignite Prospect, McMullen
County, Texas. In Continuing Cultural Resource Assessments in the San Miguel
Prospect, 1988 Season, Atascosa and McMullen Counties, Texas by B. A.
Nightengale, C. L. Highley, C. L., and S.C. Caran, pp. 21-52. Studies in Archeology
3. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1990 Appendix A--Geomorphology of Lower Village Creek, Tarrant County, Texas. In
Archeological Investigation of the Proposed Green Oaks Boulevard Extension from
1H30 to Fielder Road, Tarrant County, Texas by S.L. Andrews and S.C. Caran, pp.
Al A34. Freese and Nichols, Inc., Fort Worth, Texas.
-

n.d. Geomorphology of Brushy Creek (Archeological Site 41 WM13), Williamson
County, Texas. Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin,
Texas.

85

Caran, S. C. and V.R. Baker
1986 Flooding Along the Balcones Escarpment, Central Texas. In The Balcones
Escarpment, edited by P.L. Abbott and C.M. Woodruff, pp. 1-14. Geological Society
of America Guidebook, San Antonio.
Caran, S. C. and R. D. Mandel
1988 Quaternary Terrace Stratigraphy and Geomorphology of the Texas Gulf Coastal
Plains. Geological Society of America Abstracts with Programs 20(2):93.
Carr, J. T. Jr.
1967 The Climate and Physiography of Texas. Report 53. Texas Water Development
Board.
Dalrymple, Tate, and others
1939 Major Texas floods of 1935. Water-supply Paper 796-G. Geological Survey. United
States Department of the Interior, Washington, D. C.
Deussen, Alexander
1924 Geology of the Coastal Plain of Texas West of Brazos River. Professional Paper 126.
Geological Survey. United States Department of the Interior, Washington, D. C.
Dibble, D. S.
1976 Results of an Archeological Survey of Areas to be Affected by a Proposed Sanitary
Landfill, Camp Swift, Texas. Technical Bulletin 11. The Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Dietrich, J. W., and J. T. Lonsdale
1958 Mineral Resources of the Colorado River Industrial Development Association Area.
Report of Investigations No. 37. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Edwards, J. E.
1974 The Geomorphology and Hydrogeology of the Taylor Alluvial Fan, Williamson
County, Texas. Master's thesis. The University of Texas at Austin.
Ellsworth, C. E.
1923 The Floods in Central Texas in September, 1921. Paper 488. Geological Survey
Water-Supply, United States Department of the Interior, Washington, D. C.
Epps, L. W.
1973 A Geological History of the Brazos River. Baylor Geological Studies Bulletin No. 24.
Baylor University, Waco, Texas.
Fenneman, N. M.
1946 Physical Divisions of the United States. Geological Survey (scale 1:7,000,000).
United States Department of the Interior, Washington, D. C.

86

Ferguson, W. K.
1986 The Texas Landscape--the Geographic Provinces of Texas. Texas Mosaics (with map
scale 1:2,000,000). Austin, Texas.
Ferring, C. R.
1986 Rates of Fluvial Sedimentation--Implications for Archaeological Variability.
Geoarchaeology 1(3):259 274.
-

1988 Appendix 1--Geoarcheological Investigations along Portions of Village Creek, Tarrant
County, Texas. In Archeological Survey of the Proposed Green Oaks Boulevard
Extension along Village Creek, Tarrant County, Texas by S. L. Andrews, pp. 10 19.
Freese and Nichols,Inc., Fort Worth, Texas.
-

Follett, C. R.
1970 Ground water Resources of Bastrop County, Texas. Report 109. Texas Water
Development Board, Austin, Texas.
-

Frederick, C. D.
1987 An Investigation into the Paleoenvironmental History of the Austin Mastodon Site.
Master's thesis. The University of Texas at Austin.
1988 Paleoenvironments of Colorado River Terraces, 301 Congress Avenue (Austin
Mastodon Site). In Congress Avenue, Austin, Texas--Lessons in Economic Geology,
Architecture, and History edited by C. M. Woodruff, Jr., pp. 20-28. Austin Geological
Society Guidebook 12, Austin, Texas.
Geological Survey
1982 Lake Bastrop 7.5' Quadrangle, Texas. United States Department of the Interior,
Washington, D. C.
Godfrey, C. L., G. S. McKee and Harvey Oakes
1973 General Soil Map of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas. (Scale 1:6,000,000).
Gould, F. W.
1969 Texas Plants--a Checklist and Ecological Summary. Publication MP 585 (revised).
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M University, College Station.
-

Greiner, J. H., Jr.
1982 Erosion and Sedimentation by Water in Texas--Average Annual Rates Estimated in
1979. Report 268. Texas Department of Water Resources, Austin, Texas.
Griffiths, J. F., and Greg Ainsworth
1981 One Hundred Years of Texas Weather, 1880 1979. Monograph No. 1. Office of State
Climatologist, College Station, Texas.
-

$7

Harden, J. W.
1982 A Quantitative Index of Soil Development from Field Descriptions--Examples from
a Chronosequence in Central California. Geoderma 28(1):1-28.
Harden, J. W., and E. M. Taylor
1983 A Quantitative Comparison of Soil Development in Four Climatic Regimes.
Quaternary Research 20(3):342-359.
Henry, C. D., and J. M. Basciano
1979 Environmental Geology of the Wilcox Group Lignite Belt, East Texas. Report of
Investigations 98. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Henry, C. D., J. M. Basciano, and T. W. Duex
1980 Hydrology and Water Quality of the Eocene Wilcox Group--Significance for Lignite
Development in East Texas. Geological Circular GC 80-3. Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hester, T. R.
1986 Early Human Populations along the Balcones Escarpment. In The Balcones
Escarpment, edited by P. L. Abbott and C. M. Woodruff, pp. 55-62. Geological
Society of America Guidebook, San Antonio.
Hill, R. T.
1901 Geography and Geology of the Black and Grand Prairies, Texas. Annual Report 21.
Geological Survey, United States Department of the Interior, Washington, D. C.
Hill, R. T., and T. W. Vaughan
1898 Geology of the Edwards Plateau and Rio Grande Plain Adjacent to Austin and San
Antonio, Texas, With Reference to the Occurrence of Underground Waters. In
Eighteenth Annual Report of the United States Geological Survey to the Secretary of
the Interior, 1896-97: Part 11--Papers Chiefly of a Theoretic Nature, pp. 193-321.
Geological Survey. United States Department of the Interior, Washington, D. C.
Holman, J. A., and A. J. Winkler
1987 A mid Pleistocene (Irvingtonian) Herpetofauna from a Cave in South Central Texas.
Pearce-Sellards Series No. 44. Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas
at Austin.
-

-

Hoyt, J. C.
1936 Droughts of 1930 34. Water-supply Paper 680. Geological Survey. United States
Department of the Interior, Washington, D. C.
-

1938 Drought of 1936, With Discussion on the Significance of Drought in Relation to
Climate. Water-supply Paper 820. Geological Survey. United States Department of
the Interior, Washington, D. C.

88

Izett, G. A.
1981 Volcanic Ash Beds--Recorders of Upper Cenozoic Silicic Pyroclastic Volcanism in
the Western United States. Journal of Geophysical Research 86(B1 I):10200-10222.
Izett, G. A., and R. E. Wilcox
1982 Map Showing Localities and Inferred Distributions of the Huckleberry Ridge, Mesa
Falls, and Lava Creek Ash Beds (Pearlette Family Ash Beds) of Pliocene and
Pleistocene Age in the Western United States and Southern Canada. Miscellaneous
Investigations Series Map 1-1325 (scale 1:4,000,000). Geological Survey. United
States Department of the Interior, Washington, D. C.
Kaiser, W. R., W. B. Ayers, Jr., and L. W. La Brie
1980 Lignite Resources in Texas. Report of Investigations 104. Bureau of Economic
Geology. The University of Texas at Austin.
Kenmotsu, R. D.
1982 Cultural Resource Investigations at the Powell Bend Prospect, Bastrop County, Texas.
Research Report No. 84. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Jessen, M. L.
1977 The Geomorphic Evolution of the Colorado River, Texas. Unpublished Master's
thesis. Baylor University, Waco, Texas.
Larkin, T. J., and G. W. Bomar
1983 Climatic Atlas of Texas. Texas Department of Water Resources, Austin, Texas.
Leopold, L. B., M. G. Wolman, and J. P. Miller
1964 Fluvial Processes in Geomorphology. W. H. Freeman, San Francisco, California.
Looney, R. M., and V. R. Baker
1977 Late Quaternary Geomorphic Evolution of the Colorado River, Inner Texas Coastal
Plain. Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies Transactions 27:323 333.
-

Lower Colorado River Authority
1988 Powell Bend Potential Expansion Area. Austin (scale 1:4800).
nd

Powell Bend Mine. Brochure. Austin, Texas (pages not numbered).

Lundelius, E. L., Jr.
1986 Vertebrate Paleontology of the Balcones Fault Trend. In The Balcones Escarpment
edited by P. L. Abbott and C. M. Woodruff, Jr., pp. 41-50. Geological Society of
America Guidebook, San Antonio.
1991 Synopsis of Vertebrate Faunas of the Gulf Coastal Plain. In Quaternary Nonglacial
Geology: Conterminous United States edited by R. B. Morrison, pp. 604-610.
Geological Society of America.

89

Lundelius, Earnest L., Jr., Theodore Downs, Everett H. Lindsay, Holmes A. Semken, R. J.
Zakrzewski, C. S. Churcher, C. R. Harington, Gerald E. Schultz and S. David Webb
1987 The North American Quaternary Sequence. In Cenozoic Mammals of North America
edited by Michael 0. Woodbume, pp. 211-235. University of California Press,
Berkeley, California.
Machette, M. N.
1985 Calcic Soils of the Southwestern United States. In Soils and Quaternary Geology of
the Southwestern United States edited D. L. Weide, pp. 1-22. Special Paper 203.
Geological Society of America.
Mandel, R. D.
1980 Climatic and Vegetative Change Inferred from Alluvial Paleosols in Central and
South-Central Texas. Master's thesis. University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas.
Mankinen, E. A., and G. B. Dalrymple
1979 Revised Geomagnetic Polarity Time Scale for the Interval 0-5 m.y.B.P. Journal of
Geophysical Research 84(B2):615-626.
Nace, R. L., and E. J. Pluhowski
1965 Drought of the 1950's With Special Reference to the Midcontinent. Water-Supply
Paper 1804. Geological Survey. United States Department of the Interior,
Washington, D. C.
Natural Fibers Information Center (in cooperation with Office of the State Climatologist)
1987 The Climates of Texas Counties. Natural Fibers Information Center, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Orton, R. B.
1969 Climates of the States--Texas. Climatography of the United States No. 60-41.
Environmental Data Service, United States Department of Commerce, Washington,
D. C.
1979 Climate. In Soil Survey of Bastrop County, Texas by F. E. Baker, pp. 70-71. Soil
Conservation Service. United States Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C.
Palmer, A. R.
1983 Decade of North American Geology 1983 Geologic Time Scale. Geology
11(9):503-504.
Pattarozzi, Michael
1975 Economic and Environmental Aspects of Lignite Strip Mining, Bastrop County, Texas.
Master's thesis. The University of Texas at Austin.
Patterson, J. L.
1963 Floods in Texas--Magnitude and Frequency of Peak Flows. Bulletin 6311. Texas
Water Commission, Austin, Texas.

90

Pederson, R. J.
1979 Range. In Soil Survey Of Bastrop County, Texas by F. E. Baker, pp. 42-47. Soil
Conservation Service. United States Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C.
Pence, F. K.
1951 Preliminary Bulletin on Texas Ceramic Materials. Publication 5105. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve Fox Site, Williamson County, Texas.
Research Report No. 49. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
-

Proctor, C. V., Jr., T. E. Brown, J. H. McGowen, and N. B. Waechter
1981 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Austin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Richmond, G. M., and D. S. Fullerton
1987 Introduction to Quaternary Glaciations in the United States of America. In Quaternary
Glaciations in the Northern Hemisphere, edited by V. Sibrava, D. Q. Bowen, and G.
M. Richmond, pp. 3-10. Quaternary Science Reviews 5:3-10.
Riggio, R. F., G. W. Bomar, and T. J. Larkin
1987 Texas Drought--Its Recent History (1931 1985). Texas Water Commission LP 87 04,
Austin, Texas.
-

-

Robinson, D. G.
1983 Additional Cultural Resource Investigations on the Powell Bend Prospect, Bastrop
County, Texas. Technical Bulletin 61. Texas Archeological Survey, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Russell, R. J.
1945 Climates of Texas. Association of American Geographers Annals 35(2):37 52.
-

Sellards, E. H.
1929 Mineral Resources of Texas--Bastrop County. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1935 Stream Terrace Building Coincident with Human Occupancy in Central Texas.
Geological Society of America Proceedings for 1934.
Soil Conservation Service
1985 Texas--1982 National Resources Inventory Statistical Tables.
Department of Agriculture, Temple, Texas.

91

United States

Soil Survey Staff
1975 Soil taxonomy--a Basic System of Soil Classification for Making and Interpreting Soil
Surveys. Agriculture Handbook No. 436. United States Department of Agriculture,
Washington, D. C.
Sorenson, C. J., R. D. Mandel, and J. C. Wallis
1976 Changes in Bioclimate Inferred from Paleosols and Paleohydrologic Evidence in
East-Central Texas. Journal of Biogeography 3:141-149.
Swartz, B. W.
1957 Records of Water Levels in Bastrop and Caldwell Counties, Texas, 1937 through
December, 1956. Bulletin 5702. Texas Board of Water Engineers, Austin, Texas.
Taylor, A. J.
1982 The Mammalian Fauna from the mid Irvingtonian Fyllan Cave Local Fauna, Travis
County, Texas. Master's thesis. The University of Texas at Austin.
-

Thomas, H. E., and others
1963 Effects of Drought in Central and South Texas. Professional Paper 372 C. Geological
Survey. United States Department of the Interior, Washington, D. C.
-

Urbanec, D. A.
1963 Stream Terraces and Related Deposits in the Austin Area, Texas. Unpublished
Master's thesis. The University of Texas at Austin.
J

Wallis, J. C.
1976 Evidence of Climatic Change from Fluvial Geomorphology and Alluvial Soils of the
Colorado River, Texas. Master's thesis. The University of Texas at Austin.
Weber, G. E.
1968 Geology of the Fluvial Deposits of the Colorado River, Central Texas. Master's
thesis. The University of Texas at Austin.

J

Weeks, A. W.
1945 Quaternary Deposits of the Texas Coastal Plain between Brazos River and Rio
Grande. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 29(12):1693 1720.
-

7

J

92

91_
11"),,

O
f
o
O
O

O

r
.1

3

