Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

February 21, 2013
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2013-1: A Cultural Resources Background Review of the 211-Meter
Ledwig East A Pipeline in Northwestern La Salle County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during a background review of the Ledwig East
A Pipeline right-of-way (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Location of the Ledwig East A Pipeline on large topographic map.

Figure 2. Ledwig East A Pipeline on Millett (1974) 7.5' USGS topographic map.

Background Review
Old Maps, Aerial Photographs, Historic Research
Indian artifacts found in La Salle County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable.
Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes, and
a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness of their
spears (Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery and to hunt
with bows and arrows. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians
native to La Salle County were squeezed out by other Indian who were migrating into the area and
by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San
Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in to take their place (Leffler 1996).
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the La Salle County
area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts
of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the huntergatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his experiences in

1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves to the easily
exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer, occasionally sending a hunting
party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each other in the
semiarid environs of south Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents (Campbell and
Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced Native American groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. Beginning in the late
1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio Road, a camino real, to
and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are documented accounts
of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to establish any sort of
permanent bases in present-day La Salle County (Chipman 1992)
After the Mexican War of Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its
citizens to settle in Texas. Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that
included territory now in La Salle County. None of the recipients seem to have made use of the land,
however. By 1836, when Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated
almost solely by Indians (Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of La Salle County lay in the
disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for desperate
characters until about 1865. New settlers who lived in jacals or dugouts were frequently being
harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part to being pursued by the Texas Rangers, and
being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave La Salle County by 1877. By 1880,
cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also an important part of
the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators combined to make
sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
As with rest of the nation, during the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced
to cut back their once-lucrative vegetable production, and they fell back on raising poultry, hogs, and
dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county in the 1950s
certainly bolstered La Salle County’s economy, and although large ranches lay claim to most of the
land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively increasing part of the
county’s development (Leffler 1996).
Archaeological Atlas and Historic Maps Research
Very few, and sparsely scattered archaeological surveys have been conducted in La Salle County.
As of February 21, 2013 there were 175 archaeological sites recorded within the county, and a large
number of those were found on pipeline surveys. Nevertheless, the time-diagnostic artifacts
discovered in La Salle County provide evidence that the landscape was occupied as early as 11,000
years before the present.
The site types are as varied as the landscape. Large open campsites with numerous hearths, or
campfires, a wide assortment of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal

remains are most commonly located along stream or river terraces. Where gravels outcrop, either
along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are sometimes exposed
in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric quarries (Atlas 2013).
Of the 175 sites, 78 are prehistoric open campsites, and 94 are prehistoric lithic scatters. The more
significant and deeply buried open campsites with archaeological research potential lie close to
streams. Historic components on these same prehistoric sites include historic windmills and areas
of scattered glass and ceramic sherds, or in some cases there are large trash dumps. One unique
historic site is Fort Ewell (41LS19), an adobe structure located on the old Laredo to San Antonio
Road, and that served the U.S. Army from 1852-1854. The only State Archaeological Landmark
(SAL) recorded in La Salle County is the County Courthouse in Cotulla (Leffler 1996; Atlas 2012).
Finally, one of the more potentially significant archaeological sites in the South Texas archaeological
region is located in La Salle County; this being the Oulline Site (41LS3). The Oulline Site covers
approximately 40 acres, about eight miles north of Cotulla. Diagnostic artifacts recovered from this
large open campsite range in age from Paleoindian through the Late Prehistoric periods, and
demonstrate the potential for other significant archaeological sites to exist in the area (Hester et al.
1969).
A review of the Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites indicated that there had been no archaeological
surveys conducted within one mile of the Ledwig East A Pipeline, and no archaeological sites had
been documented within one mile. However, as shown in Figure 2, in July 2012 Tierras Antiguas
conducted a survey of the Criswell Pavelka A Pipeline that is within one mile, and in fact abuts the
Ledwig East A Pipeline. Although two archaeological sites were found along the Criswell Pavelka
A Pipeline, both are over one mile away (Nickels 2012).
Because of the relatively low habitation in a generally rural area that the Ledwig East A Pipeline
passes through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. A standard source of
review is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs available at the Perry
Castañeda Library at the University of Texas at Austin. In this case, the only map found was a 1942,
1:62,500 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers topographic map of the Dilley area (Map 2013). This map
shows no structures existing on or adjacent to the proposed Ledwig East A Pipeline right-of-way at
that time. Technically, any structures older than 45 years are now considered of interest by the Texas
Historical Commission, and this should be considered when the pipeline is constructed.

Soils
All but a few meters of the Ledwig East A Pipeline crosses through Duval fine sandy loam (DvB),
deep loamy soils on convex uplands where there is a minimal to moderate potential for buried and
intact archaeological deposits to exist to about 14 inches below the surface. Otherwise, as shown in
Figure 4, the extreme western end of the pipeline intersects Tiocano clay (Tc), deep, calcareous clay
formed in depressed, intermittent lake beds, with a minimal potential for buried and intact
archaeological deposits to exist to about 12 inches below the surface (Gabriel et al. 1994; Web Soil
Survey 2013).

Figure 3. Soils to be dissected by the Ledwig East A Pipeline.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Based upon the negative findings of known archaeological sites within the immediate area, our
personal observation of the general terrain on July 25, 2012 and an at best moderate potential for
significant archaeological deposits to exist in the upland soils in the area, we recommend that
construction of the Ledwig East A Pipeline as currently aligned be allowed to proceed as planned,
with no further archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that if any previously
undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development of the pipeline, such finds
should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological
consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2013

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
February 21, 2013].

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.
Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Gabriel, W. J., D. Arriaga, and J. W. Stevens
1994 Soil Survey of La Salle County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture,
soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C. in cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station and the Texas State Soil and Water Conservation
Board, College Station, Texas.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981

Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon
Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Hester, T. R., L. D. White, and J. White
1969 Archeological Materials from the Oulline Site (41LS3) and Other Sites in La Salle
County, Southwest Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. XXI, No. 2.
Leffler, J.
1996

La Salle County. The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 4, pp. 83-86.Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.

Map
2013

Dilley. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Map, 1942. Perry Castañeda Library Map
Collection (Http://www.lib.utexas.edu) [Accessed February 20, 2013].

Nickels, D. L.
2012 A Cultural Resources Survey of the 6.3-Mile Criswell Pavelka Pipeline in
Northwestern La Salle County, Texas. Interim Letter Report submitted to
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd. By Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations. Martindale, Texas (July 25, 2012).
Perry Castañeda Library
2013 Perry Castañeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed February 20, 2013].
Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995

Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2013

La Salle County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed February
20, 2013].

