October Fairs, see page 3!
September Meeting

Newsletter
Volume 16, Issue 9
Sept 8, 2008

Wednesday September 10
Nightengale Archaeological Center
The September meeting will be held as usual at the Nightengale Archaeological Center at 7
PM on September 10 (Wednesday). http://www.texasluas.org/meetings.html

Speaker—Chuck Hixson, Llano Uplift Archeological Society
Dstretching the Pictographs at Painted Indian Cave (41BC1)

The 41BC1 pictographs are presumed to have been painted within a narrow time frame,
perhaps in a single episode (the LUAS “mascot” is a representation of a pictograph from 41BC1).
Radiocarbon analysis on one of the pictographs indicates that they were painted around 800 years
ago at the beginning of the Late Prehistoric.
The site was recently revisited and found to contain many faint pictographs that were previously unnoticed. These were photographed and later digitally enhanced using Dstretched software. The enhancement brought out unseen details and has allowed the identification of the subject of most of the faint pictographs. We now know our assumptions as to the contemporaneity and
age of the pictographs are incorrect and at least one and possibly more of the paintings are clearly
Historic.

September Field Trip – September 20
Private ranch, Bugscuffle (Valley Spring) Tx

We will meet in Llano at 9:30 in the parking lot of Inmans Kitchen (barbecue) located on Hwy 29
approx. 1/4 mile west of the intersection with Hwy 16. It is across the highway from and a little to
the west of Coopers Barbecue. We will then caravan to the ranch, maybe 20 minutes away. We’ll
be looking for standing chimneys, Wells Fargo Station, cotton gin/mill?, and the probability of prehistoric sites on this ranch. Contact the Usual Suspects for more information or confirmation.

August Field Trip–results
All photos by Chuck Hixson

Shovel testing camp area

Spring-fed stream near burned rock midden Disturbed burned rock midden

Llano Uplift
Archeological Society
P.O. Box 302
Kingsland, Texas
78639
List of Officers
President: Pat Hatten
830-265-2392
Treasurer: Tina Prikryl
cprikryl@austin.rr.com
Secretary: Al Priest
al@studiotechsupply.com

Chimney remains, old homestead

Minutes, July, 2008 Meeting

Recovery– (in possession of landowner) - note Early Triangular,
Nolan, Late Archaic, Late Prehistoric tools and implements. Large
bone was associated (context unclear) with arrow point fragment

Al Priest, Secretary

7:05 Pat calls the meeting to order and introduces Doug Boyd who gives an interesting talk about the history and archeology of the first Capital of the Republic of
Texas in West Columbia, TX.
8:10 Doug finishes his talk with a question & answer session
8:35 end of question and answer session
8:40 Pat opens the business meeting with a treasury report from Dan Prikryl
in Tina's absence.

Special Notices
Calendar

Oct. 11, 2008
6th Annual Archeology Fair

It is voted that LUAS will contribute to TAS $150 for the Native American
Scholarship Fund.
There will be a field trip August 16 to a private ranch adjacent to LCRA's
Double Horn Preserve. Participants should meet at Opies in Spicewood at 9 am.
The September field trip will be to Valley Springs.
Future LUAS meetings and tours at Nightengale are questionable. Pat will
check with LCRA for status. The Archeology Fair the second week in October is
also in question.
9:20 End of meeting

Second and fourth Saturdays 25pm
Steward's News
Public tours at the Nightengale
Your local archeological steward is Doris Howard. If you have any
Center
questions about the archaeology of the area, she can be your first
Volunteers always welcomed!!!
Check with Pat.
Note: to contribute to the newsletter or website please contact
Andy Malof—
amalof@austin.rr.com
*hardcopy newsletters will be in
black and white henceforth

contact. Doris can be reached at (325) 247-2440

The Llano Uplift Archeological Society was organized by people interested in the protection, conservation and study of historic and prehistoric materials and sites in the Llano Uplift ("Central Mineral Region") area of the Texas Hill Country. Its primary goals include education of the membership, students and the public; and to support
other groups, researchers and educators with similar interests.
Stewardship of the Nightengale Archaeological Center is a major responsibility of LUAS.
This newsletter brought to you courtesy of

LUAS

and

Archeology Fair—Nightengale Archaeological Center
(see all Texas Archeology Month Fairs here)
KINGSLAND, Llano Co.
Oct. 11 • 6th Annual Archaeology Fair at Nightengale Archaeological Center
Visit an Indian campsite occupied thousands of years ago, view archeological exhibits at
the visitor center’s museum and learn about Native Americans who lived in this area.
Browse exhibits in the museum/visitor center building. Watch archeologists make pottery
and demonstrate the use of an atlatl. Sponsored by the Llano Uplift Archeological Society.
Free. 2–5 p.m. at 201 Circle Dr. (From Marble Falls, take FM 1431 west about 9.3 miles,
turn left on CR 126 and follow the signs. For directions to the facility on the day of the
event, call 830/598-5261.) Information: Chuck Hixson, 325/423-0379.

Following announcements from The Llano News

Llano Historical Museum completes new exhibit (LUAS member Ned Woodall spearheaded this effort)
The Llano County Historical Museum has completed a new exhibit on the prehistoric Native
Americans of this area. Thanks to generous donations of artifacts by Jerry Bridwell, of Horseshoe
Bay and Marvin Sanderson, of Tow, the display shows stone and bone tools, grinding implements
and personal ornaments.
The artifacts range in age from 12,000 years ago to 500 years ago, and respresent almost
the entire time of ancient peoples in Llano County. New informational signs are augmented with
artwork by Danielle Carmicheal of Thou Art in Llano, depicting scenes from the past based on archeological data.
Although the exhibit is modest in size and content, it is hoped that it will encourage additional donations of Native American specimens to the museum. The ultimate goal is to display not
only a full array of prehistoric materials but also to illustrate the dramatic events of AD 15001900, when various Native American and European cultures came into close contact and occasional conflict.
Museum hours are from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., Wednesday through Saturday, and Sundays 1
p.m. to 5 p.m. Everyone is invited to visit the new exhibit as well as the other interesting historical
materials on display in the old Bruhl drugstore, at 310 Bessemer Street in Llano.
Llano is the place to be with Heritage Festival (LUAS members will have a presence at this event)
The weekend of Oct. 17 and 18, the Llano County Heritage Festival and Llano River Chuck
Wagon Cook-off will take place on both sides of the Llano River.
Enjoy sitting under the shade of the many pecan trees around the square and enjoy the music of
the Riff Riders, John Arthur Martinez, The Tumbleweeds, Manny Duarte and Teru, and Johnny
Nicholas.
Unique to most communities, the Llano River divides the commercial district with a wonderful
Parker Truss Bridge, that has a walkway on both sides. Visitors can stroll on both sides of the
river and enjoy the Llano River Chuck Wagon Cook-off. Fifteen authentic wagons will roll into
Llano this year on the north bank of the Llano River, thus reminding everyone of another phase of
rugged frontier life in the heart of the Hill Country. The Red Top Jail will be open for tours, as
many a cowboy spent time there after partying and brawling around town on Saturday nights.
Llano is a National Main Street City and Preserve America Community, and just 75 miles west of
Austin. The Llano County’s 1893 Romanesque Revival Courthouse has been completely restored
and will be the setting for fabulous music, re-enactments, vendors, children’s activities and good
food.

