THE OLD GREENLEAF FISK CABIN AT GEORGETOWN
Located near Seward Junction near Leander and Liberty Hill on County Road 266
Recently purchased by MILESTONE BUILDERS
For information about this project contact: Jim Wukasch at jimwukasch@yahoo.com
Mariann Laughlin, mariann@earlyaustin.org , 817-732-5642 (office)

On the land in April, 2014, L to R Sandra Hardin (cousin and President of the FCHC Assoc.)*, Fisk cousin,
Mariann Fisk Laughlin (cousin, Director of the Mary Ann Manlove Fisk Fund), Jim Waukasch (cousin and
geologist), Jan Pelosi (Jim’s twin sister), and back right, Chuck Hixon, archeologist

*Fisk/Cashion Historic Cemetery Association

Courtesy of The Mary Ann Manlove Fisk Fund a 501 ( c ) (3)
We have been working to bring this historic land to public attention for preservation since 2004.

Coming out of the cemetery into the clearing, David Harp points south toward the Tonkawa
campground and the old home place, which has now fallen down. Only a few logs from the old cabin
stand against ancient oak trees. Still, it is an almost magical place--covered in wooded area ,with a cool
breeze and Monarch butterflies fluttering around it in the spring and fall. Many arrowheads can be seen
on the ground in the area and there is a stone that has been identified as the place where the Indians
forged their arrowheads and cooked, near the South San Gabriel River. Stories from the Fisk family say
that Greenleaf made peace with both the Tonkawa and the Comanche. We know that he used the
Tonkawa as guides. He would build pens for the Indians with their sign on them and would put pack
mules and/or cattle in them for the Indians and quite often, bags of salt. They were not to come within a
mile of the house. He did this same thing when he was surveying the Comancheria in 1838-41 near
Coleman and Brown counties. The Indians did not bother Greenleaf. He learned this from his father,
while growing up in New York.

Courtesy of The Mary Ann Manlove Fisk Fund a 501 ( c ) (3

The Old Cabin across the road on the other side of the cemetery and about a half a mile going
north of the cemetery on Co. Rd. 266. The cabin is located back off the road. It looks like the
road is going to be widened, so don’t know if it will be in jeopardy or not. These are the
coordinates we took for the cabin location last fall. Would love to have an historical marker here.
30.61896 North
97.84669 West
One of the chimneys of stone cut by Greenleaf Fisk for the old cabin across the road. (2012)
Family story says that he began this cabin in 1853 for his wife, Mary Ann, but finished it for his
second wife, Margaret Jane, around 1855. David Harp has said the family has a picture of it
before it fell in, but has never produced it. A cousin, Faye Fisk believes that she has a picture of
it also and is currently looking for it. (2014) Would like to see the chimneys preserved in a
building in a park in front of the cemetery, where the old Fisk/Cashion park used to be.
Milestone Builders has told Mariann Laughlin that they will give the land in front of the
cemetery where the old park was, to the MAMFFund. We would like to restore it as a park.
Their representative has also told Mariann Laughlin that they will have a club house building
where they would be willing to feature the history of the land in exhibits.
Archeologists who have a trained eye have told us that this house has some unique features for a
log cabin built at this time in Texas.

Courtesy of The Mary Ann Manlove Fisk Fund a 501 ( c ) (3

At the old cabin in 2011. The ancient oak trees that stood outside the old cabin were holding up the
chimneys. In 2013, the old branches broke and this chimney fell down.

Courtesy of The Mary Ann Manlove Fisk Fund a 501 ( c ) (3)

Same chimney in 2014

Courtesy of The Mary Ann Manlove Fisk Fund a 501 ( c ) (3)

Hand hewn marks on the wood, probably made by Greenleaf Fisk. (2014)

Courtesy of The Mary Ann Manlove Fisk Fund a 501 ( c ) (3)

Log on the ground of the cabin site 2012

Courtesy of The Mary Ann Manlove Fisk Fund a 501 ( c ) (3)

HISTORY OF THE FISKS AND MANLOVES IN WILLIAMSON COUNTY
Bartholomew and Avarilla Perkins Manlove moved to Williamson County in 1848. A labor of land down
the side of the Greenleaf Fisk League describes this property. Avarilla is buried in the Fisk/Cashion
Historic Cemetery. We believe that Bat Manlove is there too. Bat set up the First Committee on Safety
& Correspondence, was a member of the First Consultation, and saved the Milam Colony records
during the Runaway Scrape. When Bat became ill, he went back and forth between his daughters,
staying with Ann Elizabeth, Margaret Jane and their children, on land that he owned in Bastrop County.
He owned land in Williamson and Bell Counties that was granted posthumously to his sons Mark and
William for service to the Republic of Texas. Then he squared it up to the north of that land by buying
land from a man named Lynch. The Mark Manlove Survey is part of this land. We have much
documented history on Bat, too. Bat & Greenleaf moved to Williamson County to go into cattle ranching
and be near the Chisholm Trail that was coming through the area. Greenleaf was also charged by the
Republic with opening up the land for settlement.
County Clerk’s Office/Williamson County, TX Vol. 1, p. 103
State of Texas County of Williamson
Know all men by the presents that I, Greenleaf Fisk, of said State and County have for and in
consideration of two hundred and fifty dollars to me in hand paid the receipt whereas, if hereby
acknowledged sold, aliened, released and conveyed and by these presents sell, alien, release and convey
unto B. Manlove, his heirs and assigns all that tract of land lying and being situated in the aforesaid
county and bounded as follows: COMMENCING ON THE BANK OF THE SAN GABRIELAT THE
JUNCTION OF THE SAN GABRIEL AND THE BRANCH NEXT BELOW THE HOUSE IN WHICH
HE NOW LIVES, THENCE IN NORTHERLY DIRECTION SO AS TO INCLUDE THE WATERS OF
SAID BRANCH, HENCE FROM THE BEGINNING COMES UP THE SAN GABRIEL WITH ITS
MEANDER UNTIL IT REACHES THE MOUTH OF THE BRANCH NEXT ABOVE THE HOUSE IN
WHICH SAID MANLOVE NOW LIVES; THENCE IN A PARALLEL LINE WITH THE FIRST
MENTIONED LINE BACK, FOR QUANTITY, CONTAINING AND COMPRISING IN THE LIMITS
AFORESAID, TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY ACRES OF LAND, AND THE SAID
BARTHOLOMEW MANLOVE, HIS HEIRS AND ASSIGNS IS TO HAVE AND HOLD THE ABOVE
DESCRIBED PREMISES WITH ALL AND SINGULAR, THE LANDS, TENEMENTS AND
IMPROVEMENTS TO THE SAME, BELONGING OR IN ANY WISE APPERTAINING; AND THE
SAID MANLOVE IS TO HAVE A SUFFICIENT AMOUNT OF POST OAKTIMBER AS WILL KEEP
A FARM AND FOR FARMING PURPOSES; AND I FOR MY HEIRS AND SUCCESSORS WILL
FOREVER WARRANT AND DEFEND THIS SALE AND TITLE IN TESTIMONY, WHEREOF I
HERE UNTO SIGN SEAL AND DELIVER THIS INSTRUMENT ON THIS 30TH DAY OF APRIL
ONE THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED AND FORTY NINE.
Attest: Greenleaf Fisk
G. T. Williams (Clerk of C. C. Williamson Co.)
W. C. Dalrymple

Courtesy of The Mary Ann Manlove Fisk Fund a 501 ( c ) (3)

GREENLEAF FISK
(1807-1888)
Judge John Greenleaf Fisk was born in Albany, N.Y. on May 19, 1807. One of many children, Greenleaf
began earning his own living at the age of 12, but still managed to get a good general education in the
common schools where he lived in New York. Once, when asked by his teacher why he stayed in at recess to
study, he replied, “Because some day when I grow up, I am going to a far country and become a useful man.”

At the age of 20, Fisk professed Christ and began studying for the Presbyterian ministry at
Lane’s Theological Seminary in Cincinnati, Ohio. Both he and his brother, Josiah, later
graduated from Hanover College at Hanover, Indiana.
After graduation, Greenleaf went to Milton, Ohio and then to Illinois, where he studied law
with Stephen Douglas. You may remember Douglas from his famous debate with Abraham
Lincoln. Greenleaf supported himself by teaching and by hauling flat boat cargo down the
rivers into Missouri and New Orleans. He saved his money and passed the bar in 1834. He was
now ready to go to a “far country and become a useful man.”
Greenleaf described himself as having an “itchy foot,” and hearing that there was free land and
adventure in Texas, he and a friend embarked in a skiff down the Ohio River and headed west.
He arrived in Bastrop (Mina) in 1834, while it was still under Mexican rule. He told that as he
was coming through town for the first time he saw the most beautiful young lady that he had
ever laid eyes on and determined to find out who she was and if she were married. That young
lady was Mary Ann Manlove, daughter of Colonel Bartholomew Manlove, who later became
the first mayor of Bastrop after Texas became a Republic. They married in 1835, and ever
after, Greenleaf would refer to her as “a beautiful young lady of sterling qualities.” He built
her a house which was a Stagecoach Inn. It still stands today and is on the National Historic
Register. It is at 1005 Hill Street in Bastrop, TX and has been restored.
Not long after their marriage, Greenleaf’s and Mary Ann’s lives were interrupted by the Texas
Revolution, and Greenleaf took off with Jesse Billingsley for San Jacinto in 1836. He was
detailed to the rearguard at Harrisburg, and later ordered by General Burleson to return to
Bastrop with others, to round up cattle and take care of the women and children who were
escaping. His name appears on the San Jacinto plaque as part of the rear guard at Harrisburg
and he received his donation of land for his part in the Battle of San Jacinto. While he was
gone, his first child, William, was born during the Runaway Scrape. Greenleaf’s father-in-law,
Bartholomew Manlove, had taken the family and the Milam Colony records, on the order of
Gail Borden, and gone north and east toward San Augustine,

following the old El Camino Real and avoiding the swollen parts of the rivers and the Indians
in the area, because of Mary Ann’s condition.
When Greenleaf found Mary Ann and returned to Bastrop in 1837, he began his career in
public office. While in Bastrop County, he served as Clerk of the District Court, member of the
House of Representatives for the Republic of Texas, mayor of Bastrop, and Chief Justice of
Bastrop County. He took and passed the bar exam for Texas, under the tutelage of Judge
Leander C. Cunningham.
In 1845, he moved to Williamson County, where he became the first Chief Justice and then
County Judge of Williamson County when Texas became a state. There he helped to organize
the county government and walked 11 miles from his home on the South San Gabriel River, to
Georgetown, to hold court. He began a cattle ranch hoping to ship his cattle up the Chisholm
Trail for profit.
In 1853, Mary Ann died, and Greenleaf married her sister, Margaret Jane Manlove Lane in
1854. They had one child and Margaret Jane and the baby died in 1855. In 1857, he married
Mary Piper Hawkins. In 1860, he moved to Brown County, where he became a rancher. There,
he helped organize the county government in 1861 and became its first County Judge. Because
he saved the town when the course of its river changed, by giving the land for a new town, he is
known as the “Father of Brownwood.”
A skilled Indian negotiator, a talent he learned from his father and through his experiences in
surveying, he made his own peace treaty with Indian tribes, wherever he settled. He had
treaties with the Comanche and allowed the Tonkawa to live on his land in Williamson County,
because they were natural enemies of the Comanche and because they had had a camp ground
there for thousands of years. Once while surveying his land grants in Brown and Coleman
Counties, then the Comancheria Territory, he was captured by Comanche. He always carried
pack mules and bags of salt for trade. He traded for his life by telling the Comanche that he
would live with them peacefully and would build a cattle pen with their tribal sign on it, near
where they camped. In return, they were not to come within a mile of his homestead or bother
his family or property. He traded them salt and pack mules. As a result, Greenleaf was never
bothered by the Indians. When the depredations were occurring in Brown County, he saved
the Coggins Bros. cattle company from extinction by allowing them to move onto open grazing
land owned by him in what is today, Coleman County, after they were wiped out by Indians.
They reported that they were bothered occasionally by a stolen horse, but nothing else. His
untiring efforts at organizing the county led to the coming of the railroads and eventual
prosperity of the industry.
Greenleaf was the father of 16 natural children. He also took care of his step children by his
second and third wives, thus giving him 20 children to support in his lifetime. In his spare time,
he also organized three schools—one in Williamson County, one in Fiskville, now part of
Austin, and one in Brownwood. In those schools, he taught his children and the children of
pioneer settlers. He was also instrumental in organizing the first college at Brownwood. When
he died, the whole town shut down to attend his funeral.
Today, cenotaphs to Greenleaf and Mary Ann Manlove Fisk have been placed in the Texas
State Cemetery in Austin, Texas. They sit under a shade tree on Republic Hill. Greenleaf and
his third wife,

Mary Piper Hawkins, and some of his children and grandchildren, are buried in the Greenleaf
Fisk plot in the Greenleaf Cemetery in Brownwood, Texas. Efforts to move him to Republic
Hill were refused by his daughters in the 1930’s, when the bodies of Texas heroes of the
Republic were being transferred to the State Cemetery as a project for the 1936 Centennial.
Offices Greenleaf Fisk held in his lifetime are:
1838-1844 Chief Surveyor of the Land for the Republic of Texas
1837-38 Clerk of the District Court of Bastrop County
1838-39 House of Representatives of the Republic of Texas/Bastrop County
November 1839-April 1840 Mayor of Bastrop
1840-44 Chief Justice of Bastrop County
1850 Chief Justice of Williamson County/First County Judge of Williamson County
1862-1875 Brown County: First County Judge of Brown County, District Clerk, County Clerk,
County Surveyor, County Treasurer, and Justice of the Peace
Fisk was the only man to serve as County Judge of three counties in the history of Texas.
From “The Compleat Greenleaf Fisk”
© 2012 by Mariann Fisk Laughlin All Rights Reserved

Want to know more? Judge Greenleaf Fisk now has a Wikipedia page. Just Google his name
and read more about this family.

Courtesy of The Mary Ann Manlove Fisk Fund a 501 ( c ) (3)
“Working to bring this historic land to public attention for preservation since 2004”

