A CULTURAL RESOURCES INVESTIGATION
FOR PHASE III OF THE COMMON LEVEE AND ANZALDUAS
DIKE SYSTEMS WITHIN THE LOWER RIO GRANDE FLOOD
CONTROL PROJECT, HIDALGO COUNTY, TEXAS
(FROM STATION 0+00 TO 278+00)

Prepared for
International Boundary and Water Commission
U.S. Section
&
Hidalgo County Drainage District No. 1

By
Douglas G. Mangum, Project Archeologist
Roger G. Moore, Principal Investigator
&
DOS LOGISTICS, INC.

Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
Report of Investigations Number 525
May 2008

A CULTURAL RESOURCES INVESTIGATION
FOR PHASE III OF THE COMMON LEVEE AND ANZALDUAS
DIKE SYSTEMS WITHIN THE LOWER RIO GRANDE FLOOD
CONTROL PROJECT, HIDALGO COUNTY, TEXAS
(FROM STATION 0+00 TO 278+00)

By
Douglas G. Mangum, Project Archeologist
Roger G. Moore, Principal Investigator
&
DOS LOGISTICS, INC.

For
International Boundary and Water Commission
United States Section
4171 North Mesa, Suite C-100
El Paso, Texas 79902-1441
and
Hidalgo County Drainage District No. 1
902 N. Doolittle
Edinburg, Texas 78541

Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
Report of Investigations Number 525
May 2008

ABSTRACT
Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc. (MAC) performed an archeological survey of
Phase III of the proposed Common Levee and Anzalduas Dike Systems in Hidalgo
County, Texas. This was conducted for the United States Section, International Boundary
and Water Commission (USIBWC) at the request of Dos Logistics, Inc. (DLI). The
survey was conducted under USIBWC Archeological Resources Protection Act (ARPA)
Permit Application No. 0015. All work complied with the guidelines set out under
36CFR800 for Section 106 compliance and consistent with the rules of practice and
procedure for the Texas Antiquities Code. The project will be subject to review by the
Texas Historical Commission (THC), DLI and the USIBWC.
Phase III of the Common Levee and Anzalduas Dike Systems project consists of an
approximately 8.46-km (5.25 mi) segment of the overall levee system. This segment
begins at the Anzalduas Dam and proceeds to the northeast and east until it reaches State
Route 115 roughly 5.8 km (3.6 mi) south of the community of McAllen. (From Station
0+00 to 278+00).
MAC conducted an intensive pedestrian survey and intensive shovel testing within the
entirety of the Phase III segment of the proposed levee footprint. The field work was
performed by a crew subcontracted from Coastal Environments, Inc. The entire project
area was inventoried for cultural resources. A total of 149 (40 x 40 centimeter) shovel
tests were excavated within the project area during the initial survey. This is as per the
methodology as described in the METHODS section of this report. Out of the 149 shovel
tests only one contained any cultural resources. All others were sterile. The positive
shovel test (number 141) contained a single lithic flake (chert). No other artifacts were
observed either in the shovel test or on the surface around it.
Based on the findings MAC recommends that Phase III of the Common Levee and
Anzalduas Dike Systems rehabilitation project be allowed to proceed without additional
archeological investigation. It is felt that the single positive test was an isolate and likely
in a disturbed matrix.

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
VEGETATION, WILDLIFE, AND LAND USE
CULTURAL BACKGROUND
HISTORICAL OVERVIEW OF THE LOWER RIO GRANDE VALLEY
PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
METHODS
RESULTS
RECOMMENDATIONS
REFERENCES CITED
APPENDIX A: Photographs
APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Log

ii
iii
1
6
8
10
12
16
20
25
26
27
30
33

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Project Area in Hidalgo County
Figure 2. Project Area on the Mission USGS quadrangle
Figure 3. Project Area on 2004 near infrared aerial photographs
Figure 4a: Shovel Test locations from survey
Figure 4b: Shovel Test locations from survey
Figure 4c: Shovel Test locations from survey
Figure 4d: Shovel Test locations from survey
Figure 4e: Shovel Test locations from survey
Figure 4f: Shovel Test locations from survey
Figure 4g: Shovel Test locations from survey

3
4
5
22
22
23
23
24
24
24

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. Archeological Chronology for South Texas

10

1

INTRODUCTION
Between January 15 and January 27, 2008, Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
(MAC), of Houston, Texas conducted an archeological survey of Phase III of the
proposed Common Levee and Anzalduas Dike Systems in Hidalgo County, Texas
(Figures 1-3). This was performed for the United States Section, International Boundary
and Water Commission (USIBWC) at the request of Dos Logistics, Inc. (DLI). The
purpose of the cultural resources investigation and archeological survey is to assist the
USIBWC in meeting its requirements under Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act (NHPA). The objective of the investigation was to determine the
presence or absence of cultural materials within the locations proposed for the levee
ROW expansion.
The survey was conducted under USIBWC Archeological Resources Protection Act
(ARPA) Permit Application No. 0015 to enable survey on federal property. All work
complied with the guide lines set out under 36CFR800 which outlines the procedures for
Section 106 implementation and compliance and consistent with the rules of practice and
procedure for the Texas Antiquities Code. The project will be subject to review by the
Texas Historical Commission (THC), DLI and the USIBWC.
The overall Mission and Common Levee Systems project intends to rehabilitate and
raises 27.8 kilometers (km.) (17.3-mile [mi]) of both Mission (19.3 km [12.0-mi]) and
Common (8.5 km [5.3-mi]) Levee Systems. The goal is to meet the current .9 meter (m)
(3-foot [ft]) freeboard design requirements for flood control protection in the LRGFCP.
The USIBWC proposes to rehabilitate the Mission and Common Levee Systems within
the Lower Rio Grande Flood Control Project (LRGFCP). The Mission and Common
Levee Systems were identified as a priority area for improvement by the LRGFCP since
it does not meet current flood protection criteria. The USIBWC has proposed to raise
both existing levees height ranging anywhere from .9 – 2.4 m (3 – 8 ft), depending on
location, and expand the levee base footprint horizontally from 19.5 m to 30.5 m (64 ft 100 ft) in width. In most locations the levee base footprint expansion will be to one side
or the other of the existing levees. However because the specifics of the expansion are not
yet available, both sides of the existing levee were examined during the investigation.
The exception to this was in locales where an existing bench existed partway down the
levee slope (discussed in more detail in the METHODS section). The height increases
between .6 m and 1.8 m (2 and 6 ft) are typically needed to reach the design freeboard
value throughout the Mission Levee System. For the Common Levee System a typical
increase in levee height range from .9 – 2.4 m (3 – 8 ft), and for the Anzalduas Dike,
from 0 to 1.2 m (0 -4 ft). The areas of proposed Mission and Common Levee Systems
improvements continues downstream of the Rio Grande with the Mission Levee
beginning just west of the Town of Peňitas to its junction with the Banker Floodway
(U.S. Interior floodway). The Common Levee begins at the Anzalduas Dike along the
Banker/Main Floodway to its junction with the Hidalgo Levee System just north of the
City of Hidalgo. Along sections of the Mission Levee System, structural improvements
such as slurry walls may be required in segments with seepage potential. In an
approximate 1.6-km (1-mi) reach, a mechanically stabilized earth structure would be built

2

along the existing levee crown to avoid footprint extension beyond the existing right-ofway easements. A number of natural resources management areas are located near or
adjacent to the levee system, including units of the Lower Rio Grande Valley National
Wildlife Refuge System and the Bentsen-Rio Grande Valley State Park.
The overall project corridor is on property owned by the USIBWC, US Fish and Wildlife
Service (USFWS), Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD), the Nature
Conservancy Preserve, and the NABA International Butterfly Park and near the cities of
Peňitas, Abram, Mission, Madero, Granjeno, and Hidalgo. All of these agencies and
communities have given permission to enter the land and conduct archeological
investigations.
Phase III of the Common Levee and Anzalduas Dike Systems project consists of an
approximately 8.46-km (5.25 mi) segment of the overall levee system. This segment
begins at the Anzalduas Dam and proceeds to the northeast and east until it reaches State
Route 115 roughly 5.8 km (3.6 mi) south of the community of McAllen (From Station
0+00 to 278+00).
In coordination with the USIBWC, DLI and THC1, MAC conducted an intensive
pedestrian survey and intensive shovel testing within the entirety of the Phase IIIsegment
of the proposed levee footprint. The entire project area was inventoried for cultural
resources. A total of 149 (40 x 40 centimeter) shovel tests were excavated within the
project area during the survey. This is as per the methodology as described in the
METHODS section of this report. All of the shovel test units were negative for cultural
resources.
Project Archeologist Douglas G. Mangum, and the field crew (subcontracted from
Coastal Environments, Inc.) Field Project Archeologist Jennifer Kelly and Crewmembers
Owen Ford, Victoria Weinstein, Daymon Jackson and Lukas Zarychta conducted this
investigation under the supervision of the Principal Investigator, Roger G. Moore. All
work was done in direct consultation with Project Manager Hugo Gonzalez, Jr., P.E.,
Resident Engineer for DLI and Philip D. Waldron, Environmental Specialist for DLI. All
project related records and artifacts recovered will be permanently curated at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), in Austin, Texas. This report is offered in
partial fulfillment of ARPA Permit Application No. 0015.

1

Due to urgent nature of the proposed construction consultation with the THC has been of a preliminary
nature only and conducted entirely between THC and DLI. A formal Scope of Work requested by the THC
is underway. However the THC has given preliminary approval of the methodology utilized during the
current phase of the project as per communications with DLI.

3

Figure 1: Project Area in Hidalgo County

4

Figure 2: Project Area on the Mission USGS quadrangle

5

Figure 3: Project Area on 2005 aerial photographs

6

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
PHYSIOGRAPHIC SETTING
The Mission and Common Levee Systems are located in the Rio Grande Delta (Valley)
and is contained within the Rio Grande Embayment located in the Western Gulf Coastal
Plain of the Coastal Plain Province of the Atlantic Plain (Vigil et al. 2000). It is broken
by abandoned channels (resacas and bancos) of the Rio Grande, which form long narrow
lakes that are bordered by lush vegetation along with wetlands. The project area is also
located within the Matamoran District of the Tamulipan Biotic Province because the
project location has a combination of poorer drainage and more luxuriant vegetation than
the northern portions of the Tamulipan Biotic Province (Jahrsdoerfer and Leslie 1988:4).
The majority of the proposed project area along the right-of-way has been cleared of all
vegetation. Located alongside the levee expansion footprint are vegetation lined with
mesquite - acacia savanna or south Texas mesquite - scrub brush savanna, along with
agricultural fields, and/or commercial development.
GEOLOGICAL SETTING
The Mission and Common Levee Systems are located in the Rio Grande floodplain. The
proposed levee expansion footprint is located in a typical known geological formation
known as Alluvium. The alluvium is dominantly silt and sand deposits from frequent
flooding of the Rio Grande. The Rio Grande also includes sedimentary rocks from earlier
geologic time period of the Cretaceous and Tertiary Periods and a wide variety of igneous
and sedimentary rocks that are found downstream from the Trans-Pecos Basin and Range
region of west Texas, Mexico, and New Mexico.
SOIL
Soils within all the levee project area are mapped according to the General Soil Map of
Hidalgo County as the Rio-Grande-Matamoros Association. This association of soil is
located in deep, moderately and slowly permeable soils. These soils consist of nearly
level soils on bottomlands with typical light-brownish gray or grayish brown soil color.
Rio Grande soils are located at higher elevations than the nearly level lower positions of
Matamoros soils. Rio Grande soils typically have an eight inch thick gray silt loam
surface layer underlain by a brown silt loam to a depth of 65 inches. Matamoros soils
have a grayish brown silty clay surface layer eight inches thick underlain by light brown
gray or grayish brown silty clay to a depth of 65 inches. The project area is located on
sheets 107 and 108 of the Soil Survey of Hidalgo County, Texas (USDA-SCS 1981).
CLIMATE
The climate in Hidalgo County is a subtropical and sub-humid climate that is influenced
by the Gulf of Mexico with mild winters and hot summers. The temperatures in the
project area range from a daily maximum of 69.9° F to a daily minimum of 50.3° F in
January and a daily maximum of 96.1° F to a daily minimum of 75.7° F in July. The

7

precipitation (rainfall) total in the project area averages 22.96 inches a year (NOAANCDC 2004).
HYDROLOGY
The project area is located in and parallel to the Rio Grande River floodplain. Although
the proposed overall project corridor never crosses the modern channel of the Rio Grande
River, it does numerous tributary streams and remnant channels. A large number of
abandoned channels/oxbows are evident in the area. The area also contains a significant
number of major and minor artificial canals as well as man-made reservoirs and ponds.

8

VEGETATION, WILDLIFE, AND LAND USE
VEGETATION
The project is located within the Matamoran District of the Tamaulipan Biotic Province.
Thorny brush is the predominant vegetation type of Tamaulipan province. The
Matamoran District is characterized by semi-arid thorny brush communities on silt loam
or silt clay loam soils. In Hidalgo County, brushlands are more luxuriant and are
characterized by the predominance of several species of plants and animals that decrease
in abundance northward. Vegetation includes plants with western desert, northern coastal
and tropical similarity. Estimates of the number of native plant species that are found are
range from 170 to 265 species. Undeveloped areas contain a mixture of mesquite, acacia,
and prickly pear. Surrounding land use, where not otherwise urban, is irrigated
agriculture. Nearby land along the levee project area has been converted to agricultural
use such as orchards, cropland, or pastureland. Native vegetation has largely been
removed and replaced by pasture, row crops and citrus orchards.
The vegetation found in the Tamaulipan Biotic Province was defined as mid-valley
riparian woodland, a bottomland hardwood site alone with a mixture of various brush
species. Most of the vegetation is found along the outside of the levees right-of-way in
the project area is also surrounded by agricultural croplands. Various types of vegetation
species commonly found near the project site are Cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia),
Berlandier ash (Fraxinus berlandieriana), Sugar hackberry (Celtis laevigata), Mesquite
(Prosopis spp.), and Granjeno (Celtis pallida) along with other species of vegetation
found in the area such as Texas prickly pear (Opuntia engelmanii), Huisache (Acacia
farnesiana), Blackbrush acacia (Acacia rigidula), and Live oak (Quercus virginiana).
WILDLIFE
From a regional perspective, the proposed levee improvement area is located within the
Lower Rio Grande Valley where an considerable amount of neo-tropical species,
grassland species, and Chihuahuan desert species inhabiting the variety of habitats
nearby. The levee corridor is adjacent to various units of the LRGV National Wildlife
Refuge that are found along the Rio Grande. There are approximately 67 mammals of
potential occurrence in the LRGV, including federally listed species, such as the
jaguarundi (Felis yagouaroundi cacomitli) and ocelot (Felis pardalis). Also there are over
500 species of birds that potentially occur in the LRGV. Many of these bird species pass
through the LRGV on their way to summer breeding or wintering grounds because of the
convergence of the Central and Mississippi Flyways as well as many species from
Mexico, Central and South America. Amphibians and reptiles are also well represented
in the LRGV, with approximately 76 species that potentially occur in Hidalgo County.
LAND USE
Present day land use in the region is predominantly agricultural and residential. This
includes single family residences, rangeland, pastureland and crops. More urban and

9

residential land uses are concentrated in and around the cities of Peňitas, Abram, Mission,
Madero, Granjeno, and Hidalgo. Oil and gas production is found throughout Hidalgo
County, often at high densities. Hunting of wildlife is of tremendous economic
importance in the area. Recreational hunting for white-tailed deer, Collared Peccary
(Javelina), and mourning and white-winged dove benefits to the local economy as well.

10

CULTURAL BACKGROUND
South Texas Culture History
The project area is located within the south Texas archaeological region (Hester 1980,
1995; Hester et al. 1989; Mallouf et al. 1977). To better reflect the varied geographic
nature and corresponding cultural ecology of the region, Black (1989) has designated five
biogeographical sub regions within the area. The current project lies at the furthermost tip
of the state, within the area identified as the Rio Grande Delta. This area is, for the most
part, restricted to Hidalgo, Cameron, and Willacy Counties.
The culture history of the south Texas region extends back at least 11,000 years into the
past. A number of researchers have compiled chronological frameworks to describe the
cultural histories of the area (Black 1989; Hester 1980, 1995; MacNeish 1947, 1958;
Mallouf, et al. 1977; Story 1985; Suhm et al. 1954). The majority of these researchers
divide human occupation into four broad stages, Paleo-Indian, Archaic, Late Prehistoric,
and Historic. The stages are based on a proposed sequence of economic strategies as they
are revealed through the archaeological and/or historical record. These proposed shifts in
dominant lifeways consider cultural, economic, and technological factors in order to
provide a heuristic model useful for attempting to understand ancient and early historic
populations. While the dates assigned to the period interfaces are based on "absolute"
dating methods, they of course represent a generalized time range for the implied cultural
evolution. The dates provided in the following discussion will be drawn from Black
(1989) and are presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Archeological Chronology for South Texas (after Black 1989).
Time Period
Paleo-Indian
Early Archaic
Middle Archaic
Late Archaic
Late Prehistoric
Historic

Dates
9200-6000 B.C.
6000-2500 B.C.
2500-400 B.C.
400 B.C.-A.D. 800
A.D. 800-1600
Post A.D. 1600

The earliest period of occupation in south Texas is identified as the Paleo-Indian stage.
Based on the earliest securely dated appearance of populations in the New World, this
stage begins around 11,000-10,000 B.C., but is only documented in south Texas by 9200
B.C. Paleo-Indian sites are uncommon in south Texas, especially in the Rio Grande
Delta area of the current project. In general, during this time, it is proposed that
populations continued with a highly nomadic hunting tradition brought with them from
the Old World. Traditional models emphasize the heavy reliance that these groups placed
on the hunting of the large mammals of the Pleistocene. Plant foods and small game
undoubtedly supplanted this diet, and may have played a more important role than
previously thought (Black 1985; Patterson 1995). Artifact types associated with this
phase include various fluted and non-fluted lanceolate projectile points, such as Clovis

11

and Folsom. In general, due to a paucity of well-stratified older sites, the Paleo-Indian
stage remains poorly defined in Texas.
By 8000 B.C., the Late Wisconsin glaciation had ended, increasing climatic aridity and
creating extensive changes in the environment. As a result, the majority of Pleistocene
megafauna became extinct. This required drastic changes in the dominant subsistence
strategies of the affected populations. They adapted to these environmental changes by
shifting to a lifeway dominated by seasonal scheduling. This type of subsistence
economy specializes in a regionally circumscribed and repetitive exploitation of specific
floral and faunal resources. By remaining in familiar territory, the nomadic populations
were able to better exploit the various resources available within their local environment.
In south Texas, this adaptation had occurred by approximately 6000 B.C., considered the
start of the Early Archaic stage. However, while south Texas populations appear to have
been adapting to local environmental changes, population densities in the area appear to
have remained extremely low. Consequently, Early Archaic sites are uncommon in the
area, and again, virtually nonexistent in the Rio Grande Delta.
An increase in known sites dating to the next period, the Middle Archaic, suggests that by
2500 B.C., population densities in south Texas had risen. Although there remain some
problems with dating Middle Archaic deposits due to the scarcity of excavated deeply
stratified sites, and the apparent long-term stability of diagnostic tool forms (especially
triangular bifaces [Black 1989:49]), the Middle Archaic appears to have been a changing
resource exploitation and more extensive settlement patterns. Researchers (Black 1989;
Hall et al. 1987) have interpreted data from excavations in the Choke Canyon area as
indicating an increasing incorporation of plant foods that required intensive processing
(acorns, mesquite bean), and that resulted in archeologically recognizable accumulations
of burned rock. Further, the occupation sites have wider topographic distribution than
before, and include sites upland, alluvial, and tributary locations (Black 1989).
In contrast to earlier periods, Late Archaic sites are very common in most areas of south
Texas. This increase, especially in light of the shorter time span in relation to earlier
periods) suggests a significant increase in population densities (Black 1989:51). Site
types include shell middens and large cemeteries, and stone hearth features most likely
used for specialized plant roasting/baking, are more common than in the previous period.
The emergence of the bow and arrow, and spread of ceramic production mark the final
prehistoric period in south Texas. Late Prehistoric sites are considered to be very
common in the south Texas region, which implies a period of high population densities.
In the Rio Grande Delta area, the Late Prehistoric component is associated with the
Brownsville complex. Brownsville complex sites are identified by their sophisticated
shell working industry, which contains both tools and ornaments. Ceramics occur, but
are uncommon. Settlement studies in the Rio Grande Delta have shown that site
locations are primarily determined by the availability of fresh water sources, such as
abandoned stream channels (resacas), eolian depressions, and the Rio Grande itself
(Black 1989:52).

12

HISTORICAL OVERVIEW OF THE LOWER RIO GRANDE VALLEY
Early Exploration
Early Spanish explorers who traveled near or through the Lower Rio Grande Valley
included Alonzo Alvarez de Pineda (1519), Diego de Camargo (1520), Sancho de
Caniedo (1528), and Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca (1528) in the sixteenth century; and
Jacinto Garcia de Sepulveda (1638) and Alonso de Leon (1685-1687) in the seventeenth
century. In the year 1528 the shipwrecked survivors of the Panfilo de Nárvaez expedition
to Florida—Hernán Núñez Cabeza de Vaca, Andrés Dorantes, Alonso Castillo and their
black slave Estebanico—washed ashore onto nearby Galveston Island. They and
wandered for almost 8 years living off the land and among the natives of the gulf coast
and south Texas. Cabeza de Vaca and his men traveled throughout south Texas into
present day Lower Rio Grande Valley, New Mexico and into Mexico several times until
they reach a Spanish outpost near the Pacific Coast of Mexico. In 1685-87 following the
Rio Grande, Alonso de Leon was sent on several expeditions in search of Fort St. Louis,
a French fort.
Colonial Settlement
In 1746 Jose de Escandon, the Count of Sierra Gorda, was made governor of the newly
established province of Nuevo Santander, was assigned the task to colonizing the area of
northeastern Mexico and South Texas to be established as a line of northern defense. His
most significant duty was to explore and colonize northeastern Mexico and south Texas.
Escandon dispatched several expeditions from seven different points to survey the region
and to locate sites that were feasible for colonial settlement. These expeditions group
travel through different direction of Nuevo Santander with the group reassembling near
the mouth of the Rio Grande River in 1747. Miguel de la Garza Falcon, who led the
expedition under Escandon to explore the northern bank of the Rio Grande in search for
suitable land to established settlement in the south Texas region. As a result of the
expedition surveys, José de Escandón established fourteen villas along the Río Grande;
twelve of these were located south of the Rio Grande, with hundreds families and soldiers
and was instructed to spread Christianity into the Lower Río Grande Valley. Villas that
were established near the present project area including Reynosa (1749), Camargo
(1749), Mier (1750), and Revilla (1752), where were located along the southern bank of
the Rio Grande. The principal economic activities associated with these villas were
ranching and agriculture. The settlements of Dolores, Peñitas and La Lomita were also
founded on the northern banks of the Río Grande. During 1767 a Royal Commission of
Spain arrived in Texas to start distributing land in the area of Nuevo Santander. The
“porciones” were long, narrow, individual grants intended for agricultural and grazing
purposes. Each grant, equivalent to approximately one league, was 11 to 16 miles long
and nearly one mile wide. Each contained frontage on the Rio Grande in order to provide
access to water. The variation in length and width of the grants depended upon the
number of inhabitants within each jurisdiction to be accommodated and the exact amount
of land accorded each settler. Length of residence in the frontier settlements determined
the size of the porciones granted to particular individuals. The La Lomita Mission and

13

the community of Mission in Hidalgo County have a history that is intertwined. La
Lomita—which means “little hill”—is the historical site of a former mission and rancho
headquarters maintained by the Oblate priests of Mary Immaculate. The Oblate priests
are given credit for being the first to plant citrus trees in the valley.
History of the Lower Rio Grande Valley in the 19th and 20th Century
Over the years, land grants have produce large-scale ranching operations throughout the
Lower Rio Grande Valley and continued to provide as the main primary livelihood along
the project area for many years. However, significant political changes occurred that
affected the area from ca. 1800 to 1920 because the area in the Lower Rio Grande Valley
was often disputed territory. These impacts were reflected directly throughout the project
area in the form of troop movements and numerous battles. Beginning in 1821 with
Mexican independence from Spain, the area was in political upheaval until Texas
achieved statehood in 1846. Both the Republic of Texas and Mexico laid claim to the
region, just as the United States and Mexico would do later. Even after statehood, the
area was the setting for various conflicts including the Mexican-American War (1846–
1848), the escapades of Juan Nepomuceno Cortina (1859–1860), the American Civil War
(1861–1865), and the Mexican political upheavals and revolution (1865–1918).
Many encounters between the Confederate and Union forces during the Civil War
occurred in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. Several of these encounters took place in and
around Brownsville just east of the project area. From the American Civil War until the
early twentieth century, the LRGV experienced military presence and numerous small,
armed conflicts. Bandit raids from Mexico subdued the growth and success of the Lower
Rio Grande Valley after the turn of the century during the year 1911 to 1917. Groups of
armed men on horseback crossed the Rio Grande to raid farms, ranches and businesses in
the area. The political situation in Mexico during this time was in such turmoil that
between the years 1911 and 1915 there were nine presidents of Mexico, one of whom
ruled only 28 minutes.
Three factions within the Mexican government were most often associated with the
bandit raids. The Carranzistas were followers of General Venustiano Carranza, former
governor of the State of Coahuila, who sponsored a revolt in Mexico during early 1913.
The United States did not recognize his government until 1915. The Villistas were
followers of Pancho Villa, one-time general of Carranza, who led a revolt against his
former leader. Villa was most active along the upper Rio Grande near Chihuahua, but his
troops made raids further south, especially after the United States’ recognition of
Carranza and the later embargo of all arms to Mexico. The Hueristas were followers of
General Victoriano Huerto who was deposed by Carranza.
More than several dozens of men and women were killed on the United States side of the
border during the conflicts from 1911–1915. After Francisco Villa’s declared revolt in
late 1914, more United States citizens were killed. In the period of 1915 to 1917, there
were numerous small skirmishes and conflicts that resulted in the deaths of both civilians

14

and military personnel on both sides. Along with the armed conflicts and accounts of
murder, there are numerous reports of robbery, train derailment, and bridge burning.
The situation in the Lower Rio Grande Valley became unstable when Tom Mayfield,
deputy sheriff of Hidalgo County, arrested Basilio Ramos in January 1915 and exposed
the “The Plan of San Diego”. This scheme was supposedly formulated in Mexico to
encourage political turmoil on the Texas border until the United States formally
recognized the Carranza government. The plan called for a revolution of Mexicans on
both sides of the border to liberate Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado and California
from United States control and for formation into an independent republic which was to
be seized by Mexico at a later time.
Establishment of Irrigation
Early irrigation methods in the region originated with the first Spanish settlers, but the
water levels and flooding of the Rio Grande prevented the large-scale irrigation required
for successful farming. In the early twentieth century, as the potential for agriculture in
the LRGV became apparent, several irrigation districts were developed. The St. Louis,
Brownsville and Mexico Railroad that came to Lower Rio Grande Valley in the 1880s
opened up new agricultural possibilities. A citrus industry took root in the 1870s, and
rapidly expanded over the next several decades (Thompson 1994:69). The railroads
allowed for new irrigation technologies and equipment to reach the Rio Grande, and by
the late nineteenth century large-scale irrigation was in place up and down the river. The
irrigation canals and pump houses helped turn a once dry and desolate scrub desert into
what was billed at the time as the “magical valley” (Thompson 1994:71).
Members of Escandôn’s colony initially settled the community of Hidalgo in Hidalgo
County in 1749. In 1852, a Scotsman named John Young settled in the area and renamed
the community Edinburg. When Hidalgo County was created in 1852, Edinburg was
made county seat. The town of Edinburg was later moved north to its present location,
but a small contingent remained at the original site. This original location was called
Hidalgo. The community was known by three different names: La Habitación, Rancho
San Luis, and San Luicito (Garza, 1999). John Closner was the first to pump water in
Hidalgo for his sugar cane plantation in 1895, just east of the former location of
Edinburg, now known as Hidalgo. In 1904, Closner began the Rio Grande Valley
Reservoir and Irrigation Company, building canals for the next four years (Louisiana-Rio Grande Canal Company Irrigation System National Register Listing 1995). Another
major development effort of the early 20th century was that of the United Irrigation
Company Pumping Plant, which was constructed in 1907. The pumping plant is located
on the Mission Levee on the riverside and this area is currently developed as a mobile
home and RV park. The pump house chimney is the only remaining historic structure of
the original pumping plant. In 1909, the Louisiana-Rio Grande Canal Company
organized, subsuming Closner’s and building their first pump house in 1909-1910
(Matthews 1938:68).

15

The Development of the Levee
In 1892, an army engineering officer at Fort Brown by the name of W.H. Chatfield
proposed the first levee system in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. Chatfield’s proposal,
offered as a letter in a local newspaper, entailed building levees around the resacas,
connecting them via a series of canals and floodgates. Water would enter the system
during flood stages, to be held and released as needed to help irrigate farmland. This
would not only provide irrigation for agriculture, but much-needed flood control as well.
Along the LRGV, considerable damage has occurred from periodic heavy floods. Bond
issues in 1924 and 1925 resulted in levee construction from Donna to Brownsville. A
devastating flood in 1932 demonstrated that levees built only on the American side of the
river could not provide adequate protection (Timm, 1999). On September 3, 1932, the
International Boundary Commission (renamed the International Boundary and Water
Commission in 1944) recommended the construction of floodways on both sides of the
river. Agreements in 1932 between the Mexican and American governments provided for
a coordinated plan for flood protection and for each country to perform the work within
its own borders, at its own expense. Construction of the features in the United States was
initiated with funds made available by the Public Works Administration under provisions
of Title II of the National Industrial Recovery Act of June 13, 1933. The Lower Rio
Grande Flood Control Project (LRGFCP) was authorized by the act of August 19, 1935
(49 Stat. 660) and subsequent appropriations were granted for construction and
maintenance by the Secretary of State acting through the United States Commissioner for
the United States International Boundary and Water Commission.
The LRGFCP was constructed in the 1930s without the present Rio Grande diversion
dams. The International Boundary and Water Commission control the titles and all the
interests to the levee system. The United States government received titles or interests to
the river floodway levees but did not obtain title or interest to the lands subject to
inundation between the river levee system and the Rio Grande. The LRGFCP was
improved after major Rio Grande flooding resulted from heavy localized rains in 1958
and Hurricane Beulah in 1967. The improvements, which included diversion dam
constructions and vegetation-clearing programs, were based on United States and Mexico
revisions of the original 1932-coordinated flood control plan.
The United States and Mexico—in the water treaty of 1944—agreed to the distribution of
the waters of the Rio Grande from Fort Quitman to the Gulf of Mexico. That treaty
provided for the international development of major multiple purpose reservoirs on the
Rio Grande, including flood control as one of the purposes. The construction of Falcon
Dam in Zapata and Starr counties was part of this work. Amistad Dam and Reservoir,
located just north of Del Rio at the confluence of the Rio Grande and the Devil’s River,
was begun in August 1963 and was completed in 1968 (Timm, 1999). Amistad, in
combination with Falcon Dam, provides protection from Rio Grande floods originating
above Falcon Dam.

16

PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Immediate Vicinity of Project Corridor
A review of archival data at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL)
revealed no previously recorded archeological sites located within the proposed levee
expansion footprint. However, this same review noted that no previous archeological
investigations have directly impacted the project area. The nearest prior projects occurred
on the westernmost and easternmost ends of the corridor.
An intensive archeological survey was conducted in 1997 by Archaeology Consultants,
Inc. on the western end of the corridor (McCulloch and Warren, 1998). This investigation
was conducted within a 19 acre area in advance of proposed construction of a sprinkler
system and public restrooms within Anzalduas Park. No cultural resources were located
during the survey and the project was allowed to proceed without further archeological
investigation. The survey occurred north of the existing levee berm and just outside of the
area covered by the current investigation.
Additionally an investigation (currently under review by the Texas Historical
Commission) was conducted in 2007 by Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc. for the
IBWC and Dos Logistics, Inc. (Mangum and Moore, 2007). This survey covered a 2.6
kilometer long (1.6 mile) from the Mission Main Elevated Canal to the Anzalduas Dam
opposite the starting point of the current project area. A number of cultural resources
were observed though most of these were determined to be isolated objects. The
exception was a number of items found in the area where the levee segment passed
adjacent to the La Lomita Chapel. As a result of these finds, additional work is currently
underway to determine whether these items are related to the chapel. This survey ends
roughly 300 meters north of the current investigation and does not actually contact it.
In 2007 a linear survey of a separate segment of the levee system was conducted by
Hicks and Company for the IBWC (King and Frederick, 2007). This survey covered a 7.2
kilometer long (4.5 mile) levee segment from Lake Texano northwards to where it meets
the easternmost end of the levee segment being examined in the current investigation. No
sites were located during the survey and it was recommended that no further
archeological investigation was required. Aside from the point of contact where the two
levee segments meet, there is no locale where this earlier survey and the current
investigation examined the same area.
There are no other recorded previous archeological investigations impacting the current
project area. However it should be noted that the Louisiana-Rio Grande Canal Company
Irrigation System National Register District begins immediately beyond the eastern end
of the current investigation. This district was nominated based on its importance as an
Architectural/Engineering feature.

17

General Area of Project Corridor
Located near the Mission levee, The State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation conducted a linear survey for the relocation of FM 1016 north of the
project area. It was not stated if this was an intensive survey, and no sites were recorded
(Crawford 1984).
The Texas Water Development Board conducted one linear survey in 1992 along the Old
Military Road—which parallels the Mission Levee along a portion of the project—and
Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 1016 (Whitsett and Jurgens 1992). It was not stated if this
was an intensive survey. The 7.8-km long (4.9-mi) sanitary sewer line survey was
completed from the town of Granjeno to the sewage disposal plant located north of the
town of Madero, and one site (41HG145) was recorded.
In 2004 Hicks and Company performed an intensive survey for an electrical transmission
line corridor through Starr and Hidalgo counties (Feit and Jarvis 2004). The transmission
line corridor crosses the Mission Levee just east of the town of Peñitas. No sites were
recorded in the vicinity of the current project area during this investigation.
In 1995 an area survey was completed at Bentsen-Rio Grande Valley State Park
(BRGVSP). The intensive survey consisted of two backhoe trenches, four 1-by-0.5-meter
excavation units, and 424 shovel tests and was performed within the 588-acre park
located adjacent to the southern edge of the Mission Levee ROW (Hartmann et al. 1995).
During this study a “poorly developed paleosol” was identified within one of the backhoe
trenches between 47 and 100 centimeters (cm) below surface (Hartmann et al. 1995:20–
21). The locations of the two backhoe trenches were on the western boundary of the park
at least 2,000 m south of the Mission Levee (Hartmann et al. 1995:18, Figure 8).
The paleosol is described as a 51-cm-thick layer of dark grayish brown clay of crumb
texture and containing 36 alternating laminae of silt and clay. Three alternating
silt/clay/silt soil zones were recorded above the paleosol and are capped by a 2-cm-thick
modern A horizon. The horizontal extent of the paleosol is not known. The thick nature
of the paleosol indicated to Hartmann et al. (1995:21, 28) that soil deposition and soil
development processes were occurring concurrently and that the land surface was stable
throughout the period of soil accumulation. The upper 2-m of alluvial deposits within the
park was interpreted as being of recent age, although no specific date range or
geomorphologic analysis was presented.
One area consisting of historic metal and glass artifacts dating no earlier than 1950 and
associated with concrete debris was located at the northern edge of the BRGVSP adjacent
to the Mission Levee ROW (Hartmann et al. 1995:25–27). The debris was not considered
to be 50 years old at that time and therefore was not recorded as an archaeological site.
The area is located within the previously designated HPA of 16LJ1 by Cooper et al.
(2002:B-8). The material remains have now reached 50 years of age, and it is
recommended that they be reinvestigated and evaluated only if additional ROW is

18

acquired from the BRGVSP in this area. It is not anticipated that addition ROW will be
acquired from the BRGVSP.
Again in 1995, a large block intensive survey of approximately 186 acres was conducted
along the Rio Grande River south of the town of Granjeno. Southern Archaeological
Consultants performed the survey for the City of Los Fresnos (Keller 1995). No cultural
materials were located during the survey.
In 1978 an area survey was conducted near the Mission Levee for the Texas Department
of Transportation (TxDOT) on behalf of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA)
for an international bridge crossing at Madero. No information on this survey was located
in an abstract search of the Texas Archaeological Sites Atlas (TASA).
Most importantly, previous research by Cooper et al. (2002) has been conducted to
determine the potential for archaeological sites along the 289 km (180 mi) length of the
Lower Rio Grande Flood Control Project (LRGFCP) of which the current Mission and
Common Levee Systems project area is a part. The three part program consisted of
archival research for information of historic and prehistoric resources at facilities in
Austin, Hidalgo, Mercedes, Brownsville and Edinburg, a geo-archaeological assessment
of the archaeological potential of near surface sediments by the excavation of numerous
backhoe trenches, and a vehicular reconnaissance survey of the floodway (Cooper et al.
2002:63). Cooper et al. (2002) identified 12 areas as having a high potential for historic
archaeological resources within the Mission and Common Levee study corridors, as
defined at that time. These 12 areas were designated as high probability areas (HPAs)
(Cooper et al. 2002:B-8, B-9, and B-12). Six of these previously identified HPAs are
located within the currently defined MCLS corridor. No areas were identified that were
considered as having a high probability for the occurrence of prehistoric archaeological
resources.
A cultural resources evaluation of the Mission and Common Levee Systems was
conducted by Neel (2006) in support of the Environmental Assessment (EA) preparation.
The evaluation included research from online, archival, and published reports to
supplement previous research by Cooper, et al. (2002). In addition, photographic
documentation of landforms and resources along the project route was made for the
Mission Levee System (November 29 through December 2, 2005), and the Common
Levee System (March 7 and 8, 2006). No artifacts were collected during the course of
that documentation. Evaluation methods and detailed finding were reported in the
document A Cultural, Architectural and Engineering Resources Evaluation of the
Mission and Common Levee Systems, Hidalgo County, Texas provided with the Draft EA
in electronic format. No systematic intensive archaeological surveys have been
undertaken for the Mission and Common Levee Systems.
One National Register district, the La Lomita Historic District, is located adjacent to the
Mission Levee but nearly 2 kilometers from the current project area. The district was
recorded in 1978 and covers 122 acres. The La Lomita Chapel, an adobe structure built in
1899, is located within the district and lies close to the project ROW (TASA 2005). The

19

chapel building has been recorded as a Texas State Historic Landmark (SAL), and
Historical Marker Number 2997 is located near the entry door on the western side of the
building.

20

METHODS
Field Survey
The pedestrian cultural resources survey covered 100% of the proposed levee widening
within the extant levee ROW. The Project Archeologist and four field assistants
conducted the survey. All areas of exposed soil were examined for surface exposure of
cultural remains and features. Particular attention was paid to any landforms or features
that have been determined of high archeological probability. Surface visibility was
typically very good throughout the Project Area. No standing structures were observed
within the Project Area footprint, so there was no need for assessment of such structures.
Shovel testing was conducted in an attempt to identify buried cultural resources. The
expected footprint expansion of the levee is a maximum of 30.5 meters in width (though
typically less). The expansion will potentially impact both sides of the levee. However,
there is an extant bench roughly 2/3rds of the way down the berm slope on the north side
of the levee along some portions of Phase III. Where this bench exists it is anticipated
that the improvements will not reach the base of the berm slope and will not have the
potential to impact the natural soils. Therefore, where the bench exists, shovel testing was
limited to the opposite side of the berm only. A single transect was established on both
sides of the levee where it will be expanded. The exception to this methodology is as
discussed above. Within these transects small (40 cm by 40 cm) shovel tests were
excavated every 100 meters (Figures 4a through 4g). These typically alternated from one
side of the berm to the other, meaning that the usual interval of shovel tests along the
whole of the route was 50 meters. Shovel tests were excavated in 10-cm arbitrary levels
and were excavated to at least one meter deep or until intact basal clay, bedrock, caliche
soils or sterile deposits were reached. Each test was documented, including information
on location (utilizing a hand-held, WAAS enabled, GPS unit), soil profile and cultural
yield. Soil fill from tests was screened (when possible) through ¼-inch hardware cloth
and examined for cultural materials, and the units were backfilled immediately.
Backhoe Trenching
Based on the soils recorded for the project area it was determined that deep
reconnaissance (in the form of backhoe trenching) would be necessary if any deep
impacts are proposed. However during this initial phase of the archeological investigation
no backhoe trenching was conducted for two reasons. The first is that consultation with
THC was preliminary enough that a determination of the need for such work had not
been made as of the start of fieldwork. The second is that the proposed constructions for
the levee improvements have been described as minimally ground surface disturbing
(personal communication with Hugo Gonzalez, Jr. of DLI). Any disturbance expected
would fall well within the limits of depths reachable by shovel testing. As a result MAC
and DLI felt that it would be unlikely that the THC would require backhoe trenching.
However, MAC and DLI remain open to the potential need for backhoe trenching should
the THC determine that such work is necessary to sufficiently clear the project area.

21

Site Delineation and Determination
Any locality producing either prehistoric or historic cultural remains was recorded.
However due to the preliminary nature of the survey, State of Texas archeological site
forms were not filled out for submission to THC. Photographs, shovel test forms, and
crewmembers’ daily field notes documented positive shovel tests and features.
The collection policy for this survey was that (1) we retained any prehistoric or
potentially pre-1870 historic materials recovered from shovel tests or other subsurface
investigations that did not prove, after extensive site delineation tests, to be isolated
artifacts2, and (2) for surface materials: only diagnostic cultural materials from the above
periods were collected and retained. The exception to this policy was in the area of the La
Lomita Chapel. Because this site has been declared a National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) and State Archeological Landmark (SAL) site and is documented as having been
constructed in 1899, it was determined that artifacts found within the immediate vicinity
of the site that post-dated 1870 and up to 1950’s era would be collected.

2

These isolated artifacts, such as a single flake surrounded by multiple, negative shovel tests, will be
reburied and the isolate will not be recorded as an archeological site.

22

Figure 4a: Shovel Test locations from survey

Figure 4b: Shovel Test locations from survey

23

Figure 4c: Shovel Test locations from survey

Figure 4d: Shovel Test locations from survey

24

120

U
%
118

U
%
116

U
%

114

U
%

U115
%

112

108

U
%
U103
%

100

U
%
98

U107
%

104

96

U
%

94

U
%
92

90

91
U U
%
%

88

U
%

U%
%
U

U95
%

%
U
U97
%

U
%
%99
U

U101
%

U105
%

110

U %
%%
U
U111

U113
%

U12
%

U117
%

U109
%

106

U
%
102

U
%

U119
%

93

89

U
%

Figure 4e: Shovel Test locations from survey

120

118

U
%
116

U
%
U115
%

U117
%

U
%
U119
%

122

U
%
U121
%

124

U123
%

U
%

U125
%

126

U
%

128

U127
%

U
%

130

U
%

U
%

129

132

U131
%

U
%

144

134

U
%

U133
%

136

U135
%

U
%

U137
%

Figure 4f: Shovel Test locations from survey

Figure 4g: Shovel Test locations from survey

U
%

140

138

U
%

U
%
139

142
U
%
% %
U
U143
U141
%

U145
%

25

RESULTS
Visual examination and shovel testing was conducted in the proposed footprint of the
levee expansion. During this survey a total of 149 shovel tests were excavated. The
shovel tests were placed as per the methodology described above in the METHODS
section. Of these all but one shovel test were negative for cultural resources, though a
small number did contain minimal amounts of clearly modern historical debris (Shovel
Test Log).
Along the south side of the berm roughly 5.4 kilometers (3.3 miles) of the overall length
was impacted by farming. Much of the northern side of the berm is also taken up by
agricultural fields. This agricultural activity appeared to have significantly altered the
soils up to the edge of the berm footing. Considering the length of occupation and the
intensity of agricultural activity within the vicinity of the Rio Grande River, it is likely
that this impact extends beneath the existing levee. It was observed that numerous
rectangular agricultural fields in the area were stepped by as much a 1 meter difference
from adjacent fields. This suggested artificial re-contouring of the land for agricultural
purposes during the historic era. This circumstance made it difficult to be certain of the
natural surface elevation.
Shovel test was number 141 was the single positive (Shovel Test Log). It contained a
single lithic flake (chert) found at 19 centimeters below surface (cmbs). It was found in
compact sandy loam soils adjacent to an extant agricultural field. Compact clay subsoil
was observed at 20 cmbs, immediately below the lithic flake. No other artifacts were
recovered from the shovel test. There were no surface finds within the portion of the
project corridor closest to ST141. The single piece of lithic debitage is non-diagnostic
and therefore is not useful in determining a period of deposition. It is likely considering
the intensive agriculture in the area that the single artifact (which was well within the
plow zone) has been displaced from where it was originally deposited.

26

RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on the finding discussed above, MAC recommends that Phase III of the Common
Levee and Anzalduas Dike Systems rehabilitation project be allowed to proceed. No
significant, intact prehistoric or historic cultural resources were observed within the
footprint of the proposed construction. The single artifact recovered in shovel test 141
was from a disturbed context due to extensive agricultural activity in the area. It is
therefore recommended that the proposed construction of Phase III be allowed to proceed
without further archeological investigation. In the event archeological deposits or features
be encountered during construction, it is advised that construction cease in the immediate
area of the finds and that the Archeology Division of the THC should be contacted for
further consultation.

27

REFERENCES CITED
Black, Stephen L.
1989 South Texas Plains. In From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in Central, South, and Lower Pecos Texas, edited by Thomas
R. Hester, Stephen L. Black, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, Anne A.
Fox, Karl J. Reinhard, and Leland C. Bement, pp. 39-62. Research Series
No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Cooper, E., N. Reese, D. Shanabrook, and V. Gibbs.
2002 An Assessment of Potential Effects to Historic Properties Within the
Lower Rio Grande Flood Control Project by Proposed Maintenance
Activities of the U. S. International Boundary and Water Commission.
Miscellaneous Report of Investigations 184, Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano,
Texas, for Wendy Lopez and Associates under contract to U. S. Army
Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.
Crawford, D.
1984 FM 1016: From 2.2 Miles South of US 83 South and East to 1.5 Miles
East of FM 494. State Department of Highways and Public Transportation
Volume I, Austin, Texas.
Feit, R., and J. Jarvis.
2004 Archaeological Survey of the Roma to Frontera Electrical Transmission
Line, Starr and Hidalgo Counties, Texas. Archeological Series No. 133,
Hicks and Company, Austin, Texas.
Garza, A.A.,
1999 Hidalgo County. The Handbook of Texas Online.
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/HH/hch14.html.
Accessed September 2007.
Hall, Grant D., Michael B. Collins, and Elton R. Prewitt
1987 Cultural Resources Investigations Along Drainage Improvements,
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 59.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Hartmann, M.J., B. Lovett, and B. Baker
1995 Results of an Archaeological Survey at Bentsen–Rio Grande State Park,
Hidalgo County, Texas. Texas A & M University, Department of
Anthropology, College Station, Texas.
Hester, Thomas R.
1980 Digging into South Texas Prehistory. Corona Publishing, San Antonio.

28

Hester, Thomas R., Stephen L. Black, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, Anne A. Fox,
Karl J. Reinhard, and Leland C. Bement
1989 From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central, South,
and Lower Pecos Texas. Research Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.
Jahrsdoerfer, S.E., and D.M. Leslie, Jr.
1988 Tamaulipan Brushland of the Lower Rio Grande Valley of South Texas:
Description, Human Impacts, and Management Options. U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, Biological Report 88(36). 63 pp.
Keller, J.E.
1995

Archaeological and Geomorphological Investigations at the Anzalduas
International Crossing, Hidalgo County, Texas. Southern Archaeological
Consultants, McAllen, Texas.

King, Brian and Charles Frederick
2007 Archeological Survey of the Proposed Hidalgo Protective Levee System
Improvements in Hidalgo County, Texas. Hicks & Company.
Archeological Report Series N. 177
MacNeish, Robert S.
1947 A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas. American Anthropologist
13(1):1-15.
1958

Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Sierra de Tamaulipas.
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 48:6.

McCulloch, S.D., and J.E. Warren.
1998 A Report on the Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Anzalduas
Park Irrigation System Project, Hidalgo County, Texas. Archaeology
Consultants, Inc., George West, Texas.
Mallouf, Robert J., B. J. Baskin, and K. L. Killen
1977 A Predictive Assessment of the Cultural Resources in Hidalgo and Willacy
Counties, Texas. Survey Report 25. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Mangum, Douglas G., and Roger G. Moore
2007 A Cultural Resources Investigation For Phase I of the Mission and
Common Levee Systems Within the Lower Rio Grande Flood Control
Project, Hidalgo County, Texas (from Station 0+00 to 192+50). Moore
Archeological Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 518.
Matthews, W.K.
1938 A History of Irrigation in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. Master of Arts
thesis, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin.

29

Neel, C.
2006

A Cultural, Architectural and Engineering Resources Evaluation of
Proposed Improvements to the Mission and Common Levee Systems,
Hidalgo County, Texas. LGGROUP, Dallas, Texas. LGGROUP
Miscellaneous Reports, Report of Investigation Number 31 prepared for
Parsons, Austin, Texas.

NOAA-NCDC.
2004 Monthly Station Climate Summaries, 1971-2000, Texas. Climatography of
the United States No. 20. U.S. Department of Commerce, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Climatic Data Center,
Asheville, North Carolina.
Story, Dee Ann
1985 Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain.
Report 13. Archeological Program, State Building Commission, Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, A. D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 25.
Thompson, J.D.
1994 Historical Overview. In A Shared Experience: The History, Architecture
and Historic Designations of the Lower Rio Grande Heritage Corridor. p.
18-77. Texas Historical Commission, Austin, Texas.
Timm, J.E.
1999

Rio Grande Flood Control. The Handbook of Texas Online.
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/RR/mgr4.html.
Accessed September 2007.

USDA-SCS.
1981 Soil Survey of Hidalgo County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
Vigil, J.F., R.J. Pike, and D.G. Howell.
2000 A Tapestry of Time and Terrain. United State Geological
Survey, Geologic Investigations Series I-2720. 32 pp.
Whitsett, W.H., and C. Jurgens
1992 An Archaeological Survey of the City of Mission, Madero, and Granjeno
Wastewater Project. Texas Water Development Board, Austin, Texas.

30

APPENDIX A: Photographs

Photograph 1: Levee ROW edge near ST34 (being excavated)

Photograph 2: Typical vegetation on river side (left) and floodway side (right)

31

Photograph 3: Levee ROW where bench exists

Photograph 4: Example of vegetation outside of levee ROW nearest Rio Grande River

32

Photograph 5: Edge of levee near recently plowed field showing impacts from agriculture

Photograph 6: Stepped/terraced fields in vicinity of levee ROW

33

Photograph 7: Typical levee grade

Photograph 8: Cleared fields and drainage ditch beyond levee ROW

APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Log

34

No.

Status

Depth

1

negative

0-15

10yr4/3 brn Si L, wet

large rocks from levee construction, quit at
15cmbs

2

negative

0-62

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L, hardness increase w/depth

cement in L3, shell

3

negative

0-15

10yr3/2 v dk gr brn Si L

heavy roots

15-50

10yr5/4 ylw brn compact Si L

<5 charcoal, modern
<100 gv throughout all levels, few roots

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si L

20-40

10yr5/3 brn Si L

modern glass at 32cmbs, not kept, caliche,
shell

4

5

negative

negative

6

negative

7

negative

8

negative

9

negative
negative

11

negative

12

negative

13

negative

0-20

10yr3/2 v dk gr brn Si L

few gravel, heavy roots

10yr5/4 ylw brn compact Si L

no gravel, few roots

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

caliche

20-60

10yr5/3 brn Si, hard

caliche, few shell

0-20

10yr3/2 v dk gr brn Si L

few gravel, heavy roots

20-50

10yr5/4 ylw brn compact Si L

no gravel, few roots

0-20
20100
0-12

10yr5/3 brn Si

caliche, concrete

10yr5/3 brn Si L

caliche at top, few shell throughout

10yr3/2 v dk gr brn Si L, humic

heavy roots, few gravel

10yr5/4 ylw brn Si L, hard
10yr5/3 brn Si L

shell

0-20

15

negative

negative

10yr5/3 brn Si L & C

cement & caliche

0-20

10yr3/2 v dk gr brn Si L, humic

heavy roots

20-30
0-20

10yr5/4 ylw brn Si L, hard
10yr4/3 brn Si L

few shell

20-40

10yr5/3 brn Si L

few shell, caliche

40-60

10yr5/3 brn Si L & C

few shell

60-80

10yr5/3 brn Si L, hard

few shell

0-12

10yr3/2 v dk gr brn Si L, humic
10yr4/3 brn Si L

heavy roots

negative

17

20-40

10yr5/2 gr brn Si

few shell, limestone

40-60

10yr5/2 gr brn Si & C

few shell, limestone

60-71

10yr5/2 gr brn Si & C, hard

few shell

0-12

10yr3/2 v dk gr brn Si L, humic
10yr4/3 brn Si L

heavy roots

0-20

mottled 10yr4/3 brn & 10yr5/2 gr brn Si fill from
levee

caliche

20-40

10yr5/2 gr brn Si
10yr5/3 brn Si L & C

0-12
12-23

negative

negative

10yr3/2 v dk gr brn Si L, humic
10yr4/3 brn Si L

shell

Chain link fence at 27cmbs, could not remove

limestone, gravel, & caliche
heavy roots
Chain link fence at 23cmbs, could not remove

0-20

mottled 10yr4/3 brn & 10yr5/2 gr brn Si & C fill from
levee

20-40

10yr5/2 gr brn C

0-10

10yr3/2 v dk gr brn Si L, humic

heavy roots

10yr5/4 ylw brn Si L, hard

Chain link fence at 28cmbs, could not remove,
few shell

18
19

Chain link fence at 23cmbs, could not remove

0-20

40-60
negative

few roots

mottled 10yr4/3 brn & 10yr5/2 gr brn Si fill from
levee

12-27
16

few gravel, rabdotus

20-40

12-23
14

Comments

20-58

12-30
10

Description

10-28

few shell

APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Log

No.

20
21

35

Status

Depth

Description

negative

0-20

mottled 10yr4/3 brn & 10yr5/2 gr brn Si & C fill from
levee

20-45
0-10

10yr5/2 gr brn C
10yr4/3 brn Si L, humic

10-38

10yr5/3 brn Si L, hard

Chain link fence at 28cmbs, could not remove,
few shell

negative

Comments

few shell
heavy roots

22

negative

0-40

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C

few shell

23

negative

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si L & S

few gravel & caliche

20-40

mottled 10yr4/3 brn & 10yr5/2 gr brn Si L & S

few gravel & shell

40-80

mottled 10yr5/2 gr brn & 10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L & S,
few pieces of hard clay

few shell

mottled 10yr5/3 brn & 10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L & S
10yr4/3 brn Si L, compact in final 20cm

few shell

24

negative

25

negative

26

negative

27

negative

28

negative

29

negative

30

negative

31

negative

32

negative

33

negative

80100
0-80
0-20
20100
0-20

negative

35

negative

36

negative

mottled 10yr4/3 brn & 10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L
10yr6/3 pale brn Si L & S

few shell
modern bottle cap, brick, gravel

20-50

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L
10yr5/3 brn Si L, hard

0-20

mottled 10yr4/2 dk gr brn & 10yr5/3 brn Si L

few shell

20-60
60100
0-20
20100
0-20

10yr5/3 L & C
10yr5/3 Si L

few shell, caliche

mottled 10yr4/3 & 10yr5/3 brn Si L

few shell

10yr5/3 brn Si L
10yr4/3 brn Si C

few gravel

20-65

10yr5/3 brown hard Si L

plastic at 50cmbs

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C

glass & plastic, not kept. Common gravel

20-40

10yr5/3 brown hard Si L

common gravel

0-20

mottled 10yr4/3 & 10yr5/3 brn L

20-62

10yr5/3 brn L
10yr4/3 brn Si C

0-20
20-35

34

few shell

few shell, caliche

few shell, caliche

rock from 20-29cmbs, few shell
few gravel

0-20

10yr5/3 brown hard Si L
10yr4/3 brn Si L

few gravel

20-40

10yr5/3 brown L

40-63

10yr5/3 brown hard L

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Sl & C

20-45

10yr5/3 brown hard Si C

0-17

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

few gravel, plastic

17-45

10yr5/3 brown hard Si L

few gravel

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

few gravel, modern glass

20-43

10yr5/3 brown hard Si L

few shell

0-20

mottled 10yr4/2 dk gr brn & 10yr5/3 brn Si L & C

some concrete & gravel
modern glass at 25cmbs

37

negative

20-60

10yr5/3 brown hard C

few shell

38

negative

0-20

39

negative

0-40

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, hard
10yr4/3 brn Si L, wet

plow zone, irrigated field

40

negative

0-60

41

negative

0-60

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C
10yr4/3 brn Si L, wet, some S from 40-60

60-80

10yr4/3 brn Si L & C

42

negative

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C

few shell, plow zone 0-40cmbs

APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Log

No.

Status

Depth

10yr5/3 brown SL

43

negative

20-40
40100
0-100

44

negative

Description

10yr5/3 brown S

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C
10yr5/3 brown SL

40-80

10yr5/3 brown S

80-95

10yr5/3 brown SL

few clay nodules from 90-96cmbs

10yr3/2 v dk gr brn L

concrete

10yr3/2 v dk gr brn Si L

concrete from 20-40cmbs
caliche

46

negative

0-20
20100
0-45

47

negative

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, hard
10yr4/3 brn L

20-40

10yr5/3 brown SL

40-78

10yr5/3 brown SL & C

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, wet

40-70
0-27

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard
10yr4/3 brn L, hard

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

20-40
0-40

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard
10yr4/3 brn Si L & C

49

negative

50

negative

51

negative

52

negative

few gravel & shell

20-40

negative

negative

Comments

10yr5/3 brown SL

45

48

36

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C

20-40

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

few gravel

few gravel

53

negative

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C

54

negative

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C

gravel, bottle cap

20-46

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, hard

few shell

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, hard

20-25

10yr5/3 brown SL, hard

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

modern metal

20-40

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard

few gravel

0-40

10yr5/3 brown L

40-53

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

20-25

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard

55
56

negative
negative

57

negative

58

negative

59

negative

few gravel

0-30

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

few gravel

30-40

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard

few shell

0-10

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

20-27

60

negative

0-37

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard
10yr4/3 brn Si L

few gravel

61

negative

62

negative

0-12

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

modern debris

12-28
63

negative

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard
10yr4/3 brn Si L

modern glass & metal

64

negative

0-20
20-27
0-20
20-60

65

negative

66

negative

0-20
20-28

caliche
concrete

10yr6/3 pale brn Si L, hard
10yr4/3 brn Si L
10yr6/3 pale brn Si L, hard
10yr4/3 brn Si L

0-20

10yr6/3 pale brn Si L, hard
10yr4/3 brn Si L

20-52

10yr6/3 pale brn Si L, hard

shell

few limestone gravels

APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Log

No.

Status

67

negative

Depth

37

Description

0-20

10yr4/3 brn L

20-60

Comments

68

0-40

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard
10yr4/3 brn L & C

shell

negative

69

negative

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

charcoal & caliche

20-35

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard
10yr4/3 brn Si L

shell

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard
10yr4/3 brn Si L

gravel, modern debris

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard
10yr5/3 brn L & C, hard

caliche

70

negative

71

negative

0-15
15-32
0-20
20-43

72

73
74

76

77

78

0-40

10yr6/3 pale brn SL

negative

40-60
60100
0-20

Si L

caliche

20-40

Si L
10yr4/3 brn Si L

caliche

negative

0-10

negative

negative

negative

negative

80
81

negative

negative
negative

10yr6/3 pale brn S

0-20

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard
10yr4/3 brn Si L

20-40

10yr4/3 brn Si L, hard

40-60

10yr5/3 brown SL

60-95

10yr5/3 brown S

0-20
20-40

10yr6/3 pale brn S & 10yr4/3 brn Si L
10yr4/3 brn Si L

40-60

10yr6/3 pale brn S

60-80
80100
0-20

10yr6/3 pale brn S

20-40
40-60

10yr4/3 brn Si L

60-80

10yr4/3 brn S

80-90

10yr5/3 brown S

0-20

10yr5/3 brown Si L

20-40

10yr4/2 dk gr brn S
10yr4/3 brn S

60-80
80100
0-20

shell
modern debris

10yr6/3 pale brn S
10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L
10yr4/3 brn Si L, compact

40-60

79

powerline at 43cmbs

negative

20-27
75

shell

clay inclusions

10yr4/3 brn S
10yr4/3 brn S

20-40

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L
10yr4/3 brn Si L

40-60

10yr5/3 brown S

60-80

10yr5/3 brown S

80-90
0-20

10yr5/3 brown S
10yr4/3 brn Si L & 10yr5/3 brown Si L

20-45

10yr5/3 brown Si L

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn S L

20-40

10yr4/2 dk gr brn S L

40-60

10yr4/2 dk gr brn S

60-80

10yr4/2 dk gr brn S

1shell frag

caliche
small clay inclusions

APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Log

No.

Status

Depth

82

negative

80100
0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn S
10yr4/3 brn Si L & 10yr5/3 brown Si L

20-33

10yr5/3 brown Si L, hard

83

negative

0-20
20-38

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L, compact
10yr4/3 brn Si L, compact

84

negative

85

negative

86

negative

87
88

89
90

91
92

negative
negative

negative
negative

negative
negative

93

negative

94

negative

95

96
97
98

99

negative

negative
negative
negative

negative

38

Description

Comments

caliche

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si L

20-47

10yr4/3 brn Si L & 10yr5/3 brown Si L

caliche

0-20

1 shell frag

20-28

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L, compact
10yr4/3 brn Si L, compact

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L & 10yr5/1 gr Si L

caliche

20-49

10yr5/3 brown CL & 10yr5/1 gr

caliche

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn S L

20-30
0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L & clay
10yr4/3 brn L & 10yr5/2 gr brn

20-40

10yr6/3 pale brn Si L

40-60

10yr6/3 pale brn S

60-80
80100
0-20

10yr6/3 pale brn S

20-30
0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L, compact
10yr4/3 brn Si L

20-40

10yr5/3 brown Si L

40-60

10yr5/3 brown S

60-80
80100
0-20

10yr5/3 brown S
10yr5/3 brown S
10yr4/3 brn S L

20-40

10yr5/3 brown Si L, compact

0-20
20-44

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L
10yr4/3 brn L & 10yr5/3 brown L, compact

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si L, moist

20-23

10yr5/3 brown Si L, compact
10yr4/3 brn Si L & 10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

0-20

caliche, few charcoal

10yr6/3 pale brn S
10yr4/2 dk gr brn S L

20-30

10yr4/3 brn L, compact

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si L

20-40

10yr4/3 brn Si L

40-60

10yr4/3 brn Si L

60-80

10yr4/3 brn Si L

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si L

20-55
0-20

10yr5/3 brown L & 10yr6/3 pale brn hard L
10yr4/3 brn C L

20-45

10yr4/3 brn C L

1 shell

rubber frag, white plastic frag

few gravel

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

20-40

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L

1 shell

40-62
0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn hard C
10yr4/3 brn Si L

modern foil

20-40

10yr4/3 brn Si L

APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Log

No.

Status

100

negative

101

negative

102

negative

103
104

105

106
107
108

negative
negative

negative

negative
negative
negative

Depth

110
111
112
113
114
115
116

negative

negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative

117

negative

118

negative

119
120

negative
negative

Description

Comments

40-60

10yr4/3 brn Si L, compact

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn soft C

20-40

10yr4/2 dk gr brn soft C

40-50

10yr4/2 dk gr brn soft C

black trash bag @44cm

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact

1 chert pebble

20-38

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact

1 limestone pebble

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn soft C

few charcoal

20-45

10yr4/2 dk gr brn soft C

few gravel

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact

20-38
0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact
10yr4/3 brn Si L

20-40

10yr6/3 pale brn Si L

40-50

10yr6/3 pale brn Si L, C

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact

20-40

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact

40-50

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L, C

20-35

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L, C

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact

few limestone gravels

20-25

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact
10yr4/3 brn Si L, C

few shells

0-20
20-40
40-53

109

39

few shell frags
few gravel

1 glass frag, 1 chert, 3 limestone gravel

few limestone gravels

10yr4/3 brn Si L, C
10yr4/3 brn Si L, C

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si L

20-40

10yr5/3 brown Si L

40-55

10yr5/3 brown Si L, compact

black plastic frags

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L, C

20-36

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L & 10yr5/3 brown Si L

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C & 10yr4/3 brn Si L

wrapper

20-32

few gravels, 1 shell

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si L & 10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact
10yr4/3 brn Si L,soft C

20-47

10yr4/3 brn Si L,soft C

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L
10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

2 shell frags

20-36
0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

bioturbation

20-40

10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

bioturbation

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact

bone frag

20-40

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact
10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

burnt clay, few charcoal

0-20
20-40

10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

plastic frag

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C

20-31

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact
10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

0-20

few gravels, 2 shell frags

20-40

10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

plastic frag

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

4 shell frags, 2 chert pebbles

20-27
0-20

10yr5/3 brown Si L
10yr4/3 brn Si C

1 shell frag

20-40

10yr6/3 pale brn Si L, some clay

black plastic frags

APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Log

No.

Status

121

negative

122
123
124

Depth

Description

40-55

10yr3/1 v d gr Si L, clay chunks

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, wet

20-40

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, wet

40-56
0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, wet
10yr4/3 brn Si C, muddy

20-37

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, muddy

negative

0-20

negative

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C, compact
10yr4/3 brn Si C, muddy

20-30

10yr4/3 brn Si C, muddy

negative

125

negative

0-20

126

negative

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C
10yr4/3 brn Si C, muddy

20-35

10yr4/3 brn Si C, muddy

negative

0-20

128

negative

0-22

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C
10yr4/3 brn L & 10yr5/3 brown L, muddy

129

negative

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C

130

negative

0-20

10yr5/3 brown Si L

20-42

10yr5/3 brown Si L

0-20
20-30

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C
10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si C, muddy

127

131

negative

40

Comments

2 shell frags

yellow plastic
few gravels, 4 shell frags

1 shell frag

132

negative

20-32

10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

133

negative

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

134

negative

0-12

10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

negative

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

few gravels, levee fill

20-30

10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

few gravels

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L, compact

20-40

10yr6/3 pale brn Si L

40-60

10yr6/3 pale brn Si L
10yr6/3 pale brn S
10yr6/3 pale brn S
10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

plastic crop seed wrapper

135
136

negative

hard packed silt

137

negative

60-80
80100
0-20

138

negative

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si C

few gravel

20-40

10yr5/2 gr brn Si L, C

few charcoal, few shell

40-60

10yr5/2 gr brn SC

60-72

10yr5/2 gr brn SC
10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

levee fill
1 shell

139

negative

140

negative

141

142
143

positive

negative
negative

0-20

1 shell

0-20

10yr4/3 brn Si L

20-40

10yr4/3 brn Si L

40-60

10yr4/3 brn Si L

60-80

10yr4/3 brn Si L

2 shells

0-20

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L, compact

chert flake @ 19cmbs

20-40

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L, compact

40-52

10yr4/2 dk gr brn Si L, compact

0-20

10yr5/3 brown C, muddy

20-40
0-20

10yr5/3 brown Si L, compact
10yr4/3 brn Si L

20-36

10yr5/3 brown Si L, compact

1 marble

APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Log

No.

Status

144

negative

145
146

147
148
149

negative
negative

negative
negative
negative

Depth

41

Description

Comments

0-20

10yr5/3 brown Si L, compact

20-30
0-20

10yr5/3 brown Si L, compact
10yr4/3 brn Si L

few gravel, 1 shell frag

20-42

10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

4 limestone, 1 shell frag

0-20

10yr5/3 brown Si L

20-40

10yr5/3 brown Si L

40-53
0-20

10yr5/3 brown Si L, C
10yr4/3 brn Si C, compact

levee fill

20-40

10yr5/3 brown Si L, compact

few gravel, flake, chert cobble, 1 shell frag

0-20
20-38

10yr5/3 brown Si L
10yr4/3 brn Si L

4 shells

0-20

10yr5/3 brown Si L, compact

20-40

10yr5/3 brown Si L, compact

1 shell

5 shell frags, few gravel

