AN ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION AND MONITORING
OF THE ADAMS WATER LINE AT THE
SAN JACINTO BATTLEGROUND STATE HISTORIC SITE,
HARRIS COUNTY, TEXAS

By
Douglas G. Mangum
Principal Investigator
&
Roger G. Moore Ph.D.

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 6017
for
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
&
Walter P. Moore and Associates, Inc.

Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
Report of Investigations Number 617
June 2013

ii
ABSTRACT
In August and September of 2011 and again in July and August of 2012 Moore
Archeological Consulting, Inc. (MAC) conducted an intensive pedestrian linear metal
detecting survey and monitoring of the proposed Adams Water Line project within the
San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site. This investigation was conducted under
Texas Antiquities Permit Number 6017 under the sponsorship of the Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department (TPWD) through Walter P. Moore and Associates, Inc. The
completed archeological investigations will satisfy the requirements of Antiquities Code
of Texas and will be subject to review by TPWD, the Texas Historical Commission
(THC), and Walter P. Moore. All together the linear and area portions of the project
amounted to 4 hectares (11.7 acres) of area surveyed during this investigation. The
project area is owned entirely by TPWD and can be found on the La Porte (299524) and
Highlands (299516) USGS quadrangle maps.

The project in question involves the proposed replacement of an existing water pipeline
system at the SJBSHS. This will necessitate excavation of roughly 1,578 meters (m)
(5180 feet [ft.]) worth of trench (including three lateral trenches) some involving boring,
all in entirely new excavations A corridor roughly 10 m (30 ft.) wide centered on the
middle of the proposed trench for the new water line was examined with metal detectors
prior to construction and the trenching process was monitored by archeologists during
construction. A total of 8 battle related artifacts and another 45 historic metal or historic

iii
other artifacts were recovered during the initial survey. No additional artifacts were
recovered during the monitoring.

Because the construction has already occurred, this report makes no recommendations
regarding that aspect of the project. Based on the results of the overall investigation
(initial metal detecting and monitoring) MAC recommends that additional analysis is
needed for the battle related artifacts that were recovered. Additionally, because of the
limitations of metal detecting survey, it is recommended any future construction to be
conducted within the project corridor will still require further archeological
investigations.

iv
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Moore Archeological Consulting would like to thank the individuals, groups, and
organizations that made this project possible.

The members of the Texas Archeological Stewardship Network provided invaluable
assistance during the fieldwork. Their willingness to join us at San Jacinto regardless of
the work level or conditions, as well as their perpetual good moods has always helped set
the tone for these projects and kept them moving forward.

Our thanks go to the small group of avocational metal detectorists who worked with
MAC throughout the initial survey. The many, many hours of time they gave to this
project helped us make sure that as many artifacts as possible were found, recovered, and
properly recorded.

We wish to thank the staff members of Brockington and Associates who assisted us with
the metal detecting. Their experience, skill, and hard work helped insure that this project
was successful from the first day to the last.

We would also like to express our appreciation to Peter E. Price. In addition to helping us
set up the GIS system used for the project, he also georeferenced most of the aerial
photographs and maps used in the analysis. This work was critical to helping us
understand the battlefield as a whole and how the artifacts fit into that picture.

Finally we would very much like to thank the employees of the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department, particularly those at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site, who
helped during the project. As ever during these projects they were incredibly patient and
always willing to lend a hand.

Thanks again to everyone who helped and apologies to anyone we may have missed.

v
CONTENTS
ABSTRACT

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS

v

LIST OF FIGURES

vi

INTRODUCTION

1

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTINGS

9

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

19

PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

25

METHODS

33

FIELDWORK RESULTS

43

ARTIFACTS

49

SYNTHESIS

70

RECOMMENDATIONS

73

REFERENCES CITED

75

APPENDIX A: Artifacts

82

APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Profiles

84

APPENDIX C: Photographs

86

APPENDIX D: Monitoring Profiles

91

vi

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Project Area in Harris County.

5

Figure 2. The Project Area on the La Porte and Highlands USGS Quadrangle
Maps.

6

Figure 3. Detail of the Project Area.

7

Figure 4. Project area overlaying a 2003 aerial photograph.

8

Figure 5. Project Area over 1930 Tobin aerial photograph.

14

Figure 6. Sketch (ca. 1850’s) attributed to Samuel Houston, Jr. showing the
San Jacinto Battleground in its natural state (looking east from the
Texan camp).

14

Figure 7. Detail of the georeferenced battle map from Yoakum’s “History of
Texas” showing the Project Area in relation to battle events.

24

Figure 8: Project Area showing location of shovel tests.

45

Figure 9: Depth of fill observed in profiles during monitoring.

48

Figure 10: Battle related artifacts recovered during initial survey.

49

Figure 11: Musket ball LN 54,028.

54

Figure 12: Musket ball LN 54,034.

56

Figure 13: Musket ball LN 54,036.

57

Figure 14: Musket ball LN 54,043.

59

Figure 15: Musket ball LN 54,051.

60

Figure 16: Buckshot LN 54,041.

61

Figure 17: Artifact LN 54,013.

64

Figure 18: Bronze buckle LN 54049.

65

Figure 19: Examples of historic metal items recovered during the initial survey.

68

1
INTRODUCTION

The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD) has determined that there is a need to
replace the existing Adams Water line at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site
(SJBSHS) in Harris County, Texas. Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc. (MAC) of
Houston, Texas has conducted an archeological investigation and monitoring of the
proposed construction. This report presents the results of that investigation and the
monitoring that followed.

The Adams water line provides water to faucets and bathroom facilities at the Adams
picnic area in the easternmost part of the State Site. TPWD determined that replacement
would necessitate the excavation of roughly 1,578 meters (m) (5180 feet [ft]) worth of
trenches (Figures 1-4). The new line will extend south from the San Jacinto Monument
along the edge of Vista Road to the crossing with Park Road 1836. From there it will
continue east along Park Road 1836 all the way to the picnic grounds.

The anticipated depth of the trenches is approximately 1.3 m (4 ft) along most of the
alignment and 0.6 m (2 ft) at the causeway crossing. The width is expected to be less than
1 m (3 ft) across in most locations. Rather than attempt to find, remove, and replace the
original water line TPWD determined that the best course of action was to establish an
entirely new alignment for the replacement line, thus necessitating new excavations along
the entirety of the proposed alignment. At three locations along the alignment it will be
necessary to bore underneath the existing roads and this will necessitate the excavations

2
of 2.5 m (8 ft) deep boring machine pits.

In addition to the direct excavation impacts, moderate disturbances are expected to the
soil surfaces adjacent to the actual excavations resulting from the movement of
equipment and the placement and removal of spoils piles. Such surficial impacts are of
concern at the SJBSHS because most artifacts relating to the Battle of San Jacinto
recovered to date have typically been found within 30 centimeters (1 ft) or less of the
surface. Furthermore, the precise location of the pipeline alignment is indefinite though
most likely to fall within a limited area. As a result of these potential impacts TPWD
determined that archeological investigations prior to construction would need to examine
a corridor roughly 10 m (30 ft) wide (covering roughly 4 hectares [11.7 acres]). This
corridor was measured from the edge of the extant roads which the alignment was
expected to follow.

The project area is owned in its entirety by TPWD and can be found on the La Porte
(299524) USGS quadrangle map. The entire Project Area is within the boundaries of the
National Register of Historic Places listing for the San Jacinto Battleground and is also
listed as a National Historic Landmark.

As a result of the anticipated impacts due to construction of the proposed water line
improvements and the historic importance of the State Site, TPWD determined that all
areas where excavations would occur would need to be archeologically surveyed with
metal detector equipment to determine if any remains of the Battle of San Jacinto, its

3
aftermath, or other historic/prehistoric cultural resources existed. Consultation between
Moore Archeological Consulting (MAC) and TPWD archeologists determined that
historical records and recent archeological investigations suggested four localities along
the alignment where special measures were merited during the archeological
investigation. These locales included;

1

There are avenues of fire related to the Mexican cannon suggested by
archeological evidence and the historical record across which the proposed
waterline corridor crosses twice. Examples of this type of shot have already
been located immediately adjacent to the project corridor.

2

On April 21st, 1836 the Texan army marched across what is now Vista Road
as they advanced on the Mexican defensive line. Evidence of this advance
has been identified in other recent archeological investigations nearby and is
also present in numerous maps of the battlefield.

3

Both armies utilized the New Washington Road in arriving at the battlefield
and in movements during the battle. Recent analysis of old aerial
photographs suggests a possible route of this lost road which crosses the
current project corridor in one location.

4

Finally, the disorganized retreat of surviving Mexican soldiers and their
pursuit by the Texans in the aftermath of the battle would have crossed the
alignment for the current project in numerous locations.

4
Based on these concerns and the more general need to investigate the expected alignment
of the new water line and other elements of the planned project it was proposed that two
stages of archeological investigation would take place prior to, and during construction.
These stages included;

•

Metal detecting pedestrian survey and limited shovel testing of all water line
alignments and borehole sites. This excludes the portion of the water line
alignment which crosses the artificial land bridge. This examination will cover an
area roughly 10 m (30 ft) wide strip following the centerline of the alignment.

•

Archeological monitoring of the actual construction excavations would occur for
all project elements.

In August and September of 2011 crews from MAC conducted an intensive pedestrian
linear survey of the proposed water line improvement project within the SJBSHS. Then
in July and August of 2012 a MAC crew monitored the actual construction of the
waterline as it occurred. The intensive pedestrian survey involved metal detecting in
preference to the usual shovel testing as will be discussed in the Methods section of this
report.

The archeological survey and monitoring were conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit
Number 6017. The survey was conducted with funding from and under the sponsorship
of the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department through their contractor, Walter P. Moore.
The completed archeological investigations will satisfy the Antiquities Code of Texas

5
requirements for projects of this sort. The results of this investigation are subject to
review by TPWD, and the Texas Historical Commission (THC).

MAC staff members John “Randy” Ferguson (Project Archeologist), David Driver, Lisa
Rodriguez, Kelly Schexnayder, and technicians Rachel Goings, Stephanie McKernan,
Babatunde Babalolo, Bobbi Gryger, and Hannah Plumer worked under Principal
Investigator Douglas G. Mangum, and MAC President Roger G. Moore PhD to complete
the investigation.

Figure 1: The Project Area in Harris County.

6

Figure 2: The Project Area on the La Porte and Highlands USGS Quadrangle Maps.

7

Figure 3: Detail of the Project Area.

8

Figure 4: Project Area overlaying a 2003 aerial photograph.

9
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTINGS
Modern Climate
The modern climate of the Project Area can aptly be characterized as hot and wet for
most of the year. The mean annual temperature for the region is about 20 °Centigrade (C)
[68 °Fahrenheit (F)]. Summer temperatures average about 34 °C (93.2 °F), with
temperatures above 38 °C (100.4 °F) common during July and August (Carr 1967; St.
Clair et al. 1975). The average winter temperature is a mild 18 °C (64.4 °F). Freezes are
infrequent and of short duration, with an average of 271 frost-free days per year. Snow,
sleet, and freezing rain are uncommon.

Rainfall varies from 7 cm (2.75 in.) in March to 11 cm (4.3 in.) in December, with July to
December rainfall often supplemented by tropical fronts and storms. The rainfall records
range from a low of 45 cm (17.7 in.) to a high of 185 cm (72.8 in.) with a mean rainfall of
117 cm (46 in.). Prevailing winds are usually from the southeast, except during the winter
months when ‘Northers’ sweep into the area.

Modern Flora and Fauna
Southeast Texas is within the Austroriparian biotic province, near its western boundary
with the Texan province (Blair 1950:98-101). Pine-hardwood forests on the eastern Gulf
coastal plain mark this boundary, which is set by available moisture levels. The Project
Area is situated within the pine-oak forest subdivision of the Austroriparian province and
includes portions of the coastal prairie within its western limits (Tharp 1939).

10
Grasses within the coastal prairies and marsh vegetation area are described from a rangemanagement perspective in Hoffman et al. (1969: 45). This 4,046,873 hectare (ha)
[10,000,000-acre] area consists of 3,844,529 ha (9,500,000 acres) of gulf prairies and
202,343.6 ha (500,000 acres) of gulf marshes. The regional vegetation of the coastal
prairies is characterized as follows:

The principal grasses of the prairies are tall bunchgrass, including big
bluestem (Andropon gerardi), little bluestem, seacoast bluestem
(Schizachyrium scoparium, var. littorus), Indiangrass, eastern gamagrass
(Tripascum dactyloides), switchgrass, and gulf cordgrass. Seashore
saltgrass is common on moist saline sites. Grazing pressures have
changed the composition of the range vegetation so that the grasses now
existing are broomsedge bluestem, smutgrass, threeawns, tumblegrass
and many other inferior grasses. The other plants that have invaded the
productive grasslands are oak underbrush, mcartney rose, huisache,
mesquite, pricklypear, ragweed, bitter sneezeweed, broomweed, and
many other unpalatable annual weeds [Hoffman et al. 1969: 45].

The dominant floral species of the pine-oak forest subdivision of the Austroriparian biotic
province include loblolly pine (Pinus taeda), yellow pine (Pinus echinata), red oak
(Quercus rubra), post oak (Quercus stellata), and blackjack oak (Quercus marilandica).
Hardwood forests are found on lowlands within the Austroriparian and are characterized
by such trees as sweetgum (Liquidambar styraciflua), magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora),

11
tupelo (Nyssa sylvatica), water oak (Quercus nigra) and other species of oaks, elms, and
ashes, as well as Spanish moss (Tillandsia usneiodes) and palmetto (Sabal glabra) which
are highly diagnostic of the biotic province. Swamps are common in the region.

Blair (1950) and Gadus (Gadus and Howard 1990:12-15) define the following mammals
as common within the Austroriparian province: white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
virginianus), muskrat (Ondatra zibethicus), raccoon (Procyon lotor), coyote (Canis
latrans), opossum (Didelphis virginiana), Scalopus aquaticus, Pipistrellus subflavus,
Lasiurus borealis, Sciurus niger, Sciurus carolinensis, Glaucomys volans, Geomys
breviceps, Reithrodonomys fulvescens, Peromyscus leucopus, Oryzomys palustris, cotton
rat (Sigmodon hispidus,), packrat (Neotoma floridana), eastern cottontail (Sylvilagus
floridanus), and swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus aquaticus.). Bison (Bison bison) may have
been present on nearby grasslands at various times in the past (Gadus and Howard
1990:15).

Common land turtles include eastern box turtle (Terrapene carolina) and Terrapene
ornata, while snapping turtle (Chelydra serpentinia), mud turtle (Kinosteron spp.), river
cooter (Chrysemys concinna), and diamondback terrapin (Malaclemys terrapin) comprise
common water turtles. Common lizards include Anolis carolinensis, Sceloporus
undulatus, Leiolopisma laterale, Eumeces laticeps, Cnemidophorus sexlineatus, and
Ophiosaurus ventralis. Snakes and amphibians are also present in considerable numbers
and diversity.

12
The resources provided by river-influenced estuarine and marsh environments were
undoubtedly of great importance to the littoral residents of southeast Texas. These
resources are summarized by Gadus and Howard (1990:12-15). Estuarine fish resources
cited by Gadus and Howard include sand trout (Cynoscion arenarius), spotted sea trout
(Cynoscion nebulosus), Atlantic croaker (Micropogon undulatus), striped mullet (Mugil
cephalus), southern flounder (Paralichthysis lethostigma), shortnose gar (Lepisosteus
platostomus), channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus), freshwater drum (Aplodinotus
grunniens), red drum (Sciaenops ocellata), and bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus) and other
sunfishes. Common shellfish include Rangia (Rangia cuneata), Macoma (Macoma spp.),
dwarf surf clam (Mulinia lateralis), oyster (Crassostrea virginica), and olive nerite
(Neritina [Vitta] reclivata). Arthropods, such as shrimp and crab, are also numerous and
highly productive.

Area marshes replete with plants such as cordgrasses (Spartina spp.), reeds (Phragmites
spp.), giant millet (Setaria magna), and bullrushes (Scirpus spp.) would have formed a
highly attractive and bountiful magnet for waterfowl (Gadus and Howard 1990).

Currently the alignment for the water line project is almost exclusively manicured lawn
with a scattering of hardwood and pine trees. Historically the area was a part of coastal
prairie with riparian zones along the borders of the marsh and the bayous.

Review of the oldest available aerial imagery from a 1930 Tobin aerial photograph
(Figure 5) shows that the most of the project area was already part of the well developed

13
park. The actual alignment crosses or parallels shell roads and mowed areas in several
locales along its route. The easternmost portion of the corridor runs through the riparian
zone for the boggy slough, but even here there are roads in 1930. Those portions of the
project area not developed appear to remain open prairie in this photograph. It is probable
that the appearance of the land in the 1930 aerial image was close to the natural state of
the landscape and vegetation as it would have been in 1836. This interpretation is
supported by at least two earlier, non-photographic images of the landscape. The first is a
drawing of the battlefield attributed to Samuel Houston, Jr., son of General Houston
(Figure 6). This drawing was reputedly made at the battlefield and in the company of his
father sometime in the mid-nineteenth century, well before any significant alterations had
been made to the landscape by human activity. The second image is the H. K. Yoakum
map (Figure 7) which dates from the late 1840’s or early 1850’s. The similarities between
the 1930 Tobin aerial and the Yoakum map, significant enough to allow for effective
georeferencing between the two images, indicate very little alteration of the battlefield in
the 80 years between their making. This interpretation is further corroborated by the
similarity of terrains in unmodified portions of the Upper Texas Coast: Gallery forests
along streams and shoreline, and open prairie dotted with occasional mottes of trees.
Nevertheless the authors are not indicating that the landscape and vegetation visible in
the 1930 aerial photograph are identical to how the battlefield looked in 1836, but rather
that it is as close as any modern aerial imagery can come to showing the natural state of
the land as it was at the time of the battle. This understanding informs our interpretation
of the landforms and vegetation in relation to the battle.

14

Figure 5: Project Area overlaying a 1930 Tobin aerial photograph.

Figure 6: Sketch (ca. 1850’s) attributed to Samuel Houston, Jr. showing the San Jacinto
Battleground in its natural state (looking east from the Texan camp).

15
Soils and Geology
Geologic formations of the Upper Texas Coastal region are Pleistocene in age. The Gulf
Coastal Plain is the result of a series of sediment wedges, both marine and continental,
created over the last 65 million years (Spearing 1991). Their presence is the result of the
rise and fall of sea level and the fluvial and deltaic deposits of Texas rivers.
Combinations of these activities have contributed to the advancement of the Gulf Coast
shoreline and the Gulf of Mexico. The geological activity that created the Texas coastal
floodplain over the last 65 million years has added 402 km (250 miles [mi.]) of land to
the United States (Spearing 1991).

The surface geology of the Gulf Coastal Plain is referred to as the Lissie Formation of the
Houston Group. The Lissie Formation is a series of Pleistocene-age deposits located
stratigraphically above Pliocene-age sands and gravels. Extending from the Sabine River
to the Rio Grande, the Lissie Formation fans out into a 32 km (20 mi.) wide belt north of
the Beaumont Plain (Fields et al. 1983). It retains deltaic and fluvial characteristics from
its composition of river materials and of materials deposited from continental
deterioration carried by streams across the coastal plain (Wheeler 1976).

Evidence from prior archeological investigations indicates that there are locations within
the park that are covered with artificial fill soils dating from, among other things, the
construction of the monument in the 1930’s (Mangum and Moore n.d.). Based on this
study it was expected that such fill would be present in some portions of the water line
alignment.

16
The Project Area is depicted on sheet 107 of the Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas
(Wheeler 1976). There is only one soil type evident within the Project Area. This is Lake
Charles clay. Lake Charles soils are nearly level and are known to incorporate small
pockets of Beaumont clay, Bernard clay loam, Midland silty clay loam, Addicks loam,
and Vamont clay. Lake Charles clays are somewhat poorly drained, or poorly drained,
and have a low geoarcheological potential (Abbott 2001). The soils encountered during
the fieldwork and monitoring largely matched descriptions of both the Lake Charles and
Midland types. The exceptions were the soil deposits identified as artificial fill. Based on
analysis of the aerial imagery available for the project area it would appear that these fill
soils are predominantly related to the construction of new park roads and the causeway in
the late 1930’s.

Hydrology
The major water sources impacting the project corridor are Buffalo Bayou, Santa Anna
Bayou, an unnamed marsh, an unnamed (though sometimes referred to as Boggy Bayou)
drainage and modern inlet (the latter being the result of infilling from subsidence), and
the San Jacinto River. The impacts of these water sources on this project are as much
historical in nature as hydrological. The angle at the confluence of Buffalo Bayou and the
San Jacinto River was the limiting factor on mobility for both of the armies involved in
the Battle of San Jacinto because neither force could quickly cross these bodies of water.
Santa Anna Bayou, the unnamed marsh, and the modern inlet further complicated
mobility in and around the battlefield, ultimately acting as a cul-de-sac and leaving only

17
one potential direction (to the southwest) for easy ingress/egress (Figure 7). The
boundaries proved critical to the outcome of the battle.

Buffalo Bayou is more than 1000 m (3280 ft) to the west of the project area and makes up
the western boundary of the SJBSHS. The bayou has long been and continues to be used
as a shipping channel for the Port of Houston. The wakes generated by the passage of
ships using this channel have over time caused extensive erosion along the shoreline
leaving a steep banked drop-off from the high ground down to the water’s edge. Because
of the distance between the Buffalo Bayou and the current project corridor there are no
direct impacts to it.

The site is also impacted by the San Jacinto River, Santa Anna Bayou, and the marsh to
the north part of the alignment. These three features are all parallel to one another and to
the northern shoreline of the main landmass of the SJBHS. They are also contiguous with
one another with the bayou being the most immediate to the shoreline followed by the
marsh and then the river. Based on a review of older maps of the area it appears that
Santa Anna Bayou is of natural origin. However, it has been impacted extensively by
human activity. The marshes associated with the bayou had been used as a disposal area
for spoil dredged from the Houston Ship Channel in the San Jacinto River. Additionally
subsidence resulting from oil and water extraction had caused loss of elevation
throughout the area amounting to roughly 2.4 to 3 m (8 to 10 ft.) in topographical change.
Recent efforts by TPWD have revived the marshland. At the time of the battle the bayou,
the marshland, and the river beyond would have acted as a significant natural boundary to

18
the retreating Mexican soldiers fleeing north or east. The closest the project corridor
comes to these water sources in roughly 130 m (426 ft.) at the easternmost end of the
corridor.

The water source most immediately impacting the project corridor is the drainage
sometimes referred to as Boggy Bayou. At the time of the battle this was a intermittent
storm water drainage that split into western and eastern arms. These arms formed the low,
boggy land behind and, in combination with Santa Anna Bayou, the San Jacinto River,
and the associated marsh, encompassing the Mexican encampment. Subsidence in the
modern era has resulted in this minor drainage infilling to the point where both arms are
permanent inlets of the Santa Anna Bayou. The western arm of this inlet does not reach
the project corridor but does come within 110 m (360 ft.) of it. The eastern arm reaches
deeper into the SJBSHS and is crossed by the alignment of the current project via a
causeway (Figures 3, 4, and 7).

19
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The Project Area is within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, which has been
recently summarized by Patterson (1995). Other prehistoric summaries equally pertinent
to the prehistory of the area include Ensor (1991), and Moore and Moore (1991). The
reader is referred to these works for detailed data on the prehistory of this region.

Previous investigations in Southeast Texas have demonstrated that prehistoric people
occupied this area as early as 12,000 years ago. All through prehistory the inhabitants
were nomadic hunter-gatherers. Ensor (1991) has proposed a prehistoric cultural
sequence of periods for Southeast Texas which are as follows: Paleo-Indian (10,0008,000 BC), Early Archaic (8,000-5,000 BC), Middle Archaic (5,000-1,000 BC), Late
Archaic (1,000 BC – AD 400), Early Ceramic (AD 400-AD 800), and Late Ceramic (AD
800-AD 1750).

Evidence for prehistoric occupation of Southeast Texas is scarce in the Paleo-Indian
period, and indeed, is rather ambiguous through the Middle Archaic period (Patterson
1983; Aten 1983:156-157). However, although most previously recorded sites date to the
Late Archaic and Ceramic periods, it is probable that earlier dating sites have been lost to
erosion, channel cutting, and, particularly in the case of very early sites, to rising sea
level. In cases where early-dating artifacts have been found, such as Wheat’s (1953) finds
of projectile points dating from the Paleo-Indian through Middle Archaic periods at
Addicks Reservoir in western Harris County, the materials occur in deposits with poor
contextual integrity.

20
Sites dating from the Late Archaic through the Ceramic periods are much more
commonly found in the project vicinity. During the late Archaic period, modern climatic
conditions evolved, sea level rose and stabilized, and coastal woodlands expanded. Aten
(1983) hypothesizes that an increase in population and the establishment of seasonal
rounds, including regular movement from littoral to inland areas occurred during the Late
Archaic period. Particularly relevant to the prehistory of the Project Area are Hall’s
(1981) data from the Allens Creek project in nearby Austin County, Texas. Excavations
of a large cemetery there suggest a Late Archaic trade system that linked Southeast Texas
to Central Texas and areas eastward into Arkansas.

Lawrence Aten (1983) proposed that ceramics were introduced in the aboriginal artifact
assemblage on the Upper Texas Coast at AD 100. Ensor (1991) places the beginnings of
the Early Ceramic period at AD 400, which may be more applicable for areas inland from
the coastline. The Early Ceramic period is characterized by a continued growth in
population levels. Ensor (1991) places the beginning of the Late Ceramic at AD 800,
which coincides with the introduction of the bow and arrow. A plain sand-tempered
pottery dominates throughout both parts of the Ceramic era. Story et al. (1990) has
defined the Mossy Grove Cultural Tradition for Late Prehistoric cultures in Southeast
Texas with sandy paste pottery being the principle diagnostic artifact type.

European settlement did not begin to seriously disrupt aboriginal habitation in the areas
inland from the Upper Texas Coast until after AD 1700 (Patterson 1995:249). European
diseases, probably introduced by explorers and early traders, did begin to have impacts as

21
early as AD 1528. At least 7 epidemics were recorded among the tribes of the Upper
Texas Coast between that date and AD 1890 (Ewers 1974). By the latter date the tribes
native to the region around the SJBSHS had for all practical purposes been eradicated by
disease.

The Project Area falls entirely within the land grant of Arthur McCormick, dated August
10th, 1824 (Texas General Land Office 1896). He was one of Stephen F. Austin’s “Old
Three Hundred” colonists. Arthur died in either 1824 or 1825 and afterwards the land
was held by his wife Margaret (Peggy) McCormick and their sons. The family raised
cattle on the land (Henson 2012). This was the status of the land at the time of the battle.

Summary of the Battle of San Jacinto
This summary of the battle will be intentionally brief and basic. Many of the aspects of
the battle are subject to widely divergent interpretations. The results of prior MAC
investigations have already indicated that some elements of the battle occurred
somewhere other than where commonly accepted. They have also discredited some
generally believed notions. Those wishing a more extensive discussion of the battle are
directed to such popular sources as Stephen L. Moore’s “Eighteen Minutes” (2004) or
Frank X. Tolbert’s “The Day of San Jacinto” (1959).

On April 20th, 1836 the Mexican forces under Santa Anna met those of General Sam
Houston at the confluence of the San Jacinto River and Buffalo Bayou. On that first day
the Mexican forces made an initial foray towards the line of trees in which the Texans

22
were camped only to be driven away by cannon and rifle fire. There followed a dual
between the one Mexican cannon and the two Texan cannons which lasted some time. An
effort by the Texas cavalry to capture the Mexican cannon as it was being moved led to a
brief skirmish between the cavalry of both sides. A covering force of Texan infantry
allowed their cavalry to withdraw to the camp. Meanwhile the Mexican forces had
removed some distance across the prairie and set up a camp and defensive breastworks
made up mostly of luggage, saddles, and brush. This was the status at the end of the first
day.

Early in the morning of April 21st, reinforcements under the command of Mexican
general Martin Perfecto de Cos reached the camp after an exhausting forced march and
were detailed to the right of the Mexican lines. After the Texans did not make an
expected dawn attack, Santa Anna determined that no further hostilities need be expected,
allowed his men to stack arms and rest, and planned for an attack on April 22nd.
However, Sam Houston and his men determined to make an afternoon attack and at
around 3 p.m. began to form up. A piece of low ground (commonly referred to as the
swale) allowed the Texas forces to arrange themselves into line of battle out of sight of
the enemy pickets and begin the march upslope towards the Mexican defenses.
Regiments under the commands of Sherman, Burleson, and Millard made up the left,
center, and right wings of the Texan forces respectively. Cavalry under Lamar took the
extreme right and the artillery advanced in the middle. The Texas forces caught the
Mexican army largely unprepared for attack and after approximately 20 minutes of
combat the Mexicans broke and ran. In the ensuing chaos roughly half of Santa Anna’s

23
force was killed and most of the other half was captured. Santa Anna himself was
captured on April 22nd and, as previously mentioned, this essentially ended the Texas
Revolution.

Proposed Water Line Project Corridor in Relation to Battlefield Occurrences
The project corridor crosses numerous localities where battlefield occurrences are
recorded as having taken place and where analysis of historical maps suggests such
occurrences are likely to have taken place (Figure 7). First; there are avenues of fire
related to the Mexican cannon suggested by archeological evidence from previous
excavations (Mangum et al.2011; Mangum and Moore n.d.) and the historical record
(Yoakum 1856; Foote 1841), across which the proposed waterline corridor crosses twice.
Examples of canister shot (a type of artillery round consisting of numerous smaller balls
fitted into a ‘can’ made of tinned iron or other stiff material which effectively turned the
cannon into a giant shotgun) have already been located immediately adjacent to the
project corridor. Second; on April 21st, 1836 the Texan army marched across what is now
Vista Road as they advanced on the Mexican defensive line. Evidence of this advance has
been identified in other recent archeological investigations nearby (Mangum et al.2011)
and is also present in numerous maps of the battlefield (Yoakum 1856). Third; both
armies utilized the New Washington Road in arriving at the battlefield and in movements
during the battle (Moore 2004). Analysis of old aerial photographs (the Tobin 1930 for
example) suggests a possible route of this lost road which crosses the current project
corridor in one location. Finally; the disorganized retreat of surviving Mexican soldiers

24
and their pursuit by the Texans in the aftermath of the battle would have by necessity,
crossed the alignment for the current project in numerous locations.

Figure 7: Detail of the georeferenced battle map from Yoakum’s “History of Texas”
showing the Project Area in relation to battle events.

25
PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
There are numerous previous archeological investigations that have been conducted in
the vicinity of the current project corridor. For the purposes of this study this review of
such investigations will include all studies in the immediate area (i.e. within .5 km) of the
corridor. However, this review will also include all investigations directly related to the
Battle of San Jacinto and its immediate aftermath regardless of proximity to the project
corridor.

Cartier and Hole (1972) conducted a historical and archaeological investigation including
non-systematic metal detector survey and unit excavations which documented extensive
late nineteenth/early twentieth century dredge spoil filling, as well as leveling and filling
associated with the1936 construction of the San Jacinto Monument and Reflecting Pool.
Ing (1996) describes archaeological backhoe testing conducted at the site of an adjacent
berth expansion to accommodate renovations to the U.S.S. Texas. This investigation
included the excavation of 16 backhoe trenches in mostly dredge spoil fill. Evidence of
dumping from the 1927 San Jacinto Inn was noted, though no significant battlefield
remains or evidence of the 1830s town of San Jacinto was recovered. Cox and Tomka
(2002) is a comprehensive historical synthesis of the battlefield and archeological
management plan. The report also describes all previously identified prehistoric sites
within the battleground park. This study did not involve field investigations though
recommendations for future methods of archaeological site discovery were presented.

26
Metal detecting surveys were conducted by Moore Archeological Consulting within and
adjacent to the park (Mangum and Moore 2005; Mangum and Moore 2010; Mangum and
Moore n.d.). Frederick (2007) conducted a geoarcheological evaluation of portions of the
San Jacinto Battleground, including core borings near the berth of the Battleship Texas.
Frederick’s results have enhanced the author’s understanding of the soils at San Jacinto.

There are numerous cultural resource sites (both historic and prehistoric) within the
vicinity of the current project area. This is based on a review of the Texas Archeological
Sites Atlas. These include the battlefield itself (41HR115), three historic scatters
(41HR316, 41HR317, and 41HR865) and the mixed prehistoric/historic scatter
(41HR488). There is also an extant cemetery (the Habermehl Cemetery recorded as
C201). However, none of these, aside from the battlefield site itself, falls within the
boundaries of the current investigation. The closest know and recorded site to the current
project corridor is 41HR416, a Native American shell midden site of unknown date,
which comes within 70 m (230 ft.) of the easternmost end of the project.

One recent previous archeological investigation was coring survey conducted by Charles
Frederick (2007). This was a geomorphologic study of parts of the State Historic Site
though none in close proximity to the water line project. The study included a total of 15
core borings to examine stratigraphy at the historic park. Due to the nature of the
geological investigation there was no attempt to look for or recover artifacts from the
cores. Frederick’s primary conclusion was that in 1836 what is now the parking lot for

27
the battleship was a lower surface which supported a seasonal wetland or pond (Frederick
2007:14).

There have been other prior investigations within the vicinity of the water line alignment.
Most of these investigations, until recently, have focused primarily on prehistoric and
non-battle related historic occupations. However, with the exception of two MAC
investigations (Mangum and Moore n.d.), no previous archeological investigations have
examined the area within or close to the specific project corridor of the current
investigation.

Prewitt and Associates conducted investigations from 1986 to 1988 as part of the Peggy
Lake investigations (Gadus and Howard 1990). These attempted to relocate 41HR126
and 41HR133. Prewitt employees were unable to find 41HR126 and determined that the
site is either inundated or has been destroyed by erosion. Prewitt’s field crews were able
to relocate 41HR133. Surface collection and limited backhoe trenching were utilized to
establish its surface and partial subsurface boundaries. Within 200 m (656 ft.) of the
Phillips Ditch Project Area is a small historic site (41HR578) and another shell midden
(41HR579), both recorded by Margaret Howard for Prewitt and Associates.

An investigation as part of the Phillips Ditch Rectification Project roughly 175 m (575
ft.) southeast of the current Project Area was conducted by Moore Archeological
Consulting, Inc. Efforts were focused on determining the boundaries of two known sites.
A series of backhoe trenches and shovel probes were excavated (Mangum and Moore

28
2002). Site 41HR133 was found and backhoe trenching defined a definite northwest
boundary where the site might be threatened by the proposed construction. Efforts to find
41HR126 met with the same negative results as the previous Prewitt and Associates
investigation (Gadus and Howard 1990).

An additional MAC investigation in the area was related to the Phillips Ditch
Rectification Project. During the excavations for the project a buried shell midden was
exposed (Moore et al. 2003). MAC conducted additional examination to determine the
eligibility of the shell midden site (designated 41HR973). It was determined that the site
probably consisted of secondary deposits and construction was allowed to proceed.

Hicks and Company and Moore Archeological Consulting have conducted most of the
recent investigations in the vicinity of the Project Area associated with the battle. These
investigations were oriented entirely towards recovering battle-related and other historic
era metal artifacts through the use of metal detecting. The Hicks investigation recovered a
moderate number of battle related artifacts. According to the Karbula et al. report
(2004:1), “…44 battle or target period artifacts were recovered.” A follow-up
investigation of the same general area was undertaken by Moore Archeological
Consulting between April and August of 2005 and was conducted in full coordination
with TPWD (Mangum and Moore 2005). This investigation looked at a larger area of the
tract along the bluff overlooking Peggy Lake which is owned by the Port of Houston.
This tract covers almost the entire length of Peggy Lake shoreline between the SJBSHS
and the current Project Area. As such it was hoped that the investigation would uncover

29
evidence of the retreating Mexican army in the aftermath of the battle. Metal detecting,
utilizing similar methodology to the current investigation was conducted on 5 block areas
which totaled approximately 2.8 acres in size. A total of 27 battle-related artifacts were
found, consisting of 21 musket balls, 1 buckshot pellet, 1 percussion cap, 2 cartridge box
buckles, 1 lead strip, a crudely decorated copper item and 3 pieces of curled sheet lead.
No significant patterns were observed either in the individual blocks or in the area of
investigation as a whole. However, as hoped, the results of this project did suggest that
the retreat phase of the battle had continued across the tract along Peggy Lake.

Another recent archeological investigation was conducted at the NRG Texas property
roughly two km (1.2 m.) east-southeast of the current investigation (Mangum and Moore
2010). This investigation determined that a large group of Mexican soldiers made it to a
far copse of trees, disarmed, and surrendered as a group. This surrender is most likely that
recorded in historical accounts as having taken place under the leadership of Colonel
Juan N. Almonte (Mangum and Moore 2010). A linear concentration of more than 800
battle related artifacts (made up largely of dropped musket balls) were recovered and the
Site was designated 41HR1094. These artifacts were spread out along a line 180 m (590.5
ft.) long and 20 m (65.5 ft.) wide. The artifact scatter followed a tree line which is evident
in the 1930 Tobin aerial photograph. The primary connections between this project and
the current investigation are twofold despite the physical distance between them. First,
the NRG investigation refined the methodology used during the survey portion of the
wastewater line investigations. Second, it provided a rich body of definitively battle
related Mexican artifacts to compare to items recovered during the current investigation.

30
These results, in combination with those from the Peggy Lake investigation, tie these
project locales to the current area of investigation.

Another recent investigation was an examination of proposed locations for a new State
Site visitor’s center. This investigation looked at five potential locations for the visitor’s
center, though for three of these locales the investigation was limited to background
research (Mangum et al. 2011). One of the two locations where actual excavations took
place was immediately north of the San Jacinto Monument. This locale comes within 225
m (740 ft.) of the northernmost end of the current project corridor where it begins just
south of the monument. Excavations in this location yielded a small number of battle
related artifacts which included a trigger guard, a buckle, a Roman coin, and a few other
items thought to be battle related. While not numerous these finds nevertheless confirm
historical accounts that activities associated with the battle took place across this locale.
The other locale examined during this investigation was in the open prairie southwest of
the “4 corners” locale where Vista Road and Park Road 1836 meet and roughly 200 m
(655 ft.) from the major turn in the water line project corridor. Several dozen battle
related artifacts were found during the examination of this locale, most indicating the
likely locale of the cavalry skirmish that occurred on April 20, 1836, the day before the
main battle. However, 5 cuprous canister shot were also recovered from scattered locales
within the tract. Because there is extensive confirmation in both the historical and
archeological record that the Mexicans utilized copper to make cannon munitions
(whereas Americans did not) the canister shots from this locale are definitively those
fired by the Mexican cannon. And based on most likely potential firing points,

31
determined utilizing historical maps and traditional placement, it is probable that the
canister shot (usually numbering in the tens per “can”) were fired across the current
project corridor.

In 2010 and into 2011, MAC conducted a metal detecting survey and archeological
monitoring of construction of the wastewater improvement project at the SJBSHS
(Mangum et al. 2012). This investigation examined a linear alignment nearly 2 km. (1.2
m.) in length and 10 m. (32 ft.) in width. The investigation began in the Texan camp area
and ran along the northern edge of the extant reflecting pond and terminated at the
northwest corner of the monument. Though this investigation did not touch upon any of
the current project corridor, it did refine the methodology utilized during this
investigation. Nine battle related artifacts and another 877 historic metal artifacts were
recovered, most of the latter associated with a historic occupation site (41HR1085) which
was also recorded during the waste water project.

There have been only two previous investigations of the battlefield that have looked at
portions of the project corridor and focused on metal detecting as the means of recovering
artifacts from the battle. Both were conducted by MAC under the auspices of TPWD and
will be documented in an upcoming omnibus report (Mangum and Moore n.d.). One
involved a single day (February 11, 2006) metal detecting reconnaissance of sections of
the battlefield with the intent of finding any artifact concentrations that might suggest
locations for more intensive future investigations. The reconnaissance covered a large
area that included roughly 500 m (1640 ft.) of roadside immediately on the other side of

32
the water line corridor. The result of this reconnaissance was the recovery of several
musket balls within 100 m (330 ft.) of the current project corridor, but no concentrations
of artifacts were recovered. The second project was a single day of intensive metal
detecting (February 10, 2009) examining a line of trees along either side of Vista Road
which TPWD planned to remove. All soil within 5 m (16 ft.) of each tree trunk was
examined for hits and all such hits were excavated. The area examined as part of this tree
removal project included some segments of the current water line corridor. The results of
this investigation included the recovery of two cuprous canister shot and one cuprous
heel plate, the former definitively associated with the battle and the latter likely battle
related. The canister rounds were found on the west side of the road across from the
current project corridor and the plate was found on the east side of the road immediately
adjacent to the water line corridor. As discussed above, only the Mexicans were known
to fire copper munitions. Again, based on analysis of historical firing points for the
Mexican cannon it is likely that these canister rounds were fired across the current project
corridor.

33
METHODS
The methodology utilized during the investigation of the water line was largely based on
previous fieldwork conducted within the boundaries of the SJBSHS, along the shoreline
of Peggy Lake, at the NRG property and during the wastewater line project (Mangum and
Moore 2005, Mangum and Moore 2010, Mangum et al. 2011, Mangum et al. 2012). The
main elements of this prior work included the use of experienced metal detector operators
to find the metal artifacts, the assistance provided by Archeological Stewards under the
auspices of the Office of the State Archeologist, the use of a total station to plot the
precise location of all artifacts, and the use of controlled search areas, usually in the form
of lanes, as a sampling methodology. All of these elements were retained for the work in
the current investigation.

This archeological investigation was separated into the two elements defined as follows;
•

The metal detecting pedestrian survey of all water line alignments. The water line
alignments were expected to be 10 m (30 ft.) wide. For the purposes of maximum
metal detecting coverage the alignments were divided into 50 m (164 ft.) long
segments and each segment was split into five 2 m (6.5 ft.) wide by 50 m (164 ft.)
long lanes. These lanes and segments were fully examined by teams made up of
archeologists, stewards, and volunteer metal detectorist. The locations of any
artifacts recovered during this phase were shot in with a Total Station,
downloaded, post processed, and added to the existing GIS database recording all
previous work and finds recorded by MAC at San Jacinto.

34
•

Archeological monitoring was conducted during all actual construction involving
excavations. This involved metal detecting of the back dirt as well as periodically
examining, measuring and recording the profiles in any excavations. This
information was added to maps of the known depth of fill that have been
maintained by MAC so as to improve the understanding of fill incidents
throughout the state site. Two archeologists were present at all times during
excavations. This allowed for continuation of construction in other segments of
the alignment when cultural resource finds stopped work. The locations of any
artifacts recovered or features observed during this phase were plotted onto to the
existing GIS database recording all previous work and finds recorded by MAC at
San Jacinto.

Log books were maintained by the archeologists recording all survey, excavation, and
monitoring elements, and the results thereof. Additionally maps of all project elements
and of all finds were generated and maintained utilizing a total station and GIS software.

All metal detecting survey during the archeological elements was conducted by teams
consisting of a metal detector technician, a field archeologist, and either a member of the
Texas Archeological Stewards Network or (if stewards were not available) a second field
archeologist. The metal detectorists examined the ground surface with their machines in a
controlled fashion looking for “hits”. Hits are defined as any locale where the metal
detector indicates the presence of metal sufficient to necessitate excavation. Any hits
identified by the metal detector technicians were dug immediately by the field

35
archeologists and/or stewards. If the hit was determined to be one of several categories of
battle related, potentially battle related, or otherwise potentially historically significant,
then the artifact was collected, recorded, and shot in with a Total Station. A unique
“Location Number” was assigned to each hit location producing one or more artifacts
selected for collection and full recording under the criteria defined. The “Location
Number” is the basic unit of artifact provenience (and identifying its total station mapped
coordinate point in the real world). Metal detecting of spoil during the monitoring phase
was conducted by the field archeologists. Otherwise the recovery and recordation of any
artifacts found during this element followed the methodology described above.

Specific Metal Detecting Field Methodology
Within the 10 m (30 ft) wide water line ROW a series of five lanes, each roughly 2 m
(6.5 ft.) wide and 50 m (164 ft.) long, was cleared via mowing. Survey by metal detector
operators took place solely within these lanes. As the lanes in each 50 m (164 ft.)
segment were completed the next 50 m (164 ft.) long segment was prepared. This
continued in a leapfrog manner until 100 percent of the alignment had been covered.
Segments were consecutively numbered, but lanes, essentially a framework for keeping
the detectorists within limited search areas, were not.

Any artifact recovered were mapped in place by Total Station, documented on a Metal
Detector Survey Location form, and placed in an appropriately labeled bag.
Each individual metal detector team consisted of one volunteer metal detector, one
professional archeologist, and one archeological steward (avocational archeologist

36
certified by the Office of the Texas State Archeologist) or an additional field
archeologist. The metal detector operating teams systematically traversed each lane from
one end to the other. The operator marked each metal hit with a temporary plastic pin
flag, but the operator did not excavate. Hits were only excavated by the accompanying
archeologists or stewards.

A unique “Location Number” was assigned to each Hit location producing one or more
artifacts selected for collection and full recording under the criteria defined below. This
“Location Number” is the basic unit of artifact provenience and was designated by a five
digit number. Classification of the recovered artifact, and hence, its subsequent treatment
and recording, was ultimately the sole responsibility of the accompanying professional
archeologist.

The metal detector hit excavations differed from that of standard archeological shovel
tests in several particulars: (1) the collection treatment and level of documentation was
dependent upon the on-the-spot assessment of the significance of the item(s) unearthed:
litter going into a lane general collection bag with no further documentation, but
meaningful artifacts were formally collected and fully recorded; (2) the diameter of all
excavations were kept to the absolute minimum in order to not disturb the surrounding
strata and any associated non-metallic artifacts therein; (3) the excavations were not
carried out in traditional, arbitrary 10 cm (3.9 in.) levels; rather, the approximate,
absolute depth of a target metallic artifact meeting the collection criteria as a Metal
Detector “Location” (as well as any significant non-metallic artifacts recovered

37
incidentally during hit excavations) was measured (by tape in centimeters below surface
[cmbs]) and recorded on the accompanying form; and, (4) at the same time, a single Total
Station shot was made at the base of the excavation for each Metal Detector Location (if
possible while the collection-worthy artifact was still in situ or, more probably,
immediately after the item had been found in the last plug of back dirt out of the hole and
identified). Thus, each single Total Station shot simultaneously recorded for the
electronic spatial record both the horizontal location and the vertical elevation of the
artifact in a single measurement. Also differing from most – but certainly not all conventional shovel tests, the excavated soils were manually broken up to look for
artifacts, since the plastic, clayey nature of the soils in the region precluded dry
screening.

All significant finds and their locations were incorporated into our pre-existing San
Jacinto GIS database. This information included GIS data files in shapefile (*.shp)
format for ultimate submission to TPWD.

Shovel Testing
The one exception to the methodology described above was that, per the request of the
TPWD, MAC staff excavated one percent (1%) of “good” hits as formal shovel tests (a
“good” hit being defined as a hit made with a metal detector which the operator had high
confidence would result in the recovery of a battle related or historic metal artifact upon
being excavated). The principal reason for the addition of a second methodology for

38
metal detector artifact recovery was to ensure correct recognition of the stratigraphic
context of the collected materials.

The first “good” hit of each field day was excavated as a shovel test as described below.
The next shovel test would be dug over a good hit after 99 location numbers had been
issued for historic metal or battle related artifacts recovered, or at the beginning of the
next field day, whichever came first. In practice, because of the low number of location
numbers issued, this resulted in one shovel test excavated per day for a total of nine (9).
This method left the determination of when it was time to excavate another shovel test in
the hands of the Total Station operator (who issues the location numbers) rather than
requiring multiple teams to keep track of how many good hits had been excavated that
day. This method resulted in the excavation of more than 1% of good hits as shovel tests
as requested by TPWD.

Shovel tests were dug as follows. A 40 cm by 40 cm (15 in. by 15 in.) excavation would
be started and excavated in 10 cm (3.9 in.) arbitrary levels. This excavation encompassed
the locale where the metal detector operator centered the hit. Shovel tests were excavated
until the source of the hit was found and then continued until indisputable undisturbed
natural soil was reached or until its depth reached 60 cmbs. The reason for this
termination point was two-fold. First, no battle related or historic artifacts have been
found at SJBSHS deeper than 55 cmbs to date, and while it is of course possible that a
few artifacts may be deeper, they would be well below the current project surface
disturbance. Any artifacts within the actual trench should be detected during the

39
monitoring. Secondly, and more important to the rationale for shovel testing in the first
place, any fill or disturbed zone extending to more than 60 cm (23 in.) in depth could
potentially extend significantly farther below the surface. It is inefficient or even
impossible to determine the true depth of such fill or disturbance by manual excavation,
particularly when profiles of the mechanical excavation during the actual construction of
the line would be available.

Particular care was taken during the excavation of the arbitrary levels to avoid, if
possible, damaging artifacts that were the source of the hit signal. Each shovel test was
individually form-documented, as well as logged per a normal battle related or historic
metal artifact hit, including information on location (i.e. they were shot in with the Total
Station), soil profile and cultural yield if any. The soil profile exposed by the shovel test
was also photographed. Soil fill from shovel tests was not screened but rather was
broken up manually until the hit source was found and recovered. The shovel tests were
backfilled immediately upon completion of the recordation process.

Metal Detector Execution: Classification, Collection, and Recordation
Two categories of metal detector “Location” recordation were used for excavated
metallic hit items that were fully recorded and mapped by the Total Station:

BR = “Battle-Related” All items evident in the field and before (lab) cleaning to be (in
all reasonable probability) clearly and explicitly “Battle-Related,” such as musket and
pistol ball shot, canister shot, uniform buttons and accoutrements, etc. All such items

40
were collected, field form documented, placed in a fully-labeled, individual BR-Class
‘Location’ bag, and shot in with the total station as soon as they were excavated and
identified.

HM = “Historic Metal” All other historical metal artifacts not clearly and explicitly
“Battle-Related,” were likewise collected, field form documented, placed in a fullylabeled, individual HM-Class ‘Location’ bag, and shot in with the total station as soon as
they were excavated. Items falling into this category included horseshoes, square nails,
and miscellaneous other metallic items appearing of nineteenth century manufacture.
Collection and recording under the HM category has also typically included the
occasional post-1899 individually interesting item such as some coins, tools, etc.
Collection of post-1899 items were at the discretion of the field archeologist. Nonmetallic, pre-1900 items (for example, ceramics, glass, bone, prehistoric artifacts, etc.
recovered incidentally in the excavation of BR and HM metal detector hits were recorded
and bagged with the associated BR or HM item.

A third category for excavated metallic hits classed as meaningless debris was used and
that therefore was not fully recorded or mapped by the Total Station:
“Litter”: All clearly post-nineteenth century debris and miscellaneous trash was not field
form documented or shot in with the total station. These materials were, however,
collected in a general collection bag provenienced by the metal detection Block Number
and the lane subdivision within that block. The litter was minimally analyzed by general
descriptive category (‘bottle glass,’ ‘wire nails,’ etc.) and then discarded in the lab.

41

However, (with regard to the “post-nineteenth century debris and miscellaneous trash”
metal detector hit excavations), it was possible that non-metallic pre-1900 artifacts or
bone fragments could have been recovered incidentally/accidentally during the
excavation of a metal detector hit that proved to be in the “Litter” category. This
possibility made it necessary to provide three additional recording categories to provide
for these incidental/accidental discoveries. The categories were to be utilized only in the
instance of the incidental/ accidental recovery of these non-metallic items during the
excavation of what proved to be a “Litter” hit; all collected non-metallic items recovered
incidentally to “BR” or “HM” metallic hit excavations were simply bagged with the
“BR” or “HM” item. These categories were:

HO = “Historic Other” All non-metallic, clearly pre-1900 historic artifacts (again,
ceramics, glass, wood, etc.), miscellaneous unidentifiable non-metallic items appearing of
nineteenth century manufacture, as well as select twentieth century non-metallic items at
the discretion of the field archeologist, recovered during a litter hit localized excavation.
All such items were collected, field form documented, placed in a fully-labeled,
individual HO-Class ‘Location’ bag, and shot in with the Total Station as soon as they
were excavated.

BO = “Bone” All small bones or bone fragments recovered during a trash hit localized
excavation, without exception; lab analysis determined if human, historic (and therefore
perhaps potentially battle-related) subsistence faunal remains, or chicken bones from a

42
1950 picnic. The decision was made to err on the side of caution in regard to this
sensitive class of material. All such items were collected, field form documented, placed
in a fully-labeled, individual B-Class ‘Location’ bag, and shot in with the Total Station as
soon as they were excavated.

P = “Prehistoric” All prehistoric artifacts recovered incidental to litter hit localized
excavation. Stone tools, aboriginal ceramics, and true lithic debitage were clear-cut
examples of incidental artifact recoveries requiring full hit documentation under the “P”
category. A judgment call was made by the field archeologist in regard to potential shell
midden deposits that were “shell only,” and otherwise devoid of prehistoric artifacts. It is
known that there were a number of pre-1936 shell roads in the park, and indeed there was
evidence of several such roads in trenches and auger holes from prior investigations. So
classification of a shell-only deposit as a “Prehistoric” hit required a distinct lens or layer
of whole Rangia shells (road fill shell was not classed even as litter for collection
purposes, and discarded in the field).

Most locations within the alignment were examined at least twice (often more) by
different detectorists. This addressed the issue of variability among the machines and
operators and improved the chance of finding items at different depths and in different
specific soil conditions. All materials collected and records generated are being prepared
by Moore Archeological Consulting for permanent curation with TPWD.

43
FIELDWORK RESULTS
Results for Metal Detecting Prior to Construction
As a result of the intensive metal detecting survey of the proposed water line alignment
52 artifacts were recovered and initially recorded as BR, HM, or HO. A total of seven of
these artifacts were classified as battle related. All the remaining artifacts were classified
as historic metal or historic other. In most cases these historic metal artifacts most likely
postdate April of 1836 though some few may be directly related to the battle. Further
analysis of these artifacts is needed to determine their age and, in some cases, use.
There are a number of possible reasons why such a small number of artifacts directly, or
even indirectly, associated with the Battle of San Jacinto were found. One possibility is
that little in the way of battle activities took place on or across the project corridor and
thus few artifacts were ever deposited here. This option is relatively unlikely since both
the historical and archeological record provide numerous examples of actions that took
place on or close to the corridor. Another is that there are battle related artifacts too deep
for most commercially available metal detectors to sense. This option has a moderate
likelihood since even with best commercially available detectors there are simply
immutable limits to their capabilities. Additionally it is possible that artifacts have been
lost as a result of undocumented collecting and/or truncation, disturbance, or burial of the
natural soil surfaces in which they were originally deposited as a result of construction.
This last option has a high likelihood because of the proximity of the project to the extant
road as well as some segments of the earlier, pre-1930’s road. A review of older aerial
images, particularly one taken in 1939 during the construction of the roads and
monument, shows areas of disturbance alongside the road. Preliminary analysis of the

44
imagery suggests these disturbances are a mix of scraping and filling, both of which
could potentially remove artifacts or occlude them. This is all the more the case when we
consider that the bulk of battle era artifacts recovered to date have been found in soils 30
cm (1 ft.) or less beneath the natural, modern surface.

Results from Shovel Testing
The result of the shovel testing aspect of the current project was that nine (9) shovel tests
were excavated along the alignment (Figure 8). The classification and documentation of
the resulting profiles was conducted by MAC Principal Investigator Douglas Mangum
and Project Archeologist John Ferguson, both of whom have extensive experience with
the soil types present in the San Jacinto area, as well as in the greater Southeast Texas
region. None of the hits that were targeted as part of the shovel testing aspect of this
project resulted in the recovery of any historic artifacts. Instead all items recovered were
modern debris consisting of a penny, a silver ring (with a James Avery maker’s mark),
two aluminum pull tabs, a copper bullet jacket, a round nail, a screw top bottle cap, iron
wire, a hexagonal nut, and a lead wheel balance weight. Each of these items is among the
category of modern detritus that can and have been easily mistaken as “good hits” by
even skilled and experienced metal detectorists. These results point out the difficulty of
identifying truly good hits prior to excavation in any but the most target rich and debris
lacking environment.

The results of the shovel testing soil profile largely matches what was observed and
recorded during the monitoring (Appendix D). Disturbed soils and deposits of artificial

45
fill identified in shovel tests 1, 3, 5, 8, and 9 (relatively deep artificial fill in the case of 1
and 8) correspond with fill or disturbed soil deposits recorded in the monitoring phase as
does the lack of fill in shovel tests 4, 6 and 7 and corresponding profiles taken during
monitoring. Only the soil profile of shovel test 2 shows any variance between what was
recorded at that time and what the monitoring profiles recorded. However, the variance
between shovel test 2 and the corresponding profile from the monitoring is fairly minor
with the shovel test identifying 12 cm (4.7 in.) of fill and the monitoring recording 10 cm
(3.9 in.) of disturbed soil. This could be a simple matter of differing interpretation of a
narrow soil band. Alternately it could be the result of an actual difference in the soils at
the two locales which were 6.5 m (21 ft) apart.

Figure 8: Project Area showing location of shovel tests.

46
Results from Monitoring of Construction
Archeological monitoring took place during all phases of the construction that involved
ground disturbance. No additional artifacts were recovered as a result of this monitoring.
Though numerous pieces of metal were detected and recovered during the monitoring all
were determined to be modern debris after basic visual analysis.

The most likely combination of reasons for the complete lack of recovered artifacts
during the monitoring phase of the project is the extremely small size of the actual area
examined and the thoroughness of the initial survey phase. The initial field investigation
looked at an area roughly 11.7 acres (4 hectares) in size whereas the monitoring only
examined .2 acres (.08 hectares) (i.e. only the actual trench as opposed to the construction
footprint). Additionally the original survey involved more than a dozen archeologists,
stewards, and metal detectorists working intensively to recover as many artifacts as
possible. It is possible that all or nearly all of the artifacts present in the project corridor
(particularly the actual trench footprint) were recovered, leaving little or nothing to be
found during the monitoring. Other factors that might have contributed to the lack of
finds include (but are not limited to) the presence of artificial fill soils in some locales
(Figure 9) or prior looting within the SJBSHS as discussed above.

Profiles of the soil within the construction trenches for the water line were recorded along
the entirety of the project corridor. This allowed for a better understanding of what sort of
observable impacts have occurred to the soils of the battlefield over time, particularly
since the battle. Of particular interest was how much artificial fill soil has been deposited

47
since such deposits can make the recovery of artifacts using metal detectors increasingly
difficult dependant on how deep the deposit and the artifact is. The profiles also
permitted us to document intact historic ground surface interfaces with other, later soils.
The results of an analysis of these profiles are discussed below.

Monitoring Profiles
A total of 73 soil profiles were generated during the construction of the water line (Figure
9). The classification and documentation of the resulting profiles was conducted by MAC
Project Archeologist John Ferguson, who as previously mentioned has extensive
experience with the soil types present in the San Jacinto area. Of these 45 showed intact
soils from the surface to the deepest level of excavation. Another 14 had 25 cm (10 in.) or
less of artificial fill. Twelve had fill between 25 and 50 cm (10-19 in.) in depth below the
surface. Only two (2) profiles had depth of fill greater than 50 cm (19 in.); one at 55 cmbs
and another at 91 cmbs.

Twenty-three (23) of those profiles that showed artificial fill included lenses of crushed
shell ranging from 3 cm to 15 cm (1-6 in.) in thickness. All but one (1) of these lenses
began beneath the surface soil layer ranging in starting depth from 10 cmbs to 45 cmbs.
In each case it was evident that these shell lenses were of the crushed variety common to
road base material rather than layered, mostly intact shells as would be expected from a
Native American shell midden. Some of this is evidently part of the original road ballast
from construction of the original alignment of the modern roads in the late 1930’s or
repair/expansion of those roads since. However, as discussed below, there is at least one

48
locale where this is evidence of the earlier park roads, most of which were removed at the
time of the monument construction.

With only two exceptions the entirety of the alignment where it follows Vista Road
lacked artificial fill or disturbed soil. The first exception is on the northernmost end of the
project corridor where it is closest to the monument. At this locale the corridor is very
close to a major storm water drainage feature and it appears that most or all of the fill soil
is related to the emplacement of that feature. The second exception is at soil profile 59
(and also visible in shovel test 3) where a l0 cm (4 in.) deep deposit of crushed shell was
found at 30 cmbs. Review of the 1930 Tobin aerial imagery confirms that this locale is
one of three places where the modern road encounters the pre-construction era park road.

Figure 9: Depth of fill (in centimeters) observed in profiles during monitoring.

49
Artifacts
Battle Related Artifacts
A total of seven items recorded as battle related items were recovered during the initial
survey. Another item originally identified as historic metal was, after additional visual
examination, determined to be possibly battle related and was re-categorized pending
further analysis (Figure 10). No battle related artifacts were found during the monitoring
phase of the project. The preliminary analysis regarding these finds is discussed below.

54013

#
Y

54028

#
Y

54034
54041

#
Y
Y
#Y
#

54036

54043
54051
54049

#
Y

300

0

300 Meters

N

Figure 10: Battle related artifacts recovered during initial survey.

50
MAC did not conduct more extensive analysis of the artifacts because such detailed
analysis is not within the scope of this project. In particular the Munitions artifacts that
make up the bulk of the BR items were not subjected to a more detailed analysis because
the small number of items precluded such work at this point in time. Such analysis has
been done in the past by Douglas D. Scott Ph.D. on a volunteer basis for MAC. However
such work has always been done on larger groups of artifacts to avoid taxing Dr. Scott’s
freely given time with small parcels of work. It is hoped that at some point in the future
the munitions artifacts from this project can be batched with other finds so as to present
Dr. Scott with a more sizeable grouping for analysis. Thus MAC staff focused our efforts
on a basic assessment of each artifact after cleaning with the primary purpose of
determining whether it was likely battle related or not.

All of the artifacts discussed below have been classified as battle related even where there
is some uncertainty as to the precise age of the item. The reason is that these items are all
military in nature and, given their overall provenience within a battleground, it is more
likely that they are associated with the battle than not. This is in contrast to other items
that have been found on the battlefield which were military in nature but clearly dated
later than 1836. An example of the latter group is several .50 caliber machine gun bullets
which were found just west of the causeway. Such munitions date to the late twentieth
century and thus can be said to be definitively unrelated to the battle of San Jacinto. By
contrast, the items discussed herein as battle related are known to have been available in
1836 and were appropriate in a military context.

51
It is important to note here that, as will be discussed in more detail below, all but one of
the items recorded as a battle related artifact during this investigation were recovered
from soil identified as disturbed or artificial fill. Given that simple fact it is clear that
these artifacts have lost their original, specific context. It can be argued that this negates
their identification as battle related artifacts and there is some validity to such an
argument. In a more typical archeological site the separation of the artifacts from their
original context would rightly call into question their relationship to the site. However,
the SJBSHS is not a typical site as it must be measured in kilometers across rather than
meters or tens of meters. As a result, while the artifacts are no longer in their immediate
context, they are still within the site as a whole. Furthermore the SJBSHS is a battlefield
rather than a more typical historic site. As a battlefield, the artifacts associated with it are
primarily military in nature as opposed to farm implement, building elements, etc. which
you would expect from a homestead or similar historic era site.

Based on these factors, to assume that items of military nature found within the bounds of
the SJBSHS, even when they are found in disturbed or fill soils, are not directly related to
the military site contradicts the laws of probability and parsimony. While it is possible
that these military items are related to some other site, the higher likelihood is that the
buckle and munitions discussed below are from the brief military use of the site. The law
of parsimony (or Occam’s razor) tells us that a simpler explanation is usually more likely
to be true than a more complex one. Given all of these considerations, the authors chose
to retain the identification of these items as battle related until careful conservation,
further analysis, and additional research definitively contradicts our initial assessment.

52
Nevertheless, the authors do recognize that the displacement of artifacts from their
original context, particularly where that disturbance is likely significant in nature, does
negate the potential to utilize them in any analysis of troop placement and movement
during the military occupation of the site. As a result, our focus will be on the potential
information that can be still be recovered from the artifacts.

It is also worth addressing here the possibility, previously raised by TPWD, that some
lead munitions artifacts recovered at San Jacinto could potentially be the result of drops
left by reenactors during the annual San Jacinto Festival. This supposition has been
discussed in detail in a previous report (Mangum et al. 2012) but here the authors will
briefly repeat the reasons why this is not the case here. First; all of the lead artifacts
recovered here have significant amounts of lead carbonate/sulfate patina on their surfaces
indicating that they have been in the ground for a long period of time. Shot dropped in the
modern era would have little patination. Second; the reenactor community has confirmed
that, for safety reasons, reenactors never carry shot to events such as the San Jacinto
Festival and thus would not have any to drop. This rule has been in place since the
earliest reenactments and which has been codified by TPWD in their own “Texas State
Park Safety Manual – Living History” (TPWD 2001). Finally, based on maps provided to
MAC by SJBSHS staff, no reenactments have ever taken place in the area where shot was
found (Russell Kuykendall, personal communication 2012). Based on these points the
authors are confident that the lead munitions found during this investigation are not of
modern origin.

53
Ammunition
Most of the BR artifacts collected during this investigation were made up of small arms
ammunition of types appropriate for the period of the Battle of San Jacinto. A total of six
(6) items from this category were recovered (LN 54,028, 54,034, 54,036, 54,041, 54,043,
and 54,051). All of the small arms ammunition was made of molded lead. All but 54,041,
a single buckshot, are of what is usually assumed to be musket caliber. All were
recovered during the initial metal detecting survey. All but one of the musket balls (the
exception being LN 54028) as well as the single buckshot were found near the west end
of the causeway (Figure 10). For ease of understanding the sizes and weights of the balls
are only given in period correct caliber and ounces measurement units.

LN 54,028
This cast lead ball weighs 1.32 ounces (37.5 grams [g]) and measures at .73 caliber
(Figure 11). This size places it on the upper range of typical musket or rifle balls of the
nineteenth century. It was recovered at 3 cmbs (1 in.) in soil that was identified as being
fill or redeposited material immediately adjacent to the modern roadway (within a meter
of the blacktop) and within the built-up berm for that roadway. The soil in which it was
found was a mixture of crushed shell, gravel, and modern debris in a matrix of what
appeared to be local clay. This description of the soil matches that of the uppermost zone
from a nearby profile taken during the monitoring (Number 31 which was taken roughly
3 meters (9 ft 10 in.) from where the artifact was found [see APPENDIX D for
Monitoring Profiles]). It is possible that some portion of this road base soil also came

54
from an area of the battlefield with a high concentration of artifacts, though a
determination of precisely where is not possible.

Further examination of this musket ball reveals that it has several markings on it
suggesting that it had been fired rather than dropped. The first is a pair of parallel small
marks (.7 cm [.3 in.] in length) immediately adjacent to one another (these marks are
visible in Figure 11). These are suggestive of the ball being cut out of a cartridge with a
knife in advance of being loaded. The other markings are flattened surfaces on opposing
sides of the ball. These are similar to marks commonly associated with ramming the ball
down the bore of the musket with the ramrod. Further analysis by an expert may help
determine whether or not it was fired or dropped and potentially the source of the lead it
was made from.

Figure 11: Musket ball LN 54,028. Scale is two centimeters per square.

55
LN 54,034
This cast lead ball weighs 1.25 ounces (35.5 g) and measures at .74 caliber (Figure 12).
This size places it on the upper range of typical musket or rifle balls of the nineteenth
century. It was recovered at 15 cmbs (6 in.) near the bottom of a shell fill matrix that was
recorded as being the road base material. This description of the soil is close to that
recorded in the uppermost zone from a nearby profile taken during the monitoring
(Number 30 which was taken roughly 6.5 m [21 ft.] from where the artifact was found
[APPENDIX D]).

Further examination of this musket ball reveals that it has one marking on it suggesting
that it may have been fired rather than dropped. The marking is a flattened surface on one
side of the ball. These are similar to marks commonly associated with ramming the ball
down the bore of the musket with the ramrod. However, this marking is not as clear as
some examples the authors have seen. Further analysis by an expert may help determine
more definitively whether or not this ball was fired or dropped and potentially the source
of the lead it was made from.

56

Figure 12: Musket ball LN 54,034.

LN 54,036
This cast lead ball weighs 1.07 ounces (30 g) and measures at .69 caliber (Figure 13). It is
the smallest of the musket sized balls found during this investigation and is of a size
appropriate for a Brown Bess musket of the sort which was standard issue for the
Mexican army. It was found less than 8 meters (26 ft 2 in.) from LN 54,034 and was
recovered at 10 cmbs (4 in.). This was well within the crushed shell fill matrix that was
recorded as being the road base material. This description of the soil is close to that
recorded in the uppermost zone from a nearby profile taken during the monitoring
(Number 30 which was taken roughly 10.5 m [34 ft.] from where the artifact was found
[APPENDIX D]).

57

Further examination of this musket ball found no markings indicative of having been
fired. This suggests that it was dropped rather than fired. However, further analysis by an
expert may help determine more definitively whether or not this ball was fired or dropped
and potentially the source of the lead it was made from.

Figure 13: Musket ball LN 54,036.

58
LN 54,043
This cast lead ball weighs 1.27 ounces (36 g) and measures at .73 caliber (Figure 14).
This size places it on the upper range of typical musket or rifle balls of the nineteenth
century. The ball was deformed and the caliber was derived using the Sivilich Formula
(Sivilich 1996) and is based on the weight of damaged balls not obviously indicating any
change in its original mass (i.e. the deformation was caused by something that neither
subtracted nor added mass). The ball was recovered less than 3.5 m (11.5 ft.) away from
LN 54,034 at 15 cmbs (6 in.). This placed it near the bottom of a shell fill matrix that was
recorded as being the road base material. This description of the soil is close to that
recorded in the uppermost zone from a nearby profile taken during the monitoring
(Number 30 which was taken roughly 9.3 m [30 ft.] from where the artifact was found
[APPENDIX D]).

Further examination of this musket ball reveals that it has two markings on it indicating
that it was almost certainly fired rather than dropped. The first and more obvious is the
clear evidence of it having impacted against something at moderate to high velocity. The
impact has flattened one surface and somewhat deformed the rest of the ball (thus the
necessity of using weight and the Sivilich formula to determine the original caliber of the
ball). The second marking is what appears to be a slightly flattened band around the
circumference of the ball. Within this band is what the authors have identified as rifling.
The marks are faint and difficult to see without magnification and impossible to
photograph without specialized equipment. If this identification of these marking is
correct then the ball was fired from a large bore rifle and struck something downrange.

59
Discussion with colleagues and reenactors suggests that this ball could have been fired
from a musket bore version of the Baker Rifle (Douglas Scott, personal communication
January 17, 2013; Graeme Rimer, personal communication January 18, 2013) or from a
Hall Rifle (Charles Yates, personal communication January 17, 2013). However, all of
these sources have also suggested the possibility that there were civilian large bore
hunting rifles being made and sold during the same time period. Further analysis by an
expert may help confirm whether or not this ball was fired from a rifle and further
research may be able to determine, based on the grooves and angle of the rifling, what
sort of gun it was fired from. Determining the source of the metal using lead isotope
analysis may help determine whether the ball was fired from a Mexican or Texan
weapon.

Figure 14: Musket ball LN 54,043. Note flattened impact surface.

60
LN 54,051
This cast lead ball weighs 1.32 ounces (37.5 g) and measures at .74 caliber (Figure 15).
This size places it on the upper range of typical musket or rifle balls of the nineteenth
century. It is the largest (by the combination of weight and measurable caliber) of the
balls found during this investigation. It was found less than 70 cm (27.5 in.) from LN
54,043 and was recovered at 12 cmbs (4.5 in.). This was well within the crushed shell fill
matrix that was recorded as being the road base material. This description of the soil is
close to that recorded in the uppermost zone from a nearby profile taken during the
monitoring (Number 30 which was taken roughly 10.5 m [34 ft.] from where the artifact
was found [APPENDIX D]).

Figure 15: Musket ball LN 54,051.

61
LN 54,041
This lead buckshot ball weighs .07 ounces (20 g) and measures at .29 caliber using the
Sivilich formula (Figure 16). The formula was used because the shot was deformed by
dimpling. The deformation also precluded (at least at this stage of analysis) determining
whether the shot was cast or made in a shot tower using the freefall method. The
deformation of the shot indicates that it was, at the least, fired. It may have been part of
either a shotgun shell or a buck and ball round. The shot may have also impacted
something as there are multiple indentations that cause the deformation. The buckshot
was found at a depth of 10 cm (4 in.) roughly 17 m (55 ft.) from the cluster of musket
balls close to the causeway. It was found in a layer of what appeared to be clay fill soil of
local origin mixed with shell fragments and modern debris.

Figure 16: Buckshot LN 54,041. Note flattened surfaces.

62
The group of shots recorded as 54,034, 54,036, 54,041, 54,043, and 54,051 were all
recovered from soils that were observed to be fill which consisted of dense
concentrations of crushed roadbed shell in a matrix of dry sandy silt as deep as 35 cmbs.
This particular grouping of shot most likely comes from soils originally moved from an
area of the battlefield with a dense concentration of battle related artifacts. The most
likely source of this soil and shell mix is one of the old park roads predating the
construction of the San Jacinto Monument. According to copies of park plans provided to
Moore Archeological Consulting by SJBSHS staff these old roads, which were made
with crushed shell, were “scarified” (meaning, in essence, scraped clean and removed)
during the construction in the late 1930’s when modern paved roads were built to replace
the older shell roads. Some such material must have been salvaged and used to build up
the modern roads. It is likely that the scarification process was not a gentle one and that
some previously intact and artifact bearing soil beneath the original roads crossing the
battlefield was removed along with the shell. This supposition is born out by analysis of
aerial imagery taken during the construction process (particularly two images from 1939).
These images show evidence of extensive disruption of the soils under and adjacent to the
older park roads, in some cases impacting an area 40 m (131 ft.) wide. The depth or exact
cause of the impact is not certain, but the fact that it occurred is. This aerial interpretation
is further born out by MAC investigations in 2009 in the area near the traditional location
of the Mexican camp (Mangum and Moore n.d.). During these investigations MAC staff
observed a shallow, linear depression which precisely followed the alignment of the older
roads. Cross sections of the elevation of this depression were taken with a total station
and they confirmed an elevation change ranging from 20-50 cmbs (8-20 in.) between the

63
middle of the depression and the adjacent modern surface. This depth is significant when
you consider two additional factors; that most battle related artifacts are found within 30
cmbs (12 in.) and that few artifacts were found in this linear depression during all prior
MAC investigations of this area (one of the most intensively investigated parts of the
park with some of the highest density of BR artifacts recovered to date).

Other Battle Related Artifacts
LN 54,013
The artifact identified as LN 54,013 (Figure 17) was initially recorded as a historic metal
item. It is a ball shaped piece broken off of, at some point well in the past, a larger item
as evidenced by a break with patination and corrosion. It is made of either poor quality
bronze or of pewter. It is 20 mm (.8 in.) wide and 19.76 mm (.77 in.) long at the break
and it weighs 22.3 grams (.8 ounces).

It was found at 3 cmbs (1 in.) just north of the intersection of Vista Road and Park Road
1836. The soil it was recovered from appeared natural and intact. It is questionable
whether the nearest shovel test (ST4) and monitoring profiles (unique numbers 43 and
57) support that interpretation of the soil. Shovel test 4 found no evidence of fill and
profile 57 found the same. Profile 43 was recorded as having 0-22 cmbs (0-9 in.) of fill
soils and a thin lens of crushed shell from 22-25 cmbs (9-10 in.). Since the artifact was
found in between profiles 43 and 57 it is roughly 5 m (16 ft.) from each it is most likely
that the crew’s original interpretation of the soil as intact is correct.

64
After cleaning and upon a more detailed examination of the artifact it was determined to
most likely be battle related. Cleaning revealed that the piece was cast and that it had
once been gilt with a very thin layer of gold. Where the gold is most intact on the surface
is also where the least corrosion has occurred. The gilding (as opposed to simple plain or
polished brass or steel) suggests that this would have been a higher status object, possibly
the fragment of a weapon or other item associated with an officer or an individual of
means. Suggested origins include the pommel from a small dagger or knife, or possibly a
finial/ferrule from a swagger stick or fly whisk. The authors have seen similar objects in
simple online searches, however, it will take further analysis of the material and research
into similar items before any definitive identification can be made.

Figure 17: Artifact LN 54,013

65
LN 54,049
Artifact LN 54,049 (Figure 18) was the only definitively battle related artifact recovered
during this investigation. It is a cast bronze adjuster buckle 7.26 cm (3 in.) long, 2 cm (.8
in.) wide, .4 cm (.15 in.) thick, and weighs 17 g (.6 ounce). It is a simple loop type
adjuster lacking a tongue or cross piece of a sort most likely used to adjust slings for
rifles, shot pouches, or other equipment. Two other identical buckles, one with a tongue
and the other without, have been recovered during prior investigations in the Mexican
camp area (Mangum and Moore n.d.) and at the Surrender Site (Mangum and Moore
2010) in intact contexts, making identification of this artifact as battle related and
Mexican in origin relatively definitive. Identical buckles have also been found at the Palo
Alto battlefield in Mexican occupied areas of the battlefield (Haecker and Mauck
1997:158).

Figure 18: Bronze buckle LN 54049

66
However, the piece was recovered from disturbed context soils containing crushed shell
on the far eastern end of the project corridor (Figure 10) and less than 3 m (1 ft.) north of
the original water line (identified in place by the metal detectorists). The soil in the
excavation was identified as disturbed rather than fill and the consensus, based on the
soils observed in excavations in the immediate vicinity, was that the piece had been
displaced by the excavation of the trench for the original water line rather than
significantly moved from another locale. This supposition is neither fully supported nor
invalidated by the nearby monitoring soil profiles. Profiles 12 and 17 (15 and 17 m [4955 ft.] to the southwest respectively; APPENDIX D) showed a thin layer of disturbed but
otherwise natural soil. Profile 13 (10 m [33 ft.]) to the northwest) of the artifact had 0-18
cmbs of fill with shell over 18-22 cmbs of dense crushed shell. This latter appears to be
the remnant of the original shell roadway predating the construction of the newer
roadbeds in the late 1930’s. Based on these data points the authors feel it is most likely
that the artifact has been displaced but only moderately so. Both the historic and the
archeological record indicate that Mexican soldiers crossed this area during their
headlong retreat from the Texan attack. It is not difficult to imagine those soldiers losing
items of this sort in this area either by accident or intentionally (to lighten the load), or
because of loss of life.

General Historic Metal Artifact Collection
Historic Metal and Historic Other from the Initial Survey
A total of 52 items were recovered during the initial survey, of the project corridor
(Figure 19). Of these 45 (or nearly 90 percent) were identified as historic metal (HM) or

67
historic other (HO). This included indeterminate metal, square nails and spikes, hardware
(a sub-class of Historic Metal that included a wide variety of obviously non-battle related
items such as bolts, pipe fittings, automobile parts, and tools not immediately
recognizable as modern prior to cleaning), and horseshoes. Also found were modern
coins (a silver 1953 half dollar and a silver 1942 dime), blobs of melted lead, a lead
fishing weight, more recent bullets (such as three .50 caliber machine gun bullets, LN
54,035, 54,045, and 54,052), a silver ring later identified as modern (complete with a
James Avery maker’s mark), and a sizeable sandstone rock. The latter non-metal item
was found as a byproduct of the metal detecting (i.e. it was found while trying to reach a
metal hit).

No attempt has been made to conduct more than a basic analysis on the historic metal
artifacts (as well as the few historic others) which, after cleaning and initial assessment,
could not be determined to be battle related. Many of the artifacts were clearly from a
later time period than 1836 and some of significantly later date. Others were simply too
corroded for any identification to be made prior to conservation. Most of the rest, while
having some potential to be from the same period as the Battle of San Jacinto, were
unlikely to be something actually associated with the battle (i.e. it was unlikely that the
soldiers participating in the battle would have carried spikes in their pockets). Some of
these items, particularly in the “indeterminate metal” category may be recognizable as
specific items and potentially even as battle related artifacts after conservation.

68

Figure 19: Examples of historic metal items recovered during the initial survey.

69
Two complete and one partial horseshoes (Figure 19, top) were found during the initial
survey (LN 54,5015, 54,018 and 54,027;). These artifacts cannot be defined as potentially
battle related. Horseshoes are ubiquitous and have been around for a significant period of
time. Fullers and caulks as elements of horseshoe making appear to predate the battle of
San Jacinto by at least a few centuries. Horseshoe nails are historically square-headed and
remain so into the modern era. Further, horseshoes in general have so much variability
before the age of machine manufacturing as to preclude a precise determination of age
without a more intensive analysis or barring some distinctive features or material (i.e.
some modern shoes are made of materials other than iron). This is due to the wide range
of methodology in their making by individual farriers and blacksmiths. It is certainly
possible that these shoes are related to the battle of San Jacinto. It is more likely,
however, that these shoes were thrown at some time before or after the battle. Without a
more intensive analysis or other artifacts in context with these shoes it is not possible to
make a definitive determination.

Depth of Finds
Artifacts found during the initial metal detecting survey were found at depths ranging
from 3 cmbs to 24 cmbs (1-10 in.) (Appendix A). The average depth was 13 cmbs (5 in.)
with only 7 items being recovered at depths of 20 cmbs (8 in.) or more. Past experience
during prior MAC investigations at San Jacinto suggests that an average artifact depth of
15 to 20 cmbs (6 to 7.5 in.) is not uncommon (Karbula et al. 2004, Mangum and Moore
2005: Mangum and Moore 2010; Mangum et al. 2011).

70
SYNTHESIS
Despite the recovery of 52 artifacts during the metal detecting survey and monitoring of
the construction for this project, only a small number (n=7) were determined to be battle
related and all but one of those came from fill or disturbed soils. The vast majority of the
artifacts were historic metal or historic other items dating to later periods or, if potentially
dating to the battle period, were items unlikely to have been associated with the battle or
the military encampment.

It is highly unlikely that the low count of battle related artifacts found across the entirety
of the project corridor during this investigation is because no aspect of the battle occurred
on or near the corridor or because no artifacts from the battle happened to have been
dropped within the corridor examined. In the former case the historical and archeological
record simply provide too much evidence to the contrary. The latter option is more likely
since most battlegrounds are a mixture of dense clusters of artifacts surrounded by large
swaths of scarce and widely scattered items. If the alignment simply missed any
concentrations (always a possibility in archeological projects) then paucity of artifacts
would be the norm. Even so, the small handful of artifacts found, and most of those in
disturbed soils, seems an example of overabundant scarcity. It is rather more likely that
this scarcity has been supplemented by factors postdating the battle which have affected
the number of artifacts that could be recovered.

The most obvious of these factors is the major disturbances associated with the Roosevelt
Administration-era construction of the Monument, the Reflecting pool, and the removal

71
of the original park roads and the construction of their replacements. These large-scale
public works resulted in the wholesale excavation and removal of many truck-loads of
surface and deeper soils from the footprint of the pool, monument, and roads. The same
work also placed sterile fills over significant portions of the natural battleground surface.
Another source of exhaustive and destructive disturbance within the Battleground is the
presence of buried infrastructure, including the original water line which the current
project is replacing. This sort of disturbance is prevalent within the project corridor as
evidenced by the numerous profiles showing artificial fill and disturbed soils. It is almost
certain that at least some natural, intact surfaces have been buried beneath the fill soils in
particular, and that artifacts from the battle exist within these mantled soils beyond the
reach of current commercially available metal detecting technology.

Other factors are repeated (if mostly superficial and/or localized) impacts from
miscellaneous construction and modification to the landscape over the past century, and
undocumented collection of artifacts over at least the same length of time (particularly
over the last 50 years since metal detectors became common). These impacts have
potentially buried beyond the depth range of metal detectors or horizontally moved some
artifacts, and removed others entirely. Nevertheless, there is simply too much evidence in
the historical and archeological record indicating that the current project corridor
traverses locations known to be part of the greater battlefield to theorize that the scarcity
of battle related artifacts suggests nothing occurred here.

72
A final element to consider as to why the numbers of battle related artifacts were
relatively low on this project is the issue of the efficaciousness of metal detecting as the
primary method for archeological investigations on battlefield sites. Both the metal
detectors and their operators have limits as to how effective they are or even can be,
particularly when it comes to finding smaller and/or deeper artifacts. These limits can be
exacerbated by conditions such as variations in soil moisture, the height of grasses or
other ground cover, the angle of artifacts in the ground, sources of electromagnetic
interference such as power lines, even small amounts of new soils deposited atop the
natural surface, and many other factors. As a result, while most artifacts that are closer to
the surface and/or are larger will typically be recovered during metal detecting-based
archeological investigations, many others will likewise typically be missed entirely. A
prime example of this at the SJBSHS is Block 2 in the Mexican Camp area. This block
has been examined no less than five times over the course of eight years of project work
by MAC (Mangum and Moore n.d.). Further, this area has not been significantly
impacted by construction over the years, nor is it anywhere near power lines and there is
little evidence of significant looting here over the years. Despite these facts, each and
every incidence of metal detecting work in Block 2 has resulted in numerous battle
related artifacts being recovered. As a result we must conclude that no area examined as
part of a metal detecting archeological survey using currently available technology can be
considered empty of further metallic artifacts without other independent supporting
evidence. Though metal detecting remains the most efficient and effective method of
investigating battlefields, there is simply too much potential for artifacts to be missed
even with the most intensive coverage with the best metal detectors and operators.

73
RECOMMENDATIONS
Construction of the proposed water line improvements has already occurred. The
approval for the construction to proceed was based on agreement from the THC, with the
understanding that constant archeological monitoring would be maintained during
construction. These conditions have been fulfilled. Furthermore, the San Jacinto
Battleground (site number 41HR277) is listed as a National Historic Landmark (reference
number 66000815). The boundaries of the NRHP listing incorporate the entirety of the
current project area and provide an additional level of protection to the battleground. So
no portion of the Site is at any immediate risk from future impacts without significant
oversight. As a result this report makes no recommendations regarding the status of the
water line improvements project itself. Instead the recommendations are directed at the
artifacts recovered during this project and at the needs of the project corridor during any
future construction planned by TPWD. Potential future projects would likely be limited
to infrastructure improvements and the long anticipated landscape restoration.

Moore Archeological Consulting recommends that additional analysis be conducted on
the artifacts recovered during this investigation by appropriate experts. The questions
raised by the larger shot (particularly LN 54,043) could potentially be answered if further
analysis is conducted. Lead isotope signature analysis could determine the origin of the
lead and a ballistics examination of the bullets could determine for certain whether they
were dropped or fired and what, if anything LN 54,043 hit. Also further examination of
the base material of artifact LN 54,013 and of the gilt coating on it, as well as additional
research into its form and potential function could potentially add to our understanding of

74
the material culture of the Mexican army. These latter two items appear fairly unique if
minor artifacts within the context of the Texas Revolution and thus are worth the
additional examination.

Moore Archeological Consulting recommends that any future construction projects
within or adjacent to the current project corridor should involve an archeological
investigation involving metal detecting, particularly if the technology to conduct such an
investigation has improved. As previously discussed, there is simply too much potential
for missed artifacts (even concentrations) to assume that one examination, no matter how
thorough, recovered them all. This recommendation is all the more strongly made for any
project where construction is planned to occur in areas that were recorded, during this
investigation, as being mantled by fill soils. The dark, natural soils underneath the fill are
the remnants of the natural surface as it was in 1836. The potential for intact
archeological deposits relating to the battle in those natural surfaces is simply too strong
to ignore.

75
REFERENCES CITED
Abbott, James T.
2001

Houston Area Geoarcheology; A Framework for Archeological
Investigation, Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the
Houston Highway District. Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Division, Archeological Studies Program, Report
27.

Aten, Lawrence E.
1983

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. National Parks Service, United States
Department of the Interior. Washington, D.C.

Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2 (1):
93-117
Cartier, Robert R. and Frank Hole
1972

History of the McCormick League and Areas Adjoining the San Jacinto
Battleground. Part I of San Jacinto Battleground Archeological Studies,
1971-1972. Texas Antiquities Committee Permit Report No. 11.
Department of Anthropology, Rice University, Houston, Texas.

Cox, I. Wayne and Steve A. Tomka
2002 San Jacinto Battleground State Park: A Historical Synthesis and
Archeological Management Plan. Archeological Survey Report No. 318,
Center for Archeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

76
Ensor, H. Blaine
1991

Comments on Prehistoric Chronology Building in Southeast Texas.
Houston Archeological Society Journal, 98:1-11

Ewers, John C.
1974

The Influence of Epidemics on the Indian Populations and Cultures of
Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Volume 8: 104-115. Lincoln Nebraska

Fields, R., M. D. Freeman and S. M. Kotter
1983 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at Addicks Reservoir,
Harris County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of
Investigations 22. Austin.
Foote, Henry Stuart
1841

Texas and the Texans: or, Advance of the Anglo-Americans to the SouthWest. Thomas Cowperthwait & Co., Philadelphia.

Frederick, Charles D.
2007

Geoarcheological Evaluations of Portions of the San Jacinto Battleground,
Harris County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Letter Report No. 774.
Austin.

Gadus, Eloise F., and Margaret Ann Howard
1990

Hunter-Fisher-Gatherers on the Upper Texas Coast: Archeological
Investigations at the Peggy Lake Disposal Area, Harris County, Texas
(Volume 1). Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations Number
74. Austin.

77
Haecker, Charles M., and Jeffrey G. Mauck
1997

On the Prairie of Palo Alto: Historical Archeology of the U.S.-Mexican
War Battlefield. Texas A&M Press, College Station.

Hall, Grant D.
1981

Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos
River Valley, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 61.
Austin

Handbook of Texas Online
Entry for McCormick, Margaret by Margaret Swett Henson.
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/MM/fmcbs.html,
accessed 12 Oct., 2011
Hoffman, G. O., B. J. Ragsdale and J. Daniel Rogers
1969

Know Your Grasses. Texas Agricultural Extension Service. The Texas A
& M University System. College Station, Texas 90.

Ing, David J.
1996

Archeological Testing at the Battleship Texas Berth Enlargement: San
Jacinto Battleground State Historical Park September 1988. Document on
file, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.

Karbula, James W., Jonathan Jarvis and Rachel Feit
2004

Metal Detecting Along the Path of the Mexican Retreat at San Jacinto.
Hicks and Company Archeological Series No. 124

78
Mangum, Douglas G., Scott Butler, and Roger G. Moore
2011

Background Research and Archeological Investigations of Five
Alternative Locations for a Proposed Visitor’s Center at the San Jacinto
Battleground State Historic Site, Harris County, Texas. Moore
Archeological Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 560.

Mangum, Douglas G., David Driver, and Roger G. Moore
2012

An Archeological Investigation and Monitoring of the Wastewater
Improvement Project at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site,
Harris County, Texas. Moore Archeological Consulting, Report of
Investigations Number 596.

Mangum, Douglas G, and Roger G. Moore
2002

Archeological Investigation of the Phillips Ditch Rectification Project in
the San Jacinto State Historic Park, Harris County, Texas. Moore
Archeological Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 328

2005

Intensive Metal Detecting on Peggy Lake, Harris County, Texas. Moore
Archeological Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 457.

2010

Archeological Investigations at the NRG Property, Harris County, Texas.
Moore Archeological Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 547.

n.d.

An Omnibus Report on Archeological Investigations Conducted at the San
Jacinto Battleground State Historic Park, Harris County; 2003-2012
(working title). Moore Archeological Consulting, Report of Investigations
Number 610.

79
Moore, Roger G., and William E. Moore
1991 A Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 750 Acre Joseph S. and
Lucie H. Cullinan Park, Fort Bend County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 50.
Moore, Roger G., Douglas G. Mangum, H. Blaine Ensor, Kelly Schexnayder
2003 San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site, Harris County. As part of
“Texas Parks and Wildlife 2003 Annual Report to the Texas Historical
Commission”, Pg. 175
Moore, Stephen L.
2004

Eighteen Minutes: The Battle of San Jacinto and the Texas Independence
Campaign. Republic of Texas Press. Dallas, Texas.

Patterson, Leland W.
1983

Prehistoric Settlement and Technological Patterns in Southeastern Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Volume 54: 253-270.

1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, 66: 239-264

Sivilich, Daniel M.
1996

Analyzing Musket Balls to Interpret a Revolutionary War Site. Historical
Archeology, Volume 30:101-109.

Spearing, Darwin
1991

Roadside Geology of Texas. Mountain Press Publishing. Colorado

80
Story, D. A., Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha D. Freeman, Jerome C. Rose, D.
Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl J. Reinhard
1990 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain: Volume 1.
Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series. No. 38
Texas General Land Office
1896

Harris County, Texas General Land Office November 21, 1896. Compiled
and Drawn by Herman Pressler. Digital copy of map on file with Moore
Archeological Consulting. Houston, Texas.

Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
2001 Texas State Park Safety Manual – Living History. Self published by the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department. Austin, Texas.
Tharp, B. C.
1939

The Vegetation of Texas. Texas Academy of Sciences, Non-Technical
Series 1 (I-vi): 1-74 92

Tolbert, Frank X.
1959

The Day of San Jacinto. New York; McGraw-Hill Book Company.

Wheat, Joe Ben
1953

An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 154: 143-252. Washington, D.C.

Wheeler, Frankie F.
1976 Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and Forest Service. In cooperation
with Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.

81
Yoakum, Henderson King
1856

History of Texas: From its First Settlement in 1685 to its Annexation to
the United States in 1846. Redfield. New York.

82

APPENDIX A: Artifacts
Location
#
54001
54002
54003
54004
54005
54006
54007
54008
54009
54010
54011
54012
54013
54014
54015
54016
54017
54018
54019
54020
54021

Segment
2
3
3
3
4
4
5
5
5
6
6
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
9
9
9

54022
54023
54023
54024
54025
54026
54027
54028
54029
54030
54031
54032
54034
54035
54036
54037
54038
54039
54040
54041
54042
54043
54044

9
19
9
10
11
11
15
26
18
18
18
18
31
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
27

CMBS
12
19
17
19
10
9
8
20
17
10
5
8
3
15
15
17
7
5
10
28
28

Type
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
BR
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM

5
10
12
24
10
15
10
3
14
10
8
5
15
5
10
5
5
15
12
10
10
15
15

HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
HM
BR
HM
HM
HM
HM
BR
HM
BR
HO
HO
HM
HM
BR
HM
BR
HM

Artifact
Large Block of Iron
Square Spike
Short octagonal iron tube
Square Spike
Copper Weight
Indeterminate
Possible button piece
President Pendent
Square Spike
Wire Segment
Folded fake coin "Ole Sam"
Drain piece
Round Ball
Metal Handle
Horseshoe
Indeterminate Iron
File
Horseshoe
Metal rod or thick wire
Square Nail
Square Nail
Ceramic pipe piece with
metal
Indeterminate Iron
Square Nail
Lead Fragment
Indeterminate
Indeterminate iron
Horseshoe
Musket ball
Knife Blade
Knife Handle
Lead Fragment
Indeterminate
Musket ball
50 cal Machine Gun Shell
Musket ball
Large Sandstone Rock
Silver Ring

fishing weight
Melted Lead
Buckshot
Square Nail
Musket ball
Rivet

Count
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

83
54045
54046
54047
54048
54049
54050
54051
54052

23
24
25
25
Spur 3
21
21
21

10-15
10
22
22
15
15
12-15
20

HM
HM
HO
HO
BR
HM
BR
HM

50 cal Machine Gun Shell
Metal rod or thick wire
Coin-Half Dollar 1943
Dime-1942
Buckle
Copper Disc
Musket ball
50 cal Machine Gun Shell

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

84
Appendix B: Shovel Tests
ST
No.
1

Depth
0-12
12-33
33-42
47-60

2

0-12
12-40
40-60

3

0-10
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
50-60

4

0-10
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
50-60

5

0-9
9-22

Description
Grayish brown clay fill
Grayish brown clay- inundated with
broken oyster shell- fill
Grayish brown clay fill with some
reddish brown inclusions
10yr 3/1 very dark gray clay intact

Dark gray clay fill with shell
2.5y 2.5/1 Black clay wit few reddish
orange mottles
2.5y 3/2 Very dark gray brown clay

Very dark brown clay, dry, with roots
Very dark brown clay, dry, with roots
with some shell
Very dark brown clay, dry, with roots
with some shell
Crushed shell in upper 5 cmbs.
Brown black clay, very dense, basal
Brown black clay, very dense, basal
First 5cmbs is root zone then hits a
very dense, dry, dark brown clay
Dense, very dark brown clay, dry
Dense, very dark brown clay, dry
Dense, very dark brown clay, dry
with increasing density and moisture
Dense, very dark brown clay, dry
with increasing density and moisture
Dense, very dark brown clay, dry
with increasing density and moisture
10yr 3/2 Very dark gray brown clay,
dry, very hard. Probably either fill or
highly disturbed or pushed around
humic zone soil. Has crushed shell,
gravel, modern historic artifacts, and
trash.
10yr 3/2 Very dark gray brown clay,
moist and very firm, intact.

Comments
The item recovered from this unit
was a lead wheel balancing weight.
Fill to 47 cmbs.

Artifact found was a hexagonal
shaped iron nut.
Fill to 12cmbs.

No obvious fill but road shell lens
from 30-35 cmbs. This shovel test
plots perfectly over the pre-1937
roadway. Artifact found was iron
wire.

Had roots and occasional shell with
a screwtop bottle cap at 15cmbs.
No obvious fill

Artifact was a round nail at 10 cmbs
Fill to 9 cmbs

85

22-60

6

40-50
50-60

First 5 cmbs is root zone, then dark
brown dense clay
Very dark brown clay that is very
dense with some shell.
Very dark brown clay that is very
dense with some shell.
Very dark brown clay that is very
dense with some shell.
Very dark brown clay that is very
dense with some shell.
Black brown clay that is very dense

0-42

10yr 2/1 Black clay that is dry and
hard with many deep and wide
cracks, intact.

Artifacts found were a copper bullet
jacket and a pull tab in level 1 (010cmbs).

42-60

10yr 3/1 Very dark gray clay, moist
and firm with some calcium
carbonate concretions

No obvious fill

0-10
10-20
20-30
30-40

7

8

0-5
5-10
10-20
20-30

30-35
35-40
40-50
50-60

9

2.5y 3/2 Very dark gray brown clay,
moist and very firm, intact.

0-5
5-10
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
50-60

Root zone, sandy, silty and dry shell
Dry sandy silt with lots of shell, light
gray brown
Dense and compacted sand with
dense shell layer-fill
Dense and compacted sand with
dense shell layer-fill

Pull tab at 15cmbs
No obvious fill

Silver ring was found at 10cmbs.
Fill to 35cmbs

Dense and compacted sand with
dense shell layer-fill, light reddish
brown.
Dense very dark brown clay- still
slightly moist, natural.
Dense very dark brown clay- still
slightly moist, natural.
Dense very dark brown clay- still
slightly moist, natural.

Root zone with dark gray brown clay
Fill soil, orangish brown clay
Very dark brown clay, dense and dry
with some shell
Very dark brown clay, dense and dry
Very dark brown clay, dense and dry
Very dark brown clay, dense and dry
Very dark brown clay, dense and dry

In picnic area. Penny found at
15cmbs. Upper 20cmbs may be
redeposit.
Fill to 10cmbs

86
Appendix C: Photographs

Photograph 1: Beginning of project near monument on east side of Vista Road.

Photograph 2: Typical team of a steward, a metal detectorist, and an archeologist.

Photograph 3: Manually breaking up soil and utilizing pinpointer to locate artifacts.

87

Photograph 4: Working on Park Road 1836 at midpoint of project.

Photograph 5: Excavations in the Adams Picnic area on easternmost end of corridor.

Photograph 6: Shovel Test 1 profile.

88

Photograph 7: Shovel Test 2 profile.

Photograph 8: Shovel Test 3 profile. Note thin layer of crushed shell.

Photograph 9: Shovel Test 4 profile.

89

Photograph 10: Shovel Test 5 profile.

Photograph 11: Shovel Test 6 profile.

Photograph 12: Shovel Test 7 profile.

90

Photograph 13: Shovel Test 8 profile. Note dense layer of shell with natural soil beneath.

Photograph 14: Shovel Test 9 profile.

91

APPENDIX D: Monitoring Profiles
Unique #

Layer 1

Layer 2

Layer 3

1

0-20 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay. Disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

20-29 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay. Intact

29 - 110 2.5y5/4 light olive
brown clay w/ few calcium
carbonate concretions, Intact.

2

0-20 10yr2/1 black clay.
Disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

20-41 10yr2/1 black clay,
intact.

41-72 2.5yr4/4 olive brown
clay, intact.

3

0-16 10yr2/1 black clay.
Disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

16-40 10yr2/1 black clay,
intact.

40-72 2.5yr3/1 very dark gray
clay w/ few reddish orange
mottles.

4

0-29 dark grayish brown
clay fill w/ shell and
modern debris.

72-115 2.5y 5/4 light
olive brown clay w/ few
calcium carbonate
concretions.

29-40 reddish yellow clay
fill

40-76 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
intact.

20-40 gray clay fill w/
shell & gravel.

40-50 light yellowish brown
clay fill

50-68 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, truncated but
intact.

78-110 10yr4/2 dark grayish
brown clay, intact.

110-126 10yr5/4
yellowish brown clay,
intact.

38-80 2.5y4/2 dark grayish
brown clay, intact.

80-118 2.5y5/3 light
olive brown clay, intact.

74-103 2.5y3/2 very dark
grayish brown clay, intact.

103-138 2.5y4/4 olive
brown clay, intact.

39-90 2.5y3/1 very dark gray
clay, intact.

90-128 10yr4/3 olive
brown clay w/ few
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

0-20 dark gray sandy clay
loam fill

6

0-30 gray loamy clay fill w/
shell & modern debris.

30-78 10yr2/1 black
loamy clay, intact.

7

0-19 very dark gray clay
disturbed w/ shell & historic
debris.

19-38 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, truncated but
intact.

0-36 10yr2/1 black sandy
clay loam, disturbed w/
shell & modern debris.

36-74 10yr2/1 black
loamy clay, intact.

0-15 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

15-39 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, intact.

9

72-126 2.5yr5/4 olive
brown clay.

76-110 2.5y5/4 light
olive brown clay w/ few
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

5

8

Layer 4

Layer 5

Layer 6

92

93-126 2.5y5/4 light
olive brown clay w/ few
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

10

0-18 10yr2/1 black clay
disturbed w/ shell.

18-40 10yr2/1 black
loamy clay, intact.

40-93 2.5y4/2 dark grayish
brown clay, intact.

11

0-17 10yr2/1 black clay.
Disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

17-53 10yr2/1 black
loamy clay, intact.

53-82 2.5y4/2 dark grayish
brown clay, intact.

12

0-12 10yr2/1 black clay.
Disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

12-50 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, intact.

50-105 10yr4/2 dark grayish
brown clay, intact.

105-122 2.5y5/3 olive
brown clay w/ calcium
carbonate concretions,
intact.

13

0-18 shell inundated clay
fill.

18-22 solid crushed shell
lens.

22-40 10yr2/1 black clay,
intact.

40-117 2.5y3/1 very
dark gray clay w/
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

14

0-10 10yr3/1 very dark
clay, disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

10-22 10yr3/1 very dark
gray loamy clay, intact.

0-13 10yr2/1 black clay,
disturbed.

13-114 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, intact.

15

16

17

0-10 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

0-23 10yr3/1 very dark gray
loamy clay, disturbed w/
shell & modern debris.

10-25 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, intact.

23-37 10yr3/1 very dark
gray loamy clay, intact.

82-119 2.5y4/4 olive
brown clay, intact.

22-127 2.5y4/2 dark grayish
brown clay, intact.

114-127 7.5yr4/6 strong
brown clay w/ calcium
carbonate concretions, intact.

25-130 2.5y4/3 olive brown
clay w/ calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

130-195 2.5y5/3 light
olive brown clay w/
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

195-255 mottled
10yr5/8 yellowish
brown & 10yr7/1 light
gray clay w/ calcium
carbonate
concretions, intact.

37-122 10yr3/2 very dark
grayish brown clay, intact.

122-152 10yr6/4 light
yellowish brown sandy
clay w/ calcium
carbonate concretions,
intact.

152-174 10yr6/1 gray
clayey sand w/
10yr5/4 yellowish
brown mottles, intact.

174-211 10yr5/6 yellowish
brown clay w/ 10yr7/2 light
gray mottles and calcium
carbonate concretions, intact.

93

0-45 mottled clay fill.

45-55 crushed shell lens.

55-75 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
intact.

75-150 2.5y4/3 olive
brown clay w/ calcium
carbonate concretions,
intact.

0-19 black clay fill w/ shell
& modern debris.

19-49 10yr3/1 black
loamy clay, intact.

49-83 2.5y3/2 very dark
grayish brown clay, intact.

83-142 2.5y6/4 light
yellowish brown clay,
intact.

9-.35 10yr2/1 black clay,
truncated, intact.

35-75 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay w/ 7.5yr4/6 strong
brown mottles, intact.

75-114 2.5y6/4 light
yellowish brown clay w/
2.5y7/2 light gray
mottles, intact.

0-10 black clay fill with
shell & modern debris.

10-20 crushed shell lens.

20-56 10yr2/1 black loamy
clay, intact.

56-90 2.5y3/2 very dark
grsyish brown clay,
intact.

90-119 5yr4/4 reddish
brown clay, intact.

0-31 disturbed very dark
gray clay w/ shell &
modern debris.

31-65 10yr3/1 very dark
gray loamy clay,
truncated but intact.

65-117 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

0-15 2.5y3/1 very dark gray
disturbed clay w/ shell &
modern debris.

15-32 2.5y3/1 very dark
gray loamy clay, intact.

32-88 2.5y3/2 very dark
grayish brown clay, intact.

88-115 2.5y4/1 dark
gray clay, intact.

115-120 2.5y4/4 olive
brown clay, intact.

24

0-30 10yr3/1 very dark gray
loamy clay, disturbed w/
shell & modern debris.

30-122 10yr3/1 very dark
gray loamy clay w/
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

25

0-18 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

18-29 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, truncated but
intact.

29-62 2.5y4/2 dark grayish
brown clay, intact.

62-127 2.5y6/6 olive
yellow clay w/ calcium
carbonate concretions,
intact.

18

19

20
0-9 disturbed black clay w/
shell & modern debris.

21

22

23

26

0-16 2.5y2.5/1 black loamy
clay, disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

16-44 2.5y2.5/1 black
loamy clay, intact.

44-71 2.5y4/2 dark grayish
brown clay, intact.

71-103 2.5y4/3 olive
brown clay, intact.

150-215 5yr4/6
yellowish red clay w/
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

103-122 10yr5/4
yellowish brown clay
w/ calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

215-225 2.5y6/2 light
brownish gray clay.

94

27

28

29

0-19 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.
0-1710yr2/1 black disturbed
clay w/ shell & modern
debris.

19-21 crushed shell lens.

17-40 10yr2/1 black
loamy clay, intact.

21-59 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, truncated but intact.

59-111 2.5y3/1 very
dark gray clay, intact.

40-78 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, intact.

78-130 2.5y3/1 very
dark gray clay w/
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

0-24 10yr2/1 black
disturbed clay w/ shell &
modern debris.

24-31 10yr2/1 black clay,
intact.

31-95 2.5y3/1 very dark gray
clay, intact.

95-115 2.5y5/3 light
olive brown clay w/
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

0-20 crushed shell lens.

20-27 10yr2/1 black clay,
disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris, truncated
but otherwise intact.

27-40 10yr2/1 black loamy
clay, few FeMg concretions,
intact.

40-82 2.5y4/3 olive
brown clay, intact.

82-119 2.5y6/3 light
yellowish brown clay,
intact.

22-46 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
intact.

46-101 2.5y4/2 dark
yellowish brown clay,
intact.

101-127 2.5y5/4 light
olive brown clay w/
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

30

31

32

0-18 black clay fill w/ shell.

18-22 crushed shell lens.

0-15 10yr2/1 black
disturbed clay w/ shell &
modern debris.

15-56 10yr2/1 black clay,
truncated but otherwise
intact.

56-84 2.5y4/2 dark grayish
brown clay, intact.

84-96 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, intact.

96-115 2.5y5/4 light
olive brown clay w/
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

24-28 crushed shell lens.

28-38 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
intact.

38-90 2.5y4/1 dark gray
clay, intact.

90-122 2.5y4/2 dark
grayish brown clay,
intact.

0-14 black clay fill w/ shell.

14-23 crushed shell lens.

23-68 10yr2/1 black clay,
intact.

68-81 2.5y4/2 dark
grayish brown clay,
intact.

81-120 2.5y2/1 black
clay, intact.

0-30 dark gray clay fill w/
shell & modern debris.

30-34 crushed shell lens.

34-120 2.5y2.5/1 black clay
w/ FeMg concretions, intact.

0-18 dark gray clay fill w/
shell & modern debris.

18-20 crushed shell lens.

20-122 10yr2/1 black clay,
intact.

0-29 black clay fill w/ shell
& modern debris.

29-33 crushed shell lens.

33-133 2.5y2.5/1 black
loamy clay, intact.

33
0-24 black clay fill w/ shell.
34

35

36

37

111-122 2.5y4/1 dark
gray clay, intact.

95

38

39

40

41

0-19 dark gray clay fill w/
shell & modern debris.

19-24 crushed shell lens.

0-18 10yr3/1 very dark gray
loamy clay, disturbed w/
shell & modern debris.

18-123 10yr3/1 very
dark gray loamy clay.

0-16 dark gray disturbed
clay w/ shell & modern
debris.

16-40 2.5y3/2 very dark
grayish brown clay,
truncated but otherwise
intact.

0-17 2.5y2.5/1 black
disturbed loamy clay w/
shell & modern debris.

17-122 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, intact.

24-119 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
intact.

40-120 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
intact.

0-26 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, fill w/ shell & modern
debris.

26-30 crushed shell lens.

30-80 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
truncated but otherwise
intact.

0-22 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, fill w/ shell & modern
debris.

22-25 crushed shell lens.

25-114 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay.

0-18 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, fill w/ shell & modern
debris.

18-22 crushed shell lens.

22-31 10yr3/1 very dark gray
loamy clay, disturbed w/
shell & modern debris.

45

0-11 2.5y2.5/1 black
disturbed loamy clay w/
shell & modern debris.

11-120 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, truncated but
otherwise intact.

46

0-27 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

27-85 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

85-126 5yr4/6 yellowish red
clay, intact.

0-16 black fill w/ shell &
modern debris.

16-20 crushed shell lens.

20-65 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
truncated but otherwise
intact.

0-15 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, fill w/ shell & modern
debris.

15-21 crushed shell lens.

21-138 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

42

43

44

47

48

119-127 10yr3/1 very
dark gray clay, intact.

80-121 10yr3/1 very
dark gray clay, intact.

31-131 10yr3/1 very
dark gray clay, intact.

65-95 2.5y4/1 dark gray
clay, intact.

95-129 10yr4/1 dark
gray clay, intact.

96

49

15-19 crushed shell lens.

19-40 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
intact.

40-121 2.5y3/1 very
dark gray clay, intact.

0-13 clay fill

13-16 crushed shell lens

16-19 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

19-119 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

0-20 dark gray clay, fill w/
shell & modern debris.

20-24 crushed shell lens.

24-75 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, intact.

75-120 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, intact.

0-26 clay fill

26-31 crushed shell lens.

31-123 2.5yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

53

0-13 2.5y2.5/1 black
disturbed clay w/ shell &
modern debris.

13-40 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, intact.

40-84 2.5y4/1 dark gray clay,
intact

84-125 2.5yr3/1 very
dark gray clay, intact.

54

0-20 2.5y2.5/1 black clay
fill w/ shell & modern
debris.

20-31 crushed shell lens.

31-102 2.5y2.5/1 black clay
contains wood and iron
artifacts, intact.

102-127 10yr3/1 very
dark gray clay, intact.

0-16 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

16-116 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

56

0-10 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

10-127 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

57

0-24 2.5y3/1 very dark gray
disturbed clay w/ shell &
modern debris.

24-94 2.5y3/2 very dark
grayish brown clay, intact.

58

0-15 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

15-105 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

0-15 dark gray clay fill w/
shell & modern debris

50

51

52

55

59

60

0-30 very dark gray clay,
fill w/ shell & modern
debris.

30-40 crushed shell lens.

0-19 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

19-122 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay w/ calcium
carbonate concretions,
intact.

94-117 2.5y4/2 dark grayish
brown clay, intact.

40-100 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
truncated but otherwise
intact, calcium carbonate
concretions.

100-110 10yr3/1 very
dark gray clay w/ calcium
carbonate concretions,
intact.

97

61

62

63

0-18 dark gray clay,
disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

0-8 10yr3/1 very dark gray
loamy clay, intact.

31-104 2.5y5/2 grayish
brown clay w/ few orange
mottles & calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

104-113 2.5y4/2 dark
grayish brown clay.

30-48 10yr4/1 dark gray clay,
intact.

30-137 10yr3/1 very
dark gray clay, intact.

0-12 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

40-119 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.
12-46 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay w/ calcium
carbonate concretions,
intact.

46-126 10yr4/1 dark gray
clay w/ calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

0-10 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
disturbed w/ shell.

10-30 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, intact

30-123 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

0-9 10yr3/1 very dark gray
loamy clay, intact.

9-137 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay w/ calcium
carbonate concretions,
intact.

0-34 10yr2/1 black clay w/
few red mottles, intact.

34-114 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

0-10 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

10-93 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

93-114 10yr4/1 dark gray
clay, intact.

69

0-44 10yr3/1 very dark gray
clay, intact.

44-119 2.5y3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

119-132 2.5y4/1 dark gray
clay, intact.

70

0-22 10yr3/1 very dark gray
loamy clay, intact.

22-90 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

90-124 2.5y5/2 grayish
brown clay, intact.

0-32 dsrk gray clay fill w/
orange & tan inclusions &
shell & modern debris.

32-56 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, truncated but
otherwise intact.

56-124 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay, intact.

64

65

0-40 10yr3/1 very dark gray
loamy clay, intact.

18-31 2.5y4/1 dark gray
clay, truncated but
otherwise intact.
8-30 10yr3/1 very dark
gray clay w/ calcium
carbonate concretions,
intact.

66

67

68

71

98

72

0-22 2.5y2.5/1 black clay,
disturbed w/ shell &
modern debris.

0-26 grayish brown clay fill

73

22-80 2.5y2.5/1 black
clay, intact.

80-100 2.5y5/2 grayish
brown clay w/ calcium
carbonate concretions, intact.

100-127 5yr5/6
yellowish red clay w/
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

26-40 brownish red clay
fill w/ calcium carbonate
concretions.

40-95 grayish brown clay fill
w/ calcium carbonate
concretions.

95-120 2.5y5/2 grayish
brown clay w/ calcium
carbonate concretions,
intact.

120-134 5yr5/6
yellowish red clay w/
calcium carbonate
concretions, intact.

