Archeological Construction Monitoring and other services for
Phase 2, Proposed Improvements in David G. Burnet Park,
Harris County, Texas

Texas Antiquities Permit 5647

by
Kelly E. Schexnayder

Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
Houston, Texas
Report of Investigations Number 577
September 2010

Archeological Construction Monitoring and other services for
Phase 2, Proposed Improvements in David G. Burnet Park,
Harris County, Texas

Texas Antiquities Permit 5647
MAC Project Number 10-16

by
Kelly E. Schexnayder

Prepared for
Clark Condon Associates
and
Harris County Precinct 2,
Houston, Texas

Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
Houston, Texas
Report of Investigations Number 577

September 2010

ABSTRACT
In May and June of 2010, Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc. (MAC) monitored pier
drilling and re-excavation at the David G. Burnet Park on the north shore of Burnet Bay,
in the historic community of Lynchburg in east Harris County, Texas. The park is
approximately 3 acres and the site of the David G. Burnet farmstead (41HR407). The
project area is depicted on the Highlands, Texas 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle map
(Figure 1). This monitoring was conducted at the request of Clark Condon Associates
for Harris County, Precinct 2, under Texas Antiquities Permit Number 5647.
The project area, which included plans for a pavilion, picnic area and kitchen, measured
approximately 130 feet E/W and 64 feet N/S. The objective was to monitor the
following: the scraping to locate a privy feature identified in a previous survey (Carlson
1998), the re-excavation of two 4-ft deep foundation excavations, and the drilling of the
building piers (particularly those in the area of the privy feature).
The field investigations were conducted by project archeologist Kelly E. Schexnayder
and crew chief Randy Ferguson. Roger G. Moore served as the project’s principal
investigator.
The privy feature was not disturbed and no new features were encountered. Material
culture was collected from backfill. Although none of the artifacts can be said to be
associated with the Burnet homestead, they appear to be from a temporal period of mid
19th to early 20th century. There was little if no contamination from modern twentiethcentury activity within the backfill. Due to lack of context and very few diagnostics,
MAC is requesting not to curate the artifacts.

i

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT.....................................................................................................................i
TABLE OF CONTENTS .............................................................................................. ii
LIST OF FIGURES ...................................................................................................... iii

Introduction.....................................................................................................................1
Environmental Background ...........................................................................................3
Cultural Background.......................................................................................................4
Previous Archeological Investigations ...........................................................................7
Field Methods and Results..............................................................................................8
Artifacts Recovered from backfill ......................................................................9
Recommendations.........................................................................................................14
REFERENCES CITED ................................................................................................15

ii

LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE
1.

David G. Burnet Park project area, east Harris County, Texas (Highlands
Quad, US)..................................................................................................2

2.

Location of the Project Area within Burnet Park....................................10

3.

Photo of exposed privy feature ...............................................................11

4.

Pavilion design layout indicating the location of the piers and the privy
feature......................................................................................................12

5.

Re-excavation of the 4 feet deep slab on the west side of the pavilion .13

6.

Example of the first 3 feet of soil pulled out by the auger .....................13

iii

INTRODUCTION
(particularly those in the area of the privy
feature).

In May and June of 2010, Moore
Archeological Consulting, Inc. monitored
pier drilling and re-excavation at the David
G. Burnet Park on the north shore of Burnet
Bay, in the historic community of
Lynchburg in east Harris County, Texas.
The park is approximately 3 acres and the
site of the David G. Burnet farmstead
(41HR407).
The project area, which
included plans for a pavilion, picnic area and
kitchen, measured approximately 130 feet
E/W and 64 feet N/S. The objective was to
monitor the following: the scraping to locate
a privy feature identified in a previous
survey (Carlson 1998), the re-excavation of
two four feet deep foundation excavations,
and the drilling of the building piers

This monitoring was conducted at the
request of Clark Condon Associates for
Harris County, Precinct 2, under Texas
Antiquities Permit Number 5647.
The
project area is depicted on the Highlands,
Texas 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle
map (Figure 1). The field investigations
were conducted by project archeologist
Kelly E. Schexnayder and crew chief Randy
Ferguson. Roger G. Moore served as the
project’s principal investigator.

1

Figure 1. Map of the David G. Burnet Park project area, east Harris County, Texas (Highlands
Quad, USGS).

2

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

Climate

Soils and Geology
Harris County is located within the
West Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic
province (Hunt 1974). In the Texas region,
the surface topography of the plain is
characterized by relatively flat topography
that dips slightly towards the Gulf of
Mexico. Geologically, the project area lies
atop the Beaumont Formation, a surface
outcrop that extends from just east of the
Mississippi River in Louisiana, to
Kingsville, Texas (Bureau of Economic
Geology 1982).
The formation was
deposited during a series of glacial and
interglacial events during the Middle to Late
Pleistocene. Extensive riverine downcutting
and erosion of the formation occurred during
the periods of lower sea levels associated
with the Wisconsin glaciation. During the
Holocene, after sea levels rose once more,
the resulting river valleys filled with alluvial
soils, creating broad, level floodplains.

The modern climate of the Harris
County study area is moderated by winds
from the Gulf of Mexico, resulting in mild
winters and relatively cool summer nights
(Wheeler
1976:2,
66).
Summer
temperatures average 92°F (33°C), while
winter temperatures average 64°F (18°C).
Annual precipitation averages 46 inches
(117 cm).
Hydrology
The property is located along the
north shore of Burnet Bay, a part of the
Galveston Bay system. Burnet Bay forms at
the confluence of the San Jacinto River and
Buffalo Bayou.
Flora and Fauna
Harris County lies within the
Austroriparian biotic province (Blair
1950:98-101). Not determined by a marked
physiographic break, the western boundary
of this province is loosely identified by the
distribution of pine and hardwood forests on
the eastern Gulf coastal plain. The county is
situated within the pine-oak subdivision of
the Austroriparian province (Tharp 1939).
Blair (1950) lists the dominant floral species
of the pine-oak forest subdivision as loblolly
pine (Pinus taeda), yellow pine (Pinus
echinata), red oak (Quercus rubra), post oak
(Quercus stellata), and blackjack oak
(Quercus marilandica). Hardwood forests
are found on lowlands within the
Austroriparian and are characterized by such
trees
as
sweetgum
(Liquidambar
styraciflua),
magnolia
(Magnolia
grandiflora), tupelo (Nyssa sylvatica), water
oak (Quercus nigra), and other species of
oaks, elms, and ashes, as well as the highly
diagnostic Spanish moss (Tillandisia
usneiodes) and palmetto (Sabal glabra).

The property is depicted on sheet 97
of the Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas
(Wheeler 1976). Two soil types have been
identified in the project area: Lake CharlesUrban land complex (Lu) in the western half
of the property, and Vamont-Urban land
complex (Vn) in the eastern half of the
property. Areas identified as Urban land
include soils that have been altered or
covered by buildings or other structures
(e.g., dwellings, office buildings, parking
lots, etc.). Lake Charles soils are described
as somewhat poorly drained with very slow
surface runoff (Wheeler 1976:18-19).
Vamont soils are described as somewhat
poorly drained with slow surface runoff
(Wheeler 1976:22). Based on the PALM
predictive model developed by Abbott
(2001), both soil types are upland clayey
ancient (pre-Holocene) alluvium with a low
potential for containing deeply buried
prehistoric sites.

Blair (1950) and Gadus and Howard
(1990) identify the following mammals as
common within the Austroriparian province:
3

Howard 1990:15). Common land turtles
include eastern box turtle (Terrapene
carolina) and Terrapene ornata, while
snapping turtle (Chelydra serpentinia), mud
turtle (Kinosteron spp.), river cooter
(Chrysemys concinna) and diamondback
terrapin (Malaclemys terrapin) comprise
common water turtles. Common lizards
include Anolis carolinensis, Sceloporus
undulatus, Leiolopisma laterale, Eumeces
laticeps, Cnemidophorus sexlineatus and
Ophiosaurus ventralis.
Snakes and
amphibians are also present in considerable
numbers and diversity.

white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus),
muskrat (Ondatra zibethicus), raccoon
(Procyon lotor), coyote (Canis latrans),
opossum (Didelphis virginiana), Scalopus
aquaticus, Pipistrellus subflavus, Lasiurus
borealis,
Sciurus
niger,
Sciurus
carolinensis, Glaucomys volans, Geomys
breviceps,
Reithrodonomys
fulvescens,
Peromyscus leucopus, Oryzomys palustris,
cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus), packrat
(Neotoma floridana), eastern cottontail
(Sylvilagus floridanus), and swamp rabbit
(Sylvilagus aquaticus). Bison (Bison bison)
may have been present on nearby grasslands
at various times in the past (Gadus and

CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The earliest period of occupation in
southeast Texas is identified as the
Paleoindian stage. Based on the earliest
securely dated appearance of populations in
the New World, this stage begins around
11,000-10,000 B.C., and lasts for
approximately 4000 years. During this time,
it is proposed that populations continued
with a highly nomadic hunting tradition
brought with them from the Old World.
Traditional models emphasize the heavy
reliance that these groups placed on the
hunting of the large mammals of the
Pleistocene. Plant foods and small game
undoubtedly supplanted this diet, and may
have played a more important role than
previously thought (Black and McGraw
1985; Patterson 1995).
Artifact types
associated with this phase include various
fluted and non-fluted lanceolate projectile
points, such as Clovis and Folsom. In
general, due to a paucity of well-stratified
older sites, the Paleoindian stage remains
poorly defined in southeast Texas.

Southeast Texas Culture History
The project area is located within
the southeast Texas archaeological region
(Patterson 1995; Story et al. 1990). The
culture history of the region extends back at
least 12,000 years into the past. A number
of researchers have compiled chronological
frameworks to describe the cultural histories
of the area (Aten 1983; Ensor 1991;
Patterson 1995; Shafer et al. 1975; Story et
al. 1990). The majority of these divide
human occupation into four broad stages,
Paleoindian, Archaic/Lithic, Ceramic/Late
Prehistoric, and Historic. The stages are
based on a proposed sequence of economic
strategies as they are revealed through the
archaeological and/or historical record.
These proposed shifts in dominant lifeways
consider
cultural,
economic,
and
technological factors in order to provide a
heuristic model useful for attempting to
understand ancient and early historic
populations. While the dates assigned to the
period interfaces are based on "absolute"
dating methods, they of course represent a
generalized time range for the implied
cultural evolution. The dates provided in the
following discussion will be drawn from
Ensor (1991) and are presented in Table 1.

By 8000 B.C., the Late Wisconsin
glaciation had ended, increasing climatic
aridity and creating extensive changes in the
environment. As a result, the majority of
Pleistocene megafauna became extinct. This
required drastic changes in the dominant

4

specializes in a regionally circumscribed and
repetitive exploitation of specific floral and
faunal resources. By remaining in familiar
territory, the nomadic populations were able
to better exploit the various resources
available within their local environment.

subsistence strategies of the affected
populations. By 8000 B.C., the start of the
Early Archaic stage, the remaining southeast
Texas populations had adapted to the
environmental changes by shifting to a
lifeway dominated by seasonal scheduling.
This type of subsistence economy

Table 1. Archeological Chronology for Southeast Texas (after Ensor 1991).
Time Period
Paleoindian
Early Archaic
Middle Archaic
Late Archaic
Early Ceramic
Late Ceramic
Historic

Dates
10,000-8000 B.C.
8000-5000 B.C.
5000-1000 B.C.
1000 B.C.-A.D. 400
A.D. 400-800
A.D. 800-1750
post A.D. 1750

1000-1300 has been used to suggest the
presence of extended trade networks or
migration during this time (Aten 1983). The
period has also been associated with the
introduction of the bow and arrow around
A.D. 600 (Aten 1983).

However, research has suggested
that human population densities remained
low in the area, and may have even
decreased significantly during this time
(Moore and Moore 1991). Eventually, the
stabilization of the climate by around 1000
B.C., the start of the Late Archaic, appears
to have led to increasing populations. This
rise in regional population may have been
further facilitated by the development of
long-distance
trade,
technological
innovations, and changing social relations
(Patterson 1995).

Historic Overview
European contact in the region
began in the early 16th century with the illfated Narváez expedition that, in 1528,
deposited Cabeza de Vaca onto the Texas
coastline, possibly on Galveston Island.
More long-term contacts resulting from
permanent European settlement did not
directly impact aboriginal lifeways in
southeast Texas until the early 18th century
(Patterson 1995).
However, European
diseases introduced by explorers and early
traders had begun to affect Native American
populations in Texas by the 16th century
(Ewers 1974). Throughout the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries, epidemic diseases,
the mission system, and the fur trade
seriously reduced, and in some cases
exterminated, the indigenous populations
residing in the region.

The final prehistoric period in
southeast Texas is marked by the emergence
of ceramics. Ceramic artifacts appear in the
archaeological record of the Galveston Bay
area by approximately A.D. 100, and by
A.D 500, had been adopted by a number of
inland populations (Pertulla et al. 1995). A
plain, sand-tempered type of ceramic
identified as Goose Creek became prevalent
during the period, although a number of
decorated varieties and tempering materials
were also present (Patterson 1995; Pertulla
et al. 1995). The appearance of Caddoan
pottery in southeast Texas around A.D.

5

279 acres of land, and included a main
house, four outbuildings (detached kitchen,
storage crib, two slave houses) and several
fenced fields. From 1831 to 1836, Burnet
ran a sawmill located a short distance away,
on the San Jacinto River. He became active
in the administration of the Texas Republic
and early State, becoming a District Judge in
1834, President ad interim (1836), Vice
President (1838), Secretary of State (1839,
1846-1847),
President
(1840),
and
Congressman (1866). After his wife died in
1858, Burnet sold the farm (1865) and
moved to Galveston, where he died in 1870.

Anglo-American settlement in the
Harris County area began in the early 1820s,
with a number of Mexican land grants
awarded in 1824 (Henson 1996). The
modern boundaries of the county were
established as Harrisburg County by the
Texas Congress in 1836, and it was renamed
Harris County in 1839. The presence of the
highly navigable Buffalo Bayou stimulated
economic development of the county, and of
the city of Houston in particular. The
establishment of six railroad lines in the area
prior to the Civil War further stimulated
economic prosperity, and helped lure a
steady stream of settlers to the region. By
the second decade of the 20th century, the
growing gas and oil industry was competing
with agricultural interests, and helped create
a significant boom in population.

The property continued to be
occupied into the mid-20th century, though
with little attention given to its original
owner.
However, in 1947, Burnet’s
ownership of the property was recognized,
and the tract was given to Harris County. In
1980, an approximately 100 by 100 meter
area of what is now Burnet Park was
recorded as archeological site 41HR407.

The Burnet farmstead, named
Oakland, was established around 1831 by
David G. Burnet and his wife, Hannah
(Carlson 1998). The farmstead consisted of

6

PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

Previous investigations conducted
within the general area date back to the
1950s, and have been summarized by Hoyt
and Schmidt (1996:45-47).
Surveys
conducted by members of the Houston
Archeological Society during the mid- to
late-1950s focused on the San Jacinto River
and Galveston Bay shorelines. Sites located
during these surveys were later revisited by
McGruff and Ford (1973, 1974), and
information concerning degradation and loss
of shoreline was submitted to the Texas
Historical Commission and the Texas
Archeological Survey at the University of
Texas.

Prior
to
beginning
field
investigations,
Moore
Archeological
Consulting, Inc. performed a background
investigation of archeological and historical
literature relevant to the project area.
Literature examined for this project includes
site inventory records on file at TARL,
previous archeological investigative reports
on file at the Texas Historical Commission
(THC)
and
Moore
Archeological
Consulting, Inc. and other published
literature pertinent to the current project.
The David G. Burnet homesite was
first recorded as an archeological site by the
Baytown Historical Museum in 1980.
Personnel from the museum observed and
collected artifacts from a 100 by 200 ft area
in the southeast corner of the park.
According to the site form (TARL records),
the recovered artifacts included ceramics
(pearlware, ironstone, stoneware), patinated
bottle glass, window glass, and cut nails.
Observed artifacts included strap metal,
Rangia shells, bone, brick, and mortar. The
collected artifacts were curated at the
Baytown Historical Museum. However,
there were no subsurface investigations
conducted at that time to verify the location
and condition of potential archeological
deposits.

During the 1990s, Espey, Huston,
and Associates conducted archival research
in an effort to identify areas of potential
significance along the Houston/Galveston
Navigational Channels (Foster et al. 1993).
The search identified 103 previously
recorded sites and found evidence for over
600 potential sites, including portions of the
old townsite of Lynchburg. Also, Wagner
and Fields (1994) researched an abandoned
cemetery complex within the historic
townsite, and Wagner (1994) later
documented land-use history of the town.
Hoyt et al. (1995) refined the research of the
Foster
et
al.
(1993)
and
made
recommendations for investigations. The
study by Hoyt and Schmidt (1996) was
designed to assess the potential for
preservation of sites in Lynchburg given the
prevalence of destruction by natural factors,
such as storms and hurricanes.

In 1997, Moore Archeological
Consulting conducted an intensive survey of
the site (Carlson 1997). The investigations
were conducted under Texas Antiquities
Permit No. 1821, and included the
excavation of 27 shovel tests and five
backhoe trenches in the eastern side of the
park. A total of 493 historic artifacts were
recovered, and two historic features were
identified.

7

FIELD METHODS AND RESULTS

within which the privy was found. All
excavation was completed by a trackhoe
with a “smooth” clean-out blade. First the
select fill was removed, followed by the
native soil fill and lastly the replaced native
soil (excavated in 2007 to locate the
feature).
Beneath this last layer was
undisturbed natural soil. Within this the
intact portions of the privy pit were located.
Bits of black plastic typically used to line
excavations before they are backfilled was
noted on the northeastern corner of the
initial excavation rectangle.
It was
presumed that this plastic was the same
placed by MAC after the conclusion of the
privy testing. The trackhoe shifted to
excavate the area centered on this exposure
of plastic. Further excavation exposed the
privy just as it had been left it in 2007
(Figure 3). After this the County surveyors
shot in the privy corners so that its location
could be transferred to the project plans.
The pavilion pier system design was to
include a 1 ft buffer zone around the intact
privy deposits (Figure 4).

The fieldwork at site 41HR407 was
conducted in May and June of 2010. It
consisted of the archeological monitoring of
the following: the scraping to locate a
historic pit feature (thought to be a privy),
pier drilling and the re-excavation of two 4
ft deep foundation excavations. The privy
feature, discovered and tested in two earlier
investigations (Carlson 1997, Driver 2007),
measured approximately 2.5 m wide and 2.0
m deep, and appeared to have been partially
lined with vertical wood planks
The project area is depicted on the
Highlands, Texas 7.5' USGS topographic
quadrangle map (see Figure 1). It sits within
an approximately three acre park area
located on the north shore of Burnet Bay, in
the historic community of Lynchburg.
The park is roughly rectangular in
shape, and is bounded by Burnet Road on
the north and Hillcrest Road on the south.
The western two-thirds of the property
contain two extant softball/baseball fields,
and are covered by manicured lawns of San
Augustine and Bermuda grasses.
The
eastern third of the park contains a
playground, pathways, and a granite
monument, and is also covered in wellmanicured lawn grasses and a light density
of pecan and bois d’arc trees. Planned
construction impacts are limited to the
eastern side of the park which will be a
pavilion flanked on either side by a kitchen
picnic area and picnic area (Figure 2). The
project area measured approximately 130
feet E/W and 64 feet N/S. Below the
pavilion floor plan is the previously
identified privy. The pad to the west is to be
the kitchen picnic area and the pad to the
east will be a picnic area.

The second objective was the reexcavation of the two adjacent foundation
areas to the pavilion footprint which had
previously been excavated to a depth of 4
feet without archeological monitoring. The
trackhoe scraped down until Beaumont clay
was reached at 3- 4 feet down. The
stratigraphy revealed 2 feet of select fill
overlaying 1 ½ feet of dark gray loamy clay
(disturbed natural soil) on top of olive clay
(Figure 5). Artifacts were observed in the
west pad within the disturbed natural zone,
below select fill. Cultural materials included
ceramic, glass bottle fragments, flat glass,
square nails, and brick and mortar
fragments. These artifacts were observed
and collected as a general collection with no
provenience. No artifacts were observed in
the east pad and there were no features in
either the west or east foundation
excavations.

The first objective was to relocate
the privy feature. The excavation began
along the northern boundary of the area that
the county surveyors had laid out as the
boundary of our previously scraped area,

8

The third objective was to monitor
the drilling of the pavilion piers. The
drilling of the piers and associated bells was
performed by Specialty Drilling using a
simple truck-mounted hydraulic auger
(Figure 6). The auger bit was 3 feet long
and 1 foot wide, thereby making the holes
about 1 ½ feet in diameter. A total of 73
piers holes were drilled; 54 of them were
located
within
the
main
pavilion footprint. There was only one pier
to fall within the privy footprint and it was
in the backhoe trench/disturbed portion.
Each hole was excavated 12 feet below the
surface, well into intact soil. The transition
from select fill to natural (disturbed soil) to
undisturbed soil occurred within 4 feet.
There was a strong show of caliche at about
7 feet below surface. The soil from one
auger pulled up brick fragments from the
disturbed zone; other than this no cultural
materials were observed.

Artifacts Recovered from the Backfill
Material culture observed during
monitoring included historic ceramic, glass,
square nails, and handmade brick. All of
the artifacts came from backfill and a
selection was chosen as a general collection,
therefore they have no provenience.
The variety of ceramics recovered
consisted mostly of undecorated whitewares;
decorated whitewares included blue and
brown transferprint. Other ceramic types
collected were yellow ware, stoneware and
ironstone. Only one ceramic had a maker’s
mark dating to the mid to late 1800s.
Although none of the artifacts can be said to
be associated with the Burnet homestead,
they consist of a temporal period of mid 19th
to early 20th century. There was little if no
contamination from modern twentiethcentury activity within the backfill.

No features were observed during
the monitoring and all artifacts were
collected as a general collection.

9

Figure 2. Location of the Project Area (in black) within Burnet Park. The central pavilion floor
plan is flanked on either side by the kitchen picnic area (west) and the picnic area (east).

10

Figure 3. Exposed top of the privy feature. Note the orange flagging and pink line which mark
the corners of the feature. The black plastic is from the conclusion of the privy testing in 2007.

11

Figure 4. Pavilion design layout indicating the location of the piers and the privy feature.

12

Figure 5. Re-excavation of the 4 feet deep foundation on the west side of the pavilion.

Figure 6. Example of the first 3 feet of soil pulled out by the auger.

13

RECOMMENDATIONS

In
2010,
Clark
Condon
Associates and Harris County Precinct 2
requested MAC to monitor the pier
drilling prior to construction of the
David G. Burnet Park pavilion. In
addition, MAC was to locate a
previously identified feature as well as
monitor the re-excavation of two select
fill foundations adjacent to the pavilion.

of the artifacts can be said to be
associated with the Burnet homestead,
they appear to be from temporal period
of mid 19th to early 20th century. The one
clearly diagnostic artifact was a maker’s
mark dating to the mid to late 1800s.
There was little if no contamination from
modern twentieth-century activity within
the backfill.

In May and June of 2010, the
privy feature was successfully located
and mapped in by surveyors. The
pavilion pier design ensured that the
remaining portion of the unexcavated
portion of the privy will be protected
from disturbance and its contents
preserved
for
possible
future
investigations. During the pier drilling
and re-excavation of the two adjacent
foundations, the monitoring process
confirmed that the privy feature was not
disturbed and that no new features were
identified throughout the rest of the
project area.

Due to the fact that the artifacts
were collected from backfill and have no
context,
Moore
Archeological
Consulting is requesting permission not
to curate.
Moore Archeological Consulting
recommends that if any new impacts to
the project areas are planned, additional
investigations of the feature should be
conducted.
In the event that
archeological deposits or features should
be
encountered
during
current
construction, work should cease in the
immediate vicinity and the Archeology
Division of the Texas Historical
Commission contacted for further
consultation.

A selection of artifacts was
collected from backfill. Although none

14

REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, James T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology; A Framework for Archeological Investigation, Interpretation, and
Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District. Texas Department of
Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Archeological Studies Program, Report 27.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York
Black, Stephen L., and A. Jochim McGraw
1985
The Panther Springs Site: Cultural Change and Continuity within the Upper Salado Watershed,
South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 100. Center for Archaeological Research,
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Blair, Frank W.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117
Bureau of Economic Geology
1982
Geologic Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Carlson, Shawn Bonath
1997
Archeological Investigations at the David G. Burnet Park (41HR407), Harris County, Texas.
Report of Investigations No. 204. Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc., Houston.
Ensor, H. Blaine
1991
Archeological and Historic Investigations of the Harris County Lease in Barker Reservoir, Harris
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 2. Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Ewers, John C.
1974
The Influence of Epidemics on the Indian Populations and Cultures of Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 8:104-115.
Fields, Ross C., and Jack M. Jackson
1984
Archeological and Historical Investigations at 41GV14 and 41GV15, Galveston County, Texas.
Reports of Investigations No. 34. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Foster, Eugene, John Gilvar, and Steven D. Hoyt
1993
Archival Research, Houston-Galveston Navigational Channels, Texas Project, Galveston, Harris,
Liberty and Chambers Counties, Texas. EH&A Document No. 920918. Prepared for the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District, Austin.
Gadus, Eloise F., and Margaret Ann Howard
1990
Hunter-Fisher-Gatherers on the Upper Texas Coast: Archeological Investigations at the Peggy
Lake Disposal Area, Harris County, Texas (Volume 1). Reports of Investigations No. 74. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Hoyt, Stephen D., and James S. Schmidt
1996
National Register Testing in the Lynchburg Townsite, Harris County, Texas: Lynchburg Pump
Station Feasibility Study. Espey, Huston, and Associates, Inc., Austin.

15

Hoyt, Stephen D., Eugene R. Foster, and James S. Schmidt
1995
Intensive Archival Research, Close-Order Survey, Magnetometer Survey, Dating and Offshore
Diving, Houston-Galveston Navigational Channels, Texas Project, Galveston, Harris, Liberty and
Chambers Counties, Texas, Offshore, Galveston Bay, and Hosuton Ship Channel. EH&A
Document No. 950271. Prepared for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District,
Austin.
Hunt, C. B.
1974
Natural Regions of the United States and Canada. W. H. Freeman, San Francisco.
Kovel, Ralph, and Terry Kovel
1986
Kovels’ New Dictionary of Marks: Pottery & Porcelain, 1850 to the Present. Crown Publishers,
Inc., New York.
Lange, Frederick W., and Shawn Bonath Carlson
1985
Distributions of European Earthenwares on Plantations on Barbados, West Indies. In The
Archeology of Slavery and Plantation Life, edited by Theresa A. Singleton, pp. 97-120. Academic
Press, Inc., New York.
Moore, Roger G., and G. Z. Moore
1991
Cypress Creek and Northern Harris County: A History. In Archaeological Survey of Cypress
Creek from Spring Branch to Kuykendahl Road, Harris County, Texas, edited by H. Blaine Ensor,
pp. 12-32. Archaeological Surveys No. 8. Archaeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Patterson, Leland W.
1995
The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:239-264.
Pertulla, Timothy K., Myles R. Miller, Robert A. Ricklis, Daniel J. Prikryl, and Christopher Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:175-235.
Shafer, H. J.
1972
An Assessment of the Archeological Resources to be Affected by the Cedar Bayou Navigation
Project, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, University of Texas. Research Report no. 6.
Shafer, Harry J., Edward P. Baxter, Thomas B. Stearns, and James P. Dering
1975
An Archeological Assessment of the Big Thicket National Preserve. Anthropology Laboratory
Research Report 17. Texas A&M University, College Station.
Story, Dee Ann, Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha D. Freeman, Jerome C. Rose, D. Gentry Steele,
Ben W. Olive, and Karl J. Reinhard
1990
The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain: Volume 1. Arkansas Archeological
Survey Research Series, No. 38.
Tharp, B. C.
1939
The Vegetation of Texas. Texas Academy of Sciences, Non-Technical Series 1:1-74.
Toulouse, Julian Harrison
2001
Bottle Makers and Their Marks. The Blackburn Press, New Jersey.
Wagner, Janet K
1994
Additional Archival Research Documenting Land-Use History for the Lynchburg Pump Station
Feasibility Study, Harris County, Texas. Letter Report No. 398. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.

16

Wagner, Janet K., and Ross C. Fields
1994
Historical Research on the Lynchburg Cemetery, Harris County, Texas. Letter Report No. 397.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Wheat, J. B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site: An Archaeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 154:143-252
Wheeler, Frankie F.
1976
Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station and the
Texas State Soil and Water Conservation Board.

17

