Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

October 16, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2012-55: A Cultural Resources Survey of the 475-Meter Martin Dim
A Pipeline in Western Dimmit County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our cultural resources background review of the 475-Meter
Martin Dim A Pipeline right-of-way (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Martin Dim A Pipeline on county-wide topographic map.

Figure 2. Martin Dim A Pipeline on Asherton (1992) topographic map.

Background Review
Old Maps, Aerial Photographs, Historic Research
Diagnostic projectile points such as Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview types found in Dimmit County
indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000 years. Plentiful food sources such as wild
game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable. Early technology included tools from wood
and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes, and a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a
throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness of their spears (Hester 1984; Leffler 1996).
Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery and to hunt with bows and arrows.
"During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians native to Dimmit County
were squeezed out by other Indian who were migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were
moving up from the south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila.
Apaches and Comanches moved in to take their place" (Leffler 1996).
"No permanent Spanish settlement seems to have been established in the future Dimmit County.
Beginning in the late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio
Road, a camino real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. After the Mexican War of
Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its citizens to settle in Texas.

Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that included territory now in
Dimmit County. None of the recipients seems to have made use of the land, however. By 1836, when
Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated almost solely by Indians"
(Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of Dimmit County lay in the
disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for desperate
characters until about 1865. Carrizo Springs was founded in 1865, with the new settlers who lived
in jacals or dugouts frequently being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part tobeing
pursued by the Texas Rangers, and being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave
Dimmit County by 1877, and in 1880 Carrizo Springs became the county seat for the newly formed
county. By 1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also an
important part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators
combined to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
Although the residents of Dimmit County learned to cope with the sparse annual rainfall, artesian
wells ushered in an era of large vegetable truck farms in the 1890s, and Dimmit County became
known as part of the Texas Winter Garden Region, one of the most prolific vegetable-growing areas
in the country.
As with rest of the nation, the Great Depression many of the county's farmers were forced to cut back
their once-lucrative vegetable production during the depression, and fell back on raising poultry,
hogs, and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county in the
1950s certainly bolstered Dimmit County's economy, and although large ranches lay claim to most
of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively increasing part
of the county's development (Leffler 1996).
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the Dimmit County
area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts
of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the
hunter-gatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his experiences
in 1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves to the easily
exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer, occasionally sending a hunting
party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each other in the
semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents (Campbell and
Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are
documented accounts of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to
establish any sort of permanent structures (Chipman 1992).
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the Martin Dim A Pipeline
passes through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. A standard source of
review is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs available at the Perry
Castañeda Library at the University of Texas at Austin. In this case, the only map found was a 1939,

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers topographic map (Map 2012). This map shows no structures existing
on or near the Martin Dim A Pipeline at that time. Technically, any structures older than 45 years
are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be considered
when the lateral is constructed.
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Other than early work done by A. T. Jackson in 1932, perhaps the earliest systematic archaeological
survey in Dimmit County was conducted by Thomas Hester and Parker Nunley in 1964 and 1965.
Their work resulted in the documentation of 24 archaeological sites in the county, ranging in age
from the Early Archaic through the Late Prehistoric Toyah phase (Nunley and Hester 1966).
However, other surveys in the county since that time have resulted in a total of 160 archaeological
sites being documented in the county as of October 10, 2012. Of these, 99 are prehistoric open
campsites ranging in age from the Paleoindian through Late Prehistoric periods. Prehistoric burials
have been discovered at four of these campsites. Prehistoric lithic scatters and lithic procurement
sites account for 50 of those documented. Historic sites documented in the county include houses
from the 1800s built of stone (one with a cowboy burial), farmstead operations, and a railroad berm
from the 1800s. Other sites of interest include a carved Indian petroglyph, and other petroglyphs near
Campo de los Cuervos. The only designated State Archaeological Landmark in the county is the
Dimmit County Courthouse (Atlas 2012).
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say
what bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of Dimmit County before then.
Only cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and apparent
lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods. Archaeologists have
documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites, including large open campsites that are
most commonly located along stream or river terraces with numerous campfires, where a wide
variety of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal remains are found.
Where gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient
gravels are sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or
prehistoric quarries.
Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the lack
of cultural resource surveys near the Project Area (PA) that would have located sites, rather than the
probable non-existence of sites. In fact, the PA lies to the west of a large archaeological survey
conducted in anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al. 1981).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both Live
Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000 years
ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and gathering
natural food resources available in the area. In addition, archaeologists from the Center for
Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted archaeological
investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir. A number of different types of
structures were investigated, the purpose being to extract as much information as possible about
architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns during the last half of the 19th century within the
reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met
the challenges of living in a frontier area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming
of law and order, railroads, and modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).

A review of the Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites indicated that there are no previously
documented archaeological surveys or sites within one mile of the proposed Martin Dim A Pipeline.
However, as shown in Figure 2, TAAI has conducted a survey of the NHL Pearsall Lateral Line,
resulting in the discovery of no sites within one mile of the proposed Martin Dim A Pipeline
(Nickels 2011).

Soils
The Martin Dim A
Pipeline crosses
three soil types that
offer varying depths,
sedimentation and
deposition rates, and
broad, shallow
streams course
through the area. As
such, the soils and
their
proximity to streams
likewise imply the
potential for the
preservat i on of
intact cultural
resources to exist.
Figure 3 shows the
soils that there are to
be intersected by the
Martin Dim A
Pipeline (Web Soil Figure 3. Soils to be dissected by the Martin Dim A Pipeline .
Survey 2012). Table 1
then presents a brief description of each type, and their potential to contain buried and intact cultural
deposits.
Table 1. Soils to be Dissected by the Martin Dim A Pipeline .
Buried and Intact Archaeological
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Brundage fine sandy loam (Bu)

Deep loamy soils on terraces adjacent

Moderate to High to about 26

to small creeks

inches below the surface

Deep loamy soils on convex-form

Minimal to Moderate to about 20

uplands

inches below the surface

Deep loamy soil on gently undulating

Minimal to Moderate to about 30

uplands

inches below the surface

Brystal fine sandy loam (ByB)

Tonio fine sandy loam (TOB)

Potential

Field Survey Goals, Methodology, and Levels of Effort
Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey, along with limited shovel testing. The topics addressed were site
type, distribution, density, size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical framework is structured
around patterns of settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems for the South Texas region.
The goals of the project were to:
1)
locate and record cultural locations and sites in the project area using a systematic survey
methodology;
2)
quantify site size, as well as depth, and stratigraphy; and,
3)
place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.
Methods and Levels of Effort
Three archaeologists conducted an intensive 100-percent pedestrian survey along the pipeline,
meandering back and forth
across the 100-foot width of
the right-of-ways. Surface
visibility ranged from 70 to
100 percent (see for
example, Figure 4). All
cutbanks, and rodent and
mammal backdirt piles
along the right-of-way were
thoroughly examined. One
area of particular interest
was the right-of-way
crossing at El Barrosa
Creek. The creek has a fairly
steep cut bank at this point
with areas of pooled water
and ground disturbance by
feral hogs and livestock.
This area is shown in Figure
5. In accordance with a Figure 4. Martin Dim A Pipeline right-of-way; facing northwest.
general “no collection”
policy, cultural material of a redundant nature, both prehistoric and historic, were not to be collected.
Instead, they were to be fully documented via sketches, field photographs, and copious notes.
Exceptions were to be made for diagnostic artifacts, particularly those artifacts which could be
considered as significant to the interpretation of Texas prehistory, such as Early Archaic-Paleoindian
transitional, or Paleoindian diagnostics. These were to be collected on a case-by-case basis, and that
decision was left up to the Principal Investigator and/or the Project Archaeologist. Historic buildings,
trash scatters, or other historic occurrences adjacent to the ROW were to be documented with
photographs and included in this report of investigations. Two shovel tests were dug along El

Figure 5. Crossing at El Barrosa Creek.

Figure 6. Location of Isolated Finds and Shovel Tests.

Barrosa Creek (Figure 6) in
20-cm levels, and all
sediments were screened
through 1/4-inch wire mesh.
Following our designed
research plan, any artifacts
recovered from shovel tests
were not to be collected, but
were to be placed in the
upper 10 cm of the
backfilled shovel test. The
results of shovel testing
were fully documented on
Shovel Test forms, are on
file at the Tierras Antiguas
Arch aeological
Investigations office in
Martindale, Texas, and are
available upon request.

Results of the Investigations
Pedestrian Survey and Shovel Testing
A thorough surface examination revealed heavily eroded and plowed surfaces south of El Barossa
Creek (see for example, Figure 4), and eroded and deflated soils north of the creek. Two bifacial
manufacturing flakes were found north of the creek, and are described below. Shovel testing on the
north side of El Barrosa Creek revealed roughly 20 cm of brown sandy clay overlying brown clay
to a depth of 60 cm. On the south side, light brown fine sandy loam within a heavily disturbed plow
zone of approximately 30 cm transitioned to brown sandy loam. No artifacts were found in either
of the shovel tests.
Isolated Finds (IF)
Two isolated artifacts found on the periphery of the Martin Dim A Pipeline were designated as
Isolated Finds 1 and 2 (Figure 6). Both specimens are tan, non-heat treated, fine-grained, bifacial
manufacturing chert flakes with no cortex. Specimen 1 (IF1) measures 3.1 cm long x 2.1 cm wide.
Specimen 2 (IF2) measures 2.3 cm long x 2 cm wide. They were found on a highly eroded clay pan
surface roughly 100 meters northwest of the El Barrosa Creek crossing, on a gently sloping surface.
As non-diagnostic isolates, they are considered as non-significant.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Based upon the lack of archaeological sites documented within close proximity to the proposed
Martin Dim A Pipeline, negative results of shovel testing adjacent to El Barrosa Creek, and the at
best minimal potential for significant archaeological deposits to exist in the upland soils in the area,
we recommend that construction of the Martin Dim A Pipeline as currently aligned be allowed to
proceed as planned, with no further archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that
if any previously undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development of the
pipeline, such finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified
archaeological consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
October 10, 2012].

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.
Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke
Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series:
Volume 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Hester, T. R.
1984 Fragments, Flints, and Footprints: The Prehistory of Dimmit County. In Dimmit
County Mesquite Roots, Volume I, pp. 1-6, edited by L. K. Tidwell. Wind River
Press. Austin, TX.
Leffler, J.
1996

Dimmit County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 6, pp. 645-648.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Map
2012

Big Wells U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Map, 1939. Perry Castañeda Library
Map Collection. [Accessed June 15, 2012].

Nickels, D. L.
2011 A Cultural Resources Survey of the 13.8-Mile NHL Pearsall Pipeline from the
Pistol Well Pad to the NHL Pearsall Pad, Dimmit County, Texas. Archaeology
Report #60. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.

Nunley, P., and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. XVIII, No. 3, pp. 233-253.
Perry Casteñeda Library
2012 Perry Cesteñeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed October 10, 2012].
Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2012 Dimmit County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed October
10, 2012].

