PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Forty, Number Five, May, 2019

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Andy Burchard
Miranda Bible
Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller

Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

4

Program Information:

4a

Courthouses of Texas

5

TAS Field School

6-7

From the Editor’s Desk
This month we will be hearing from Rick Day (p. 4) on the subject of Ranald MacKenzie (1840-1899) and his
probable campsite on the Pease.
As we know, ultimately archaeology is not about stones and bones; it’s about people. And very
few people had a more dramatic life or military career than did Ranald Slidell MacKenzie .
The following site has a few items of interest, beginning with this list::
https://civilwartalk.com/threads/ranald-s-mackenzie.81708/
Let's start with ten things you may not have known about Mackenzie....
1) His father, a well-known author, took his mother's maiden name.
2) His uncle was John Slidell....the U.S. Ambassador to Mexico who later became a Confederate ambassador to England,
famous for being seized on the Trent in 1861.
3) His aunt was the wife of Commodore Matthew C. Perry, who opened Japan and its trade to the West.
4) He had two brothers, both high-ranking Naval officers.
5) He graduated from West Point in 1862.
6) In three years he received seven brevets and six wounds. One would give him his "nickname" among the Comanches-Bad Hand
7) He was originally assigned to the frontier in the 41st Infantry, an African American Regiment. Eventually he would
take command of the 4th Cavalry and be assigned to forts such as McKavett, Clark and Concho.
8) In 1872 he led a raid against the Kickapoo into Mexico and pretty much ended their border raiding.
9) In 1874, he led the raid on Palo Duro Canyon, destroying five Comanche camps and 1,500 horses, ending the
Comanches' ability to hunt and raid effectively, and pretty much ending the Red River War.
10) In 1883, after being assigned to head the Department of Texas, he planned to marry and settle down on some land
near Boerne (a beautiful Hill Country town near San Antonio), but became seriously ill and ended up being escorted to
New York, where he was first placed in an insane asylum and after his release to his family, committed suicide.
****
But to continue the Editor’s Note:
MacKenzie graduated from West Point, first in his class. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant called him the "most promising young
officer" in the Union Army. He was not popular with his men, who referred to him as the “Perpetual Punisher.” He
seems to have seen battles and raids all over the Plains. Sent to avenge Custer’s defeat, he helped to bring a close to the
Black Hills War. Next he was named as commander of New Mexico, and then of Texas in 1883. His increasing mental
instability led to his retirement from the Army on March 24, 1884 for "general paresis of the insane."
He died, apparently by his own hand, in 1899, and is buried in West Point National Cemetery.

2

Panhandle Archaeological Society
Minutes of the April 2019 Meeting
The meeting was called to order by President Veronica Arias at 7:22 p.m. in the Amarillo Downtown Library.
There were 19 persons in attendance.
PROGRAM: The program for the evening was supposed to be “Peopling of the New World: Central Controversies
of the 21st Century” by Dr. Bonnie Pitblado; however, she became ill at the last minute. Fortunately, our own Scott
Brosowske presented on the forum he sat on at the Society for American Archaeology (SAAs) about the relationship
between collectors and professionals. Starting in the 1960s and 70s there were new state and federal laws and regulations about preserving archaeological sites. These brought a rift between collectors and professionals and at least a
couple of generations of professional archaeologists were taught not to work with collectors. He shared a little about
his background and how he got into archaeology. He came from a collecting family, and through some chance meetings he went to college to become a professional archaeologist. In 2016 the SAAs decided they needed a task force to
create a statement to be published about working with collectors. This task force was chaired by Bonnie Pitblado,
who then asked Scott to be on it. The task force transitioned to an interest group in 2017 and opened up dialog that
had not been present before. They learned that about 95% of professionals think it is a good idea to work with collectors
MINUTES: Paul Katz moved that the March Minutes be approved as published in PASTIMES. This was seconded
by Alvin Lynn and the Minutes were accepted.
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: I gave the publications report in Rolla’s absence. I reported a beginning March balance of $2446.87, we gained $1.72 in interest, with an ending March balance of $2448.59 in the Money Market Account. The ending balance was $5,185.50 in the Certificate of Deposit.
OLD BUSINESS: Beryl is stepping down as newsletter editor. Erin Frigo has volunteered to take this task on. It was
discussed that the newsletter is a reflection on the society, not the editor, so please send anything related to the editor.
It doesn’t have to be elaborate. A short summary of a museum you visited would be good.
May 17 is Lamar Science Day. We will be doing a Rock Art activity with the kids. If you are interested let Paul Katz
know.
TAS field school will host a public Archaeology Fair Thursday, June 13 from 4 to 8 pm. We will be doing corn
grinding. We only have one more meeting before the field school.
NEW BUSINESS: Scott announced that planning is going well for the TAS annual meeting.
The meeting adjourned at 8:35 p.m.
Respectfully submitted,
Miranda Bible, Substitute Secretary

3

Upcoming Events
May 15

7:00 p.m.

Regular meeting, PAS. Amarillo Public Library, Downtown Branch, Upstairs.

5:30 p.m.

Please join us for our pre-meeting dinner, Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor.

May 17, all day

Lamar Elementary School Introduce students to archaeology.
Email Paul Katz katzes-priam@msn.com if you can help.

June 8-15

TAS Field School, Palo Duro Canyon

July 15-16-17

Canyonlands: Trip to Big Bend, three nights. Rick Day, Richard Galle, Carol
Campbell, and Ellen Fowlkes have visited the park if you have questions.

October 11-13

TAS Annual Meeting, Amarillo.

October 16-19

Plains Anthropological Society conference, Bloomington, Indiana
SWFAS will be here next year. Watch for details.

*****

PROGRAM INFORMATION
May 15, 2019
Colonel Mackenzie on the Pease River
Rick Day
Abstract-----It is well known that Colonel Mackenzie
camped on the Middle Pease River during the Red River
War. What has not been known is exactly where the 1874
campsite is located. Because of artifacts found on one tributary of the Middle Pease River, that site may have been
found.

Bio----- I am currently a Science teacher at Lockney Middle
School. I have been a Long time member of T.A.S., past
member/president of Midland arch society, current president
of Canyonlands Arch Society and T.H.C. Arch Steward.

4

THE FAMOUS COUNTY COURTHOUSES OF TEXAS
DALLAM COUNTY
Present County Seat: DALHART; Original County Seat: Texline

2nd Dallam County Courthouse —1903

Remodeled

The first courthouse in Dallam county, a two-story wooden structure, was built in 1891, in the original county seat,
Texline. Still standing in 1970, it is gone now.
The Red River Wars, 1874-75, marked the removal of the Kiowa and Comanches, and the arrival of Anglo-American settlers. The county was formed, like several other counties in the Panhandle, from Bexar in 1876, and organized in 1891.
The coming of the railroad compelled the formation of a new town, named Dalhart because it is in both Dallam and Hartley counties. It was elected County seat in 1903, and a new courthouse was built that year. It is said that most early hearings concerned cattle rustling, bootlegging, and gambling.
In 1879 the Texas Legislature appropriated three million acres of land to finance a new state Capitol building. The Capitol
Syndicate was contracted to erect the building in exchange for the land. The State paid cash for the rest of the cost. Originally intending to use the virtually vacant land only temporarily for pasture, the group imported longhorn cattle from south
and central Texas. They planned that later they would build towns and lure investors and settlers, but when this began to
look dubious, they erected fences and formed the XIT, ranch. The name signified either “Ten in Texas,” since it covered
all or most of ten counties, or “Biggest in Texas.” It was certainly the largest tract of land anywhere to be enclosed in
barbed wire. The ranch was dissolved in 1912, but it lives on in the memories of the Great Plains and of cowboys everywhere. Even movie cowboys.
Dallam County was named for James
Wilmer Dallam (1818–1847), a native of Baltimore, who moved to
Matagorda in 1839. A lawyer, he is
the author of A Digest of the Laws of
Texas: Containing a Full and Complete Compilation of the Land Laws;
Together with the Opinions of the
Supreme Court.

3rd Dallam County Courthouse —1922
5

Founder and editor of the Colorado
Herald, a Matagorda weekly, his
motto was, "Give me liberty to
know, to utter, and to argue freely,
above all liberties." He died of yellow fever (age 29) in New Orleans,
and is buried in Matagorda.

6

7

