PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Forty-one, Number Five, May 2020

President
Erin C. Frigo
Vice president
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Andy Burcham
Miranda Bible
Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Monarch_In_May.jpg

Newsletter Editor
Erin C. Frigo

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Program Information

4

Upcoming Events

5

Suggested Activities for Volunteering and Outreach

6

https://pixabay.com/images/search/spring/

2

Minutes of the Last Meeting:
Our last meeting was cancelled due to COVID-19 concerns. Therefore,
there are no minutes to report. Wishing you all a great summer!

https://mymodernmet.com/christian-spencer-rainbow-hummingbird/

3

Program Cancellation:

Dear members of the Panhandle Archaeological Society,
I am very sorry, but our meeting for this month must be cancelled as well. Even with
some businesses and institutions beginning to open up now, it still doesn’t seem like a good idea.
Also, for those of you who have not heard, the Texas Archeological Society has cancelled
their 2020 summer field school. They have also cancelled their 2020 annual meeting. In place of
the fundraising efforts/events that they would be doing at the annual meeting, they are now holding an ebay auction. For anyone who may not have received their email with the links to the auction, I will forward you that email after sending out this newsletter. They have also postponed
their Ceramics Academy and Archeology 101 Academy. The new dates for those events have not
been decided at this time.
We are still hoping to be able to do some fun activities and outreach at some point. Andy
has proposed that, when things calm down, perhaps we can do the fieldwork activities that were
planned for the Southwestern Federation participants. Rolla has also brought up that this summer
marks the 50th anniversary of the Panhandle Archaeological Society, and has suggested that we
plan some kind of celebration in honor of this anniversary, again when things have calmed down.
Maybe we could have a meeting dedicated to the anniversary or some other separate celebration
aside from the Studer Banquet. Maybe even just a fun time at a local park with cake and ice
cream to celebrate! I’d be down for that! Let me know what you all think and if you have any
other ideas for us to kick off as soon as we’re on the other side of this crisis!
If you are still interested in cultural resource monitoring, please let me know and I will
pass that information along to Chris Podzemny. Hopefully the Amarillo Community Market is
still on for the summer, and if you are interested in doing that at all, please let me know. And
please let me know of any outreach/volunteering and “just for fun” events that you would like to
do! Hopefully this pandemic doesn’t ruin all of our plans, so let’s keep thinking of stuff to do!
In this time of great uncertainty concerning this pandemic, please keep checking your
email (and the social media pages if you follow those) to stay up to date on our meetings and
events. Hopefully we can finally meet in September! I’m also hoping that there are still a few
summer activities we can do!
In the meantime, until we all meet again, please be careful, stay safe and well, and stay
home as much as you can!
Erin Frigo

4

UPCOMING EVENTS

September 16

7:00 p.m. Regular meeting, PAS. Amarillo Public Library, Downtown
Branch, Upstairs.
5:30 p.m. Please join us for our pre-meeting dinner, Napoli’s, 700 So.
Taylor.

https://www.dreamstime.com/photos-images/spring.html

5

Suggested Activities for Volunteering and Outreach:

Cultural Resource Monitoring
Potential locations: Palo Duro Canyon State Park, Cross Bar Ranch
As-needed basis: If this interests you, please contact Chris Podzemny to let him know when
you are most available and to provide your contact info to him as well. He will be at the
meetings to provide you with his contact information.
Amarillo Community Market (on Polk Street in Amarillo, Texas)
Days: Saturdays
Times: From 9:00am to 1:00 pm
Months: From early June until late September.

6

