Geology of the
Ville Platte Quadrangle
Louisiana
To Accompany the Ville Platte
30 x 60 Minute Geologic Quadrangle

f

.X (

Richard P. McCulloh, Paul V. Heinrich, and John I. Snead

Louisiana Geological Survey • Geological Pamphlet No. 14

l!Q

State of Louisiana
M, J. "Mike" Foster, Jr" Governor
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge
Mark A. Emmert, Chancellor
Louisiana Geological Survey
Chacko]' John, Director and State Geologist

Originally prepared in 1996 for the U,S, Geological Survey, Department of the Interior,
under cooperative agreement No, 1434-94-A-1233,

Cover: Reduced image of Ville Platte 30x60 Minute Geologic Quadrangle,

This public document was published at a total cost of $192,50, 50 copies of this document were published in this first printing
at a cost of $192,50, This document was published by the Louisiana Geological Survey, 3079 Energy, Coast and Environment
Building, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, 70803, to aid in public understanding of the geology of Louisiana, under the authority of R.S,
30:206, This material was printed in accordance with standards for printing by state agencies established pursuant to R.S, 43:31,

Geological Pamphlet No.14

Geology of the
Ville Platte Quadrangle
Louisiana
Richard P. McCulloh, Paul V. Heinrich, and John I. Snead

I

"

LOUISIANA STATE UNIVERSITY

LOUISIANA GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Baton Rouge

2003

-

© 2003 by the Louisiana Geological Survey

Contents
Acknowledgments........................................................................................................................ ........
Introduction, Location, And Geologic Setting .....................................................................................
Previous Work................................................................................................................................ .....
Methods ...............................................................................................................................................
Allostratigraphic Approach To Unit Definitions ..................................................................................
Results..................................................................................................................................................
Conclusion ............................................................................... ,. ...... ........ ......... ..................... ..............
Correlation Of Map Units ...................................................................................................................
Description Of Map Units...................................................................................................................
Bibliography ........................................... ,........ .... .... ..... ....... ................. ......... .................... .... ........ ......

iii

IV

1
2
2
2
3
5
5
6
9

q

Acknowledgments
The Ville Platte 30 x 60 Minute Geologic Quadrangle (Snead et al. 2002) was originally prepared
in cooperation with the U.S. Geological Survey, Department of the Interior, as part of its
STATEMAP program under Cooperative Agreement No. 1434-94-A-1233 (Snead et al. 1995b).
The Louisiana Geological Survey (LGS) gratefully acknowledges the Louisiana Department of
Natural Resources, Office of Mineral Resources, for support for the final production and printing
of this published edition under DNR Contract No. 2400-99-01, "Provision of Technical Services
to the Office of Mineral Resources-Task 4." Gus C. Rodemacher, Assistant Secretary, and William
E. Marsalis, Geologist Administrator of the Office of Mineral Resources were instrumental in the
formulation and acceptance of this contract.
R. Hampton Peele and Robert Paulsell of the LGS Cartographic Section performed the Geographic Information System (GIS) tasks and the cartographic production and design tasks,
respectively.
This report was originally prepared to accompany the first release of the map as a plot-ondemand product in 1999. Margo Olinde, then the LGS editor, edited the manuscript for that
release, though the report was not formally produced as a printed document at that time. Scott
Smiley edited the report for production as an LGS publication for this release. Lisa Pond, LGS
Cartographic Section, provided the graphic design.
Whitney J. Autin of the State University of New York, College at Brockport, reviewed and
provided valuable comments on the Quaternary correlation effort.

iv

drainage basins: the eastern portion of the middle
Calcasieu River drainage basin, on the west, and the
headward reaches of streams of the Mermentau Bayou
drainage basin, on the south. The quadrangle also
contains the transition in Pleistocene strata from the
fluvial terrace-associated deposits of these rivers and
streams to their coast-parallel terrace-associated
deposits of the south Louisiana coastal plain.

I ntroduction, Location, and
Geologic Setting
Louisiana's surface geology is dominated by units of
Quaternary age whose noteworthy variety and complexity have presented chronic problems for previous
attempts to correlate and classify them. A preliminary
draft of a workable statewide classification of the
Quaternary, recently formulated by Snead et al.
(1998), forms the primary basis for this presentation of
the correlation and classification of units mapped in
the Ville Platte quadrangle.

A pattern of relict channels on the older Prairie
surface provides evidence that the Red River once
flowed independently into the Gulf of Mexico west of
its modern confluence with the Mississippi River. This
transitional setting and the confluence of the two large
river systems greatly increase the potential for
complexity in the number and interrelations of the
units recognized and mapped in the area. A distinct
semicircular ridge associated with the outcrop of
limestone caprock, mapped stream captures, and
several distinct, low scarps offsetting the Pleistocene
terrace surfaces indicate Late Quaternary neotectonic
activity within the Ville Platte quadrangle.

The Ville Platte1:100,000-scale quadrangle covers a
region lying between 31 °00' and 30°30' north latitude,
and between 93°00' and 92°00' west longitude (figure
1). This is a region of moderate relief in which altitude
ranges from less than 10m above sea level within the
Red River and Mississippi River valleys to 80+ m on
the Pleistocene uplands of the coastal plain in the
northwestern corner of the quadrangle. The region
includes Holocene and Pleistocene fluvial deposits of
the Red, Calcasieu, and Mississippi rivers; Pleistocene
coast-parallel terrace complexes,
interpreted here as allogroups; loesscovered surfaces adjacent to the
Mississippi River valley; a network of
relict Pleistocene channels; and an
active but aseismic fault system. A
small outcrop of limestone caprock
atop the Pine Prairie salt dome is
also noted, one of only two exposures
LOUISIANA
of salt-dome caprock known in
Louisiana.

o

50 miles

1..'---....'

The northeastern portion of the
quadrangle encompasses the western
valley wall of the MiSSissippi River
flood plain where it is joined by that
of the Red River from the northwest,
not far below the present-day
confluence of the channels of the two
rivers. Most of the remainder of the
quadrangle encompasses parts of two

_...J--

30

X

60 Minute Geologic Quadrangles

o

Published as of 2002
In preparation

Figure 1. Location of Ville Platte 1:1 00, ODD-scale quadrangle.
1

30°

a

Previous Work

quadrangles. These were checked by comparison with
and analysis of published and unpublished geologic
mapping, aerial photographs, other types of imagery,
and soils information. This included geotechnical data
from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and
the Louisiana Department of Transportation and
Development (DOTD) and soil surveys and data from
the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
(formerly Soil Conservation Service [SCS]). These
interpretations were then spot-checked in the field.

Different portions of the Ville Platte quadrangle
were geologically mapped at a scale of 1:62,500 in
parish geological investigations in the 1940s and 1950s
(Fisk 1940; Welch 1942; Holland et al. 1952; Varvaro
1957). Until recently, reassessment of this mapping
had been done only in conjunction with
recompilations at much smaller scales, e.g., 1:500,000
(Snead and McCulloh 1984) and 1: 1,100,000 (Saucier
and Snead 1989).

Published geologic mapping and aerial photography
and imagery were consulted extensively. The published
geologic mapping consulted in this study included Fisk
(1938, 1940, 1944), Welch (1942), Jones et al. (1956),
Doering (1956), Varvaro (1957), Saucier (1974),
Smith and Russ (1974), Russ (1975), Snead and
McCulloh (1984), and Saucier and Snead (1989).
Aerial photography and imagery used in the mapping
came from Edgar Tobin Aerial Surveysl (ETAS), the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA), and the Agricultural Stabilization and
Conservation Service (ASCS). The primary aerial
photography consisted of 1:2,000 black and white
ETAS aerial photography flown between 1939 and
1942 and 1:20,000 black and white ASCS aerial
photography flown at various times between 1939 and
1962. NASA 1 :80,000 color-infrared aerial imagery
flown in 1978 supplemented the ETAS and ASCS
aerial photography. Fieldwork was used to verify
the mapping.

Since the late 1980s the Louisiana Geological
Survey (LGS) has attempted to sustain an ongoing
effort to remap the state's surface geology at intermediate scale and has done so almost entirely via cooperative agreements with the U.S. Geological Survey
(USGS). These agreements were initially under its
COGEOMAP program, which later became the
STATEMAP program following authorization by
Congress of the National Cooperative Geologic
Mapping Program in 1992.
These projects have permitted LGS to undertake
the systematic and comprehensive new mapping of the
geologically youngest river and delta deposits that
underlie three-fourths of Louisiana and to complete
initial compilation of new, intermediate-scale coverage
of the state's upland landscapes and alluvial bottoms
above the coastal zone. The STATEMAP project for
fiscal year 1994-95 entailed the geologic mapping of
the De Ridder and Ville Platte 1: 100,000 quadrangles
(Snead et al. 1995a, b). The mapping of the Ville
Platte geologic quadrangle for that project is here
presented within the framework of the recent formulation of a preliminary statewide classification of
Quaternary units by Snead et al. (1998).

Once finished, the 1:24,000 overlays were
recompiled onto an overlay of the USGS 1: 100,000
quadrangle map. This draft map was then edited,
reviewed, and redrawn to produce the preliminary
final map, from which the digital cartographic product
was prepared.

Methods

Allostratigraphic Approach to
Unit Definitions

For the preliminary mapping of the geology of the
Ville Platte quadrangle (Snead et al. 1995b), draft
geologic maps were prepared for each of the thirty-two
7.5-minute USGS topographic quadrangle maps
composing it. They were then recompiled at the
1: 100,000 scale. The draft maps consisted of vellum
overlays registered to 7.5-minute quadrangles, many of
which are recently published provisional editions
previously unavailable to geologic mappers. Alluvial
and terrace-unit contacts, and escarpments associated
with known and hypothesized surface faults of the
coastal plain, were delineated on the overlays using
these new, high-quality 7.5-minute topographic
1

Most previous approaches to the correlation and
mapping of Pleistocene units in Louisiana regarded the
sequences underlying terrace surfaces as mappable
units of formation rank. In the intermediate-scale
geologic compilations undertaken in previous LGSUSGS cooperative agreements, these formations were
replaced by informal units called complexes. Problems
with the traditional terrace concept had led Autin et al.
(1991) to introduce complexes as groupings of temporally related surfaces, the associated sedimentary
sequences of which were assumed to comprise related

P.O. Box 839905, San Antonio, TX 78283-9905

2

rr

!

allostratigraphic units, or lithosomes distinguished by
their bounding unconformities (Autin 1996).

recognized in Louisiana: Sicily Island (possibly early to
middle Wisconsinan) and Peoria (late Wisconsinan).
Their distributions, from Miller (1983), have not been
revised since the 1984 Geologic Map ofLouisiana.

This approach was prompted by the general lack of
diagnostic or distinct lithologic characteristics within
Pleistocene sediments that are similar to a considerable
degree because of their overall textural heterogeneity.
The treatment given by Snead et al. (1998) was a
provisional first attempt at an allostratigraphic approach to statewide classification and correlation
within the Pleistocene of Louisiana, with subdivision
into constituent informal allounits; in this schema, the
complexes of earlier usage survived as the major unit
groupings.

Results
The process of compiling the map revealed and
substantiated significant geological features within the
Holocene and Late Pleistocene alluvial valleys of the
Mississippi and Red rivers, the Late Quaternary coastparallel terrace surfaces, and the small stream valleys·
traversing this area.
UPLAND ALLOGROUP

The unit names in this map and report have been
revised to fit that classification. It is hoped that this
approach will evolve into formal allostratigraphic
nomenclature as the units become better defined.

The Upland Allogroup crops out only in the
northwestern corner of the Ville Platte geologic
quadrangle. It consists of the Willis Formation
(Pliocene), which is correlative with the Willis of Texas
and equivalent to the Citronelle Formation of eastern
Louisiana and Mississippi. For this investigation the
Willis was not differentiated.

Although the nature and variety of the different
sources of information and types of criteria employed
in the classification of map units are not sufficient for
formal definition of allounits, allostratigraphic criteria
are incorporated wherever possible-in the manner
recommended by Autin et al. (1991) and employed by
Snead et al. (1998)-to formulate provisional or
informal unit definitions, with the different criteria
prioritized and hierarchically ordered as follows:

INTERMEDIATE ALLOGROUP

The Intermediate Allogroup mapped in the Ville
Platte Geologic Quadrangle corresponds to the
Intermediate Complex of Saucier and Snead (1989)
and is differentiated into three constituent units. The
principal units mapped are the Lissie Alloformation
and the Oakdale alloformation. The Lissie, equivalent
to the Lissie Formation of Texas, forms an extensive
surface encompassing the area around De Ridder,
Louisiana, and is approximately equivalent to the
Bentley terrace of Fisk (1938, 1940) and Welch
(1942). The surface associated with the Oakdale
alloformation is approximately equivalent to the
Oberlin terrace of Doering (1956). A younger unit,
the Elizabeth alloformation, is marked by a lower
surface discontinuously exposed over a much smaller
area along the Calcasieu River and areas to the west.

1. Characteristics of a unit's bounding unconformities,
including associated paleosols

2. Identification of geomorphological/depositional
surfaces associated with the unit
3. Summary of the depositional environment(s),
including subunits reflective of depositional morphology, with associated constituent lithologies.
The major groupings of units (Deweyville, Prairie,
Intermediate, Upland) were treated as groups in a
generic stratigraphic sense, with allostratigraphic
thinking and precepts applied to whatever degree the
data permit; they are here designated as allogroups.
This treatment reflects the operational correlations that
have remained broadly consensual among investigators
as thinking has evolved in the years since the release of
the first published Geologic Map ofLouisiana (Snead
and McCulloh 1984) and in the last ten years of
intermediate-scale map compilations under LGSUSGS cooperative agreements. Loesses-comprising
eolian silt veneers over earlier Pleistocene and older
deposits-are important markers useful for the
correlation of underlying map units, somewhat
analogous to the paleosols. Two distinct loesses are

PRAIRIE AnOGROUP

The Ville Platte geologic map shows Prairie
Allogroup deposits associated with each of the major
rivers (Calcasieu, Red, and Mississippi) as well as
coast-parallel equivalents created by ancestral streams
and coalescing alluvial fans. The principal expanse of
Prairie deposits in the map area is equivalent to the
Beaumont Formation of Texas and is here mapped as
Prairie Allogroup, Beaumont Alloformation. This unit
exhibits the clearly discernible relict channels of the
Pleistocene Red and Calcasieu rivers. Two previously

3

ac

loops of the lower meander belt are comparable in
channel width and radius of curvature to those of the
modern Mississippi River. As mapped, these lower
meander belt loops are concave toward the upper
meander belt. This pattern indicates that the abandoned river course with which they are associated lies
buried beneath the upper meander belt (Heinrich
1991; Saxton 1986).

undifferentiated Prairie surfaces appear topographically
below this unit along the valley wall of the Mississippi
River. The most extensive of these surfaces exhibits
the scrolls and channels of the Pleistocene Mississippi
River and correlates with the Avoyelles prairie to the
north and the Lafayette meander belt to the south.
The unit underlying this surface is here mapped as
Prairie Allogroup, Avoyelles alloformation. A still
lower, discontinuous surface that exhibits meander
bights, channels, and loops proportional in width and
radii to the modern Red River is also recognized. The
unit underlying this surface is here mapped as Prairie
Allogroup, Big Cane alloformation. This surface,
exposed over a relatively small area, is at approximately
the same elevation as adjacent Holocene Red River
meander belts, but it is covered by Peoria Loess, so the
unit apparently represents remnants of Late
Wisconsinan meander belts of the Red River, making
it the lowermost surface of the Prairie.

Within the upper meander belt, the Ville Platte
geologic map also shows a small area of meander belt
and natural levee deposits composed of reddish colored
alluvium of the Red River. The distinctive red color of
this alluvium is derived from the Permian red beds of
Oldahoma and northeast Texas. This alluvium was
deposited by the Red River while it was active in the
Mississippi River meander belt 3 course, subsequent to
the Mississippi River occupations. This map unit also
includes the historically active, narrow, natural levee
associated with the modern channel of Bayou Teche
(Autin et al. 1991).

DEWEYVILLE ALLOGROUP

Small surfaces representative of the Deweyville
Allogroup on the Calcasieu River are identified in two
levels. The lower surface, developed on the Sandjack
alloformation, is near the elevation of and in some
places overlapped byHolocene alluvium. Terraces on
upper tributaries of the Calcasieu previously mapped
as Deweyville (Snead and McCulloh 1984) are here
identified as undifferentiated Prairie Allogroup
alluvial terraces.
MISSISSIPPI RIVER MEANDER BElT

EAST-WEST TRENDING SCARPS

The Ville Platte geologic quadrangle shows a series of
linear escarpments trending east to west that have a
distinctive topographic expression. They consist of strikeoriented slope breaks with strike-parallel continuity on
the order of several kilometers, and they are marked by
elevation contours that may change spacing along strike
but have uniform spacing in a given location. The scarps
break individual terrace surfaces and, in a number of
places, very nearly coincide with the bounding scarp
separating different terraces. The escarpments are
interpreted as the residual fault-line scarps associated with
Tertiary growth faults that have been reactivated during
the Pleistocene (Heinrich 1994).

3

The Ville Platte1:100,000-scale geologic map
differentiates Mississippi River meander belt 3, as
mapped by Saucier (1974) and Saucier and Snead
(1989), into two meander belts as suggested by Saxton
(1986), Heinrich (1991, 1993a), and Heinrich and
Autin (2000). The oldest of these meander belts, the
"Pre-Teche-Mississippi meander belt" of Saxton
(1986), is mapped as meander belt 3 (lower). Overlying and incised into the lower meander belt is the
younger unit, a later occupation of meander belt 3,
here mapped as meander belt 3 (upper).

The association of similar scarps with known
Tertiary growth faults has been documented by
Heinrich (1988) near DeQuincy, Louisiana, and is
similar to that characteristic of fault-line scarps
associated with faults of the Baton Rouge system in
southeastern Louisiana (Durham and Peeples 1956;
McCulloh 1991, 1992, 1996). The faults of the Baton
Rouge system do not produce detectable earthquakes
but are known to be active because of the cumulative
damage done to structures located on and near certain
fault segments over periods of years and decades.

The lower meander belt differs in several ways from
the upper meander belt. Its ridge and swale topography lies about 3 m (9 ft) below the level of the ridge
and swale topography in the tipper meander belt. Also
the channel loops of meander belt 3 (lower) are
considerably more developed than the relatively simple
meander loops of the later meander belt 3 (upper),
although they occupy the same area. The channel

The same geomorphic surface has been mapped on
both the updip and down dip side of some of these
escarpments. The presence of the same surface unit on
either side of the escarpment indicates displacement by

4

a fault rather than the incision of the deposits of an
older terrace before the deposition of the younger
terrace. If present, the identification of constructional
landforms, such as ridge and swale topography or
fluvial channels, that are contiguous across the slope
break would also identify certain escarpments as the
surface expression of faulting. However, thus far such
features have yet to be found within the Ville Platte
quadrangle because of the age and dissected nature of
the dominant surface units.

hold the most promise for devising a meaningful
correlation and classification of surface Quaternary
strata that is workable statewide, although formal
allounit definition within the Quaternary of Louisiana
is generally not yet possible. The geologic map
illustrates subdivisions within the Upland, Intermediate, and Deweyville allogroups and Mississippi River
meander belt 3; lower surfaces representative of the
Prairie Allogroup near the Mississippi River western
valley wall; residual fault-line scarps in Pleistocene
sediments; and fragments of a Late Wisconsinan Red·
River meander belt that appear to form the lowermost
Prairie surface.

Some of the escarpments that are interpreted as
residual fault-line scarps virtually coincident with
contacts separating different terraces also form the
southernmost contact of the adjacent Pleistocene units
updip. An examination of the contact between the
Prairie Allogroup and the Holocene chenier and
deltaic plains south of the study area shows that it is
extremely irregular and embayed, reflecting the uneven
onlap of Holocene sediments over the eroded downdip
edge of the Prairie because of slight but significant
variations in the topography of the latter. In contrast,
the only east-to-west-trending linear segments of
Prairie and Intermediate contacts depicted on published maps occur in the Florida parishes east of the
study area, where Holocene deposits have accumulated
against residual fault-line scarps associated with faults
of the Baton Rouge system (Snead and McCulloh
1984; Mossa and Miller 1989). Using these linear
contacts associated with known residual fault-line
scarps as an analogy, some bounding escarpments of
similar appearance in the Ville Platte quadrangle are
tentatively interpreted here as residual fault-line scarps.
This interpretation is further supported by the presence of major Tertiary growth faults that parallel these
escarpments in the subsurface at an appropriate
downdip depth and distance.

Correlation of Map Units
HOLOCENE

Hua

Undifferentiated deposits of small upland
streams

Hb

Backswamp deposits

Hrm

Red River meander-belt deposits

Hrl

Red River natural levee deposits

Hrs

Red River crevasse splay deposits

Hrd

Red River distributary deposits

Hrc

Red River channel remnants

Hmm3u Mississippi River meander belt 3-upper
deposits
Hmm31 Mississippi River meander belt 3-lower
deposits
Hm13u Mississippi River levee deposits (meander
belt 3-upper)
Hm131

Mississippi River levee deposits (meander
belt 3-lower)

Hs

Small river deposits, undifferentiated
(Calcasieu River)

Conclusion

PLEISTOCENE

The Ville Platte1:100,OOO-scale geologic quadrangle map and the draft 7.5-minute mapping conducted for this investigation provide a detailed overview of the surface geology within the project area.
The Ville Platte quadrangle is underlain at the surface
predominantly by units of Quaternary age. It is
distinguished by the notable variety and complexity of
these units, predisposed by its position at the
confluence of the flood plains of the Red and Mississippi rivers, and spanning the transition between
fluvial and coast.:.parallel terrace-associated units. The
allostratigraphic approach to the interpretation of these
Quaternary units has proven fruitful and appears to

LOESS
[pattern] Peoria Loess (shown where the total
thickness is 1 meter or greater)

[pattern] Sicily Island Loess (shown where the total
thickness is 1 meter or greater)

5

Pd

DEWEYVILLE ALLOGROUP
Deweyville Allogroup, undifferentiated

Pds

Sandjack alloformation

Pdm

Merryville alloformation

reddish yellow to reddish brown silt, silty clay, sandy
clay, and some sand.

PRAIRIE ALLOGROUP

Pp

Prairie Allogroup, undifferentiated

Ppl

Prairie Allogroup, Late Sangamon

Ppbc

Big Cane alloformation

Ppav

Avoyelles alloformation (includes
Lafayette meander belt)

Ppe

Prairie Allogroup, Early Sangamon

Ppbe

Beaumont Alloformation

Pi

Intermediate Allogroup, undifferentiated

Pio

Oakdale alloformation

Pie

Elizabeth alloformation

Pil

Lissie Alloformation

Hrd Red River distributary deposits-silty to
clayey, reddish brown sediments that form the narrow
natural levees of distributaries that extend from Red
River meander belts into the adjacent backswamp.
Hrc Red River channel remnants-sinuous tonal
patterns interpreted to be abandoned Red River
channels, buried beneath backswamp deposits.

INTERMEDIATE ALLOGROUP

Hmm3u Mississippi River meandet· belt 3,
upper deposits-point bar deposits of the youngest
level of Mississippi River meander belt 3, buried by a
thin layer of overbank sediments. The surface is
characterized by ridge and swale topography and
minor natural levees. It consists of thick, sandy point
bar deposits covered by a thin layer of silt and
silty clay.

UPLAND ALLOGROUP

Pou

Upland Allogroup, undifferentiated

P o uw

Willis Formation

Hmm31 Mississippi River meander belt 3, lower
deposits-point bar deposits of an older level of
Mississippi river meander belt 3, buried by a layer of
overbank sediments. The surface is characterized by
ridge and swale topography and minor natural levees.
It consists of thick, sandy point bar deposits covered
by a variable thickness of silty clay and clay.

Description of Map Units
HOLOCENE

Hua Undifferentiated deposits of small upland
streams-alluvial deposits of minor streams and creeks
filling valleys cut into older deposits. The modern
flood plain within these valleys constitutes the
surface of these deposits.

Hm13u Mississippi River levee deposits (meander belt 3, upper)-Mississippi River deposits comprising prominent natural levees flanking the younger of two
meander belts within Mississippi River meander belt 3.
They consist of silt, silty clay, clayey silt, and some sand.

Hb Backswamp deposits-Holocene backswamp
deposits of the Red River and, in the eastern part of
the quadrangle, mixed Red and Mississippi river
deposits. They underlie flood basins between meander
belts. These sediments consist of dark reddish brown
to dark gray or black silty clay or clay.

Hm131 Mississippi River levee deposits (meander belt 3, lower)-Mississippi River deposits comprising prominent natural levees flanking the older of two
meander belts within Mississippi River meander belt 3.
They consist of silt, silty clay, clayey silt, and some sand.

Hrm Red River meander-belt deposits-point bar
and associated overbank deposits underlying meander
belts of the Red River. The surface of the meander belt
is characterized by ridge and swale topography. These
deposits typically consist of red to reddish brown
sand, silt, silty clay, and sandy clay.

Hs Small river deposits, undifferentiated
(Calcasieu River)-undifferentiated alluvial deposits
consisting of natural levee, overbank, and abandoned
channels within the Calcasieu River valley.

Hrl Red River natural levee deposits-natural levee
deposits of the Red River that comprise low natural
levees that flank the meander belts of the Red River.
These sediments typically consist of yellowish red
to reddish brown silt, silty clay, sandy clay, and some
sand.
.

PLEISTOCENE
LOESS

[pattern] Peoria Loess-Eolian silt veneer of Late
Wisconsin age, mantling Pleistocene strata. Loess is
shown where the total thickness is 1 meter or greater.
[pattern] Sicily Island Loess-Eolian silt veneer,
possibly of early to middle Wisconsin age,mantling
Pleistocene strata. Loess is shown where the total
thickness is 1 meter or greater.

Hrs Red River crevasse splay deposits-Red
River sediments that form fan-like crevasse splays that
originate from the Red River. Typically they consist of

6

F ---

I
I

DEWEYVILLE ALLOGROUP

tocene streams. Deposits associated with these valleys
are commonly found within the upper portions of the
drainage basins. The surface is blanketed by Peoria
Loess near the loess source (the Mississippi River flood
plain), and the sediments at the top of the unit range
from sand to clay. Includes the Avoyelles Prairie of
central Louisiana and the Lafayette meander
belt of southwestern Louisiana.

Pd Deweyville Allogroup, undifferentiatedalluvial deposits of ancestral late Pleistocene coastal
plain streams and certain Mississippi River tributaries.
In the Ville Platte quadrangle, the Deweyville is
concentrated along the Calcasieu river valley. Multiple
levels are locally recognized and delineated where
applicable. Surface deposits are generally sandy and
grade to sandy and gravelly channel and point-bar
deposits. Surface morphology can be veneered by
younger alluvium. The Deweyville geomorphic surface
is topographically inset into the Prairie Allogroup or older
deposits, and it is characterized by meander scars substantially larger than those of modern stream flood plains.

Ppbc Big Cane alloformation-Peoria Loesscovered surface that lies below the level of the
Avoyelles and Lafayette Prairies, and is partially buried
by Holocene Red River alluvium. Possibly meanderbelt deposits of a late Pleistocene Red River.
Ppav Avoyelles alloformation-meander-belt
deposits of the late Pleistocene MiSSissippi River
terraced above and parallel to its alluvial valley in
central Louisiana. Remnants of constructional meander-belt morphology are preserved. The surface is
blanketed by Peoria Loess, and the sediments at the
top of the unit range from sand to clay.

Pds Sandjack alloformation-alloformation of the
Deweyville Allogroup along the Sabine River that is
intermediate in age and topographic position between
the Merryville and Fredonia alloformations.
Deweyville, Texas lies on the surface of the Sandjack
alloformation.
Pdm Merryville alloformation-oldest
alloformation underlying the topographically highest
surface of the Deweyville Allogroup along the Sabine
River. The terrace of the Merryville alloformation lies
on the Louisiana side of the Sabine River valley
directly across from
Deweyville, Texas.

Includes the Lafayette meander belt, which is made
up of meander-belt deposits of the late Pleistocene
Mississippi River terraced above and parallel to its
western valley wall and cut into the Prairie Allogroup,
Early Sangamon, Beaumont Alloformation in southwestern Louisiana. This subunit is characterized by
preserved remnants of constructional meander-belt
morphology. Two flood plain levels are locally recognized. The surface is blanketed by Peoria Loess near
the Mississippi River flood plain, and the sediments at
the top of the unit range from sand to clay.

PRAIRIE ALLOGROUP
Pp Prairie Allogroup, undifferentiated-a diverse
depositional sequence of late to middle Pleistocene
deposits of the Mississippi River, its tributaries, and
coastal plain streams; includes terraces, fluvial (meander-belt, backswamp, and braided-stream), colluvial,
estuarine, deltaic, and marine units deposited over a
considerable part of the late Pleistocene (Wisconsin to
Sangamon). Surfaces generally show little dissection
and are topographically higher than the Deweyville.
Multiple levels are recognized along alluvial valleys and
coast-parallel trends. The Prairie is locally mapped as
undifferentiated alluvial terraces, especially where
discontinuous surfaces are incised into older complexes
within valleys.

Ppe Prairie Allogroup, Early Sangamon-older of
the Prairie Allogroup temporal phases; an equivalent of
the Beaumont of Texas and Eunice Terrace of southwestern Louisiana. A diverse depositional sequence of
flood plain, meander-belt, and backswamp deposits of
the middle Pleistocene ancestral Mississippi River, Red
River, local fluvial equivalents of tributary streams, and
coastal plain streams. Where this unit is mapped near
the Mississippi River flood plain, it is blanketed by
both Peoria and Sicily Island Loess or loess-derived
colluvium. The unit dips into the subsurface beneath the
Pleistocene Prairie Allogroup, Late Sangamon, in the
coast-parallel region, but is commonly terraced above the
Prairie Allogroup, Late Sangamon, in stream valleys. The
sediments are generally clay, silty clay loam, or sandy clay
loam, and in places include sand and gravel. Includes the
Beaumont Alloformation in southwestern Louisiana.

Ppl Prairie Allogroup, Late Sangamon-alluvial
deposits of ancestral late Pleistocene streams. In the
coast-parallel Prairie the unit consists of meander-belt
deposits of the late Pleistocene Mississippi River, and
west of the Mississippi River deposits the unit consists
of the ancestral coastal plain deposits of late Pleis-

7

Ppbe Beaumont Alloformation--oldest and
topographically highest of the Prairie surfaces of
southwestern Louisiana. It exhibits the relict channels
of the Red and Calcasieu rivers and includes deposits
of the Ingleside barrier trend to the southwest of the
Ville Platte quadrangle. It is composed of coastal plain
deposits of late to middle Pleistocene streams.

PH Lissie Alloformation-dissected alluvial
deposits of early Pleistocene streams. Previously the
Bentley Terrace in southwestern Louisiana. The
regionally extensive Upland geosol occurs at the top of
the unit. The unit is bounded updip by the Willis
surface and down dip by younger subunits of the
Intermediate Allogroup.

INTERMEDIATE ALLOGROUP

UPLAND ALLOGROUP

Pi Intermediate Allogroup, undifferentiatedfluvial deposits of the Mississippi River, its tributaries,
and coastal plain streams; includes terraces locally
designated as Lissie, Elizabeth, and Oakdale. Topographically, the Intermediate is commonly higher than
the Prairie Allogroup and lower than the Upland
Allogroup and Tertiary formations. It is generally
dissected and lacks distinct constructional topography.
Where mapped near the Mississippi River flood plain, the
unit is blanketed by Sicily Island Loess, which is overlain
by less than 1 m of Peoria Loess in locations southwest of
where the Red and Mississippi river flood plains meet.
The sediments are generally silt loam or loam.

Pou Upland Allogroup, undifferentiated-alluvial
deposits of early Pleistocene and Plio-Pleistocene
streams from both glacial and nonglacial sources.
Includes higher fluvial terraces previously designated as
Bentley and Williana as well as the Pliocene Lafayette
and Willis formations. The regionally extensive
Upland geosol occurs at the top of the allogroup.
Where mapped near the Mississippi River flood plain,
the unit is blanketed by Sicily Island Loess, which is
overlain by less than 1 m of Peoria Loess in locations
southwest of where the Red and Mississippi river flood
plains meet. Sediments are generally tan to reddish clay
loam or sandy loam that grades to sand and gravel.
Local stringers and lenses of clay are present.

Pio Oakdale alloformation-alluvial deposits of
middle Pleistocene streams in southwestern Louisiana.
It lies in elevation between the higher surfaces of the
Intermediate and Upland allogroups and the Prairie
Allogroup, Early Sangamon. The surface is highly
dissected and lacks any constructional topography.
Previously the Oberlin surface of southwestern Louisiana.

Pouw Willis Formation-deeply dissected alluvial
deposits of Pliocene streams originating from
nonglacial sources. Previously designated as the
Williana Terrace in southwestern Louisiana. The unit
is unconformably underlain by Tertiary formations of
Miocene to Eocene age updip of the Ville Platte
quadrangle to the north, and it is bounded downdip
by the Lissie surface. The regionally extensive Upland
geosol occurs at the top of the unit.

Pie Elizabeth alloformation-alluvial deposits of
middle Pleistocene streams in southwestern Louisiana
that are older than the Oakdale surface and lie above
it. The Elizabeth surface is highly dissected and lacks
any constructional topography.

8

r
Bibliography

-

1991. Geomorphic regions. In Overview, Inventory, and Assessment of Cultural Resources in the
Louisiana Coastal Zone. Published report prepared
for Coastal Management Division, Department of
Natural Resources, under contract SFP No. 2510190-09. New Orleans, La.: R. Christopher Goodwin
and Associates. Pp. 42-65.

-

1993a. Geomorphology. In H. Vigander and B.
Maygarden, eds., Cultural Resources Inventory of
Public Access Lands in the Atchafalaya Basin,
Vicinity of the Sherburne Wildlife Management
Area, Pointe Coupee, St. Martin, and Iberville
Parishes, Louisiana. Draft report for the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, New Orleans district, under
contract no. DACW29-92-D-0012, Delivery Order
No.4. New Orleans, La.: Earth Search, Inc. Pp. 1150.

-

1993b. Geomorphology and geology. In T. KcKan,
B. Maygarden, and P. V. Heinrich, Cultural Resources Survey of EABPL Off-Site Borrow Areas,
Levee Items E-64, E-76, and E-64a, Iberville,
Iberia, and Assumption Parishes. Report for the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, New Orleans
district, under contract no. DACW29-92-D-0012,
Delivery Order No.5. New Orleans, La.: Earth
Search, Inc. Pp. 5-20.

-

1994. Surface residual fault-line scarps of the Lake
Charles quadrangle, southwestern Louisiana.
Unpublished map. Baton Rouge: Louisiana Department of Natural Resources, Louisiana Geological
Survey. Scale 1:250,000.

Autin, W. J. 1996. Pleistocene stratigraphy in the
southern Lower Mississippi Valley. Engineering
Geology 45:87-112.
Autin, W. J., A. T. Davison, B. J. Miller, W. J. Day,
and B. A. Schumacher 1988. Exposure oflate
Pleistocene meander-belt facies at Mt. Pleasant,
Louisiana. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 38:375-383.
Autin, W. J., S. F. Burns, B. J. Miller, R. T. Saucier,
and J. 1. Snead 1991. Quaternary geology of the
Lower Mississippi Valley. In R. B. Morrison, ed.,
Quaternary nonglacial geology: conterminous U.S.
The Geology of North America, v. K-2. Boulder,
Colo.: Geological Society of America. Pp. 547-582.
Autin, W. J., and R. P. McCulloh, comps. 1992. New
Roads geologic quadrangle map plus explanation
and notes. Prepared in cooperation with the U.S.
Geological Survey, COGEOMAP program, under
cooperative agreement no. 14-08-0001-A0863.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, Louisiana
Geological Survey. Scale 1: 100,000.
Doering, J. A. 1956. Review of Quaternary surface
formations of the Gulf Coast region. Bulletin of the
American Association of Petroleum Geologists
40:1816-1862.
Durham, C. 0., Jr., and E. M. Peeples III 1956.
Pleistocene fault zone in southeastern Louisiana.
Abstract. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association
of Geological Societies 6:65-66.

Heinrich, P. v., and R. P. McCulloh 1999. Pliocene
Series. In R. P. McCulloh and P. V. Heinrich,
Geology of the Fort Polk region, Sabine,
Natchitoches, and Vernon Parishes, Louisiana. Final
report prepared for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth district, under contract no.
DACA63-95-D-0051, delivery order no. 0008.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, Louisiana
Geological Survey. Pp. 43-69.

Fisk, H. N. 1938. Geology of Grant and La Salle
Parishes. Geological bulletin no. 10 (includes two
1:62,500-scale geologic maps). Baton Rouge:
Louisiana Department of Conservation, Louisiana
Geological Survey. 246 pp. plus plates.
-

-

1940. Geology of Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes.
Geological bulletin no. 18 (includes one 1:62,500scale geologic map). Baton Rouge: Louisiana
Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological
Survey. 240 pp. plus plates.

Heinrich, P. v., and Autin, W. J., comps. 2000, Baton
Rouge 30 x 60 Minute Geologic Quadrangle:
Louisiana Geological Survey, Baton Rouge, Scale
1:100,000.

1944. Geological investigation of the alluvial valley
of the lower Mississippi River. Vicksburg, Miss.:
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 78 pp. plus
plates. viii

Heinrich, P., Snead, J., and McCulloh, R. P., 2002,
Lake Charles 30 x 60 Minute Geologic Quadrangle:
Louisiana Geological Survey, Baton Rouge,Scale
1:100,000.

Heinrich, P. V. 1988. Tectonic origin of Montgomery
terrace scarp of southwestern Louisiana. Abstract.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of
Geological Societies 38:582.

9

Heinrich, P., Snead, J., and McCulloh, R. P., 2003,
Crowley 30 x 60 MinuteGeologic Quadrangle:
Louisiana Geological Survey, Baton Rouge, Scale
1:100,000

agreement no. 14-08-0001-A0878. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana Department of Natural Resources,
Louisiana Geological Survey. Scale 1:250,000.
Rogers, J. E., and A. J. Calandro 1965. Water Resources of Vernon Parish, Louisiana. Water resources bulletin no. 6 (includes one 1: 126,720-scale
geologic map). Baton Rouge: Louisiana Department
of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey. 104
pp. plus plates.

Hinds, D. J. 1997a. A report to accompany the
geologic map, Fort Polk area, western Louisiana,
scale 1:24,000. Unpublished report (includes one
1:24,000-scale geologic map). Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University. 49 pp. plus plates.
-

1997b. A report to accompany the geologic map,
Slagle area, western Louisiana, scale 1:24,000.
Unpublished report (includes one 1:24,000-scale
geologic map). Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University. 61 pp. plus plates.

McCulloh, R. P. 1991. Surface faults in East Baton
Rouge Parish. Open-file series no. 91-02. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana Department of Natural Resources, Louisiana Geological Survey. 25 pp. plus
plate (five sheets).

-

1998a. Neogene Stratigraphy and Depositional
Environments of the Fort Polk and Slagle Area,
Western Louisiana. M.S. thesis (includes two
geologic maps at an approximate scale of 1:53,333).
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University. 100 pp.
plus plates

-

1992. Geomorphic expression of Quaternary
surface faults of the Baton Rouge fault system, East
Baton Rouge Parish, southeastern Louisiana coastal
plain, USA. Abstract. Kyoto, Japan: 29th International Geological Congress 2:395.

-

1996. Topographic criteria bearing on the interpreted placement of the traces of faults of the Baton
Rouge system in relation to their fault-line scarps.
Open-file series no. 96-01. Baton Rouge: Louisiana
Department of Natural Resources, Louisiana
Geological Survey. 13 pp.

-

-

1998b. Geologic map of the Fort Polk area, Vernon
Parish, Louisiana. Geologic quadrangle map no.
GQ1. Produced in cooperation with U.S. Geological Survey, EDMAP program, under assistance
award no. 1434-HQ96-AG-01535. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University, Louisiana Geological
Survey. Scale 1:24,000.

Miller, B. J. 1983. Louisiana loess (Lake Charles
quadrangle). Unpublished map. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana Department of Natural Resources,
Louisiana Geological Survey. Scale 1:250,000.

1998c. Geologic map of the Slagle area, Vernon
Parish, Louisiana. Geologic quadrangle map no.
GQ2. Produced in cooperation with U.S. Geological Survey, EDMAP program, under assistance
award no. 1434-HQ97-AG-01753. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University, Louisiana Geological
Survey. Scale 1:24,000.

Mossa, J., and B. J. Miller 1989. Tickfaw trend sand
hills. In Mossa, J., and W. J. Autin, eds., Quaternary Geomorphology and Stratigraphy of the
Florida Parishes, Southeastern Louisiana: A Field
Trip. Guidebook series no. 5. Baton Rouge: Louisiana Department of Natural Resources, Louisiana
Geological Survey. Pp. 49-58.

Holland, W. c., L. W. Hough, and G. E. Murray
1952. Geology of Beauregard and Allen Parishes.
Geological bulletin no. 27 (includes two 1:62,500scale geologic maps). Baton Rouge: Louisiana
Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological
Survey. 224 pp. plus plates.

Rogers, J. E., and A. J. Calandro 1965. Water Resources of Vernon Parish, Louisiana. Water resources bulletin no. 6 (includes one 1: 126,720-scale
geologic map). Baton Rouge: Louisiana Department
of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey. 104
pp. plus plates.

Jones, P. H., E. L. Hendricks, B. Irelan, A. N. Turcan,
H. E. Skibitzke, and F. N. Hansen 1956. Water
resources of southwestern Louisiana. Water Supply
Paper no. 1364. Reston, Va.: U.S. Geological
Survey. 460 pp.

Russ, D. P. 1975. The Quaternary Geomorphology of
the Lower Red River Valley, Louisiana. Ph.D.
dissertation. University Parle: Pennsylvania State
University. 208 pp. plus plates.

Louisiana Geological Survey 1993. Alexandria geologic
quadrangle map plus explanation and notes.
Prepared in cooperation with U.S. Geological
Survey, COGEOMAP program, under cooperative

Saucier, R. T. 1974. Quaternary geology of the Lower
Mississippi Valley. Research series no. 6. Fayetteville:
Arkansas Archaeological Survey. 26 pp.

10

r
-

1994. Geomorphology and Quaternary geologic
history of the Lower Mississippi Valley. Vicksburg,
Miss.: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Waterways
Experiment Station. Volumes I (364 pp. plus
appendices) and II (28 oversized plates).

the U.S. Geological Survey, STATEMAP program,
under cooperative agreement no. 1434-HQ97-AG01812. Scale 1:500,000.
Varvaro, G. G. 1957. Geology of Evangeline and St.
Landry Parishes. Geological bulletin no. 31 (includes one 1:62,500-scale geologic map). Baton
Rouge: Louisiana Department of Conservation,
Louisiana Geological Survey. 295 pp. plus plates.

Saucier, R. T., and]. 1. Snead, comps. 1989. Quaternary geology of the Lower Mississippi Valley. Plate 6
in Morrison, R. B., ed., Quaternary nonglacial
geology: conterminous U. S. The Geology of North
America, v. K-2. Boulder, Colo.: Geological Society
of America. Scale 1:1,100,000.

Welch, R. N. 1942. Geology of Vernon Parish.
Geological bulletin no. 22 (includes one 1:62,500scale geologic map). Baton Rouge: Louisiana
Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological
Survey. 90 pp. plus plates.

Saxton, D. C. 1986. Quaternary and Environmental
Geology of North Lafayette Parish, Louisiana. M.S.
thesis. Lafayette: University of Southwestern
Louisiana. 121 pp.
Smith, F. L., and D. P. Russ 1974. Geological investigation of the Lower Red River-Atchafalaya Basin
area. Technical report S-74-5. Vicksburg, Mississippi: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Waterways
Experiment Station.
Snead,]. 1., and R. P. McCulloh, comps. 1984.
Geologic map of Louisiana. Baton Rouge: Louisiana Department of Natural Resources, Louisiana
Geological Survey. Scale 1:500,000.
Snead,]. 1., P. V. Heinrich, and R. P. McCulloh,
comps. 1995a. De Ridder [Louisiana portion] 30 x
60 minute geologic quadrangle (preliminary) map
plus explanation and notes. Prepared in cooperation
with the U.S. Geological Survey, STATEMAP
program, under cooperative agreement no. 143494-A-1233. Baton Rouge: Louisiana Department of
Natural Resources, Louisiana Geological Survey.
Scale 1:100,000.
-

1995b. Ville Platte 30 x 60 minute geologic
quadrangle (preliminary) map plus explanation and
notes. Prepared in cooperation with the U.S.
Geological Survey, STATEMAP program, under
cooperative agreement no. 1434-94-A-1233. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana Department of Natural Resources, Louisiana Geological Survey. 1: 100,000scale.

Snead, J., Heinrich, P., and McCulloh, R. P., 2002,
Ville Platte 30 x 60 Minute Geologic Quadrangle:
Louisiana Geological Survey, Baton Rouge, Scale
1:100,000.
Snead, J. 1., P. V. Heinrich, R. P. McCulloh, and W. J.
Autin, comps. 1998. Quaternary geologic map of
Louisiana. Unpublished map plus 12 pp. expanded
explanation and notes. Prepared in cooperation with

11

I

"

louisiana Geological Survey
louisiana State University
3079 Energy, Coast and Environment Building
Baton Rouge, louisiana 70803
Tel: 225/578.5320
Fax: 225/578.3662
www.lgs.lsu.edu

I

.......I

