Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

March 16, 2012
Subject: Letter Report #2012-5: A Cultural Resources Background Review of the 205-Meter
McKenzie M 2H Pipeline in Northwestern McMullen County, Texas
Mr. David Black
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Mr. Black,
This letter provides a Final Report of findings during our background review of the McKenzie M
2H Pipeline right-of-way (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. McKenzie M 2H Pipeline on county-wide topographic map.

Background Review
Old Maps, Aerial
Photographs,
Historic Research
“In the earliest of
written accounts,
no permanent
Spanish settlements
seem to have been
established in the
area now known as
McMullen County.
In 1828, the land
was assigned to
John McMullen and
James McGloin,
who contracted to
settle the area with
200 Catholic
immigrants. By
1835 the Mexican
government had
issued perhaps
fifteen grants of
land in the area of
present McMullen
County to colonists
associated with the
McMullen-McGloin
project. None of
t h e s e g r a n t e es
actually settled on
the land assigned to
them, however. By
1836, when Texas
s e c e d e d f r o m Figure 2. McK enzie M 2H Pipeline on Pertle Creek (1969) topographic
Mexico, the area map.
remained populated
almost entirely by the Indian bands that roamed through the area.
When William Bollaert, an English land speculator, traveled through the area between the Nueces and
Frio rivers in 1844, for example, the only people he encountered were convicts who had escaped from
a prison in Laredo. Even after the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo definitively assigned the Nueces Strip
to Texas, outlaws and unfriendly Indians delayed development of the area for years. By 1860, there

were perhaps 100 settlers in the county. By the late 1860s and early 1870s, a number of ranches had
been established, mostly in the northern part of the county. For protection, ranchers often grouped
their dwellings together” (Leffler 1996:437-440).
A standard source of review is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs
available at the Perry Casteñada Library at the University of Texas at Austin (Perry Casteñeda Library
2012). Although this source would normally prove invaluable for researching the possibility of, and
potential for, historic sites and structures to exist within one mile of a project area, in this case the
McKenzie M 2H Pipeline route is in such a rural area that no old maps or aerial photographs were
available. A second standard research source consulted for old maps and aerial photographs was a
very comprehensive and large compilation of old maps and aerial photographs compiled by the Texas
Department of Transportation from dozens of historic archives throughout the state of Texas. Once
again, the McKenzie M 2H Pipeline route appears to be in a rural area of McMullen County that
either warranted little attention, or the area was void of historic structures.
Nevertheless, the lack of comprehensive historic map and aerial information, coupled with the
paucity of cultural resources surveys within the area is possibly, and perhaps probably, why no
information is available regarding the presence of historic structures, ranching or industrial activities,
or persons of historic significance to the immediate area. Technically, any structures old than 45 years
are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be considered
when the pipeline right-of-way is excavated. Historic sites recorded in McMullen County consist of
local family cemeteries with just a few burials in each, house sites and farmsteads from as early as
the 1850s, and trash scatters..
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
There are 225 documented archaeological sites in McMullen County. Of those, 147 are prehistoric
open campsites with evidence that as a whole, open campsites in the county have been occupied from
the Paleoindian through the Historic periods. As with most of the region, many campsites are situated
on stream terraces, but there are also some in the uplands. Fifty-nine sites are classified as lithic
scatters, and generally these are located in the uplands and along stream cutbanks where gravels
outcrop. They also exhibit evidence of being used for the past 11,000 years. One quarry site has been
recorded in the county, as has a single sandstone burned rock midden. The only prehistoric burial
noted was found at one of the open campsites. Historic sites consist of local family cemeteries with
just a few burials in each, house sites and farmsteads from as early as the 1850s, and trash scatters
(Atlas 2012).
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say what
bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of McMullen County before then. Only
cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and apparent
lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods. Archaeologists have
documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites, including large open campsites that are
most commonly located along stream or river terraces with numerous campfires, where a wide variety
of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal remains are found. Where
gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are
sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric
quarries.

Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the lack
of cultural resource surveys near the PA that would have located sites, rather than the probable nonexistence of sites. In fact, the PA lies to the west of a large archaeological survey conducted in
anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al. 1981).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both Live
Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000 years
ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and gathering
natural food resources available in the area. In addition, archaeologists from the Center for
Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted archaeological
investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir. A number of different types of
structures were investigated, the purpose being to extract as much information as possible about
architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns during the last half of the 19th century within the
reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met
the challenges of living in a frontier area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming
of law and order, railroads, and modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
A review of the Texas Historical
Commission’s Atlas of Texas
Archaeological sites indicates that no
professional documented archaeological
surveys have been conducted one mile of
the Project Area (PA), and no
archaeological sites have been recorded.
However, as shown in Figure 2, TAAI
conducted field surveys of the McKenzie
North Lateral, the McKenzie South Lateral,
and the JJ Henry Lateral (Nickels 2011a, b;
2012). In all cases, no archaeological site is
known to exist within one mile of the Martin
Mason M 2H Pipeline.

Soils Map
The McKenzie M 2H Pipeline crosses
through a soil type that has not as yet been
mapped (Figure 3). However, it is clear that
the pipeline will course through an upland
area remote from either extant or prehistoric
water sources, and where soils are generally Figure 3. Soils map of the Project Area.
shallow. The closest soil mapped is
Campbellton clay loam (CpB) (Web Soil Survey 2012). These are shallow loams on interfluve ridges
and slopes, with a minimal potential to contain intact and significant archaeological deposits to at
most, seven inches below the surface.

Summary and Recommendations
A search of the Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites database as well as published documents indicate
that there are no known archaeological sites within one mile of the Project Area. In addition, the
pipeline right-of-way courses through an upland area where there is at best a moderate potential to
encapsulate intact archaeological deposits of significance to the prehistory or history of Texas. As
such, Tierras Antiguas recommends that the pipeline be allowed to be constructed as currently aligned
without any further archaeological investigations. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommends
that if any additional, undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development, such finds
should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.
.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
March 16, 2012].

Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon
Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Leffler, J.
1996

McMullen County. The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 4, pp. 437-440.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Nickels, D. L.
2011a A Cultural Resources Survey of the 1.4-Mile McKenzie North Lateral Right-ofWay in Northwestern McMullen County, Texas. Archaeological Report #68.
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, TX.
2011b A Cultural Resources Survey of the of the 10.5-Mile JJ Henry Lateral Right-ofWay in Northwestern McMullen County, Texas. Archaeological Report #64.
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, TX.
2012 A Cultural Resources Survey of the of the 2.9-Mile McKenzie South Lateral
Right-of-Way in Northwestern McMullen County, Texas. Archaeological Report
#58. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, TX.
Perry Casteñeda Library
2012 Perry Cesteñeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed March 15, 2012].
Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2012 McMullen County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed March
15, 2012].

