Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

August 31, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2012-48, A Cultural Resources Survey of the 985-Meter McKenzie
Foley B 2H Pipeline in Northwestern McMullen County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our cultural resources survey of the McKenzie Foley B 2H
Pipeline (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. McKenzie Foley B 2H Pipeline on large topographic map.

Figure 2. McKenzie Foley B 2H Pipeline on Pertle Creek (1969) topographic map.

Background Review
Old Maps, Aerial Photographs, Historic Research
“In the earliest of written accounts, no permanent Spanish settlements seem to have been established
in the area now known as McMullen County. In 1828, the land was assigned to John McMullen and
James McGloin, who contracted to settle the area with 200 Catholic immigrants. By 1835 the
Mexican government had issued perhaps fifteen grants of land in the area of present McMullen
County to colonists associated with the McMullen-McGloin project. None of these grantees actually
settled on the land assigned to them, however. By 1836, when Texas seceded from Mexico, the area
remained populated almost entirely by the Indian bands that roamed through the area.
When William Bollaert, an English land speculator, traveled through the area between the Nueces
and Frio rivers in 1844, for example, the only people he encountered were convicts who had escaped
from a prison in Laredo. Even after the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo definitively assigned the
Nueces Strip to Texas, outlaws and unfriendly Indians delayed development of the area for years.
By 1860, there were perhaps 100 settlers in the county. By the late 1860s and early 1870s, a number
of ranches had been established, mostly in the northern part of the county. For protection, ranchers

often grouped their dwellings together” (Leffler 1996:437-440).
A standard source of review is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs
available at the Perry Castañeda Library at the University of Texas at Austin (Perry Castañeda
Library 2012). Although this source would normally prove invaluable for researching the possibility
of, and potential for, historic sites and structures to exist within one mile of a project area, in this
case the McKenzie Foley B 2H Pipeline is in such a rural area that no map or aerial photograph
earlier than 1969 was available. This route appears to be in a rural area of McMullen County that
either warranted little attention, or the area was void of historic structures.
Nevertheless, the lack of comprehensive historic map and aerial information, coupled with the
paucity of cultural resources surveys within the area is possibly, and perhaps probably, why no
information is available regarding the presence of historic structures, ranching or industrial activities,
or persons of historic significance to the immediate area. Technically, any structures older than 45
years are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be
considered when the pipeline right-of-way is excavated.
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
There are 225 documented archaeological sites in McMullen County. Of those, 147 are prehistoric
open campsites with evidence that as a whole, open campsites in the county have been occupied
from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods. As with most of the region, many campsites are
situated on stream terraces, but there are also some in the uplands. Fifty-nine sites are classified as
lithic scatters, and generally these are located in the uplands and along stream cutbanks where
gravels outcrop. They also exhibit evidence of being used for the past 11,000 years. One quarry site
has been recorded in the county, as has a single sandstone burned rock midden. The only prehistoric
burial noted was found at one of the open campsites. Historic sites consist of local family cemeteries
with just a few burials in each, house sites and farmsteads from as early as the 1850s, and trash
scatters (Atlas 2012).
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say
what bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of McMullen County before then.
Only cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and apparent
lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods. Archaeologists have
documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites, including large open campsites that are
most commonly located along stream or river terraces with numerous campfires, where a wide
variety of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal remains are found.
Where gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient
gravels are sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or
prehistoric quarries.
Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the lack
of cultural resource surveys near the PA that would have located sites, rather than the probable nonexistence of sites. In fact, the Project Area lies to the west of a large archaeological survey conducted
in anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al. 1981).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both Live
Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000 years

ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and gathering
natural food resources available in the area. In addition, archaeologists from the Center for
Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted archaeological
investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir. A number of different types of
structures were investigated, the purpose being to extract as much information as possible about
architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns during the last half of the 19th century within the
reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met
the challenges of living in a frontier area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming
of law and order, railroads, and modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archaeological sites indicated that
no professional documented archaeological surveys had been conducted within one mile of the
proposed McKenzie Foley B 2H Pipeline, but five archaeological sites had been documented within
one mile (Atlas 2012). Notably, the Atlas includes only those surveys for which an Antiquities
Permit has been issued by the Texas Historical Commission, but as shown in Figure 2, TAAI has
conducted archaeological surveys of the Foley Unit A MCM 1H Pipeline, the McKenzie South
Lateral, and the JJ Henry Lateral (Nickels 2012a, b; 2011). The only archaeological site discovered
by TAAI along these three pipeline surveys is 41MC577. Otherwise, the other four sites were
recorded by E. R. Mokry, Jr. In 1975 (Mokry 1976); a brief description of each site follows.
41MC324
The Scallorn arrow point found at this site implies a Late Prehistoric, Austin phase period of
occupation, sometime between roughly 1250-70 years B. P. However, other artifacts found at the site
such as a Perdiz arrow point, Leon Plain pottery sherds, beveled knife fragments, smoothed
sandstone slabs, and large mammal bones suggest it was also occupied by Late Prehistoric, Toyah
phase bison hunters sometime between roughly 700-300 years B. P. In addition, E. R. Mokry, Jr.
observed mussel shells, bifaces, cores, and lithic debitage spread across the surface in 1975.
41MC325
The cultural remains observed in 1975 at this site are very similar to those observed at 41MC324,
i.e., Toyah phase Perdiz and Fresno arrow points, Leon Plain pottery sherds, mussel shells, and large
mammal bones. In addition, E. R. Mokry, Jr. noted the existence of chipped stone blades, another
example of Toyah phase technology.
41MC326
The projectile points found at this site imply that it was occupied at least twice, but during different
periods in prehistory. A Tortugas point implies an early Middle Archaic period occupation, roughly
4000 B.P., while the discovery of Edwards and Ensor points on the surface suggest later Transitional
Archaic or early Late Prehistoric occupations about 1250-700 B. P. Other chipped stone pieces
observed on this site include Clear Fork gouges, scrapers, and hammerstones.
41MC327
41MC327 appears to have been the earliest occupied site of the seven that E. R. Mokry, Jr. recorded
in 1975. His documentation of Plainview and Golondrina basal fragments at the site (Mokry 1976)
suggest that Paleoindian hunters and gatherers were there perhaps as early as 8800 B.P. In addition,
this was obviously a favored campsite over the ensuing several thousand tears as evidenced by the

presence of Abosolo and Tortugas dart points from the Middle Archaic, an Ensor point from the Late
or Transitional Archaic, and a Scallorn point from the early, Austin phase of the Late Prehistoric.
Other pieces of chipped stone observed on the site included Clear Fork gouges, scrapers, and cores.
41MC577
41MC577 appears to be a prehistoric open campsite occupied multiple times on stratified terrace
deposits along Leoncita Creek, where springs may have flowed for several millenium, but now is
dry. Other than subtle slope slumping and erosion along the bank of the creek, the terrace deposits
appear to be very stable, and little disturbance was observed where the terraces were not negatively
impacted by modern construction. Evidence of stone tool manufacturing was evident, from core
reduction through final stage bifaces, and multiple hearth features are probable. Its research value
is considered high, with potentially deeply buried and well-stratified archaeological deposits. As
such, Tierras Antiguas assessed the site as potentially significant, and recommended that the site be
avoided during construction of the JJ Henry Lateral pipeline.

Soils
Although soils mapping of this area of McMullen County has not yet been completed, it appears that
construction of the McKenzie Foley B 2H Pipeline will apparently impact three soil types. These are
briefly described in Table 1, along with their predicted potential to contain intact cultural deposits
in deeply buried, and thus potentially significant contexts; they are further illustrated in Figure 3.

Table 1. Soils to be Impacted by Construction of the McKenzie Foley B 2H Pipeline.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas, and Depths

Buried and Intact Archaeological
Potential

Dosrios clay (DsB)

Deep clay on convex interfluves
and slopes

Minimal to <8 inches below the
surface

Imogene fine sandy loam (ImB)

Deep sandy loam on low stream
terraces and flood plains along
creeks

Moderate to about 22 inches below
the surface

Tordia clay (TOB)

Very deep alkaline clay on uplands
and sideslopes

Moderate to about 16 inches below
the surface

Figure 3. Soils map of the McKenzie Foley B 2H Pipeline area.
Our personal observation of this
immediate area during a field
survey indicated that the general
area was very heavily eroded and
deflated, with numerous
mechanical push piles (see for
example, Figures 4 and 5),
exposing petrified wood fragments
and carpet gravels on the uplands,
as well as the underlying caliche in
several areas. Although particular
attention was given to the drainage
crossing along the southeastern
portion of the right-of-way, the
drainage was observed to be
generally broad and ephemeral, Figure 4. Typical vegetation and surface visibility along the
with no terrace deposits (Figure 6). McKenzie Foley right-of-way; taken from N3152792 E534808
(NAD83), facing northwest.

Figure 5. Photo of McKenzie Foley right-of-way taken from N3152818
E534761 (NAD83); facing northwest.

Figure 6. Drainage crossing at N3152898 E534610 (NAD83); facing
northeast.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Based upon the absence of cultural resources observed on the eroded and deflated surfaces, and the
at best moderate potential for significant archaeological deposits to exist in the soils in the area, we
recommend that construction of the McKenzie Foley B 2H Pipeline as currently planned be allowed
to proceed, with no further archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that if any
previously undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development of the facility, such
finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological
consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
July 31, 2012].

Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke
Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series:
Volume 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Leffler, J.
1996

McMullen County. The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 4, pp. 437-440.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Mokry, E. R., Jr.
1976 Notes on Paleoindian Projectile Points from McMullen County. In La Tierra, pp.
26-27. Newsletter of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association.
Nickels, D. L.
2012a A Cultural Resources Survey of the of the 1.1-Mile Foley Unit A MCM 1H
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Northwestern McMullen County, Texas. Archaeology
Report #86. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, TX.
2012b A Cultural Resources Survey of the of the 2.9-Mile McKenzie South Lateral
Right-of-Way in Northwestern McMullen County, Texas. Archaeology Report
#87. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, TX.
2011 A Cultural Resources Survey of the of the 10.5-Mile JJ Henry Lateral
Right-of-Way in Northwestern McMullen County, Texas. Archaeology Report
#64. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, TX.
Perry Castañeda Library
2012 Perry Castañeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed July 31, 2012].
Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Web Soil Survey
2012 McMullen County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed July 31,
2012].

