CALABOOSES IN PILOT POINT, TEXAS

BY
WILLIAM E. MOORE

CONTRIBUTIONS IN ARCHAEOLOGY 5

2014

INTRODUCTION
I have visited all 254 Texas counties and it was not until April of 2013 that I saw
my first Texas calaboose. That name was familiar to me from the many western movies I
had seen as a child. Being locked up in the calaboose was a phrase I had heard often but
I had never equated it with anything but the typical western jail as depicted by
Hollywood. Behind the local grocery store in Gause, Texas is a small concrete structure
that immediately caught my attention. When I asked one of the local residents about this
interesting building I was told that it was their calaboose. One of my first thoughts was
what it must have been like to be locked up in a small building with a dirt floor and no
plumbing or electricity. The summer heat must have been unbearable as would have
been cold winter days and nights.

There is no formal definition for a calaboose. The name was derived from a very
old Spanish word – Calaboza – that means jail or dungeon. These tiny structures were
mainly used for short term or overnight stays for minor offenses such as drinking and
fighting. They also served as holding facilities for the more serious prisoners until
transportation to the county jail could be arranged. My definition of a calaboose is a
small, one-story structure that varies in size. So far, I have documented examples from
72 square feet to 363 square feet. Most calabooses have one or two rooms or cells. I
have only found two with three cells.

My visit to Pilot Point in Denton County was one of many trips across the state to
visit a calaboose. At the time of this writing, I have visited 65 similar structures and
identified many more that are now gone. I have a website (www.tinytexasjails.com.) that
documents my progress I greatly value any comments and learning about calabooses that
I am not aware of. Each calaboose has been recorded at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory on the campus of The University of Texas at Austin as a historic
site. The number assigned to the one in Pilot Point that is still standing is 41DN585.

1

Figure 1. Pilot Point in 1885

The first documented calaboose in Pilot Point is depicted on the Sanborn fire
insurance map (Sheet 1) dated 1885 (Figure 1). It was a one-story wood building located
at 117 ½ North Jefferson Street in city block 9. It is depicted on the Sanborn maps dated
1891, 1901, and 1907 in the same location and referred to as a calaboose.

2

Figure 2. Pilot Point in 1912

No Sanborn maps were published between 1907 and 1912. Therefore, this
researcher does not know the date that the wooden calaboose discussed above was
demolished. It is not present on the Sanborn map dated 1912 (Sheet 2), but the same map
shows a one-story stone jail at 408 Liberty Street in block 16 (Figure 2). The size of this
jail is consistent with the calabooses I have visited during this study. Therefore, the use
of the word jail is a choice of words. The word calaboose would be equally as accurate.

3

Figure 3. Pilot Point in 1921
Sometime between 1912 and 1921 (Sheet 2), the stone jail had been converted to
a cobbler shop. A one-story ironclad city jail was back at city block 9 in the same general
area as the earlier wood calaboose (Figure 3). The concrete calaboose that is present
today had not been constructed.

4

I visted Pilot Point on June 12, 2013 and documented a small calaboose owned by
the city that is located at 106 West Division Street (Figure 4). It is in a fenced area that
serves as the water works plant for the city. At the time, the gate was locked and I was
only able to take phtographs. Mario Cisneros is an employee of the city of Pilot Point,
and he measured the calaboose and took photographs of the interior and exterior.

Figure 4. Calaboose on City Property

5

The outside measures 9 feet across the front and 13 feet on the sides (117 square
feet). The interior consists of two rooms; a foyer in the front and a cell behind the foyer
(Figure 5). The distance from the floor to the top of the interior walls is 6.9 feet and the
distance to the peaked room is 8 feet. The exterior door is on the south wall and
measures 24 by 70 inches. There is a single window on the north wall with metal bars
and that measures 16 by 19 inches. The door and bars are three-quarter inch steel. The
rest of the building is made of concrete using the poured in place method that was
common during the early part of the 20th century.

Figure 5. View of Cell from Foyer

6

According to historian Jay Melugin, this jail was constructed in the 1920s. The
site of the jail was purchased by the city sometime between1912 and 1922. Therefore, it
is assumed that it was constructed during this period. These dates are consistent with the
Sanborn maps that were published in 1921.
Currently, the city is using it as a place for storing supplies and machinery
asociated with the water plant. There are no plans to demolish it at this time.
For those interested in learning more about the subject of jails I recommend
reading “Just Visiting’ Old Texas Jails” by Joan Upton Hall, published in 2007 by State
House Press, McMurry University in Abilene, Texas and “Wanted: Historic County Jails
of Texas” by Edward A. Blackburn, published by Texas A&M University Press in 2006.
Also, there is a very useful website entitled “Red River Historian” that contains pictures
and documentation about North Texas and surrounding areas.

7

