BCS
Archeological Survey Report
on the
Blossom Telephone Company,
Blossom Exchange Fiber Optic,
Lamar County, Texas

TAC Permit # 5771
BCS Project Number: 83-10
Prepared For: Midland Group, Inc.
Project Name: Blossom Telephone Company, Blossom Exchange Fiber Optic
Project Location: Lamar County, Texas
Land Status: Public road right of way
Surveyed By: Heather Szarka and Robert Walker
October 11-13, 2010
Report By: Heather Szarka
November 18, 2010

NOTICE
This report was prepared for agency review and is not intended for public use. Disclosure of site
locations is prohibited. If information is to be released to the general public, all maps and
references to site locations must first be removed. Permission must also be sought from Midland
Group, Inc. and the Texas Historical Commission.

Phone (405) 329-5425

Briscoe/Szarka Consulting Services
P.O. Box 6566 Norman, Oklahoma 73070

Fax (405) 329-7431

Abstract
Blossom Telephone Company proposes to replace existing copper telephone lines with new fiber
optic technology. The telephone grid covers the Blossom area in Lamar County in northeast
Texas. Midland Group, Inc. made initial consultation with the Texas Historical Commission
(THC) in July/August of 2010. THC recommended a four mile stretch (Figure 1) of line at the
northern terminus for archeological survey based on the presence of known sites and high
probability of discovering new sites. Portions of the right-of way (ROW) that were 100%
disturbed by road cutting and construction were not shovel tested.
The proposed new fiber optic line will replace an existing buried copper telephone line. The new
line will be installed with a cable plow within the utilities easement of the county road ROW.
This segment was physically inspected between October 11 and 13, 2010, by Heather Szarka
(Principal Investigator), and Robert Walker (Archeological Technician) of Briscoe/Szarka
Consulting Services. These investigations were conducted on behalf of Midland Group, Inc.
under TAC Permit number 5771. The primary contact for Midland Group is Harold Thompson,
who can be reached at 332 S. Third Street, Ozark, Missouri 65721, (417) 485-5889.
The new line will be installed by a cable plow on a track mounted vehicle. The Area of Potential
Effect (APE) includes an eight foot wide (the width of the cable plow) surface disturbance
corridor. Sub-surface disturbance will include a trench 3 inches wide and 3 to 4 feet deep. A
total of less than 2 acres will be disturbed by the installation of the new cable. The existing and
new lines run along a country road right of way in areas that are 60 to 100% disturbed by
previous utility line construction, drainage ditches and general road maintenance.
For archeological purposes, a corridor up to 20 feet wide (roughly 10 acres) (width of the ROW
varies along the county road) was included in the archeological investigations. The corridor
generally spans the distance between the existing road edge and fence line on the edge of private
property (Figure 1).

ii

Figure 1: General Project Area, looking north.

iii

Three previously recorded prehistoric sites (41LR135, 41LR142 and 41LR44) are located within
one mile of the project; 41LR135 is within 400 feet. Two others (41LR45 and 41LR48) are
located just outside the one mile corridor.
One area of archeological interest (41LR319) was located during these investigations. Access to
private property adjacent to the road right of way was not allowed, and site details are based on
tests and observations made within the road right of way.
41LR319 is a positive shovel test on a pimple mound, the edge of which extends past the fence
above a steep bank down to the roadbed. The test contained two flakes and a possible core/FCR
located between 80 and 100cm. No other positive shovel tests were located and the road cut
contained no visible artifacts. Many pimple mounds were visible from the fence line on private
properties closer to Nolan Creek.
The area adjacent to 41LR135 (located approximately 400 feet off the ROW) was thoroughly
inspected and no artifacts or features were noted in the road ROW.
Artifacts were not collected during these investigations. All areas of archeological interest were
found to be heavily disturbed in the APE. Installation of a new buried cable line immediately
next to an existing buried line in the road right of way will have no effect on significant cultural
resources and no further archeological concerns are being recommended.
This assessment is subject to review and concurrence by the Texas Historical Commission.

iv

Table of Contents
Abstract --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ii
Introduction ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 1
Environmental Setting --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 3
Research Design and Methodology -----------------------------------------------------------------

5

Prefield Background Research ----------------------------------------------------------------------

6

Prehistoric Background ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 7
Historic Background ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 15
Native American Concerns --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 19
Cultural Resources-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 19
Recommendations -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 22
Professional Estimations ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 22
Bibliography --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 23
Appendix I. Shovel Test Data ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 28
Appendix II. Project Maps --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 31
Appendix III. Site Form ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 34

v

Introduction
Blossom Telephone Company proposes to replace existing copper telephone lines with new fiber
optic technology. The telephone grid covers the Blossom area in Lamar County in northeast
Texas (Figure 2). Midland Group, Inc. made initial consultation with the Texas Historical
Commission (THC) in July/August of 2010. THC recommended a four mile stretch of line at the
northern terminus for archeological survey based on the presence of known sites and high
probability of discovering new sites. Portions of the right-of way (ROW) that were 100%
disturbed by road cutting and construction were not shovel tested.
The proposed new fiber optic line will replace an existing buried copper telephone line. The new
line will be installed with a cable plow within the utilities easement of the county road ROW.
This segment was physically inspected between October 11 and 13, 2010, by Heather Szarka
(Principal Investigator), and Robert Walker (Archeological Technician) of Briscoe/Szarka
Consulting Services. These investigations were conducted on behalf of Midland Group, Inc.
under TAC Permit number 5771. The primary contact for Midland Group is Harold Thompson,
who can be reached at 332 S. Third Street, Ozark, Missouri 65721, (417) 485-5889.
The new line will be installed by a cable plow on a track mounted vehicle. The Area of Potential
Effect (APE) includes an eight foot wide (the width of the cable plow) surface disturbance
corridor. Sub-surface disturbance will include a trench 3 inches wide and 3 to 4 feet deep. A
total of less than 2 acres will be disturbed by the installation of the new cable. The existing and
new lines run along a country road right of way in areas that are 60 to 100% disturbed by
previous utility line construction, drainage ditches and general road maintenance.
Three previously recorded prehistoric sites (41LR135, 41LR142 and 41LR44) are located within
one mile of the project. Two others (41LR45 and 41LR48) are located just outside the one mile
corridor.
One area of archeological interest (41LR319) was located during these investigations. Access to
private property adjacent to the road right of way was not allowed, and site details are based on
tests and observations made within the road right of way.
41LR319 is a positive shovel test on a pimple mound, the edge of which extends past the fence
above a steep bank down to the roadbed. The test contained two flakes and a possible core/FCR
located between 80 and 100cm. No other positive shovel tests were located and the road cut
contained no visible artifacts. Many pimple mounds were visible from the fence line on private
properties closer to Nolan Creek.
The area adjacent to 41LR135, located approximately 400 feet from the project, was thoroughly
inspected and no artifacts or features were noted in the road ROW.
For archeological purposes, a corridor up to 20 feet wide (roughly 10 acres) (width of the ROW
varies along the county road) was included in the archeological investigations. The corridor
generally spans the distance between the existing road edge and fence line on the edge of private
property.
1

Figure 2: General Project Area.

2

Environmental Background
The project is located near the boundary between the southern Osage Plains and the Gulf Coastal
Plain physiographic provinces, but within the Gulf Coastal Plain province (Fenneman 1946).
Ecologically, the area is transitional from the southern prairie-plains to the East Texas forests in
the Cross Timbers and Blackland Prairie natural resource areas. This area has a humid,
subtropical climate. Summers are hot and winters are mild except for brief periods of cold
temperatures associated with arctic fronts. Precipitation and temperature data show that late
spring and early fall are the wettest months, while summer temperatures are high and rainfall is
low. Occasionally, tropical storms reach this area causing severe flooding. Normal over bank
flooding is common in the spring months when Pacific air masses collide with warm Gulf air.
The entire Red River drainage basin has developed over relatively soft late Paleozoic and
Cretaceous sedimentary rocks (Hendricks 1976). The headwaters of the Red River are located in
the western Texas Panhandle in Late Permian sandstone and shale. The river channel cuts
through Permian clastic rocks until it reaches Cretaceous carbonates in the Lake Texoma area.
In the Lake Texoma area, the bedrock units exposed at the surface belong to Cretaceous clastic
and carbonate stratigraphic units. The lithologic differences among these units are components of
landscape evolution, including drainage network development, soils genesis and supply of
alluvial parent materials.
Bedrock lithology is the principal factor that has influenced development of regional
geomorphology. Two major upland geomorphic/physiographic subdivisions are recognized: the
Cross Timbers and Black Prairie. Because climatic variation within this region is minor,
differences in landforms, soils and vegetation among the upland subdivisions are attributed to
different bedrock lithology.
The four mile stretch of road requiring a survey was slightly rolling with areas of forest and
pasture (Figures 3 and 4). The entire length of the project parallels Nolan Creek to the east and
several small intermittent drainages cross the project as they flow toward Nolan Creek.

3

Figure 3: View of Project area, looking north. Note forest vegetation.

Figure 4: View of pastures adjacent to the Project Area, looking east.
4

Research Design and Methodology
The basic design for these investigations was to locate cultural resources that exist in the
proposed construction corridor or Area of Potential Effect (APE). Parts of the four mile segment
of the new buried fiber optic line pass adjacent to significant previously recorded sites, and given
the topographic setting, similar or other sites are possible in the area.
The new buried fiber optic will be installed within the utility easement within county road ROW
and it was expected that much of the project corridor would be severely disturbed by prior phone
line construction, other utility lines and roadway improvements. The segment was walked in
linear fashion along one or both sides of the roadway.
Areas of the segment, adjacent to the fence, contained some remaining surface soils and areas of
archeological interest. These areas were subjected to shovel testing along the road right of way.
Shovel testing consisted of excavating roughly 30 X 30cm holes through surface soils. Fill from
each test was hand sifted through 1/4 inch hardware cloth before back filling the holes. A
Garmin hand-held GPS receiver was used to spot locate tests, segment points, and artifacts. The
receiver was set to the 1927 NADA datum for correlation with USGS maps used during the
investigations. Shovel test data and results are included as Appendix I of this report.

5

Prefield Background Research
Prior to the initiation of fieldwork, the site records and project files on-line at the TexSite
archives were searched for information about previously recorded archeological sites in the
project area. There were three archeological sites within one mile of the immediate project area
and several sites have been recorded in surrounding areas. One of these sites is located adjacent
to the project.
41LR135 is a prehistoric site located 415 feet from the project area. The site is discussed further
in the Cultural Resources section of this report. This site will not be disturbed by the proposed
project.
41LR142 is a prehistoric site located 1250 feet from the project area. The site is discussed
further in the Cultural Resources section of this report. This site will not be disturbed by the
proposed project.
41LR44 is a prehistoric site located 3900 feet from the project area. The site is discussed further
in the Cultural Resources section of this report. This site will not be disturbed by the proposed
project.
41LR45 is a multi-component site recorded is 1975 is association with the Big Pine Lake
Reservoir project. The site is 1.4 miles from the project and will not be disturbed.
41LR48 is a prehistoric site recorded is 1975 is association with the Big Pine Lake Reservoir
project. The site is 1.7 miles from the project and will not be disturbed.
A search of the older aerial photographs that accompany the USDA Soil Surveys for Lamar
County (circa 1950s aerials) show a few homesteads along the roadway but no such sites that
would be impacted by the project.
According to the most recently available listings of the National Register of Historic Places, no
properties have been listed on the Register in the project area.

6

Prehistoric Background
Paleo-Indian (Early Prehistoric) Period
It is unclear exactly when the first people entered the area, but evidence from the Cooperton Site
in Oklahoma (Anderson 1975) suggests that small groups were in the area by about 17,000 years
ago. The oldest firmly dated site, however, is the Domebo site (Leonhardy 1966), a Clovis
mammoth kill which dates to 11,500 B.P. Both sites are located on the Prairie Plains west of the
Cross Timbers, about 100 miles to the northwest of the study area.
The Clovis people were far-ranging nomadic foragers distinguished by their gracile lanceolate
spear points (commonly found throughout the Plains states) and mammoth kill sites (rare). Other
tools associated with the culture include a number of scrapers and knives made from prepared
core blades. Aside from the Domebo Kill Site in Caddo County, Clovis evidence in Oklahoma is
primarily recognized by period spear points found throughout the state. In Texas, excavations on
Paleo-Indian sites have been undertaken at Lewisville (Crook and Harris 1957) and the Aubrey
Site (Ferring 1990). Ferring's excavations at the Aubrey site revealed in situ deposits indicative
of faunal procurement activities and intrasite activity areas that suggested a single group
occupied the site either once or over a series of brief occupations (Ferring 1997:5). A full report
by Ferring on his investigations at the Aubrey site remains pending.
The Folsom culture follows the Clovis around 10,500 years ago, and, like the Clovis, is most
noted for distinctive fluted projectile points. Population appears to have increased somewhat as
Folsom points are much more commonly found than Clovis points. Folsom people hunted a
now-extinct species of bison, and our knowledge of the culture comes primarily from bison kill
sites on the edge of the High Plains to the west. At the Cooper Site in Woodward County
(Bement 1994), the skeletal remains of 40 bison were excavated from an eroded canyon along
with 32 projectile points and other tools. Of particular interest from the site was a bison skull
with a red hematite design, recognized as the western hemisphere's earliest artwork and evidence
of ritual found to date. Folsom camp sites remain rare but are now being recognized and
excavated on the Southern Plains. Jack Hofman (Bement, Buehler and Hofman 1996) has
recently conducted excavations at the Waugh site in Harper County, Oklahoma, where a camp
and kill site were both located.
Both Clovis and Folsom people had a well-developed knapping technology with tools made from
prepared blades (the Lame' Technique) of the finest cherts and flints available throughout the
Plains region. A variety of unifacial knives and scrapers with fine flaking are also present within
the Clovis.
A number of possibly different or descendant groups follow the Folsom, identified mostly on the
basis of point styles, including the Scottsbluff, Angostura, Agate Basin, Plainview, and others.
The point styles seem to suggest that people have become more regional by this time. By the
end of the period, the Meserve, Red Smoke, Plainview and Cody Complexes are recognized for
the Prairie Plains and High Plains, and the Dalton Complex is recognized for the Woodlands east
of the Plains. Johnson (1989) suggests that Plains groups moved east and interacted with Dalton
groups at this time.

7

Aside from the point styles, tool kits include a variety of animal, wood, and vegetal processing
items. Prepared blade technology persists, but is corrupted by the use of locally available
quartzites and other lithic sources. Johnson (1989) sees a shift from production of Plainview
points from prepared blades (the Lame' technique) to production from bifacial performs (a
Dalton technique) as a possible eastern influence on western cultures as well. Plainview,
Meserve, and Dalton styles appear to carry over into a transition period between the Paleo-Indian
and later Archaic periods.
The Packard Complex (Wyckoff 1964) is a woodland-savanna adaptation on the eastern edge of
the Cross Timbers in Mayes County, Oklahoma. The lowest levels at the Packard site were
dated to about 9500 B.P. and included a number of lanceolate points, prepared blade tools, biface
fragments, and a scraper made from a broken lanceolate point. The Pumpkin Creek Complex in
Love County of southern Oklahoma (Wyckoff and Taylor 1971) appears to be a Prairie-Plains
adaptation dating from about the same time as Packard, and contains a variety of early style
points (Scottsbluff, Midland-Plainview, Meserve, Dalton, Greenbriar, and Golondrina).
Wyckoff (1984) places the Packard and Pumpkin Creek Complexes in the Early Archaic, but the
typological considerations clearly identify a connection to the preceding Paleo-Indian period.
The Archaic (Middle Prehistoric) Period
It is presumed that the Archaic people of the region were the direct ancestors of the proceeding
Paleo-Indian people, although movements of people towards the east (Johnson 1989) is
recognized. Traditionally the Archaic period is seen as a continuation of the Paleo-Indian
lifestyle, with slightly larger groups remaining in more restricted territories and more effectively
exploiting area resources with a wider range of tools. The period dates to perhaps between 9000
and 2000 B.P. (Hughes 1986).
The first attempts to identify and order the Middle Prehistoric manifestations for the Southern
Plains were by Ray (1935) and Sayles (1935) in West Texas. Ray's Clear Fork and Sand Dune
cultures identified early and late Archaic complexes in and around Abilene, Texas, and Sayles
redefined Ray's scheme as Phases I, II and III of the Brazos River Branch -- later combined by
Krieger (1946) into the Brazos culture. Harris (1962) identified the Carrollton and Elam foci as
early and late manifestations for the eastern or prairie plains area of the culture, and Shaeffer
(1966) introduced the Lawton Aspect for the same culture in Oklahoma.
Prikryl (1990), among others, sees a broad cultural pattern for much of the Southern Plains, with
a lack of regionalization for at least the Early Archaic portion of the period. Nomenclature in the
literature continues to define portions of the Southern Prairie-Plains on the basis of modern
political boundaries. Differences, however, do not exist on either side of the Red River and the
same cultural sequences apply to both sides. General characteristics of the period include small
to larger groups of bison hunters whose numbers expand through time, intensive exploitation of
local resources (including lithics) and a preference for occupying higher terraces and hill tops.

8

Early Archaic (ca. 9000-6000 B.P.)
Pollen data from along the Washita River (Bond 1966) suggest that the area was open prairie at
this time. Information from the Perry Ranch (Saunders and Penwan 1979), Gore Pit (Hammatt
1976) and Pumpkin Creek sites (Wyckoff and Taylor 1971) suggests that bands remained small
and far ranging. Projectile points proliferate to include a variety of styles (Meserve, Greenbriar,
Trinity, Ensor, San Patrice, Frio, and others) that evolve from earlier Paleo-Indian styles. Other
tools diagnostic of the Early Archaic include Clear Fork gouges, prepared blade tools, oval
grinding stones, large irregular-shaped scrapers and well-prepared distal end scrapers. Burned
rock middens at Gore Pit (Hammatt 1976) are similar to those of the Edwards Aspect from
central Texas (Suhm 1960) and sites in northern Oklahoma and southern Kansas (Thies 1990).
Middle Archaic (ca. 6000 to 3500 B.P.)
Regionalization appears to have occurred around this time with changes in the environment
beginning to approximate modern conditions (Prikryl 1990). Oak-savannah began replacing
prairie grasslands on the eastern half of the Southern Plains by about 5000 years ago (Albert and
Wyckoff 1984).
In north-central Texas the period is recognized as the Carrollton focus of the Trinity Aspect
(Crook and Harris 1952). Aside from minor differences attributable to the greater amount of
research in Texas, materials as far north as Central Oklahoma are comparable and are considered
a part of the focus. Population groups became larger in number during this period and began
exploiting smaller areas in a central based wandering system with large central encampments and
smaller satellite foraging camps.
The absence of burned rock middens during the period (Prikryl 1990) suggests a shift away from
previous resource exploitation or an intensified focus on other types of resources. A variety of
stemmed and notched spear point styles emerge including Carrollton, Morrill, Wells, Andice,
Bell and Calf Creek styles. Other items in the tool kit include wedge-shaped bifaces, choppers, a
variety of flake tools, bifacial knives, drills, gravers, flake and biface scrapers, grinding stones,
and rough gouges. Chipped stone and ground axes are rare but occasionally associated with
Carrollton sites.
The Calf Creek Horizon (Wyckoff 1994) is tentatively recognized as a variant of the Middle
Archaic on the basis of large distinctive knives of the Calf Creek style (with deep basal notches
and fine flint working) found on the eastern edge of the Southern Plains from Kansas to central
Texas. Dates for the period of production of Calf Creek bifaces cluster around 5000 to 6000
years ago, but much remains to be learned before the Calf Creek Horizon can be separated from
the Carrollton as a separate group or culture.
Late Archaic (ca. 4000 to 2000 B.P.)
The Late Archaic in north-central Texas is defined as the Elam focus (Crook and Harris 1952),
with strong ties to the east and north (Prikryl 1990). Common projectile point styles include
Gary, Langtry, Dallas, Trinity, Godly, Ellis, Elam, Edgewood, Yarbrough, Marcos, Marshall and
9

a variety of poorly stemmed and variously corner- to side-notched styles. There is a three-fold
increase in the number of sites attributed to the period and the reappearance of burned rock
middens. Sites remain located primarily on prominent terraces and ridges but expansion onto
lower terraces and flood plain rises is also observed, with a specific orientation towards water.
There is little difference between the Oklahoma and north-central Texas manifestations. Minor
differences (based more on topographic settings) may represent a variant of the Elam focus, but
association of the Oklahoma Late Archaic with the Elam appears fairly clear.
Woodland Period (ca. 2000 to 1200 B.P.)
The Woodland Period is generally seen as a transition between the Archaic and later Plains
Village periods, with influence from the east (Vehik 1984). The introduction of pottery and the
bow and arrow differentiates the early Woodland people from the Late Archaic. Mesic
conditions around 1750 years ago (Prikryl 1990) suggest that the oak-savannah was replaced by
oak forest, approximating modern conditions in the region. This shift would have pushed the
grasslands further west, with deer replacing bison as the major large fauna in the region. Aside
from a shift from bison to deer hunting, the Woodland Period is not recognized as a separate
temporal component in north central Texas. In Oklahoma, however, the Woodland Period is
recognized but poorly defined or understood.
The two best known Woodland components in the Cross Timbers of Oklahoma are the RoulstonRogers site (Drass 1979) and the Quillan site (Hughes and Briscoe 1987). Roulston-Rogers,
located on a high terrace point on the north side of Little River in Seminole County, Oklahoma,
has been radiocarbon dated to around A.D. 600. The Quillan Site is located on a buried terrace
of Crutcho Creek in Oklahoma County and was radiocarbon dated to A.D. 240.
Features from the Roulston-Rogers site included a number of burnt rock concentrations and
stone-lined hearths. Woodland features found at Quillan include a small structure and several
small storage pits. Small corner-notched "Scallorn" style arrow points, a variety of stemmed and
notched dart points (of late Archaic style), rough cordmarked and smoothed surface pottery, a
variety of flake and biface tools, and grinding stones are common traits of the period in central
Oklahoma. Signs of horticulture do not appear until very late in the period (Vehik 1984) at a
time when the Woodland is in transition to the following Plains Village period.
One complex within central Oklahoma, the Pruitt complex (Barr 1966), appears to date from
A.D. 700 to 800 (Bell 1984:323). While it does share features with Washita River populations,
and is considered to be a late Plains Woodland manifestation derived primarily from the east, it
is too poorly known to be unequivocally considered the ancestor of the Washita River
populations.
Plains Village Period (ca. 1200 to 350 B.P.)
The Lake Texoma region was a crossroads between three groups during the late prehistoric. The
Henrietta focus extends up the Red River to the west, the Washita focus extends up the Washita
River to the north and northwest, and the Caddoan area extends down the Red River to the east.
The local manifestation of the Plains Village period, the Bryan focus, shows similarities to all
10

three cultures and was originally identified by Bell and Baerreis (1951) on the basis of WPA
excavations at three sites in the reservoir area.
Characteristics of the focus included square houses with four center posts, bell- and basin-shaped
storage pits, plain brown shell-tempered and Sanders redware ceramics, a variety of arrowpoint
forms, small sized endscrapers, drills, knives, celts, grinding stones, bone tools (mostly bison
bone) and imported lithics from Kay County, Alibates, Frisco, and novaculite (Rohn 1998). A
midden mound containing 15 burials was also excavated at the James site (Ray 1960) where the
burial pattern closely resembles that at the Dillard site in northern Texas (Martin 1994) with an
absence of associated grave goods.
The Bryan focus was originally thought to be associated with the late Gibson Aspect (Caddoan)
on the basis of Sanders pottery and square house with four center posts. Much of the character
of these sites, however, more closely resembles Plains Village sites to the west and north. Most
of the Bryan focus sites are now covered by Lake Texoma and little additional research has been
(or can be) done in the area. Bryan (as a focus) has fallen out of favor and is not mentioned in
Robert Bell's 1984 Oklahoma Prehistory. The Red River Caddo, however, was also left out of
Bell's book, either inadvertently or by design.
Drass (1995) separates the Plains Village Period of central Oklahoma into an earlier Paoli phase
and later Washita River phase for the culture, centering around Grady and Garvin Counties in
south-central Oklahoma, with Washita River components rare north of the South Canadian River
and south of the Arbuckle Mountains. The Paoli phase developed out of local Woodland groups
between 1100 and 1200 years ago as groups aggregated into small hamlets on terraces along the
Washita River. Gardening of native plants such as marsh elder, sunflower, little barley and
dropseed appears to have been initially a supplemental activity to hunting (deer, bison and small
game) and fishing (fish and mussels). By AD 1100, however, horticulture came to include corn,
beans and squash in a balanced hunting and farming economy (Drass 1995).
By around AD 1200, the Paoli phase was replaced by the Washita River phase. Populations
expanded dramatically during the period. Smaller hamlets became large villages and the culture
spread to cover a larger territory. Contacts with other areas are represented by trade goods,
including ceramics from the Caddo to the east, and lithics from the west and north. Stylistic
variations in tools and projectile points, an increase in site size and density, and an increase in
agricultural specialization mark the difference between the Paoli and Washita River phases of the
Washita River culture through time.
The collapse and disappearance of the Washita River culture around AD 1450 remains a matter
of debate. The mid-fifteenth century was a time of expansion of the Apachean groups onto the
Southern Plains and raiding by bands of Farrones and Lipans undoubtedly impacted local
populations throughout the area.
In northern and central Texas, the typical Plains complex is known more locally as the Henrietta
Complex. Krieger (1946) defined the Henrietta complex based on materials from the Harrell site
in Young County, Texas. This complex appears to be related to groups of the Plains Village
tradition farther north, especially to the Washita River phase, but is recognized primarily in
11

North Central Texas (Brooks 1989). There is some suggestion, however, that certain sites of the
Complex (i.e., the Dillard site of northern Texas) may have more relationships with the Caddoan
Area to the east than previously expected (see Martin 1994). Data relating to house form are
limited, but the complex may have been characterized by oval structures, with depressed floors
and perishable walls with posts. Other features include extensive midden deposits; flat or
shallow, slab-lined rock hearths; and simple, irregularly shaped storage pits (Peter and Weston
1993:26).
Burials consist of flexed or semi-flexed interments placed in a distinct cemetery area. The
artifact assemblage from the Harrell site includes a wide variety of arrow point types (i.e.,
Fresno, Washita, Harrell, Scallorn, Alba, Bonham, and Perdiz) suggesting the possibility of a
mixed sample. Numerous dart points were also recovered from the Harrell site. Other lithic tools
include leaf-shaped and diamond-shaped beveled knives; small endscrapers; sidescrapers;
spokeshaves or notches; oval scrapers; drills or perforators; milling basins; manos; celts; ground
stone pipes; bison scapula hoes; bone awls, knives, and fishhooks; and various types of both
mussel and marine shell artifacts. The dominant pottery type is the shell-tempered Nocona Plain,
which is also common at sites of the Washita River phase to the north. Other ceramics include a
corncob-roughened ware, and trade wares both from eastern Caddoan groups and from
Southwestern cultures (Brooks 1989).
Excavations by Martin (1994:105-200) at the Dillard site located along the Red River
approximately 12 miles northwest of Gainesville, Texas, exposed a late Prehistoric Plains
Village site containing numerous burials and artifacts suggestive of interaction with Caddoan
groups, including "... maize agriculture, sedentary lifestyle, items obtained by trade from
Mississippian cultures, housing that was similar to Caddoan construction, and Caddoan style
tobacco pipes" (Martin 1994:194-195). Additionally, the site shared numerous cultural traits
with the Washita River phase further north in Oklahoma, including "... maize agriculture,
comparable arrowpoint assemblages, Nocona Plain and Lindsay Cord-marked pottery, sites
situated on river terraces, more deer remains than bison, as well as the appearance of trade goods
from both the Caddoan Area and from areas to the west and southwest" (Martin 1994:195).
In southeastern Oklahoma, the Mississippian cultural pattern is known as the Caddoan Tradition,
a general term used to describe a series of closely related complexes with spatial diversity and
internal development in northwest Louisiana, southeast Oklahoma, west Arkansas, and northeast
Texas. Much of the cultural relationships and developments are oriented to specific river areas
with chronologies localized within a broader, regional perspective. The western limits of the
Red River Caddo are generally thought to be thirty to fifty miles down river from Lake Texoma.
Hochatown Focus (ca. 950 to 750 B.P.)
This is characterized by a variety of site types, including flat-topped or conical mounds, off
mound villages, hamlets, and other special purpose sites. The houses, primarily rectangular in
outline with extended entryways, generally have central hearths and four interior support posts.
Rock hearths, storage or refuse pits, ovens, and burials also exist within sites from this period;
the burials are often extended, with some accompanied by elaborate grave goods (including
engraved conch shells, copper, ceramic vessels, and so forth).
12

Cultural materials include a combination of grog-tempered plainwares (Williams, LeFlore, and
Sanders Plain), with occasional decorated ceramic wares (Davis Incised, Crockett Curvilinear
Incised, and Holly Fine-Engraved, for example). While Wyckoff (1967: Table IV, p. 109) lists
small arrow points, including side and corner-notched forms (Alba, Agee, Scallorn, Hayes, Reed
and Bonham) in association with large contracting- and expanding-stemmed forms (Gary, Ellis,
Edgewood, and Williams), this may be the result of deposit mixture rather than true associations.
The utilitarian tool assemblage is much the same as the preceding Woodland. In the burial
contexts, however, the presence of such items as conch shells, copper-covered ear spools, stone
beads, and T-shaped pipes indicate status differentiation.
Sanders Focus (ca. 750 to 500 B.P.)
This phase manifests itself by the florescence of differentiated ceremonial mound and village
sites, more intense long-distance trade networks, and concentration of exotic goods in mound
centers. Houses may be either square with four interior support posts and a central hearth with
extended eastern entryways, or rectangular with two interior roof supports. Refuse pits, rock
lined hearths, isolated and multiple burials occur, as do house structures and conical or flattopped mounds.
Burials indicate a clear social status hierarchy, with an elite class, involving elaborate burial in
constructed mounds. Exotic burial goods include decorated wood and copper, chipped stone
bifacial swords, ground stone maces, and stone effigy pipes, as well as the more conventional Tshaped stone elbow pipes.
The Ceramic assemblage primarily includes undecorated grit-grog or shell-tempered ceramics
(Williams, LeFlore, and Woodward Plain), with engraved and incised wares. Sanders pottery
includes a distinctive hematite red painted or slipped ware generally known as Sanders Redware
or Sanders Plain. Increased contact between the Red and Arkansas Rivers is suggested by the
common occurrence of pipes, ear spools, and ceramic types (Lintz and Vehik 1986: 21).
McCurtain Focus (ca. 550 to 350 B.P.)
This focus is marked by a contraction in the number of sites in the area, a decrease in exotic
items, predominance of shell-tempered ceramic wares, and increased relationships with the
Prairie-Plains Region (Lintz and Vehik 1986). Mounds are no longer constructed over burials
except in the eastern Red River area, and deep shaft graves into and through existing mounds
occur along the Red River. Houses, rectangular or circular, usually have rock hearths or ovens
and storage cysts.
Artifact assemblages indicate further influence from the Prairie-Plains areas to the west, with the
occurrence of small, notched and unnotched arrow points (Washita, Reed, Fresno, and Maud
points) increasing at the expense of the corner-notched points (Scallorn, Alba, and Bonham).
Bone tools (including bison scapula hoes, tibia digging stick tips, and T-shaped drills) increase,
as well as shell-tempered ceramic wares at the expense of clay-tempered varieties (Albert 1984).

13

Protohistoric Background (Ca. 350 to 200 B.P.)
The Protohistoric period begins with the first European explorations of the Southern Plains and
ends after the Louisiana Purchase of 1803, when more accurate records of the region began to be
kept. The Southern Plains was undoubtedly a part of the Plains Apache range in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries. In the central plains, Apachean manifestations of the period are assigned to
the Dismal River Aspect (Gunnerson 1968). Characteristics of the culture are thin, hard, black,
sandy-paste ceramics, a variety of hunting and processing tools, and defensive perimeters at
some villages. Structures are generally crude and more temporary than in the proceeding period,
and bison hunting appears to be the primary economy of the people. In the southern plains three
complexes are identified: the Garza, Edwards and Wheeler.
Two poorly defined cultures of this period have been found in Oklahoma. Baugh (1982)
identified the Edwards Complex in western Oklahoma, primarily on the basis of excavations at
the Edwards Site in Beckham County. This site has mixed components including an assortment
of Caddoan, Southwestern and local ceramics, suggesting contacts over a wide area. The site
also had a defensive ditch around the perimeter of the village. Baugh (1982) attributes the
Edwards Complex to the Wichita, essentially as a continuation of the proceeding Washita River
culture, but the black, sandy-paste pottery from the site, and other general similarities to the
Dismal River Aspect (and the Garza Complex in west Texas) suggest an Apachean occupation at
the site. The Lowrance Site in Murray County also included a component with gray sandy paste
pottery (Wyckoff 1972) similar to Edwards pottery, and also similar to the Dismal River Aspect.
Both sites are probably a part of the Wheeler Complex as originally defined by Bell and Bastian
(1967) on the basis of surface collections from three sites in west-central Oklahoma. Occasional
French trade goods date the culture to between AD 1650 and 1725. Large distal scrapers of Kay
County chert were identified as contemporaneous with specimens from the Deer Creek Site in
Kay County, suggesting the Wheeler people were participating in the same economic interaction
sphere as the Deer Creek people (identified as Wichita bands). Again, however, the principal
pottery of the Wheeler Complex is black, sandy-paste pottery similar to the Dismal River Aspect.
Groups of the Wichita Confederacy, also being Plains Villagers, have left much more substantial
archeological remains in the southern Plains. Two villages belonging to historic Wichita groups
have been identified and investigated west of the project area in Oklahoma and the North Central
Plains area of Texas, and along the boundary between the North Central Plains and Northeast
Texas (Bell 1984; Fox 1983:41-46). On the basis of excavations at the Pearson site located in
Rains County, Texas, on the eastern edge of the North Central Plains, the Norteno focus has been
proposed for these historic Wichita components (Duffield and Jelks 1961).
Extensive archeological work has been conducted at several sites along both banks of the Red
River and near the present-day Texas town of Spanish Fort. Excavations at the Longest site in
Jefferson County (34Jf1), documented the presence of a fortified enclosure and circular grass
covered lodges (Bell and Bastian 1967). Although the Longest site has long been believed to be
the site attacked by Parilla in 1759, recent research by Elizabeth John suggests that there may
have been another fort along the Red River in this area that was the one attacked by Parrilla
(Robert Brooks, as quoted in Peter and Weston 1993: 36). Supposedly, the fort attacked by
14

Parrilla was subsequently burned by the Osage. The Longest Site is believed to be the same one
visited much later by Anthony Glass in the early 1800s. A second fortified village was located
by Briscoe Consulting Services at Horseshoe Bend on the upper end of Lake Texoma (Briscoe
1992), which could be the one attacked by Parilla.
Artifacts from Wichita sites exhibit a mixture of Native American manufacture and materials
obtained in trade with the French or the Spanish. Artifacts of Native American manufacture
include triangular arrow points (i.e., Fresno, Harrell, and Washita), thick endscrapers on flakes,
diamond-shaped beveled knives, T-shaped perforators, bifacial gun flints, bison scapula hoes,
pottery elbow pipes, and Womack Engraved pottery. Trade artifacts include metal knives, knife
handles, axes, splitting wedges, kettle fragments, awls, chisels, scissors, buttons, flintlock gun
parts, bullets and shot, bridle parts, numerous trade beads, and metal ornaments such as bells,
finger rings, and bracelets (Fox 1983:45).

Historic Background
Cabeza de Vaca conducted the first European exploration of Texas in the 1530s. De Vaca and a
party of survivors of the ill-fated Navarez Exploration of Florida reached Texas and survived by
living with various groups of Indians for several years while they made their way to Mexico
(Kingston 1988: 14). De Vaca reached Mexico in 1536. Stories told by the Indians he met
depicted a fabled golden land to the north known as Cibola, which spurred the Coronado
expedition of 1540-42. Other stories told by natives in Florida, also led to the ill-fated de Soto
Expedition, launched at roughly the same time. Moscoso, the leader of the de Soto Expedition
after the death of Hernandez de Soto, may have reached the eastern edge of the region in 1542
while attempting to reach the Coronado Expedition to the west. An Indian slave from the
Coronado party was captured and reported the Coronado party to be only nine days journey to
west (Bolton 1949: 356). This would, assuming Coronado was in the Texas Panhandle region,
place Moscoso's party in north central Texas, possibly near Dallas as suggested by Crook (1989).
De Campo, a Portuguese with Padilla, may have been the first European to visit the heart of
West Texas during his 5-year trek from Kansas to Mexico (Bolton 1949: 358-361). In 1542,
Fray Juan de Padilla and a small party returned to Quivira after the Coronado Expedition and
was ambushed somewhere east of the Wichita village (Bolton 1949: 340-341). De Campo was
able to escape and made his way back to Mexico by moving south from Quivira, essentially
through central Texas. His narratives of the trek, however, were more concerned with his
experiences and tribulations and very little was recorded about the regions he passed through.
Missions were established later in southern Texas. San Francisco de los Tejas was established in
1690, San Tisimo Nombre de Maria was established in 1691, San Pedro (Antonio) in 1718, San
Francisco de los Neches in 1716, San Juan Bautista in 1718, Villa of San Fernando de Bexar in
1731, Laredo in 1755 and San Saba in 1757. Land grants for colonizing were also taken up by
many in the vicinity of the missions.

15

The Red River country to the north was the borderland, essentially, between Spanish Texas and
French Louisiana. Spanish interest remained low except for concern about expansion of French
trade into the area. In 1719, Bernard de la Harpe crossed the Red River on his way to the first
meeting between the French and the Wichita. Two Wichita villages were located along the
Arkansas River in the general vicinity of modern Tulsa, Oklahoma, at that time. Forty years
later these villages were located on the Red River along the upper reaches of present day Lake
Texoma (Bell, Jelks, and Newcomb 1967), where they established two fortified villages on the
north bank of the Red River. The move south may have been partly due to Kiowa, Comanche
and Plains Apache displacements, but French trade was more likely the primary impetus for
relocation. Wichita and Comanche raiders, armed with French weapons, attacked and destroyed
the Spanish Mission at San Saba in 1758.
After the destruction of the Mission at San Saba in 1758, Colonel Diego Ortiz Parilla led a
punitive expedition across west Texas to punish the Comanche and Wichita raiders (Kingston
1988: 20). Parilla and a large force of allied Indians (Mexican and Apache) and Spanish soldiers
passed through central Texas to a point on the Red River near present day Spanish Fort, where
his party was met and defeated by a superior force of Wichita and Comanche warriors (Duffield
1965; Kraenzel 1955). The Wichita were reported to have a palisade around their village which
led later settlers to identify this portion of the Red River as the "Spanish Fort" area. A second
fortified Wichita village, 34Lv-93, has been located at Horseshoe Bend on the upper end of Lake
Texoma (Briscoe and Burkhalter 1992).
The Red River was considered the northeast border of Mexico, and aside from border patrols,
very little interest was paid to the area. Spain acquired all of the territory west of the Mississippi
River at the end of the Seven-Year War and made peace with the Wichita in 1785 (Tyson 1981:
56). The Wichita continued to occupy two large villages along the Red River and Pedro Vial
was sent in 1788-89 to establish a road between the Wichita villages and Natchitoches
(McLeRoy 1997: 21). Vial's route ran east-west through present Grayson County, generally
along what has become US Highway 82, and eventually connected the settlements at Bexar and
Natchitoches in Texas to Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Spain relinquished control of the Louisiana Province to France in 1802. The French were, at the
time, at war with England. Transfer of the Louisiana Province to the United States by France in
1803 also transferred the dispute over the limits of the territory from between Spain and France
to Spain and the United States. It was not until 1819 that the boundary was settled. The AdamOnis Treaty (Tyson 1981: 89) placed the border between Spain and the United States along the
Sabine River, 32nd Parallel, and Red River as far west as the 100th meridian (essentially the
border of modern Texas with Louisiana and Oklahoma).
John Hart was apparently the first to take advantage of the new treaty in 1822 when he set up a
hunting camp near present day Preston Bend (McLeRoy 1993: 21). Hart rafted a load of furs
down river that winter and set the stage for commercial interests in the area. Abel Warren
(Britton 1980: 12) established trading posts along the Red River near the future towns of Warren,
Texas, and Taylor, Oklahoma, both of which were short-lived operations. Holland Coffee,
former partner with Warren, established a trading post at Preston Bend in 1838. Hart returned to
the area and settled at Preston Bend in 1839.
16

At the same time, the U.S. was busy moving Choctaw and Chickasaw groups into the area north
of the Red River. The Treaty of Doak's Stand was signed with the Choctaw, establishing a
territory for them north of the Red River, and many of the prosperous farmers took up new
plantation tracts in the territory. The majority of the tribe, however, was not moved to the
territory until after the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek in 1830.
Miller County in Arkansas Territory was extended along the north side of the Red River almost
as soon as the boundary between the United States and Spain had been established. However,
the Treaty of Doak's Stand gave this area to the Choctaws and over 200 families were forcefully
removed by the US Army in 1819 (Neal and Rees 1994:12). Many of the settlers shifted to the
south side of the river, extending west as far as present Cooke County. Their numbers were
augmented by others originally intending to settle in the Austin Colony who simply took up land
on the south side of the river.
Settlement in Spanish/Mexican Texas was also on the rise after Moses Austin received a grant to
settle 300 families between the Brazos and Colorado rivers (Kingston 1988: 45). Moses died in
1821 and the impresario was left to his son Stephen to fulfill. Austin's colony was settled by
southern American farmers and a grant for settling 900 additional families followed in 1825.
Texas Independence in 1836 further swelled the number living in the region. Red River County
was established in 1836 and broken into several smaller counties in 1837. Lamar County was
part of this split and enacted in 1841. In 1870 Delta County was split off, reducing Lamar
County to its current size. The original county seat was Lafayette, northwest of present-day
Paris. In 1842 Texas Congress passed a law stating that each county seat had to be within five
miles of the geographic center. Mount Vernon was then named the county seat but no
courthouse was built. In 1844 George Wright donated 50 acres of his land for a townsite with
the condition it was made the county seat. The new town was named Paris and remained the
county seat.
A splinter group of Mormons, en route to Austin, wintered on the old Fort Johnson site in
1845/46, but moved on in the spring. The group came to the area from Missouri, via the TexasMissouri Road or Shawnee Trail. The road extended from the crossing at Preston Bend through
Indian Territory, to Joplin, Missouri. The various trails in Texas terminated at the head of the
trail at Preston, a collection point for cattle being driven north to eastern markets. The trail
remained the primary point of entry connecting Texas with the rest of the United States until
1858.
In 1857, John Butterfield received a US. contract to carry mail between St. Louis and San
Francisco (Dunlop 1971: 219). The route for Butterfield's stage line followed an older military
route through Indian Territory and entering Texas at Preston. Benjamin Colbert, a Chickasaw
Indian businessman, convinced Butterfield to move the route east to his ferry at Shawneetown
(McLeRoy 1993: 39-40), and Preston was bypassed. A stage station was built at Shawneetown,
Sherman, Gainesville and points west. Preston remained a staging area for cattle being driven
north, but commerce shifted to Shawneetown and Sherman along the stage line in 1858.

17

On June 2, 1865, Governor Murrah officially surrendered Texas to the Union, two weeks after
Lee's surrender at Appomattox. Elements of the Texas Cavalry, however, remained in the field
with General Stand Watie until his surrender at Fort Towson on June 23, 1865, the last military
force to surrender at the end of the war (Knight 1988: 274).
Immediately after the Civil War, north Texas saw a population boom as families moved west to
get away from the destruction and post-war problems in the eastern States. Small rural
communities began to develop along the old Butterfield Road, and other routes across the
county.
Cattle drives were resumed shortly after the end of the Civil War. By 1866, the route between
Preston, Texas and Baxter Springs, Kansas and Joplin, Missouri became known as the Shawnee
Cattle Trail. By 1870, however, officials in Missouri were restricting the importation of Texas
cattle due to problems with "Texas Fever" (Skaggs 1978:9), caused by the Texas Black Tick.
Texas longhorns were immune to the disease but other breeds of cattle in Indian Territory,
Kansas and Missouri were not. 1870 was the first year cattle were driven straight north from the
Dallas-Fort Worth areas on the Chisholm Trail.
Blossom, in Lamar County, was occupied by 1849 and had a post office under the name of
Blossom Prairie. In 1876 the Texas and Pacific Railway established a stop and quickly became a
shipping point for lumber, railroad ties, livestock and grain. By the 1890s lumber had been
depleated and cotton crops replaced lumber yards in Blossoms economy. Population increased
through the 1920s but the Great Depression forced many out of the area and the population
plummeted. Additionally, the town did not share in the economic relief brought by World War
II. The area became a farming community and has fluctuated in population to current day.

18

Native American Concerns
Numerous prehistoric sites throughout the region are known to contain graves of concern to the
Native American communities of the Southern Plains.
The Southern High Plains region is an important location in Cheyenne, Kiowa, Plains Apache
and Comanche history as the last place where the tribes and the buffalo ran free. Specific village
sites, battle grounds and other localities where important events occurred are known to tribal
historians throughout the region. Any activity that impacts these areas would be a concern to the
Southern Plains Tribes.
There are no known localities in the immediate project area that would be of particular concern
to the Cheyenne, Comanche, Plains Apache or Kiowa tribes in the immediate project area. Little
information is available about areas of concern to the sixty or so other Plains tribes that have an
association with the region.

Cultural Resources
Three previously recorded sites are located within one mile of the project area. One new locality
was discovered during the course of these investigations.
41LR135
41LR135 is an early ceramic period prehistoric site located 415 feet from the project area. This
site was the location of the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) 1991 field school. Excavations
yielded thick plain ceramics, tools, lithic debris, faunal remains, charred plant remains and firecracked rock (FCR). These were removed from a midden, several small pits and one large deep
pit. Radiocarbon samples dated to A.D. 740 to 810.
During this visit, the road ROW was tested along the edge closest to the site. No artifacts or
features were noted among the disturbed deposits. This site will not be disturbed by the
proposed project.
41LR142
41LR142 is a prehistoric site assigned to the Middle Archaic/Woodland period. The site was
surface collected and revealed a Travis point, Gary points, points of an unknown type, a
hammerstone and metate. This site is located 1250 feet from the project area and will not be
disturbed by the proposed project.
41LR44
41LR44 is a prehistoric site consisting of low pimple mounds and ridges in a large open pasture.
Surface collection yielded plain and decorated ceramics, FCR, dart point and lithic debris. This
site is located 3900 feet from the project area and will not be disturbed by the proposed project.

19

41LR319
41LR319 is a positive shovel test on a pimple mound, the edge of which extends past the fence
above a steep bank down to the roadbed. This area is above a drainage of Nolan Creek, near its
confluence with Nolan Creek. The test contained two flakes and a possible core/FCR located
between 80 and 100cm. No other positive shovel tests were located and the road cut contained
no visible artifacts. Soils were 15 cm of brown sandy loam over 70cm (15cm to 85cm) of light
brown sandy loam over 15 cm (85cm to 1m) of mottled grey/tan sandy loam over mottled grey
and red clay to 110 cm. According to the NRCS Web Soil Survey, soils in the site are Woodtell
loam and Freestone-Hicota complex. Many pimple mounds were visible from the fence line on
private properties closer to Nolan Creek.
The road in this location is cutting into the land as it descends to the intermittent drainage
crossing, thus the site is located well above (approximately 10 feet) the road surface and area
where the cable will be laid. The project will not impact the site.

View of pimple mound remnant from bottom of road cut, facing east.

20

View of pimple mounds in pasture on private land, facing east toward Nolan Creek.

21

Recommendations
41LR319 is a positive shovel test on a pimple mound, the edge of which extends past the fence
above a steep bank down to the roadbed. The road in this location is cutting into the land as it
descends to the intermittent drainage crossing, thus the site is located well above (approximately
10 feet) the road surface and area where the cable will be laid. The project will not impact the
site.
This assessment is subject to review and concurrence by the Texas Historical Commission.

Professional Estimations
In the professional opinion of Heather Szarka, Principal Investigator, these investigations and
recommendations comply with federal guidelines and standards for archeological performance in
the State of Texas as detailed by the Council of Texas Archeologists.
Heather Szarka
Briscoe/Szarka Consulting Services
P.O. Box 6566
Norman, Oklahoma 73070
(405) 329-5425

22

Bibliography
Anderson, Adrian
1962 The Cooperton Mammoth: A Preliminary Report. Plains Anthropology, Vol. 7, No. 16,
pp. 110-12. Lincoln.
1975

The Cooperton Mammoth: An Early Man Bone Quarry. Great Plains Journal, Vol. 14.

Ball, J.
1980 Grayson County, 1860 to Present. In: Ancestors and Descendants, Grayson County,
Texas. Taylor Publishing Company, pp 16-21.
Bell, R.
1984 Protohistoric Wichita. In: Prehistory of Oklahoma. Edited by Robert Bell, pp. 363-378.
Academic Press, New York.
Bell, R. and D. Baerreis
1951 A Survey of Oklahoma Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and
Paleotological Society, Vol. 22, pp 7-100.
Bell, R. and T. Bastian
1967 Survey of Potential Wichita Archeological Remains in Oklahoma. Pilot Study of Wichita
Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, R.E. Bell, E.B. Jelks and W.W. Newcomb, editors.
National Science Foundation Final Report.
Bell, R., E. Jelks, and W. Newcomb
1967 A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archaeology and Ethnohistory. National Science
Foundation, Washington, D.C.
Bement, L.
1994 Results of the 1994 field season at the Cooper Site. Oklahoma Archeological Survey,
Newsletter, Vol. 14, No. 2.
Bolton, H.
1949 Coronado, Knight of Pueblos and Plains. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.
Briscoe, J.
1991 Archeological Survey Report on the Unocal 105-13 Well, Lake Texoma, Marshall
County, Oklahoma. BCS contract report, Norman.
1994

Cultural Resources Inventory Report on the Ok-Tex Pipeline Company Proposed
Abandonment of Ok-S, Cooke County, Texas, Love County, Oklahoma. BCS contract
report, Norman.
23

1995

Cultural Resources Inventory of the Warren Petroleum Company Low Pressure Tie In
Pipeline, Grayson County, Texas. CRM report prepared for Roberts Schornick &
Associates, Norman.

1999

Archeological Survey Report on the Texas Exploration and Production Inc. Red River
Crossing Pipeline Project, Lake Texoma/Texoma Wildlife Management Area, Cooke
County, Texas, Love County, Oklahoma. BCS contract report, Norman.

Briscoe, J. and R. Burkhalter
1992 Archeological Survey Report on the LE Jones Production Company, Minnie Mae #1-27
Well Project, Lake Texoma, Love County, Oklahoma. BCS contract report, Norman.
Britton, M.
1980 Ancestors and Descendants of Grayson County, Texas. Taylor Publishing Company,
Dallas.
Crook, W.
1989 Traces of Moscoso Near Dallas? In: In the Light of Past Experiences, Papers in Honor
of Jack T. Hughes. Panhandle Archeological Society, Publication No. 5, Clarendon.
Crook, W., Jr. and R.K. Harris
1952 Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: the Carrollton and Elam Foci. Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin No. 23.
1957

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man near Lewisville, Texas, and Associated Faunal
Material. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeoogical Society, Vol. 28, pp. 7-97.

Cruse, Bret
2008 Battles of the Red River War Archeological Perspectives on the Indian Campaign of
1874. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Duffield, L.
1965 The Taovayas Village of 1759, In Texas or Oklahoma? Great Plains Journal, Vol. 4,
No. 2.
Duffield, L. and E. Jelks
1961 The Pearson Site, A Historic Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas.
Archeology Series 14. Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin.
Dunlop, R.
1971 Great Trails of the West. Abingdon Press, Nashville.
Fenneman, N.
1946 Physical Divisions of the United States. United States Department of the Interior,
Geological Map Survey, Map.

24

Ferring, R.
1990 The 1989 Investigations at the Aubrey Clovis Site, Texas. Current Research in the
Pleistocene Vol. 7, pp. 10-12.
1995

Archaeology and History of the Ray Roberts Lake Area of Northcentral Texas, 18501950. University of North Texas Institute of Applied Sciences, contract report
DACW63-86-0098, Denton.

Ferring, R. and B. Yates
1997 Holocene Geoarchaeology and Prehistory of the Ray Roberts Lake Area, North Central
Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences, University of North Texas.
Fox, D.E.
1983 Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of the Past 450 Years. Corona
Publishing Company, San Antonio.
Hendricks, L.
1976 Geology of the Midcities Area, Tarrant, Dallas, and Denton Counties, Texas. Geologic
Quandrangle Map No. 42. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas, Austin.
Gunnerson, James
1968 Plains Apache Archaeology: A Review. Plains Anthropologist, vol. 13.
Gunnerson, Delores
1972 Man and Bison on the Plains in the Protohistoric Period. Plains Anthropologist, Volume
17, Number 55, pp. 1- 10.
Gustavson, Thomas C.
1990 Geologic Framework and Regional Hydrology: Upper Cenozoic Blackwater Draw and
Ogallala Formations, Great Plains. Bureau of Economic Geology, Austin.
Habicht-Mauche, Judith
1991 Coronodo's Querchos and Teyas in the Archeological Record of the Texas Panhandle.
Plains Anthropologist, Volume 37, Number 140, pp. 247-260.
Haley, Everetts
1936 Charles Goodnight, Cowman and Plainsman. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Hofman, Jack
1989 Prehistoric Culture History- Hunters and Gatherers in the Southern Great Plains. Chapter
5. In: From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great
Plains. Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series, Number 35, pp. 61- 70.
Fayetteville, Arkansas.

25

Johnson, Eileen
1989
Lubbock Lake Landmark: 1987 Fenceline Corridor Survey and Testing Program,
Quaternary Research Center Series, Number 1. Museum of Texas Tech University.
Lubbock.
Kingston, M.
1988 A Concise History of Texas. Gulf Publishing Company, Houston.
Knight, W.
1988 Red Fox, Stand Watie and the Confederate Indian Nations during the Civil War Years in
Indian Territory. The Arthur H. Clark Company, Glendale.
Kraenzel, C.
1955 The Great Plains in Transition. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Leckie, W.
1967 The Buffalo Soldiers. University of Oklahoma Press. Norman.
Leonhardy, F.
1966 Domebo: A Paleo-Indian Mammoth Kill in the Prairie Plains. Contributions of the
Museum of the Great Plains, No. 1, Lawton Oklahoma.
Lowe, R. and R. Campbell
1987 Planter and Plain Folk: Agriculture in Antebellum Texas. Southern Methodist University
Press, Dallas.
McLeRoy, S.
1997 Black Land, Red River, A Pictorial History of Grayson County, Texas. The Donning
Company/Publishers. Virginia Beach, Virginia.
Maquire, J.
1993 Katy's Baby, The Story of Denison, Texas. Nortex Press, Austin.
Neal, L. and M. Rees
1994 An Archaeological Survey of the Historic Native American Sites Associated with Military
Posts of Oklahoma. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Historic Preservation Grant 40-9380052.018, Norman.
Peter, D. and G. Weston, editors
1993 1990-1991 Archeological Survey of Selected Parcels of Fort Sill, Oklahoma. Fort Sill
Military Reservation Technical Series, Report of Investigations No 1. Geo-Marine Inc.
Plano, Texas.

26

Rohn, A.
1998 Haleys Point (34MA15) on the Red River, Marchall County, Oklahoma (Area F).
Wichita State University Publications in Anthropology No. $.
Schultz, C.B.
1943
Some Artifact sites of Early Man in the Great Plains and Adjacent Areas. American
Antiquity, Volume 82, Number 3, pp. 242-249.
Sellards, E.H.
1938 Artifacts Associated with Fossil Elephant. Bulletin of the Geological Society America,
Volume 49, pp. 999-1010.
Shwadlenak, G.
1979 Hagerman, Texas. In: The History of Grayson County, Texas. Grayson County Frontier
Village, Inc. and Hunter Publishing Company, Denison. pp 70-71.
Skaggs, J.
1978 Cattle Trails in Oklahoma. In: Ranch and Range in Oklahoma. The Oklahoma Series,
Oklahoma Historical Society, Vol. 8, pp 7-17.
Swanson, Eric
1995
Geo-Texas, A Guide to the Earth Sciences. Texas A&M Press, College Station.
Tyson, C.
1981 The Red River In Southwestern History. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Wyckoff, D.
1964 The Cultural Sequence at the Packard Site, Mayes County, Oklahoma. Oklahoma River
Basin Survey Archaeological Site Report 2, Norman.
Wyckoff, D.
1984 The Cross Timbers: An Ecotone in Historic Perspective. In: Contributions to Cross
Timbers Prehistory. Edited by Patricia L. Kawecki and Don G. Wyckoff. Studies in
Oklahomas Past No. 12, Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
Wyckoff, D. and L. Taylor
1971 The Pumpkin Creek Site: an Early Archaic Site of the Southern Plains Border. Plains
Anthropologist Vol. 16, No. 51.

27

Appendix I. Shovel Test Data
ST
No.
1
2

UTM

Stratum 1

Stratum 2

Stratum 3

280218 E
3740464 N
280176 E
3739077 N

0-15 cm light
brown sandy loam

15-20 cm light
orange sandy clay
5-30 cm light brown
fine sandy loam
55-90 cm fine light
tan sand mottled
with very fine light
silt

20-43 cm orange
sandy clay
30-50 cm redorange clay

0-5 cm organic duff

3

280165 E
3739009 N

0-55 cm fine light
brown sandy loam

4

280166 E
3738736 N

0-5 cm organic duff

5-50 cm light brown
sandy loam

5

280168 E
3734527 N

0-5 cm organic duff

5-35 cm light brown
sandy loam

6

280168 E
3734556 N

0-5 cm organic duff

5-30 cm light brown
fine sandy loam

7

280170 E
3734664 N

0-3 cm organic duff

3-7 cm light red
brown sand

8

280169 E
3734731 N

0-5 cm duff and
tree branch falls

5-30 cm light brown
sandy loam with
moderate rock and
gravel inclusions

90-100 cm
mottled gray and
red clay
50-75 cm very fine
light tan sandy silt
with mottled red
clay
35-75 cm light
brown sandy loam
mottled with
reddish brown
clay
30-65 cm light
brown fine sand
with light gray silt
and clay inclusion
7-15 cm heavily
mottled gray and
red clay
30-65 cm light tan
fine silty sand

28

Stratum 4
n/a
n/a

Comments
sparse road
gravel in test
little to no
gravels

Results
Negative
Negative

n/a

sparse road
gravels at top
of test only

Negative

75-80 cm mottled
gray and red clay

little to no
gravels

Negative

75-80 cm mottled
red and gray clay

Negative

65-70 cm mottled
gray silt and clay

Negative

n/a

65-70 cm mottled
red and gray clay

likely topsoil
eroded into
drain

Negative

Negative

ST
No.

UTM

9

280174 E
3734858 N

10
11

280181 E
3735542 N
280185 E
3735883 N

Stratum 1

0-4 cm organic duff

0-3 cm organic duff
0-5 cm organic duff

Stratum 2
4-40 cm brown clay
loam with moderate
road gravel
inclusions
3-10 cm brown clay
loam
5-35 cm light brown
sandy loam

Stratum 3

Stratum 4

40-45 cm redbrown clay

n/a

Negative

n/a

Negative

n/a

Negative

n/a

Negative

10-15 cm light
gray clay
35-40 cm mottled
gray and red clay
60-65 cm gray clay
with some red
clay mottled in

12

280180 E
3735918 N

0-3 cm organic duff

3-60 cm light tan
very fine sandy silt

13

280187 E
3736075 N

0-5 cm organic duff

5-30 cm light brown
sandy loam

30-55 cm light tan
very fine sandy silt

14

280191 E
3736204 N

0-5 cm organic duff

5-15 cm light brown
sandy loam

15-45 cm light tan
very fine silty sand

15

16
17

280204 E
3736384 N

0-15 cm light
brown sandy loam

15-85 cm dark tan
sandy loam

280205 E
3736375 N
280197 E
3736394 N

0-15 cm brown
sandy loam

15-50 cm tan sandy
loam
3-15 cm red and gray
mottled clay

0-3 cm forest duff

Comments

55-60 cm gray
with red mottled
silty clay
45-50 cm gray
mottled with
yellow clay

Results

Negative

Negative
ST positioned
on small
pimple
mound.
Gravel
inclusions
start at 80cm.
80-90 cm 1
thin red flake,
1 FCR; 90-100
cm 1 small
black flake

85-100 cm
mottled gray/tan
sandy loam with
artifacts and
increased gravel
content

100-110 cm
mottled gray and
red clay

50-60 cm mottled
gray and red clay

n/a

Negative

n/a

n/a

Negative

29

Positive

ST
No.

UTM

Stratum 1

Stratum 2

Stratum 3

18

280199 E
3736422 N

0-3 cm forest duff

3-10 cm brown
sandy loam

19

280209 E
3736914 N

0-15 cm light
brown sandy loam

15-75 cm tan sandy
loam

20

280211 E
3736949 N

0-15 cm light
brown sandy loam

15-75 cm tan sandy
loam

10-20 cm red and
gray clay
75-85 cm hard
gray-tan sandy
loam with pebbles
75-85 cm hard
gray-tan sandy
loam with pebbles

21

280213 E
3737039 N

0-10 cm brown
sandy loam

22

280185 E
3737922 N

0-10 cm brown
sandy loam

10-35 cm gray-tan
fine sandy loam
grading to clay
10-40 cm tan sandy
loam

Stratum 4

Comments

Results

n/a

Negative

85-95 cm red and
gray clay

Negative

85-95 cm red and
gray clay

Negative

55-60 cm gray clay

n/a

Negative

40-50 cm red and
gray clay

n/a

Negative

30

Appendix II. Project Maps

Project Area Map

31

North end of Project Area
32

South end of Project Area

33

Appendix III. Site Form

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

