INTENSIVE ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF A PROPOSED BANK
STABILIZATION AREA AT ZEDLER MILL PARK, CITY OF LULING,
CALDWELL COUNTY, TEXAS

by

Damon Burden

Principal Investigator: Ross C. Fields

LETTER REPORT NO. 877

submitted to

Freese and Nichols, Inc.
Austin, Texas

by

Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Cultural Resources Services
Austin, Texas
PAI No. 213019

January 2014

TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 6621

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT ..................................................................................................................... iv
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING.......................................................................................... 1
RESULTS OF THE FILE SEARCH ................................................................................... 3
RESULTS OF THE ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY ........................................................... 3
RECOMMENDATIONS ..................................................................................................... 6
REFERENCES CITED ....................................................................................................... 7

ii

LIST OF FIGURES
1. Project location map ......................................................................................................

2

2. Modern aerial photograph of the project area showing the project APE
and trench locations ....................................................................................................

4

iii

ABSTRACT

On August 14, 2013, personnel with Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted an
intensive archeological survey at Zedler Mill Park in Luling, Texas, for Freese and Nichols,
Inc., under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6621. This work was completed prior to a proposed
riverbank stabilization project. The horizontal Area of Potential Effects (APE) is about
0.25 acres of city property, which encompasses a 441-ft-long, ca. 30-ft-wide segment of
alluvial terrace on the San Marcos River above a historic-age millrace. The depth of impacts
associated with the project will vary from ca. 2 to 30 ft.
Four trenches excavated in the south half of the APE revealed similar floodplain
deposits across that area. A small amount of material dating to the mid-twentieth century
or later was identified in two trenches. The stratigraphic position of flexible polyurethane
foam identified in Trench 3 and the earliest date of commercial production for that material
indicate that the top 60 to 100 cm of the terrace sediments were deposited in the last 60
years. No historic or prehistoric archeological remains were identified in the underlying
alluvium. The north half of the APE was not trenched because surface topography indicates
it is less conducive to human habitation than the flatter, wider terrace to the south, and
because parts of the area were disturbed by previous construction. Given these findings,
Prewitt and Associates recommends that the bank stabilization project is unlikely to impact
any archeological resources that are eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places under Criterion D (36 CFR 60.4; 36 CFR 800.4, 5) or designation as State Antiquities
Landmarks (13 TAC 26.2, 8). It is therefore recommended that the proposed project be
allowed to proceed without additional archeological investigations.
CURATION

This survey was conducted under a limited-collection policy in which only temporally
diagnostic artifacts were to be retained for curation. No such artifacts were identified during
the field investigation. Materials found were noted, briefly described, and returned to the
point of recovery. Project records and photographs are housed at the offices of Prewitt and
Associates, Inc.

iv

INTRODUCTION

On August 14, 2013, personnel with Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted an
intensive archeological survey on the north bank of the San Marcos River at Zedler Mill
Park in the City of Luling in southern Caldwell County, Texas (Figure 1). The survey was
conducted prior to a proposed riverbank stabilization project that will include installation
of sheetpiling along 441 ft of the bank upstream from the millrace. The sheetpiling will be
anchored by 1.25-inch-diameter tie rods attached to forty-four 24-inch-diameter pipe pilings
placed 20–27 ft back from the bank. The pipe pilings will be set 20–30 ft deep. Trenches
excavated for tie-rod installation will be as deep as 11 ft at the north end of the project area,
but only 2 ft deep or less over most of the area. The project also requires postconstruction
surface grading. The total horizontal Area of Potential Effects (APE) is 441 ft long by ca.
30 ft wide and encompasses about 0.25 acres. The vertical APE will range from ca. 2 to 30 ft
below the current ground surface.
This archeological survey was conducted for Freese and Nichols, Inc., and the City of
Luling under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6621. It was performed in accordance with the
requirements of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act and the Antiquities
Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977, Title 9, Chapter 191, VTCS 6145-9).
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

The project area is on the west edge of the Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic province,
along a segment of the perennial San Marcos River that is bounded by Holocene alluvium
inset in mudstones and sandstones of the Eocene-age Wilcox Group (Fenneman 1938;
Fisher 1979; Sellards et al. 1966:Figure 4). The APE is on a low, lenticular Holocene alluvial
terrace on the north side of the river. Approximately 25 m across at its widest point, the
lower terrace merges with the wall of an upper terrace at the north and south ends of the
APE. The surfaces of both terraces dip slightly from north to south; they are separated by
4.5 and 1.5 m at the north and south ends of the APE. The lower terrace is 1.5 to 2 m higher
than the current water line. Frequently flooded Bosque soils mapped across the project area
formed in loamy, calcareous alluvium on nearly level floodplains along the San Marcos River
(Lowther and Werchan 1978:11; USDA-NRCS 2013a, b). This soil unit is briefly flooded at
least once each year, and surface layers vary from clay loam to loam due to surface alteration
during periods of sediment deposition (Lowther and Werchan 1978:11).
The Caldwell County climate is classified as humid subtropical, with hot summers
caused by tropical maritime air masses that predominate from spring through fall. Polar
air masses provide a more-continental climate characterized by large daily temperature
variations in the winter months. Seasonal temperature extremes exceed 100°F in July and
August and dip below 32°F in the winter months. Precipitation is distributed throughout
the year, with peaks in late spring to early summer and again in the early fall (Lowther
and Werchan 1978:67, 70).
The biota of Caldwell County are defined as Texan (Blair 1950). The county’s position
near the west edge of the biotic province suggests the likelihood of east-to-west variation
1

Caldwell

Project Area

Guadalupe

³

0 150 300

600

Meters
Gonzales

Caldwell County
TEXAS

Figure 1. Project location map (1994 USGS 7.5-minute topographic map, Luling quadrangle).

2

in represented species of flora and fauna with some geographical overlap between species
characteristic of the Texan province and the Balconian and Tamaulipan provinces to the
west and southwest. The project area is in a segment of the Southern Post Oak Savannah
of the East Central Texas Plains ecological region (Griffith et al. 2004; McMahan et al.
1984:Figure 1). Historically a true hardwood savanna, the Southern Post Oak Savannah
currently consists of a mix of post oak woodland, improved pasture, and rangeland with a
thick understory of yaupons and eastern red cedars in some areas and invasive mesquites
in southern portions of the ecoregion (Griffith et al. 2004). The project area is in a segment
of the “post oak woods, forest, and grassland mosaic” vegetative regime, which is one of three
closely similar vegetation types found on the sandy soils of the Post Oak Savannah (Frye
et al. 1984). Commonly associated plants include “Blackjack oak, eastern redcedar, mesquite,
black hickory, live oak, sandjack oak, cedar elm, hackberry, yaupon, poison oak, American
beautyberry, hawthorn, supplejack, trumpet creeper, dewberry, coral-berry, little bluestem,
silver bluestem, sand lovegrass, beaked panicum, three-awn, sprangle-grass, and tickclover”
with pecan, sycamore, and cottonwood common along tributaries (Frye et al. 1984).
RESULTS OF THE FILE SEARCH

Review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Archeological Sites Atlas indicated
that the project area overlaps the depicted site boundary for Zedler’s Mill (41CW28). This
gristmill and a stone dam were built just above the confluence of the San Marcos River and
Mill Creek in 1874. They were key components of a complex of buildings and structures
built in this location in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries; some were used
through the 1950s. Two investigations have been conducted on and adjacent to the mill
complex for the City of Luling since about 2003. TRC Environmental Corporation conducted
an archeological survey of proposed streambank stabilization on the north riverbank
downstream from the dam and on the south bank from above the dam downstream to State
Highway 80. No archeological deposits were identified during this survey. Limited archival
research also was conducted to evaluate the age and associations of the existing water-control
features (Quigg and Myers 2005:iii). That investigation resulted in a recommendation that
those features be considered eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.
Personnel from Tierras Antiguas Archeology conducted an intensive archeological survey
of the 10-acre park in 2008. That survey documented the various buildings and structures
in the park; no intact subsurface archeological deposits were identified (Nickels 2008). No
other archeological sites are recorded within 1 km of the project APE.
RESULTS OF THE ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

The field investigation consisted of pedestrian survey and visual examination of
vegetation-free surface exposures and mechanical trenching in and adjacent to the APE
(Figure 2). Existing disturbances include subsurface electric and irrigation lines that
cross short segments of the APE and a concrete-slab stage in the project area north of a
boat ramp. Surface visibility within most of the project area typically ranged from 30 to
40 percent, but varied from zero in areas covered by thick carpet grass around and north
of the stage to 100 percent in heavily trafficked areas around the boat ramp and south of

3

4

3
2
1

Backhoe Trench
Project Area
0

5

10
Meters

20

³

Source: Esri, DigitalGlobe, GeoEye, i-cubed, USDA, USGS,
AEX, Getmapping, Aerogrid, IGN, IGP, swisstopo, and the GIS
User Community

Figure 2. Modern aerial photograph of the project area showing the project APE and trench
locations.

4

the mill complex. Pieces of modern plastic and modern bottle glass were observed on the
surface in areas with little to no vegetation; no prehistoric or historic-age artifacts were
observed on the surface.
Four trenches were evenly distributed in the APE between the millrace and the
boat ramp, and their locations were recorded with a handheld GPS unit. All were in or
adjacent to the mapped boundary of historic archeological site 41CW28. No trenches were
placed in the APE north of the boat ramp because the lower alluvial terrace pinches out
there, merging with the sideslope of the upper terrace. The area also has been disturbed
by construction of the stage and an adjacent amphitheater. The backhoe trench density of
16 per acre far exceeds the Texas Historical Commission’s minimum archeological survey
standard of 3 tests per acre on tracts of this size.
Trenches were excavated by a rubber-tracked John Deere 27D compact excavator
fitted with a 30-cm-wide toothed bucket. Trench widths were 2.5 to 3 times the bucket width
to facilitate access and investigation. A total of 24.3 linear meters was excavated among
the four trenches, which ranged from 5.7 to 6.7 m in length (average = 6 m) and had an
average maximum depth of 1.5 m. Trench walls and floors were monitored for artifacts,
cultural features, and other anomalies during excavation. Trench walls were scraped and
cleaned with shovels and trowels and closely inspected for artifacts and other cultural
manifestations. A Trench Excavation Record Form was used to record trench dimensions,
exposed sediments, and the presence/absence of artifacts and modern trash. In addition, a
representative wall segment was photographed in each.
Trench excavation began on a slightly elevated portion of riverbank at the south
end of the project area and moved north (see Figure 2). All trenches revealed very similar
sediment profiles composed of loamy and clayey floodplain deposits with minor carbonates,
few to no gravels, and scattered terrestrial snail shells (e.g., Rabdotus spp.). Surface layers of
variably consolidated, granular to blocky, brown to reddish gray sandy loam (typically about
20 cm thick) overlay 40–80 cm of very well-consolidated, typically blocky, grayish brown
loam that grades to a dark grayish brown clay loam with depth. The boundary between
the first and second zones is diffuse in some areas but separated by thin lenses of fine sand
in others, which suggests the zones are part of the same stratigraphic unit impacted by
surface disturbance. A zone of laminated sediments was identified in all of the trenches. In
Trenches 1 and 3, Zone 3 primarily consists of dark grayish brown and very dark grayish
brown clay loam interspersed with thin laminae and lenses of clayey sand and sand. In
Trenches 2 and 4, Zone 3 is predominately light yellowish brown to brown laminae of sand
and clayey sand with noticeably darker lenses of sandy mud, sandy clay, and clay. Laminated
sediments extended to the floors of Trenches 1–3. A basal zone of very well-consolidated,
tacky, black to very dark brown clay was exposed along the base of Trench 4 (130–135 cm
below the surface).
A porcelain insulator fragment was identified in the Trench 2 backdirt, and late
historic/modern trash was identified in Trench 3. The top two zones of sediment in Trench 3
are consistent with those observed in the other trenches, but the zone of laminated sediments
was truncated and only present in the southeast half of the trench. A stump void was on
the edge of the truncated unit in the center of the trench, about 80 cm below the surface.
Segments of iron pipe and steel cable were recovered in the immediate vicinity of the

5

stump void, and fragments of goat wire fencing were visible in both trench walls, extending
northward from about 0.5 m south of the void. The parabolic arrangement of the goat wire
segments in the trench walls, the downsloping contact of truncated laminae, and the position
of the stump void suggest the trench bisected the base of a broad, shallow gulley or surface
depression in an earlier terrace surface. An irregular unit of light yellowish brown silty
loam mixed with occasional fragments of clay loam at the base of the parabolic cut probably
is redeposited material. Several pieces of flexible polyurethane foam were found among
the goat wire in Trench 3. The presence of this foam, first produced commercially in 1954
(Plastomer Corporation 2013), suggests the goat wire and other metal items identified in the
trench are of recent age, and by extension, indicates that the overlying sediments identified
in all four trenches (Zones 1 and 2) were deposited in the last 60 years. No prehistoric or
historic-age artifacts were observed in any of the trenches.
RECOMMENDATIONS

No prehistoric or historic-age artifacts were observed on the surface during pedestrian
survey or in any of the trenches. Recent artifacts in Trenches 2 and 3 are late historic to
modern in age, and it appears that the upper 60–100 cm of the lower terrace were deposited
in the last 60 years and thus have no potential for archeological remains. Subsurface impacts
associated with tie rod installation throughout the trenched area are expected to be ca.
2 ft (60 cm) deep, and thus this activity will not affect any archeological deposits in that
portion of the APE. While tie rod installation north of the boat ramp will require deeper
trenches, they will be excavated in the wall of the upper terrace and where the terrace wall
merges with the lower terrace. These areas are less conducive to human habitation than
the broader terrace surface to the south and therefore are considered unlikely to contain
significant archeological deposits. In addition, segments of the APE north of the boat ramp
have been disturbed to an unknown depth by construction of the stage and the adjacent
amphitheater. Installation of the 24-inch-wide pilings on the outer edge of the APE could
affect archeological deposits buried at depths greater than the trenches excavated during
this survey, but any such impacts would be limited in spatial extent.
Given these findings, Prewitt and Associates recommends that the bank stabilization
project is unlikely to impact any archeological resources that are eligible for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places under Criterion D (36 CFR 60.4; 36 CFR 800.4, 5) or
designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (13 TAC 26.2, 8). It is therefore recommended
that the proposed project be allowed to proceed without additional archeological
investigations.

6

REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93–115.
Fenneman, N. m.
1938
Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Fisher, W. L.
1979
Geologic Atlas of Texas, Seguin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Frye, R. G., K. L. Brown, and C. A. McMahan
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Griffith, G. E., S. A. Bryce, J. m. Omernik, J. A. Comstock, A. C. Rogers, B. Harrison, S. L. Hatch,
and D. Bezanson
2004
Ecoregions of Texas (color poster with map, descriptive text, and photographs). U.S.
Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia.
Lowther, A. C., and L. E. Werchan
1978
Soil Survey of Caldwell County, Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
McMahan, C. A., R. G. Frye, and K. L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis. Wildlife Division, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin,
Texas.
Nickels, D. L.
2008
A Cultural Resources Survey of Zedler Mill Park, City of Luling, Caldwell County,
Texas. Report No. 2. Tierras Antiguas Archeology, Martindale, Texas.
Plastomer Corporation
2013
The History of Plastomer Corporation. Electronic document, http://www.plastomer.
com/about-us, accessed August 2013.
Quigg, J. m., and T. Myers
2005
San Marcos Riverbank and Zedler’s Mill Stabilization, Caldwell County, Texas:
An Archeological and Historical Assessment. Technical Report No. 34062. TRC
Environmental Corporation, Austin.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1966
The Geology of Texas. Bulletin 3232. The University of Texas at Austin.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (USDA-NRCS)
2013a
Web Soil Survey. Electronic document, websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov, accessed August
2013.
2013b

Soil Series Classification Database. Electronic document, soils.usda.gov/technical/
classification/scfile, accessed August 2013.

7

