ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR MUD CREEK TRIBUTARY
DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS, SAN ANTONIO, BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS
WBS Element: 40-00330-04-02
Environmental Project Code: 10-518A8-580CIP

by
Damon Burden

Principal Investigator: Ross C. Fields

LETTER REPORT NO. 874

submitted to

Adams Environmental, Inc.
San Antonio, Texas

by

Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Cultural Resources Services
Austin, Texas
PAI No. 213012

July 2013

TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 6535

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT ..................................................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING.......................................................................................... 1
RESULTS OF THE FILE SEARCH ................................................................................... 3
RESULTS OF THE ACHEOLOGICAL SURVEY ............................................................. 4
RECOMMENDATIONS ..................................................................................................... 8
REFERENCES CITED ....................................................................................................... 9

ii

ABSTRACT
On May 3, 2013, personnel with Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted an intensive
archeological survey along a drainage ditch segment in northern San Antonio, Texas, for
Adams Environmental, Inc., under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6535. This work was
completed prior to proposed drainage improvements. The horizontal Area of Potential
Effects (APE) for the project is 9.2 acres of city property, which encompasses a ca. 2,100-ft­
long, 190-ft-wide drainage ditch segment just east of Mud Creek between Thousand Oaks
Drive and Tavern Oaks Drive. Review of available topographic maps, aerial photographs,
and satellite imagery before the ﬁeld investigation indicated that this ditch segment
was excavated after 1992 to redirect the ﬂow of a natural Mud Creek tributary prior to
development. Modern roadways and residential developments frame the project APE, and
it is bordered and crossed by numerous subsurface utilities. Seven shovel tests and eight
backhoe trenches were excavated in and on the edges of the APE. The ﬁeld investigation
indicated that natural surfaces along some parts of the drainage ditch were capped and
leveled with gravel ﬁll prior to residential development; other areas were capped and leveled
with construction ﬁll. Trench excavation, which was limited to the ﬂoor of the drainage
ditch due to utility alignments on the ditch margins, indicated deep mechanical impacts to
original sediments. The surface layers exposed in these trenches probably were deposited
after drainage ditch construction. Modern trash was mixed in surface sediments in some
of the shovel tests and one trench.
Two pieces of lithic debitage identiﬁed on the surface at the south end of the APE
between the ditch and Preston Hollow Drive are undoubtedly associated with previously
recorded prehistoric site 41BX842. Although the site boundary overlaps the south end of the
APE, the site was subjected to extensive disturbance over the past 20 years. The ﬁndings of
the investigation suggest that any 41BX842 archeological deposits that might remain within
the APE would lack both integrity and signiﬁcance. No other archeological materials were
identiﬁed. The APE does not contain any cultural resources that are eligible for National
Register listing or State Archeological Landmark designation, and it is recommended that the
proposed project be allowed to proceed without additional archeological investigations.
CURATION
This survey was conducted under a no-collection policy. Identiﬁed artifacts were noted,
brieﬂy described, and returned to the point of recovery. Project records and photographs
are housed at the ofﬁces of Prewitt and Associates, Inc.

iii

INTRODUCTION

On May 3, 2013, personnel with Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted an intensive
archeological survey along an ca. 2,100-ft-long segment of drainage ditch just east of Mud
Creek, between Thousand Oaks Drive and Tavern Oaks in northern San Antonio, Texas
(Figure 1). The survey was conducted prior to a proposed drainage improvements project
that will include this ditch segment. Speciﬁc project details were not available, but the ﬂoor
of the ditch will be deepened to add capacity, with all excavation conﬁned to the existing
channel. The horizontal Area of Potential Effects (APE) for the proposed project will be ca.
2,100 ft long by 190 ft wide and will encompass 9.2 acres. The estimated vertical APE will be
about 3 ft or less below the modern ground surface. Comparison of the 1992 USGS Longhorn
topographic quadrangle, aerial photographs, and Google Earth satellite imagery indicates
that the ditch segment was excavated after 1992 to reroute a natural Mud Creek tributary
prior to adjacent residential development. A short segment at the north end of the APE
is the only part of the project area that follows the original tributary course. Residential
properties now border both sides of the generally northeast-southwest-oriented drainage.
This archeological survey was conducted under the direction of Adams Environmental,
Inc., for the City of San Antonio under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6535. It was performed in
accordance with the requirements of the Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resource
Code of 1977, Title 9, Chapter 191, VTCS 6145-9) and the City of San Antonio’s Historic
Preservation and Design Section of the Uniﬁed Development Code (Article 6 35-360-634).
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

The project area is at the foot of the Balcones Escarpment on the western extreme
of the Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic province in northeastern Bexar County, Texas. The
project is along the transitional boundary between the Blackland Prairie to the southeast
and the Edwards Plateau to the northwest (Arbingast et al. 1973:12; Fenneman 1938;
McMahan et al. 1984:Figure 1; Sellards et al. 1966). The Blackland Prairie is characterized
by rolling tall grasslands underlain by soft limestones, marls, and chalks, whereas the scarp
along the edge of the Edwards Plateau is a rugged, dissected landscape of limestone hills
and canyons created by extensive stream downcutting and headward erosion.
According to the Geologic Atlas of Texas (Bureau of Economic Geology 1983), the APE
is on a band of Quaternary ﬂuviatile terrace deposits mapped along Mud Creek and the
adjacent tributary. These deposits are bordered on the southeast and northwest by Upper
Cretaceous-age Pecan Gap chalk and Austin chalk. Holocene alluvium is not mapped in the
vicinity of the project area. Mapped soils include frequently ﬂooded Trinity and Frio soils
along the original tributary alignments and Lewisville silty clay with 1 to 3 percent slopes
on a dividing interﬂuve (Taylor et al. 1991:Sheet 29). Trinity and Frio soils occur as thin,
elongated, and irregularly shaped areas on the ﬂoodplains of small streams and larger ﬁeld
drainages and are represented by thin depositional or active degradational (scouring and
shifting) regimes in different areas (Taylor et al. 1991:32). Trinity soils compose the majority
of the soil unit and are 1.0–1.5 m deep with clay loam to gravelly clay surface layers. Frio

1

Project Area

0

³

City
of San
Antonio

200 400

800

Meters

TEXAS

PAI/13/slh

Figure 1. Project location map (1992 USGS 7.5-minute topographic map, Longhorn quadrangle).

2

soils are 1.0–1.2 m deep and are darker with higher percentages of clay than Trinity soils.
Lewisville silty clay soils are found on “long, narrow, sloping areas” between terraces and
uplands and on slopes along major drainages (Taylor et al. 1991:25). Surface layers about
0.5 m thick are underlain by calcareous clay subsoil.
The Bexar County climate is classiﬁed as modiﬁed subtropical and is predominantly
marine in the summer and continental in the winter (Taylor et al. 1991:102). The climate
of the Blackland Prairie physiographic unit is classiﬁed as modiﬁed humid subtropical
with Gulf-inﬂuenced hot summers and continental-inﬂuenced mild winters. The Edwards
Plateau physiographic unit is classiﬁed as subtropical steppe (Natural Fibers Information
Center 1987:10–12). Seasonal temperature extremes exceeding 100ºF and dipping below
32ºF occur in both regions but are more frequent on the Edwards Plateau. The mean
annual precipitation for Bexar County is 29.1 inches (739 mm). Precipitation is distributed
throughout the year, with peaks in the late spring and early fall months (Natural Fibers
Information Center 1987:49; Taylor et al. 1991:102).
As with landscape and climate, the biota of Bexar County differs east to west with
geographical overlap of some species. Flora and fauna of the Edwards Plateau and Blackland
Prairie are deﬁned as Balconian and Texan, respectively (Blair 1950). Although the dominant
vegetative regime for the project area is now listed as urban, native vegetation may have
included live oak–ashe juniper woodlands and live oak–ashe juniper parklands (Fry et al.
1984). Mapped soils once supported tall and midlevel grasses with widely scattered elm,
hackberry, and mesquite trees (Lewisville series) and dense covers of elm, hackberry, oak,
huisache, mesquite, thorny shrubs, and tall to short grasses (Taylor et al. 1991:32; USDA­
NRCS 2013).
RESULTS OF THE FILE SEARCH

Review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Archeological Sites Atlas (Atlas) on April
30, 2013, revealed ﬁve recorded prehistoric archeological sites (41BX354, 41BX355, 41BX356,
41BX630, and 41BX842), a historic cemetery (41BX993), and two previous archeological
investigations within 1 km of the APE. Sites 41BX354, 41BX355, and 41BX356 were recorded
during a 1977 sewer line survey conducted by personnel with the Center for Archaeological
Research (CAR) at the University of Texas at San Antonio. The 1970s survey area depicted
in the Atlas overlaps the entire project APE. Site 41BX354, on the west bank of Mud Creek
about 0.4 km west of the APE, was a large (650x200 m) site consisting of abundant lithic
artifacts and a burned rock midden. Site 41BX355, also on the west creek bank, was a
smaller (100x50 m) lithic scatter 1 km north of the project area. Site 41BX356 was a small
(50x25 m) open campsite with abundant lithic artifacts and at least six possible burned
rock middens east of the creek, about 0.3 km north of the APE. Site 41BX630 was a 182x15­
m lithic procurement area with numerous lithic artifacts on the east side of Mud Creek,
about 0.6 km north of the project area. This site was recorded during a survey conducted
by a CAR afﬁliate when the area was undergoing residential development in 1984. The
south end of the project area overlaps 41BX842, a large (400x300-m), dense lithic scatter
with multiple burned rock middens that extended into now developed areas east and west
of the APE and modiﬁed areas south of Thousand Oaks Drive. The bulldozed and looted
site apparently was recorded in the late 1980s or early 1990s prior to existing residential

3

development. All of the above-mentioned prehistoric sites were extensively disturbed if
not destroyed by subsequent residential, commercial, and infrastructure development. The
historic cemetery (41BX993) was recorded in 1993. About 0.5 km southeast of the APE,
the small cemetery consists of eight marked graves reportedly associated with the African
American Grifﬁn family.
RESULTS OF THE ACHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Field investigations consisted of pedestrian survey and surface examination of
vegetation-free surface exposures, shovel testing, and mechanical trench excavation in and
adjacent to the APE (Figure 2). The project area is clearly deﬁned by existing roadways and
residential properties. The APE encompasses a ca. 2,100-ft-long, 190-ft-wide drainage ditch
segment that is approximately 1.5 m deep, with sloping side walls and a ﬂat base. Surfaces
along the top edges of the ditch are typically ﬂat, with as much as 5 m of space separating
residential properties from the top ditch edge on its east side. Benches are absent along
most of the ditch’s west side where yard fences are set at the top of the slanted ditch wall.
Surfaces along Preston Hollow Drive and on the north side of the drainage west of Tavern
Oaks are cut such that they drop 0.50–0.75 m before meeting the tops of the adjacent ditch
walls. The APE is bordered or crossed by numerous subsurface utilities. Communications
and electric lines run between Preston Hollow Drive and the west ditch edge at the south
end of the APE. Communications lines also cross the ditch ahead of the concrete intake at
Thousand Oaks Drive and run along the east ditch edge for nearly all of the project length.
A water main also crosses the ditch ahead of the concrete intake and another borders the
north end of the APE west of Tavern Oaks. Sewer lines cross the APE in three places, and
another runs adjacent to the water main at the north end of the APE. The concrete aprons of
four drainage outﬂows are spaced along the east side of the drainage ditch, and channelized
tributaries intersect the ditch on the east and north sides. Surface visibility typically varied
from 0 to 25 percent, with occasional higher visibility along foot trails, two-track roads, and
utility alignments.
Seven shovel tests and eight backhoe trenches were excavated, and their locations
were recorded with a hand-held GPS unit. Most of the shovel tests were excavated along
the top edges of the ditch to check for intact soil remnants. Utilities placement and
mandatory statutory tolerance zones for mechanical excavation along marked subsurface
utility alignments relegated trench excavation to the ﬂoor of the drainage ditch. Shovel
tests and trenches were not systematically spaced along survey transects, but trenches
were distributed such that at least one was excavated for every 100 linear meters of the
APE. While the combined shovel test and backhoe trench density of 1.6 per acre falls
slightly below the Texas Historical Commission’s minimum archeological survey standard
of 2 tests per acre on tracts of this size, this level of effort is considered sufﬁcient given
the level of disturbance within the APE and the high subsurface visibility provided by
the trenches.
Shovel tests were approximately 30 cm in diameter and were excavated in 20-cm
levels when sediments allowed. Removed sediment was screened through 1/4-inch-mesh
hardware cloth or carefully sorted through with a trowel when too difﬁcult to screen
efﬁciently. A Shovel Test Record Form was used to record brief sediment descriptions and

4

es
Pr

n
to

ss
Pa

D

r

8
3
1

lta
De

2

7

e
ov
Gr

Dr

v
Ta

C
ston
Pre

e rn

6

Oa

tD
our

ks
St

r

5

4

Fa
lco
n

Gr
o

ve

Dr

ton
H

ollo
w

Dr

7

Tr
e

e

G

ro
ve

Dr

Ro
se
tti
D

2

4
Th
ou
sa
nd

6

1
O

ak
s

Dr

Sa
ck

vil
le

Ro
we

Dr

Pre
s

3

r

Dr

Project Area
Shovel Test
Backhoe Trench

5

PAI/13/slh

³

0

20 40

80

Meters

Figure 2. Modern aerial photograph of the project area showing the project APE and shovel test
and trench locations.

5

notes about the presence of modern trash and construction materials. Shovel Tests 1–3 were
at the north end of the project area, Shovel Tests 4–6 were at the south end, and Shovel Test
7 was on the east side of the drainage ditch in the central portion of the survey area (see
Figure 2). All but Shovel Test 3 were on benches along the drainage ditch edges, whereas
Shovel Test 3 was on the ditch ﬂoor. The average shovel test depth was 23 cm, with depths
ranging from 15 to 33 cm.
Shovel Test 1 was on a bench between the larger drainage ditch to the east and
a smaller ditch to the south. It exposed 15 cm of dark brown silty clay loam mixed with
abundant angular and subangular limestone gravels above large pieces of tightly packed
limestone. Shovel Test 2 was on a ﬂat bench at the east edge of the drainage ditch,
approximately 60 m east of Shovel Test 1. It exposed about 15 cm of dark brown, slightly
tacky silty clay mixed with frequent small to large angular and subangular limestone gravels,
glass, and other modern trash over construction pad material. The latter consisted of a mix
of pale yellowish brown and cream-colored sand and sandy loam, fragments of similarly
colored clay, frequent gravels, and limestone cobbles. Shovel Test 3 was excavated on the
ﬂoor of the drainage ditch prior to backhoe trenching. It exposed a 20-cm-thick surface layer
of wet, dark brown, tacky silty clay over tightly packed limestone gravels with minimal
intervening sediment.
Shovel Tests 4–6 were excavated on the margins of the drainage ditch at the south
end of the project area. Shovel Test 4 was on a relatively ﬂat bench between the ditch and
marked utility alignments in an area where a chert biface thinning ﬂake and a chert ﬂake
fragment were observed on the surface. Presumably associated with previously recorded
site 41BX842, these items were the only prehistoric artifacts identiﬁed during the survey.
Shovel Test 4 revealed a 5-cm-thick surface layer of dark brown silty clay over a 7-cm-thick
layer of identical sediment interspersed among frequent angular and subangular limestone
gravels and cobbles. A basal layer, exposed to a depth of 18 cm below the surface, consisted
of well-consolidated brown clay interspersed with abundant, tightly packed angular and
subangular limestone gravels and cobbles. No artifacts were identiﬁed in the excavated
sediment.
Shovel Tests 5 and 6 were on a flat surface east of the ditch and a marked
communications line. They revealed 10 to 15 cm of moderately consolidated silty clay
loam mixed with common to abundant small gravels, asphalt gravels, pieces of glass, and
other modern trash over a layer of asphalt and an underlying gravel pad. Both tests were
excavated to depths of 22 cm. The construction materials are consistent with the abundant
asphalt and concrete fragments visible in a foot trail on the east ditch wall only meters
west-northwest of Shovel Test 6. It is not clear if the asphalt pad exposed in these tests is
part of a single constructed surface or (as the concrete in the east ditch wall suggests) is
simply construction debris imported to cap and raise original surfaces and create a stable
east ditch wall.
Shovel Test 7 was on a ﬂat surface on the east edge of the drainage ditch, about
10 m north of its conﬂuence with a channelized natural tributary. It exposed moderately
to well-consolidated, reddish brown to brown, strongly granular silty clay and clay mixed
with occasional small gravels from the surface to a depth of 33 cm.

6

Trenches were excavated using a backhoe ﬁtted with a 0.8-m-wide toothless bucket.
A total of 51.25 linear meters was excavated in eight trenches that ranged from 6.0 to 6.8 m
in length (average = 6.4 m). Maximum trench depths, which varied according to encountered
sediments, ranged from 0.9 to 1.1 m for an average of 1.0 m. Trench walls and ﬂoors were
monitored for artifacts, cultural features, and other anomalies during excavation. Trench
walls were closely inspected for artifacts after excavation, but the walls were not cleaned
since initial efforts to clean the gravel-laden, clayey, and typically loosely consolidated
sediments showed little improvement over the original exposures. A Trench Excavation
Record Form was used to record trench dimensions, exposed sediments, and the presence/
absence of artifacts and modern trash. In addition, a representative wall segment was
photographed in each trench.
Trench excavation began at the south end of the project area and moved north (see
Figure 2). Trenches 1–3 revealed 25- to 50-cm-thick surface layers of black to very dark brown,
weakly to strongly granular, gravelly silty clay loam. Surface sediments were interspersed
with moderate to abundant small to large, subangular to rounded limestone gravels, some
rounded chert gravels, and occasional subangular limestone cobbles. Secondary layers of
reddish brown to red gravelly silty clay loam 25–35 cm thick were exposed in Trenches 1
and 3. The gravel component in this zone was identical to that in the upper layer in terms
of size grade and morphology, but clasts made up much larger percentages of the secondary
zones in these trenches. In Trench 3, the secondary zone consisted chieﬂy of gravels with a
minor percentage of intervening silty clay loam. Basal zones consisted of dusky red tacky
clay with few small to medium-sized gravels in Trench 1 (15 cm exposed), and a red very
gravelly clay loam (almost a clayey gravel) in Trench 3 (50 cm exposed). The surface layer
in Trench 2 capped a 45-cm-thick basal zone of dark red gravelly clay. The gravel load in
this zone increased with depth, and indurated limestone and occasional chert cobbles were
exposed on the trench ﬂoor.
Trenches 4 and 5 were placed across from drainage outﬂows in the north half of the
project area. These trenches revealed thin surface layers (less than 10 cm thick) of silty
clay and silty clay loam with few small gravels over layers of ﬁne to large limestone gravels
interspersed with subangular limestone cobbles and very minor percentages of intervening
reddish brown to red clay. These loosely consolidated gravel layers were exposed to a depth
of 90 cm. In Trench 4, the gravel zone was wet, and water pooled on the trench ﬂoor soon
after exposure. Indurated limestone exposed on the ﬂoor of Trench 5 suggests that the
trench ﬂoor was not far above bedrock.
Trenches 6–8 at the north end of the project area revealed 25- to 60-cm-thick surface
layers of black to dark brown, granular to blocky, tacky silty clay and clay with moderate
to very abundant small to large limestone gravels and occasional limestone cobbles.
Clasts were pervasive throughout the surface layer in Trench 7, but clast frequencies
graded from rare to abundant with depth in Trenches 6 and 8. An aluminum can, paper,
and pieces of plastic were scattered in surface-layer sediments in Trench 6. Basal layers
in these trenches (exposed to ca. 100 cm below the surface) consisted of black or reddish
brown to strong brown tacky clays mixed with extremely abundant limestone gravels and
moderate to frequent limestone cobbles. The basal layer in Trench 8 was predominantly
clasts with a very minor percentage of intervening clay. Cobble morphology in these three
trenches varied from slightly rounded to subangular and angular tabular pieces. Cobbles

7

were pervasive and interlocked on the ﬂoors of Trenches 6 and 7. Pieces of limestone up
to 50 cm in length were exposed in Trench 8.
The trench proﬁles suggest surface soils were mechanically scraped down close to the
interface with gravel-laden substrata or were completely removed when the drainage ditch
was constructed. Any surface soils that might have been left undoubtedly were reworked
and disturbed at that time. The color and compositional similarities evident in surface
layer sediments exposed in the trenches, and the distinct color differences noted between
these layers and underlying sediments, suggest that most if not all of the surface zones
are derived from postconstruction alluvial deposition. Modern trash exposed throughout
the surface layer in Trench 6 supports this interpretation. Morphological characteristics
of the gravels and cobbles exposed in the basal clastic sediments in all of the trenches are
indicative of a combination of colluvial and relict alluvial deposition.
RECOMMENDATIONS

Review of available topographic quadrangles, aerial photographs, and Google Earth
satellite imagery indicate that the project APE encompasses a drainage ditch excavated
after 1992 to redirect the ﬂow of a Mud Creek tributary prior to adjacent residential
development. Only the north end of the project area overlaps the original tributary course.
Modern roadways and residential developments frame the surveyed drainage ditch segment,
which is bordered and crossed by numerous subsurface utilities. Shovel test excavation
along the ditch edges suggest that natural surfaces in some areas were capped and leveled
with gravel ﬁll for residential development and house construction. Other areas along the
ditch appear to be capped and leveled with asphalt and concrete. Trench excavation on the
ﬂoor of the drainage ditch indicates that original ditch construction cut deeply into natural
sediments on an interﬂuve between Mud Creek and the original course of the now modiﬁed
Mud Creek tributary. Most, if not all, of the surface sediments in the trenches probably were
deposited after drainage ditch construction. Modern trash was mixed in surface sediments
in Trench 6 and in some shovel tests.
A chert ﬂake and ﬂake fragment observed on the surface between the drainage
ditch and Preston Hollow Drive were the only prehistoric artifacts identiﬁed during the
survey. These artifacts are undoubtedly associated with prehistoric site 41BX842. While
the recorded site boundary overlaps the south end of the project area, recent residential,
commercial, and infrastructure development extensively disturbed this site, and no intact
prehistoric archeological deposits remain within the APE. Hence, the APE does not contain
any cultural resources that are eligible for National Register listing or State Archeological
Landmark designation, and it is recommended that the proposed project be allowed to
proceed without additional archeological investigations.

8

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, J. R. Buchanan, W. L. Hezlep, L. T. Ellis, T. G. Jordan,
C. T. Granger, and C. P. Zlatkovich
1973
Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93–115.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1983
The Geologic Atlas of Texas, San Antonio Sheet. Reprint. Originally published in 1974.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Fenneman, N. M.
1938
Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Frye, R. G., K. L. Brown, and C. A. McMahan
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas Map. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
McMahan, C. A., R. G. Frye, and K. L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis. Wildlife Division, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin,
Texas.
Natural Fibers Information Center
1987
The Climates of Texas Counties. Bureau of Business Research, The University of
Texas at Austin, in cooperation with the Ofﬁce of the State Climatologist, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1966
The Geology of Texas. Reprint. Originally published 1932. Bulletin 3232. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Taylor, F. B., R. B. Hailey, and D. L. Richmond
1991
Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (USDA-NRCS)
2013
Soil Series Classiﬁcation Database. Electronic document, soils.usda.gov/
technical/classiﬁcation, accessed April 2013.

9

