Our Canyon Home:

The Settling of Pinto Canyon
It was January of 1907, and the wagon creaked and swayed danger-

set in, it was short lived, for not far down the canyon was their

ously as Dora Wilson carefully guided the two-horse team down

only neighbor, a man who would help the Wilsons through their

the rocky slope into Pinto Canyon. There was no road, scarcely

most difficult hour, a man whose capacity for kindness was rivaled

even a trail. They had run a pole through the spokes, to lock the

only by his ambition to succeed.

rear wheels in place. But even then, with all of their worldly possessions strapped down inside, the weight was too great. James

José Prieto wasn’t new to the

Wilson and his friend, Hart Greenwood, tied ropes to the rear

canyon, but like most

of the wagon, their horses bracing to further slow its descent.

ranchers in the

Darkness came, and the family pitched camp precariously on a

area, he did

small bench halfway down the slope. The next day they reached

not own his

the canyon bottom, and soon pulled up beside a crudely built
jacal—a one room rock house built by a squatter who had long
since moved on. This shack was to be their new home.
The heyday for homesteaders in the Big Bend had already
passed. All the good grazing land—Alpine valley, the Davis Mountains, the Marfa Plain—had been claimed years
ago. Most of what remained was rough and broken, more
shrubland than grassland, and better suited to goats than to
cattle. Located as it was below the Marfa Plain and along the
northern flanks of the Chinati Mountains, Pinto Canyon was
such a place. But the state had recently passed one of its
last and most generous land laws—allowing new settlers
a full eight sections of school land, under condition of
settlement and improvement. The result was a second
land rush, a new flood of settlers eager to succeed, but
who had to settle for land passed up by those who came
before. The Wilsons were part of this latter wave. But if
they were too late to stake a claim to the fertile grasslands,
at least the land they got was expansive and with the meager
but reliable flow of Pinto Creek, water was plentiful.
But trouble found them early. On their second day in the
canyon, James’ horse kicked him, breaking his leg, rendering
him helpless to work or to care for his wife and their three
young daughters. A doctor was summoned but there was little
he could do except adjust the leg brace Wilson had worn since
childhood, the result of paralysis suffered as an infant. If despair

James E. Wilson, Pinto Canyon homesteader, ca. 1910. Photo courtesy
of the Junior Historian’s Collection, Marfa Public Library.

land. Born in Santa Cruz de Rosales, Chihuahua, in 1866, he immigrated to the United States with his family at the age of eight.
As many who came before and after, the Prietos sought a better
life, escaping a past marred by servitude and—before that—slavery. They settled outside the hamlet of Ruidosa, one of several
new farming communities springing up along the Rio Grande.
Throughout his childhood, José helped his father Francisco on
the family farm. When he came of age he began to work area
ranches, branding calves and shearing sheep and goats. In 1891
he married Juanita Barrera and, with his new bride, moved into
a crude dugout a stone’s throw from Pinto Canyon. By the time
José rode up the canyon to help the Wilsons, he and Juanita had
already lived in the area for some 15 years.
While

Mr. Wilson’s

leg slowly healed, José

The Wilson family in front of their adobe home in Pinto Canyon, ca. 1912.
Courtesy of the Junior Historian’s Collection, Marfa Public Library.

watched over his meager
herd of cattle, making
sure they did not stray
from the canyon. He also
began making regular
trips down to the store
in Ruidosa, returning
with groceries to feed the
family. To Wilson, José
Prieto was no less than
a godsend. A friendship
developed between them
that transcended ethnic
differences, proving to
be as lasting as it was rewarding. And not just for
Wilson.

The José Prieto family, ca. 1914. Courtesy of the Prieto Family Collection.

about—available land, adequate rainfall, fair prices. And there
was progress: more families would arrive, a road would be built

Weeks passed. The days

through the canyon, a schoolhouse would be constructed. And

began to warm. When

there, for a while, before the dark clouds began to form on the

Wilson could finally ride

far horizon, the canyon would become its own insular com-

again, he set to improv-

munity, where the children of four families—Anglos and His-

ing his ranch. He traded

panic alike—would learn and play together, would share stories

his cattle for 100 Angora

and dreams and experiences. Before the Mexican Revolution

goats and soon began building an adobe house up a tributary

would bring violence to the region, causing many

to Pinto Creek. Significantly, he would also have a chance to

to flee. Before the drought and Great Depres-

reciprocate José’s kindness, offering a gift that would change his

sion would bring ranchers to their knees.

José Prieto, one of the earliest and most successful ranchers in Pinto Canyon. Courtesy
of the Prieto Family Collection.

friend’s life—by teaching him the required paperwork for filing

Before José’s brightest and most promis-

on his own land. For Prieto, it was a windfall. Like so many others

ing son would die at the hands of Texas

in the border region, the odds had been stacked against him—an

Rangers.

illiterate Mexican in a world ruled by literate Anglos. Starting out

(Continued on pg. 14)

with nothing more than a small herd of goats, by the end José
had assembled one of the largest and most successful ranches
in Pinto Canyon. It was a gift José never forgot. Throughout his
life, he always credited Mr. Wilson with helping him to succeed.
That’s how it was in the beginning. People helped each other,
watching over their neighbors’ livestock, loaning out a wire
stretcher or fresno, rounding up and shearing together. It was all
new, and they were all in it together. For in the first two decades
of ranching in Pinto Canyon, there was much to be hopeful

2

Center for Big Bend Studies

Pinto Canyon, looking west past Needle Peak from the edge of the Marfa Plain.
Photo by David Keller.

Continuing Excavations at the

Genevieve Lykes
Duncan Site
While test excavations at the Genevieve Lykes Duncan (GLD) site
(which occurred over a near two-year period) concluded in fall
2012, work has steadily continued at the site. Our recent efforts
have been focused on a block excavation in the area of the site
known as the Broadway Locale where concentrated Late Paleoindian features were identified during the testing phase. To ac-

New shelter
for the ongoing block
excavation.

commodate long-term excavations, certain logistical matters were
addressed first: 1) an elaborate
shelter/shed was constructed
over the block area to provide shade for the crew and to
help protect the priceless Late
Paleoindian-aged deposits;
and 2) a smaller and more traditional shed was constructed
for shade over a solar-powered water-screening station.
Test excavations had previously indicated the depos-

Newly exposed Feature 18.

New exposure of Feature 2.

its directly overlying the planned block were culturally sterile, yet the geophysical (magnetometer and
ground penetrating radar) investigation identified
several nearby subsurface anomalies—these were
shovel tested with negative results. Consequently, the
ca. 2-m thick overburden was removed to the zone
of strata containing the Late Paleoindian remains,
leaving a level ca. 6 x 8 m area with the long axis
paralleling the arroyo bank. Due to a number
of factors, including costs and our desire to
protect the deposits, only half of this area (3 x 8
m) was slated for excavation at this time. A grid

Unusual “fish-tail” dart point
found adjacent to Feature 2.

Biface found in-situ.

was established, consisting of 22 whole 1 x 1 m
units and 9 partial units along the arroyo wall. Within the grid,

uncovered. While neither F-2 nor F-10 has been fully excavated,

two east-west trending baulks were left in order to retain details

additional FCR have been revealed adjacent to each and likely

of the stratigraphy and this divided the block into three separate

indicate that most of these features are intact. And, although

excavation areas: north, central, and south. After charcoal and

erosion had scattered the upper portion of F-18, a small central

small scattered bits of fire-cracked rock (FCR) were first exposed

basal area of it is intact and contains abundant woody charcoal.

in each of the areas, it became apparent that the deposits sloped

Creosotebush charcoal from F-18 yielded an uncalibrated conven-

gently from north to south. Fortuitously, the baulks proved to

tional radiocarbon date of ca. 8250±47 radiocarbon years before

neatly divide the block into compartmentalized areas with as-

present (RCYBP), only ca. 200 years earlier than radiocarbon

sociated cultural debris at similar elevations; due to the slope,

dates from F-2 that lies about 6 m away.

each area varies in elevation from adjacent areas by ca. 2 cm.
Recovery of stone tools and lithic debris has been sparse, as is the
As the excavation proceeded using tightly controlled 2-cm levels

case at most Paleoindian sites, yet these materials are comprised of

in each unit, new light was shed on two of the previously recorded

both local (high and medium quality) and non-local (high quality)

features, Feature 2 (F-2) and F-10, and a new feature (F-18) was

(Continued on pg. 11)

La Vista de la Frontera

3

Of Artifact Collectors and Archaeologists

The Black Rock Cairn
A recent interesting article by Chris Merriman in El Palacio, a

Jim began to bring order

flagship publication of the New Mexico Department of Cultural

to the collection by catego-

Affairs, touches upon the long-running “tumultuous” relationship

rizing and displaying the

between professional archaeologists and private artifact collectors

expanding collection. For

in the Southwest (Merriman 2013:43–47). While expressing the

much of his life, he had

archaeological perspective that collectors obtain artifacts with

collected without benefit

“less attention to detail than an archaeologist would,” Merriman

of any archaeological train-

goes on to explain that:

ing or guidance. Then, in
his later years, through

. . . not all collectors are the same, and there is a wide

intensive self-study and

range of collecting behaviors. On opposite ends of the

professional tutoring, Jim

spectrum are those who are part of an inquisitive, well-

pursued a more scientific

meaning public that genuinely cares about prehistory,

archaeological attitude

and those who collect artifacts for personal gain.

toward discovery, categorization, and display of ar-

Merriman thus skirts the particulars of the perpetual collector-

tifacts. The museum now

archaeologist debate, and instead focuses on the potentials for

James M. Davis.

mutually beneficial working relationships between scientists and

materials as well as Jim’s extensive collections and displays.

houses the earlier collected

knowledgeable laymen. He makes his case by describing the positive interactions of archaeologists with Robert Weber, a well-known

Perhaps due to knowledge garnered as a latecomer to the Concho

collector and avocational archaeologist in New Mexico.

Valley Archaeological Society, Jim began to better comprehend
the magnitude of data loss inherent to uncontrolled digging and

During my long tenure as a Texas archaeologist, I gradually came

collecting. This is reflected both in his attempt to at least cursorily

to the realization that scientists have been made aware of only

document, through photography and notes, some of his group’s

a tiny percentage—probably five percent or less—of highly sig-

finds during their uncontrolled digging of Black Rock Cairn, as

nificant archaeological discoveries made routinely by an army of

well as in subsequent actions.

collectors over the last century. If it could somehow be calculated,
the magnitude of loss of scientific data concerning prehistory

A short time after their discovery and dig, I was approached by

would be staggering (e.g., see Mallouf 2000). The reluctance of

Jim and one of his associates who inquired as to whether or not

most collectors to share their finds with archaeologists is rooted

their find, regardless of its destruction, would still be of inter-

in a hodge-podge of fact and fiction, far too convoluted to address

est to archaeologists. Thus began a cooperative arrangement

here, that has plagued such interactions historically.

between collector and archaeologist that led ultimately to a
detailed, after-the-fact documentation of the feature and all as-

There are, however, many individual examples of successful

sociated artifacts. At one point, Jim and I traveled to West Texas

cooperation between scientific and collector communities in

and camped at the cairn site for the purpose of preparing a scale

Texas. One such example concerns the discovery of a remark-

map of the find-spot. We obtained soil samples and additional

able prehistoric mortuary cairn by collectors in the Trans-Pecos

photographic coverage of the site and its environs. While at the

region. Named the Black Rock Cairn, this unusual and singularly

site, we made note of additional artifacts eroding from cracks in

important prehistoric feature was discovered and subsequently

the bedrock beneath what had once been the cairn. During that

excavated by James M. ( Jim) Davis and friends during a hunting

trip, Jim repeatedly expressed his regret that such an important

trip to the Davis Mountains area.

discovery had not been explored and excavated scientifically.
Clearly, had he been able to repeat his discovery, he would have

Jim Davis, now deceased, was a native of Sterling City and a

opted to involve a professional archaeologist.

familiar face among local historians as well as artifact collectors
across Texas. His is one of the earliest ranching families to settle

While cairn (stacked rock) burials are not uncommon in the

in Sterling County, and like his collector father before him, and

Trans-Pecos region, this particular feature was much larger and

his four siblings, Jim manifested a passionate interest in our

considerably more complex than the norm. In fact, as far as is

Native American past. Wishing to share their discoveries, Jim

known by this writer, nothing quite comparable to Black Rock

and his father established a small museum at their ranch house

Cairn and its contents has ever been encountered in the south-

to display the Davis collections. Before the death of his father,

western United States.

4

Center for Big Bend Studies

Upon discovery, the feature consisted of a circular stack of rock
roughly six meters in diameter.
Having quickly determined that
the feature was man-made, Jim Davis and his friends began removing
rock and digging in the soil beneath, where they found multiple
human burials and stone artifacts
that had been placed intentionally
with the interments. During his
three-day dig, Jim would occasionally stop progress to take photos
that included groupings of artifacts
from subareas within the cairn, and
he took cursory notes concerning
some skeletal and artifact distributions.

The cairn was later determined,

Turquoise pendants from Black Rock Cairn.

from osteological analysis of a
small sample of human bone saved
by Jim, to have contained a minimum of seven individuals—five
females and two males—and might
actually have held as many as nine
or more interments. Associated
with the burials were almost 500
artifacts, including hundreds of arrow and dart points, bifacial knives,
drills, a stone digging tool, stone
ornaments, shell beads, fossil corals, and various minerals, the latter
including raw copper ore, bits of
azurite, sulphur crystals, and variable forms of hematite (iron ore).
From a typological perspective, a
span of some 9,000 years is represented among artifacts from the
feature. It goes without saying that
the archaeological implications of
the cairn’s contents are enormous.

Examples of dart points from Black Rock Cairn.

The real point of this glance into one of a multitude of excep-

continue to dwindle in number, knowledgeable collectors, like

tional discoveries made by artifact collectors is that, if coopera-

Jim Davis, could play increasingly key roles in sustaining the

tion rather than suspicion were the norm, we could all greatly

future of archaeological data recovery.

enrich our interpretation and reconstruction of the past. For the
—Robert J. Mallouf

typical collector, possession of the artifact is the ultimate goal.
While for the archaeologist, the artifact—documented in its
original position with other artifacts and materials—is the key to
understanding human behavior and changing lifeways. Professional archaeologists do not build personal artifact collections.
If, upon making important discoveries, more collectors would
involve archaeologists early in their finds prior to digging, both
communities would benefit and critical scientific data could
be saved. As our ancient, nonrenewable archaeological sites

References Cited
Mallouf, Robert J.
2000 An Unraveling Rope: The Looting of America’s Past. In: Repatriation
Reader: Who Owns American Indian Remains?, Devon A. Mihesuah, editor,
pp. 59–73. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Merriman, Chris
2013
Archaeologists, Collectors, and Museum Collections: Insights from the
Robert H. Weber Collection. El Palacio 118(3):43–47.

La Vista de la Frontera

5

CBBS Research across

the Eastern Trans-Pecos
In 2013, Center for Big Bend Studies (CBBS) research endeavors

ation in characteristics such as crystalline structure, grain size,

across the Trans-Pecos were focused on a variety of topics, ranging

lamination, and secondary inclusions that suggest a spectrum of

from ongoing investigations of study areas on private ranches, to

formation processes (i.e., sedimentary, igneous, and metamor-

rock art studies, and aerial mapping. All of this work took place

phic). Significantly, they are all the product of a suite of processes

under the auspices of the Trans-Pecos Archaeological Program

associated with intense volcanism during the Tertiary Period

(TAP), established in 2004 to help guide the CBBS with a series of

20–38 million years ago. Selection of specific stone for manu-

research topics geared toward fleshing out a larger understanding

facturing tools or processing materials is a result of a multitude

of cultural developments in the greater Big Bend region.

of decisions and variables, including accessibility, durability, ease
of use and manipulation (flaking characteristics), and flake edge

New discoveries on the 02 Ranch bring the total number of sites

characteristics (sharpness). Each is balanced in turn, and clues

up to 493, a number of which were brought to the CBBS’s attention

regarding these decisions provide important information about

by ranch manager Homer Mills. Still more buried archaeological

technological and settlement strategies employed by prehistoric

deposits on the ranch were found along major drainage courses,

toolmakers on the 02 Ranch and across the larger Trans-Pecos

and the characteristics of the sediments suggest that some may

study area.

be as old as or older than the Early Archaic (6500–2500 B.C.).
Several new discoveries represent different aspects of prehistoric

Additional research efforts on the Pinto Canyon Ranch have

lifeways, such as processing localities (mounds of burned rock

produced promising results, helping to pave the way for ongoing

produced while baking plant foodstuffs) and architectural rem-

studies into the future. A second season of excavation at Surprise

nants (Late Prehistoric and possible Archaic-aged wikiup ring

Rockshelter shed light on a variant of Late Prehistoric architec-

foundations). Furthermore, excavation has continued amidst

ture—a stacked stone enclosure within the confines of the shelter—

Late Paleoindian deposits at the Genevieve Lykes Duncan (GLD)

grass-lined pits, stashes of tools and raw materials (ground stone

site (this volume), and clues garnered from those efforts continue

and processed le-

to aid in the search for more sites of this age on the 02 Ranch.

chuguilla fibers,
respectively), and

Recently, several toolstone procurement sites and quarries were

a range of technol-

discovered on landforms outlying the GLD site. These are locations

ogies represented

where a specific stone was collected because its physical attributes

by

met specific needs for the manufacture of stone tools—qualities

wooden materials

not equally inherent in every type of stone. Explorations near

(e.g., fire boards,

the GLD site and other locations on the ranch have tentatively

arrow tips, and a

identified source

painted possible

areas for three

billet). Center ar-

specific varieties

chaeologist Robert

of toolstone of

W. Gray has now

interest, each of

conducted exten-

which are repre-

sive analysis of

sented in the lithic

over 900 time-di-

assemblage recovered

agnostic projectile

from the GLD site, re-

points from the

ferred to variously as

ranch, building a

claystone,

mudstone,

data set that will

siltstone, silicified tuff, or

grow and be uti-

jasper. While we yet lack

lized for a variety

conclusive mineralogi-

of studies focused

cal and lithological

on typologies and

analyses of these

settlement pat-

Jasper-like toolstone discovered on the 02
Ranch is represented in the GLD lithic
assemblage.

materials, each dis-

perishable

CBBS archaeologists investigating Surprise Rockshelter on the Pinto Canyon Ranch.

terns.

plays distinct variA variety of botanical remains from Surprise Rockshelter provides clues about Late Prehistoric features.

6

Center for Big Bend Studies

Mark Willis worked with the CBBS to conduct aerial mapping

to accredited researchers. Given the number of rock art sites and

of a remote and dramatic Cielo complex site at Desperation Mesa

complex nature of the documentation, building the database is

and a series of buried Late Archaic deposits around Warm Spring

a very laborious process. As it unfolds, the database will provide

(see this volume). He also constructed a three-dimensional model

unprecedented access to one of the more intriguing aspects of

and enhanced photo mosaic of rock art at Tablecloth Rockshel-

Big Bend prehistory—the plethora of diverse images created over

ter, adding yet another layer of analysis to this noteworthy site.

thousands of years by the region’s native occupants.

Among the ever growing number of new sites discovered on the

The CBBS also contin-

ranch are several that suggest a pattern of ceremonial or ritual

ues work at Guadalupe

behaviors, some of which may be related to Protohistoric horse

Mountains National

nomads such as the Apache. The phenomenon is evident in a

Park, where we per-

number of small basalt boulders (15 thus far) decorated with petro-

form assessments of the

glyphs, most of which were discovered in a loosely circumscribed

conditions of archaeo-

setting—can-

logical sites in a variety

yons, terraces,

of locations across the

and ridges along

park. Assessments are

the lower Sierra

considerable efforts

Vieja in prox-

involving extensive in-

imity to spring

ventories, feature and

outlets. Five of

artifact descriptions,

these boulders

GPS maps, and data-

are located on the

base forms addressing

Dancing Rocks

management infor-

Petroglyph site

mation (site condition,

(Mallouf 2013)

impacts, and research

that

includes

potential). This effort

images of horses

is aimed at helping the

and humans. More small basalt boulder glyphs were recently

National Park Service

discovered within 5 km of Dancing Rocks, each with distinct

manage the hundreds

though currently indecipherable motifs, as well as several lone

of sites and cultural

boulders with pecked or chipped “blazes” or patches—possible

resources in the park

trail or route markers. In each instance, a live spring lies in close

(additional sites are recorded each year) in the midst

proximity. Together, they reveal an emerging behavioral pattern

of natural erosion, recreation, and economic de-

that appears to be unique to a specific geographic context, wherein

velopment.

Basalt boulder with petroglyphs and possible trail
blaze from the Pinto Canyon Ranch.

native peoples attached cultural value to significant places and
important resources. These places may have been marked or
memorialized in a way akin to trail-side shrines found elsewhere
in the world. This is one of many hypotheses being investigated
by the CBBS as research continues on the Pinto Canyon Ranch.
The CBBS moved forward in 2013 with development of a regional
rock art database, mostly through structuring of the database
system and delineating specific attributes and fields for data
entry. The evolving goal of the project is to provide a web-based
resource wherein
site-specific rock

A CBBS archaeologist inspects a high rockshelter in the Guadalupe Mountains.

—Samuel S. Cason

Reference Cited
Mallouf, Robert J.
2013
The Dancing Rocks Petroglyphs: Horse
Nomads in the Sierra Vieja Breaks of
the Texas Big Bend. In: Archaeological
Explorations of the Eastern TransPecos and Big Bend: Collected
Papers, Vol. 1, edited by Pat
Dasch and Robert J. Mallouf, pp. 235–260. Papers
of the Trans-Pecos Archaeological Program
6, Center for Big
Bend Studies,
Sul Ross State
University,
Alpine, Texas.

art data is housed
for the general
public, and more
detailed, sensitive
information (e.g.,
locational data)
can be provided

Canyons and peaks of Guadalupe
Mountains National Park.

Petroglyphs from the Black Hills in Brewster County,
one of many images that will be inventoried in the
developing rock art database.

La Vista de la Frontera

7

Trans-Pecos Archaeological Imagery—

Mark

For several years, the

the landscape to be ana-

CBBS has been fortu-

lyzed in 3D while provid-

nate to partner with

ing high-resolution maps

archaeologist and im-

of the target zone, the

agery specialist Mark

latter an essential compo-

Willis on a variety of re-

nent of all archaeological

search projects across the

projects. Working with the

Trans-Pecos study area.

CBBS over the years, Mark

Mark brings consider-

has applied these methods

able technical expertise

at a number of sites in the

and creativity to bear

Trans-Pecos study area:
• Birthday (Early Ar-

on new ways of docu-

chaic campsite on the

menting archaeologi-

02 Ranch);

cal phenomenon, often

• Sundog (Late Prehis-

combining cartography,
photography, and threedimensional (3D) model-

Photo mosaic of the Birthday site with topographic contour lines (left) and detail of
prehistoric stone enclosures atop Desperation Mesa (right).

ing. A fundamental process of Mark’s work involves combining
high resolution digital photographs with spatial information (X,
Y, and Z coordinates), wherein a mosaic photograph is “draped”
over a 3D model of the subject—be it an archaeological site, a
prehistoric stone feature, or a stone surface covered with rock

toric campsite on the
02 Ranch);

• Genevieve Lykes Duncan (multi-component campsite on
the 02 Ranch);
• Lizard Hill (artifact cache and stone alignments in southern Brewster County);
• Dark Creek (burial and cairn alignment in southern Brewster County);

art images.

• Cuesta Arriba (prehistoric stone enclosures in southern
Low altitude aerial mapping is a particularly exciting aspect of

Brewster County);

Mark’s work, a process in which he employs a variety of tools

• Turtle Ridge (petroform in central Brewster County);

to acquire aerial images, including extendable poles, kites and

• Camp Meyers (historic military outpost in Terrell County);

blimps, as well as automated aircraft—a roto-copter and a drone.

• Desperation Mesa (prehistoric stone enclosures on the

These devices, equipped with digital cameras, can capture hundreds or even thousands of images that are subsequently stitched
together using computer programs to form seamless photo mo-

Pinto Canyon Ranch); and
• Warm Spring (Late Archaic buried campsite on the Pinto
Canyon Ranch).

saics. Mark uses a process known as photogrammetry to generate
three-dimensional data from two-dimensional images, so that the

In the spring of 2013, Mark flew an aerial mapping mission over

resulting mosaic conveys

Desperation Mesa, a remote and dramatic landform in the far

topographic information

reaches of the Pinto Canyon Ranch. Launched from a desert

such as elevations and

hilltop, the automated aircraft flew to the distant mesa after

landform contours. Ulti-

crossing a deep canyon. Mark looked on, keeping track of the

mately, this process allows

aircraft’s progress on a laptop computer at the launch site. The
resulting photo mosaic provides a
more comprehensive visualization
of the site than might otherwise
be possible. The narrow summit
of the isolated mesa is dotted with
prehistoric stone rings—structural
remnants—and defensive redoubts,
suggesting that the landform likely
served as a strategic refuge in times
of conflict. Mark’s aerial imagery
adroitly captured the larger distributions and individual characteristics

Mark preparing an automated aircraft for a “mission” over
Desperation Mesa (left) and photographing rock art at Tablecloth
Rockshelter (right).

8

Center for Big Bend Studies

of each of the structures and stone
features, providing a prologue to
continued research at the site.

k D. Willis and the CBBS
Another element of Mark’s work involves enhancement of rock
art imagery. In many regards, it is similar to aerial mapping.

trast between the hues adjusted to
different values. Further analyses

In these cases, high resolution digi-

revealed additional, previously

tal photo mosaics are draped over

indiscernible images, and the art

virtual 3D models of rock art pan-

was visible in a new light and

els, be they positioned on a cliff or

greater detail—the tableau of

boulder face, the wall or ceiling

tiny human and animal-like

of a rockshelter, or a bedrock

figures, a scene suggestive of

exposure. Algorithms are ap-

Low altitude aerial
photograph and 3D
model of Desperation Mesa.

plied to color data in digital
photographs (with a computer

hunting magic. More than 40
figures (both pictographs and
petroglyphs) include deer, pos-

program called D-Stretch) to en-

sible bears, felines, and canines, as well as numerous anthropo-

hance faint pigments and different hues and to contrast various

morphs with bows, arrows, and headdresses. Through the pro-

colors. Mark gets similar results applying photogrammetry to

duction of enhanced digital images, Mark’s efforts at Tablecloth

petroplyph images, allowing him to tease out subtle and eroded

Rockshelter make it possible to more effectively convey the

portions of such panels. These processes bring out faded rock

impact of this prehistoric art to archaeologists and the audience

art images no longer visible to the naked eye

of rock imagery research.

and can, in some instances, help reconstruct
sequences of composition and successive over-

Mark’s work provides alternative and comple-

printing. The resulting enhanced 3D images are

mentary techniques that enhance CBBS ar-

a striking complement to imagery produced

chaeological investigations in the Big Bend.

by traditional documentation techniques.

Whether he finds himself at an 11,000-year-

Since rock art images are unfortunately

old Paleoindian campsite or on a remote cliff

a vanishing resource—succumbing to

face covered with petroglyph images, the

inevitable erosion and, in some cases,
vandalism—Mark’s use of these methodologies provides a means of virtually
preserving the imagery. For the CBBS

Trans-Pecos is an ideal proving ground for

This graphic 3D model of cupules and linear petrohis innovations in archaeological imagery.
glyphs on the Tinaja Blanca Boulder Petroglyph
is generated by a combination of photographs and
Likewise, the CBBS benefits hugely from
surface texture mapping.

the products of Mark’s cutting-edge tech-

in the Trans-Pecos study area, he has applied these techniques

niques, be that through his high-quality site maps or enhanced

to several projects, including efforts at the following sites:

rock art imagery. It is notable that the creative methodologies

• Tres Yonis (petroglyphs and a pictograph in southern

he has honed in the Trans-Pecos and across the state have led

Brewster County);

him abroad to the South Pacific, South America, and Paleolithic

• Cerro Chino (petroglyphs on the Pinto Canyon Ranch);

rock art sites in Europe. The symbiotic relationship established

• Arroyo Tinaja Blanca Petroglyph Boulder (petroglyphs on

between Mark and the CBBS promises to continue to produce

the Pinto Canyon Ranch);

high-quality imagery as the CBBS seeks to unravel the prehistoric

• Tablecloth Rockshelter (pictographs and petroglyphs on
the Pinto Canyon Ranch); and

and historic mysteries of the greater Big Bend.
­—Samuel S. Cason

• Cosmic Rockshelter (pictographs and petroglyphs on the
Pinto Canyon Ranch).
Rock art at Tablecloth Rockshelter
(on the Pinto Canyon Ranch) is often
difficult to discern, and unless the
low, overhanging ceiling is viewed
in just the right light, many of the
images are nearly invisible. However, working in the low light of a
spring afternoon, Mark systematically captured hundreds of digital
images on the panel and the surrounding boulder. Later, the photo
mosaic was digitally enhanced to
accentuate faded colors, and the con-

Enhanced photo detail of petroglyphs and pictographs at Tablecloth Rockshelter (left) help define nearly
indiscernible images. The enhanced motifs (right) convey a scene that appears to depict hunting magic.

La Vista de la Frontera

9

The First Documented Clovis Projectile
Point in Jeff Davis County, Texas
The recent discovery of a Clovis projectile point fragment is the

suggesting a traumatic event or series of events such as disease,

first documented example of the type in Jeff Davis County, Texas.

climatic change, or natural disaster. In the eastern Trans-Pecos

It was found in October 2010 on private property west of Fort

region, only a handful of these distinctive Clovis points have been

Davis in the south-central portion of Jeff Davis County. The point

found, and all have been isolated surface finds.

fragment was discovered by Jeff Collins of Fort Davis, who has
a long and special interest in projectile points. Thinking he had

The Jeff Davis County point is fragmentary but readily attrib-

discovered either a Clovis or Folsom point and understanding its

utable to Clovis origins. Its most distinctive attributes are the

significance, he brought the find to the attention of archaeolo-

flutes that were successfully removed on each face, starting at

gists at the Center for Big Bend Studies (CBBS) of Sul Ross State

the base zand terminating near the mid-point of the specimen.

University. CBBS staffers were able to examine the artifact and

Heavy edge-grinding occurs on the lower blade edges and base,

verified that it was indeed a Clovis point, a projectile point rarely

another characteristic of Clovis points. Although a hinge fracture

encountered in the eastern Trans-Pecos region.

removed one corner of the base, the intact portion has a concave shape. The blade tip

For the uninitiated, Clo-

was re-sharpened prior

vis points are distinctive,

to being broken from an

fluted, lanceolate-shaped

impact fracture. It is fash-

projectile points associat-

ioned from a high-quality

ed with the Clovis culture,

milky-white chalcedony

the earliest well-defined

with a slight yellowish

human culture in North

tint. Clovis peoples are

America. Clovis sites date

known for their use of

to the Early Paleoindian

high-quality toolstone,

period that began around

and this specimen is no

13,500 years ago. Clovis

exception.

points were first found in
Staff of the CBBS visited

situ with mammoth remains in 1932–1933 along
the South Platte Riv-

(Left) Clovis point: obverse and reverse faces. Drawing by Richard L. McReynolds.
(Right) Photograph of Clovis point–reverse face.

er

and documented the location of the Clovis find,

near Dent, Colorado. At the time, they were simply considered to

although no other Clovis-related artifacts were identified. Thus,

be larger versions of Folsom points, which had been previously

like the others found in the region, this Clovis point is an isolated

discovered (in the late 1920s) near Folsom, New Mexico. However,

find. Despite the lack of evidence for a Clovis campsite, the find

a second in situ discovery of the larger fluted points was made

suggests Clovis peoples were accessing the distinctive ecological

in 1936 at Blackwater Draw Locality 1, a site near Clovis, New

zones in the southern Davis Mountains and adjacent Marfa Plain.

Mexico, revealing they occurred stratigraphically below Folsom

Furthermore, the chalcedony from which the point is made most

points. As a result, the larger fluted points came to be known as

likely was derived locally, as nearby lag gravels of it occur close

Clovis points. Clovis groups are known to have been hunters

to the find location and another major source is located in the

of megafauna—extinct forms of large bodied animals such as

Frenchman Hills south of Marfa, Texas. While definitive Clovis

mammoth and giant bison—but recent research at select sites

sites in the region remain elusive, this find provides another clue

(e.g., the Gault site in Central Texas) indicates they had a gen-

of the culture’s presence and understanding of the landscape. We

eralized hunting-gathering economy. The Clovis culture ended

would like to thank Mr. Collins and the landowner for allowing

very abruptly, sometime around 13,000 years ago. Interestingly,

documentation of this rare find.

numerous species of megafauna also became extinct at this time,

—Robert W. Gray

Ellen Sue Turner Memorial Fund
A memorial fund in honor of Ellen Sue Turner has been recently established at the CBBS. Ellen Sue Turner, who passed away
several years ago, made many contributions to Texas archaeology, including tireless research of the many projectile point types
(dart and arrow points) in the state. With approval of her children, the fund (the Ellen Sue Turner Memorial Fund) will support
summer archaeological intern positions at the CBBS. The fund is yet another way that Ellen Sue’s name and legacy can contribute
to the study of Texas archaeology. Please go to our website (http://ww2.sulross.edu/cbbs/) to learn more about the fund or to donate. You can also use the CBBS store on page 15 to make your donation. Please call us at 432-837-8179 if you have any questions.

10 Center for Big Bend Studies

Continuing Excavations at the Genevieve Lykes Duncan Site, continued from page 3.

have tentatively
identified three
local
South baulk profile showing substrata within paleosol (Zones 3 and 4).

toolstone

source areas; while
focused studies have yet to be undertaken on these materials,

materials. Most tools recovered thus far can be characterized as

there are distinct variations in texture, luster, and color, undoubt-

“expedient,” that is, they were made cursorily and consist of utilized

edly a result of the complex geologic history at this location (i.e.,

and/or retouched core fragments and flakes. However, several

sedimentary, igneous, and metamorphic processes). Sampling

interesting bifaces unearthed include a small early stage fragment

for phytoliths and starch grains in the units within each 2-cm

that could be a dart point preform; a well-flaked, long, narrow, and

level is being undertaken to possibly detect the locations of plant

thin fragment missing its proximal end; and, most importantly, a

processing activities. An analysis of isolated and feature-specific

corner-notched dart point with an expanding (“fish-tail”) stem. The

FCR—involving lithology, size, and weight variables—will poten-

latter was recovered next to, and at the same approximate elevation

tially shed light on cultural preferences and practices through

as F-2, tantalizingly suggesting that the point is contemporaneous

time. And, while residue analysis of a scraper fragment from

with this feature that dates to ca. 8050±30 RCYBP.

the site failed to yield results, further efforts in this realm will be
attempted on both stone tools and FCR to potentially identify

Geoarchaeological investigations of the aforementioned baulks

distinctive plant and/or animal markers.

have revealed the presence of two substrata within a paleosol—a
dark-colored buried strata that represents an old stable ground

Our progress at the GLD site has been intentionally slow and

surface—within which the Late Paleoindian deposits reside. It is

steady to carefully recover the secrets held within it for millennia.

possible these substrata correlate with earlier and later occupa-

As the earliest dated site in the Big Bend (at ca. 9480±40 RCYBP),

tions represented within the deposits, as suggested by radiocarbon

and among the earliest documented occurrence of both earth

dates from the various thermal features in this area of the site.

ovens and ground stone in North America, the site merits such
diligence and patience. Through our ongoing work at the site,

A few of the research strategies helping to guide the ongoing

we anticipate further findings will continue to shed new light

investigation are identifying sources of toolstone, sampling for

on Late Paleoindian lifeways in the Big Bend. It is an exciting

phytolith and starch grains, an in-depth study of the FCR pres-

journey we are on . . . hang on for the ride!

Thank You!
ent, and residue analyses. Short-range excursions near the site

—Richard W. Walter and William A. Cloud

Supporters: Sincere thanks to those foundations, a corporation, and the many individuals who have provided much needed sup-

port to the CBBS since the 2012 edition of La Vista de la Frontera was published. All donations are greatly appreciated! Special thanks

are extended to the largest contributors: The Brown Foundation, Inc., of Houston; Jeff Fort; the Semmes Foundation; the Permian Basin
Area Foundation; The City of Alpine, Texas; Genevieve Duncan; Cameron and Susan Duncan; Thad Steele; Homer Mills; Meredith Dreiss and

Dr. David O. Brown; Kim Lawrence; the Brewster County Tourism Council; an anonymous donor through the Orange County Community
Foundation; Century Trailer Company; Edgar and Linda Duncan; George Canon; Pete Peterson; Tom Crum; Virginia Wulfkuhle; Brenda
Whorton; Mozelle Jeffrey; Houston Harte; William and Caroline Carrington; Sandra Lowenfield; Dr. David Cockrum; Kathleen Olsen; Dr.
Iris Korus; Emily Rauh Pulitzer; Dr. Glen Ely; and the Tierra Grande Chapter of the Texas Master Naturalists.

Volunteers: Heartfelt thanks to the dedicated and talented volunteers who have assisted the CBBS since the 2012 edition of La
Vista de la Frontera was published. An impressive number of volunteer hours have been logged in the field and the J. Charles and Ellen
A. Kelley Memorial Library, and at the CBBS annual conference. Volunteers consist of: Mozelle Jeffery, Bob Mallouf, Benny Roberts, Gena
Roberts, Sandy Lynch, Victoria Lowe, Ruth Jansyn, Ann Ohl, Tim Gibbs, Mary Alvarado-Cloud, and Clay Chisholm.

Professional Volunteers: A number of professionals have also assisted the CBBS through volunteerism since publication
of the last newsletter. These individuals have helped us immensely through their expertise and passionate assistance, and are warmly
thanked: Dr. Charles Frederick, Dr. Chet Walker, Mark Willis, Brittney Gregory, and David Yelacic.

Board Members: Each and every member of our three boards (CBBS Advisory Council; Friends of the CBBS; and the CBBS Editorial
Board) are sincerely thanked for their service! Their assistance with a plethora of tasks has helped the CBBS achieve its many accomplishments.

La Vista de la Frontera

11

The Three Bells
of Ojinaga

Reed, on page 3 of Insurgent Mexico, described the Ojinaga
church, formerly a federal stronghold but by mid-January
held by Constitutionalists, as having three “enormous Spanish bells hanging on a rack outside and a cloud of blue

In April 1993, I was in Ojinaga, Chihuahua, neighbor city to Presidio,

incense crawling out of the black doorway.”4 As I had nothing

Texas. While passing the plaza de armas in front of the Nuestro Padre

more than a xerographic copy of the archival picture that day in

de Jesus Church, my glance registered something askew about the

1993, it was a relief to find the church office open. Upon entering I

single bell tower that hovered above one corner of the façade. Three

noticed, suspended upon the wall, a black-and-white photograph

bells were situated in separate casements high upon the campanile;

of the iglesia Nuestro Padre de Jesus. Out front were suspended

so placed, it would have been impossible for them to peal. Hmm,

Reed’s “enormous Spanish bells.” The archival photograph and

thought I. What’s the point of displaying bells that cannot toll?

the Ojinaga church seemed to be one and the same.

Back in Alpine while performing research for my master’s thesis

The local Catholic priest, unsure about the three bells, granted

at the Archives of the Big Bend, I had run across a weathered old

permission that I, along with an escort, could climb the belfry and

photograph that depicted an adobe church front with no bell

perform an inspection. So doing, I observed five bells. Two bells

tower; the image portrayed three hefty campanas (bells) draped

were freely suspended and in current use. The others, however,

from a cottonwood-log rack in front of a church. The photo-

remained situated in arched windows along the exterior walls;

graph, like so many archival others not identified, was posited in

these, it turned out, were cast in 1893 at Ojinaga and were the bells

the collection of a Big Bend character from the 1920s who had

described by Reed in Insurgent Mexico. Fortunately, someone in the

traveled extensively in post-revolutionary Mexico.1 Something

past had enough foresight to realize the importance of the artifacts

about the scene at Ojinaga that day resonated with me.

and had them mounted on high, rather than consigned to scrap.

Having read John Reed’s Insurgent Mexico, it could have been

In Mexico, almost every

the image Reed painted with words that I best recalled that

community has one or sev-

windblown spring day. Harvard graduate Reed, a reporter for

eral historians (cronistas), ei-

the Metropolitan magazine, had been assigned to cover the

ther officially designated or

Mexican Revolution in Chihuahua. His passage across the Big

otherwise. In Ojinaga, the

Bend and into legend came simultaneously with the disappearance

church Nuestro Padre de Jesus had Sr. Benjamin Nieto, to whose

of the “Old Gringo,” Ambrose Bierce, a major nineteenth century

home I was directed. It was Nieto who confirmed that the three

American literary figure.2 Seventy-one-year-old Bierce, who de-

bells were the same which dominated the church front during the

parted Chihuahua City in late December 1913 or early January 1914

Mexican Revolution. Las campanas are individually nominated: the

for Ojinaga with Constitutionalists under General “Pancho” Villa,

Sacred Heart of Jesus (el Sagrado Corazon de Jesus), the Virgin of

intended to observe the fighting at the border town. Nevertheless,

Refuge (La Virgen del Refugio), and the smaller of the three, El

he disappeared somewhere along the way, never to resurface. One

Refugio. Nieto also confirmed Reed’s account by stating that the

of the great ironies in the history of American literary personages

antique doors of the church had been locked to the federals when

is that Reed and Bierce may have missed meeting one another

they entered Ojinaga in December 1913; in response, the Huertistas

by only a few days, or even hours, at Ojinaga.

(federals) set fire to the old portal and gutted the entranceway. It
was a cold January. One suspects the “blue incense crawling out

Reed, through a series of familial adversities as well as fostered

of the black doorway” to have been more the result of campfires

acquaintanceships, readings and indoctrination at Cambridge, had

set within the cavern rather than incense. Reed, like most effec-

become a political leftist. After his Mexican adventure the young

tive journalists, was known to puff his images from time to time.

man from Portland, Oregon, went to France and Germany in 1917
in order to report World War I; however, upon passing through

Nuestro Padre de Jesus is situated upon the site of the original

Russia with Louise Bryant in September, Reed fell in love with

Mission Santiago del Norte. The revolution-era building was

that country. He remained a committed Marxist throughout the

built in “1870 or 1880” but was refurbished in 1960 by brothers

remainder of his life, dying of typhus in Moscow at age 33. Vladi-

of the Order of Josefinos from Mexico City. A bell tower was

mir Lenin himself approved Reed’s burial with honors beside the

added. Current appearance and additional modifications to the

Kremlin Wall. His greatest work, Ten Days That Shook the World (1919),

structure are a result of those efforts.

an apercu of the 1917 October Revolution in Petrograd, influenced
thousands; arguably, some consider Ten Days to have been the great-

The church, situated upon the main plaza along with the mu-

est literary emanation from Russia since the nineteenth century.

nicipal palace adjacent to what was almost certainly old Presidio

1. T.V. Skaggs Collection, Archives of the Big Bend, Sul Ross State University, Box 3
folder 43.
2. Fonda Films, Old Gringo, 1989.
3. Ian Frazier, “John Reed’s Unblinking Stare,” The American Scholar (Summer 2002),
29–39.

4. John Reed, Insurgent Mexico, 1914 Reprint, New York: Simon & Schuster, Clarion
Books, 3.

3

12 Center for Big Bend Studies

Photo courtesy of the Skaggs Collection, Archives of the Big Bend, Bryan
Wildenthal Memorial Library, Sul Ross State University.

del Norte—the highest and most defensible ground available—

had been abandoned in 1912 due to the fighting, was complete

represents part of a cultural theme in Mexico. Called “la plaza de

only so far as San Sostenes, Chihuahua, a watering station about

armas,” or more simply “la plaza,” the setting denotes the central

halfway between the capital and the Rio Grande. Had Bierce be-

part of town. It is generally the location of the seat of government

come ill en route, no medical services would have been available

as well as of religion and, often, of business. Gaston Bachelard,

to him, as Mexican armies had no medical corps at the time.

in his book Poetics of Space, repeatedly suggests that an oneiric, or
“dream” house, grows from the inside out.5 So ripens a Mexican

Had Bierce died along the way, he would probably have been

village, town or city. A primary objective in any war that takes

buried at the end of the line, San Sostenes. A dearth of records

place within Mexico is to “take” the plaza, i.e., the heart (or womb?)

in the municipio precludes evidence of burials; additionally, no

of the city. That done, the conquest is considered complete.

record exists of his having been at Ojinaga on or about 9 or 10
January 1914. The theory of Bierce having been transported to

Such was the case in December 1913 when Federal General

Marfa, Texas, where he died and was buried, has been discredited.

Salvador Mercado had retreated from an untenable position
at Chihuahua City following the Constitutionalist victories at

John Reed, however, rode along with Villa for a time gathering

Juárez and Tierra Blanca. Mercado was no fool. While his pas-

material for his book, Insurgent Mexico. The rest is history. And

sage to Ojinaga was unopposed, the general realized that Villa’s

the three silent bells of Ojinaga remain witnesses to it all.

power increased with every Constitutionalist victory. Unless Villa

—Glenn P. Willeford

personally led the attack, and perhaps even if he did, the plaza in
Ojinaga should be impregnable. Conversely, should the “bandits”

Glenn P. Willeford, M.A., is a historian and historical novelist. His

prevail, Mercado and his troops could withdraw across the Rio

five published books include the 2011 novel The Last Peace Officer,

Grande and, if precedent meant anything, be transported by rail

and Zephyr, published in 2012 under the pseudonym “A.Z. Hays.” The

on United States soil to Laredo where his army might re-cross into

author resides in Old Mexico.

Mexico and again support the usurper General Victoriano Huerta.
Villa sent two generals to take Ojinaga: Panfilo Natera of Zacatecas
and Chihuahua native Toribio Ortega. For about two weeks, the
generals worked at taking the town. They failed to do so. Yet Ojinaga had to be taken. The Constitutionalist route to victory lay to
the south, not the north. Pancho Villa realized he could not leave
a substantial enemy force at his back and thereby invite a twofront contest. Villa, now military governor of Chihuahua, became
discomfited at the failure of his generals. He left the capital city
on or about January 7 and came north halfway toward Ojinaga
by train, the rest by horseback, arriving on January 9, 1914. Next
day the Constitutionalists, now led by Villa himself, attacked. The
timing, just after darkness set in, was perfect. In less than two
hours, Mercado’s army began to fall back in what would become
a sweep of the federal defenses. The plaza at Ojinaga had been
hotly contested, and the dead would be tallied in the hundreds.
Ambrose Bierce may have been among those who fell. Nonetheless, a more plausible scenario for his demise has more recently
surfaced. A few days before Christmas, 1913, Bierce wrote his
now famous “last letter” to a lady friend in Washington, D.C. In
the text he states, “If you hear that I have been stood up against a

This incredible 16-foot tall sculpture shown above is the

Mexican stone wall and shot to rags know that I think it a pretty

work of Hershall Seals, Chairman of the Art Department

good way to depart this life. It beats disease, old age or falling down

at the University of Mary Hardin-Baylor. It is displayed on

the cellar stairs. To be a gringo in Mexico, ah, that is euthanasia!”

private property in Oakville, Texas, between Corpus Christi

Bierce, an asthmatic, had been hospitalized at New Orleans a

and San Antonio. Mr. Seals uses stylized anthropomorphic

month earlier after being caught outside during a driving rain-

forms commonly known as “shaman” in much of his art.

storm. He was susceptible to changes in weather. In all likelihood,

Numerous ancient cultures used similar stylized figures

Bierce had set out for Ojinaga—as he had indicated he would in

in their pictographs and petroglyphs to depict human/

the letter—with Villista troops (not with General Villa himself). The

spirit-like entities; pictographs of Pecos River style rock

winter of 1913 was a cold one plagued with frigid “northers.” My

art often include such figures and many researchers think

research has shown that the Orient Railway, which construction

they depict peyote-induced spirit journeys. The Oakville
Shaman is shown on a quest with an atlatl and spear, the

5. Gaston Bachelard, The Poetics of Space (Boston: Beacon Press, 1994. First published in
French as La poétique de l’espace by Presses Universitairies de France, 1958), 68, 101, 229.

destination and purpose is left for the viewer to ponder.

La Vista de la Frontera

13

Our Canyon Home: The Settling of Pinto Canyon, continued from page 2.

These things would follow. But like the calm before the storm, there were a handful of years that offered
hope, that offered promise, that offered a vision
La Vista de la Frontera is the annual newsletter of the Center
for Big Bend Studies of Sul Ross State University. Address
correspondence to the Editor, Center for Big Bend Studies,
Box C-71, Alpine, TX 79832, or cbbs@sulross.edu.
Editing by William A. Cloud and Susan Chisholm.
Graphic design by Letitia Wetterauer.

of a better future. In this
way, Pinto Canyon was a
microcosm of the larger
theatre that was the Big
Bend, but one whose
tortured backdrop so ap-

CBBS Advisory Council

propriately reflected the

Chairman: Tom Crum, Granbury
Director: William A. Cloud, Alpine

harsh drama that would
play out within its folds.

Félix D. Almaráz Jr. Claude Hudspeth
San Antonio
San Angelo

William Wright
Abilene

—David W. Keller

Jed Becker
El Paso

Jerry Johnson
Alpine

Ex Officio from
SRSU, Alpine:

To learn more, watch for

J. P. Bryan
Houston

John Klingemann
San Angelo

Quint Thurman

the history of Pinto Can-

Paul Carlson
Ransom Canyon

Ben Love
Marathon

Jim D. Case

David Fannin
Marfa

John L. Nau, III
Houston

Liz Jackson

John Fowlkes
Marfa
Pete P. Gallego
Alpine
Rick Hendricks
Santa Fe, NM

Melleta Bell
James W. Downing

the forthcoming book on
yon to be published in the
near future.

José Prieto and daughter Frances on the Prieto Ranch in Pinto
Canyon ca. 1935. Courtesy of the Prieto Family Collection.

Honorary
J. Travis Roberts Jr. Members:
Marathon
Lonn Taylor
David Rogers
William C. Foster
Alpine
Rubén Osorio
Zuñiga
J. Tillapaugh
Neil Caldwell
Odessa

Texas State University System
Board of Regents
Ms. Donna N. Williams
Chairman
Arlington
Mr. Ron Mitchell
Vice Chairman
Horseshoe Bay

Mr. Vernon Reaser, III
Bellaire
Ms. Rossanna Salazar
Austin

Mr. Charlie Amato
San Antonio
Dr. Jaime R. Garza
San Antonio
Mr. Kevin J. Lilly
Houston

Mr. David Montagne
Beaumont

Mr. William F. Scott
Nederland
Mr. Matthew Russell
Student Regent
San Marcos

Dr. Brian McCall
Chancellor
Austin

Mission
The Center for Big Bend Studies fosters interdisciplinary
scholarship of the diverse prehistoric, historic, and modern
cultures of the borderlands region of the United States
and Mexico, with emphasis on the area encompassed by
Trans-Pecos Texas and north-central Mexico. The Center
is committed to the recovery, protection, and sharing of
this region’s rich cultural legacy through dynamic programs involving research, education, public outreach, and
publication.

Pinto Canyon, looking south towards the Chinatis. Photo by David Keller.

Good Luck, Dawnella
It is with much sadness that we say goodbye to a long-time
staff member, Dawnella Petrey. Dawnella initially volunteered
with the CBBS almost 10 years ago, in June 2004. On that
project we were stranded in the backcountry, a result of
an intense rain and lightning storm, and ultimately
had to build road before making it back to civilization. That eventful beginning did not deter her
though, as she returned to take a Field School
course held at Wolf Den Cave in 2006. She received her B.A. from The University of Texas at
San Antonio that same year and began working
for the CBBS and has been a valued employee

Volume 24, Winter 2014
ww2.sulross.edu/cbbs/
cbbs@sulross.edu

14 Center for Big Bend Studies

ever since. Circumstances have now led her on
another path and we wish her the best of luck in
these endeavors. We will miss her!

S
IE

N

TE

RF

T
O R B I G BEND S

S

ELT
ER

UD

Sul Ross State University

Some of our recent journals are listed here.
The abstracts can be read on our website,

IE

TE

N

Journal 25 in Press

TH ROCKSH

CE

O
ECL
BL
TA

CE



CBBS Store

OTH ROCKSHE
LT
E CL
ER
BL
TA

RF

O R B I G BEN D S

ww2.sulross.edu/cbbs/.

front

$15 each (plus $3 shipping
for the first book and 50¢
for each additional book)

TU

D

Sul Ross State University

back

CBBS T-Shirts

Featuring rock art from the Big Bend’s Tablecloth Rockshelter,
the CBBS t-shirts were designed by our former graphic illustrator,
Avram Dumitrescu, and are produced in Alpine, Texas. Available
in green or khaki, adult sizes S, M, L, XL, XXL and youth sizes S,
M, and L.
$15 each (plus $1 shipping per t-shirt)
green
khaki
T-shirt #1 Size ______ Color

JBBS 24

T-shirt #2

Size ______ Color

khaki

green

T-shirt #3

Size ______ Color

khaki

green

CBBS Challenger Grande Mug
Out of Print
JBBS 23

JBBS 22

JBBS 21

These 14 oz. ceramic mugs have a classic simple
style with a bright white glossy finish and large
comfortable handle. The mugs are dishwasher safe and have the CBBS logo on two sides.

$15 each (plus $1 shipping per mug)

Qty. _____

CBBS Caps

JBBS 20

JBBS 19

JBBS 18

Brushed washed dark khaki, 100% cotton
twill cap embroidered with the CBBS logo.
Casual, unstructured design, 6 panels, precurved visor, adjustable Velcro closure. One
size fits most.

$15 each (plus $1 shipping per cap)

Qty. _____

La Vista de la Frontera

15

Center for Big Bend Studies
Sul Ross State University
Box C-71
Alpine, Texas 79832

ww2.sulross.edu/cbbs/

Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage

PAID
Alpine, Texas
Permit No. 2

Address Service Requested
232267-121700-60-RES

