Appendix A.
El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail Legislation
Page 1 of 2
[A full copy of the National Trails System Act can be found at http://www.nps.gov/nts/
legislation.html]

118 STAT. 1370

PUBLIC LAW 108–342—OCT. 18, 2004

Public Law 108–342
108th Congress
Oct. 18, 2004

To amend the National Trails System Act to designate El Camino Real de los
Tejas as a National Historic Trail.

[S. 2052]
El Camino Real
de los Tejas
National Historic
Trail Act.
Texas.
Louisiana.
Mexico.
16 USC 1241
note.

An Act

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of
the United States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘El Camino Real de los Tejas
National Historic Trail Act’’.
SEC. 2. DESIGNATION OF EL CAMINO REAL DE LOS TEJAS NATIONAL
HISTORIC TRAIL.

Section 5(a) of the National Trails System Act (16 U.S.C.
1244(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(24) EL CAMINO REAL DE LOS TEJAS NATIONAL HISTORIC TRAIL.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—El Camino Real de los Tejas (the Royal
Road to the Tejas) National Historic Trail, a combination of
historic routes (including the Old San Antonio Road) totaling
approximately 2,580 miles, extending from the Rio Grande
near Eagle Pass and Laredo, Texas, to Natchitoches, Louisiana,
as generally depicted on the map entitled ‘El Camino Real
de los Tejas’ contained in the report entitled ‘National Historic
Trail Feasibility Study and Environmental Assessment: El
Camino Real de los Tejas, Texas-Louisiana’, dated July 1998.
‘‘(B) MAP.—A map generally depicting the trail shall be
on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate
offices of the National Park Service.
‘‘(C) ADMINISTRATION.—(i) The Secretary of the Interior
(referred to in this paragraph as ‘the Secretary’) shall administer the trail.
‘‘(ii) The Secretary shall administer those portions of the
trail on non-Federal land only with the consent of the owner
of such land and when such trail portion qualifies for certification as an officially established component of the trail, consistent with section 3(a)(3). An owner’s approval of a certification agreement shall satisfy the consent requirement. A certification agreement may be terminated at any time.
‘‘(iii) The designation of the trail does not authorize any
person to enter private property without the consent of the
owner.
‘‘(D) CONSULTATION.—The Secretary shall consult with
appropriate State and local agencies in the planning and
development of the trail.

Page 149
VerDate 11-MAY-2000

08:28 Nov 10, 2005

Jkt 029194

PO 00000

Frm 00234

Fmt 6580

Sfmt 6581

C:\STATUTES\2004\29194PT2.001

APPS10

PsN: 29194PT2

A ppendix A

Appendix A. El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail Legislation, Page 2 of 2
[A full copy of the National Trails System Act can be found at http://www.nps.gov/nts/
legislation.html]

PUBLIC LAW 108–342—OCT. 18, 2004

118 STAT. 1371

‘‘(E) COORDINATION OF ACTIVITIES.—The Secretary may
coordinate with United States and Mexican public and nongovernmental organizations, academic institutions, and, in consultation with the Secretary of State, the Government of Mexico
and its political subdivisions, for the purpose of exchanging
trail information and research, fostering trail preservation and
educational programs, providing technical assistance, and
working to establish an international historic trail with complementary preservation and education programs in each
nation.
‘‘(F) LAND ACQUISITION.—The United States shall not
acquire for the trail any land or interest in land outside the
exterior boundary of any federally-administered area without
the consent of the owner of the land or interest in land.’’.
Approved October 18, 2004.

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY—S. 2052:
SENATE REPORTS: No. 108–321 (Comm. on Energy and Natural Resources).
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 150 (2004):
Sept. 15, considered and passed Senate.
Sept. 28, considered and passed House.

Page 150

Appendix B: Certification Program –
Partnership Certification Agreement
El Camino Real de Los Tejas
National Historic Trail

National Park Service
US Department of the Interior

Partnership Certification Agreement

[Name of the site]

[Location of the site]

Type of Property: [site or segment]

Owner: [Name]

General
This agreement represents the Secretary of the Interior's certification, under section 7(h) of the National Trails System Act, that [name of the site],
located in [location], meets the national historic trail criteria established by the National Trails System Act and any supplemental criteria prescribed by
the Secretary of the Interior.
The National Park Service and [name of the owner] agree voluntarily to strive to achieve the highest level of resource protection and visitor appreciation
of trail resources and history at the historic site and trail segment, as provided for in the Comprehensive Management Plan for El Camino Real de los
Tejas National Historic Trail for "...the identification and protection of the historic route and its historic remnants and artifacts for public use and
enjoyment." (National Trails System Act 16 U.S.C. - 1241 et seq. Section 3(a)(3)).
Through this agreement, the National Park Service and [name of owner] agree, if mutually deemed appropriate, to work jointly on planning,
interpretation, resource management, and other matters that relate to El Camino Real de Los Tejas National Historic Trail at [name of site/segment], and
to strive to meet the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Management Plan for the Trail.
[Name of the owner] retains all legal rights to the property and nothing in this agreement is to be construed as granting any legal authority to the
National Park Service over the property or any action by [name of the owner].
The agreement may be canceled by either party at any time by providing written notice to the other party. The National Park Service and [name of the
owner] agree, whenever possible, to identify issues or concerns to allow for resolution.
This agreement will remain in effect unless cancelled by either party, or until the ownership of the property is transferred to another entity.

Signatures
I hereby agree to a partnership with the National Park Service for [name of the site/segment] on El Camino Real de Los Tejas National Historic
Trail.

____________________________________
[Name of the owner]

_______________________
Date

On behalf of the Secretary of the Interior, I agree to a partnership with [name of the owner] for [name of the site/segment], on El Camino Real de
los Tejas National Historic Trail.

[Name] Superintendent
National Trails Intermountain Region

_________________________
Date

Page 151

Page 152

Appendix C: Solicitor’s Opinion
United States Department of the Interior
OFFICE OF THE SOLICITOR
Santa Fe Unit, Southwest Region
P.O. Box 1042
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-1042
January 12, 2011

Memorandum

Confidential / Attorney-Client-Privileged Communication /
Exempt from Release under FOIA

To:

Superintendent, National Trails Intermountain Region

From:

Attorney-Adviser, Santa Fe Unit, Southwest Region

Subject:

El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail – Addition of Additional
Routes

By memorandum dated December 3, 2010, to Lynn A. Johnson, Regional Solicitor, Southwest
Region, you requested an opinion as to whether the National Trails Intermountain Region
(“NTIR”) of the National Park Service (“NPS”) may add routes to El Camino Real de los Tejas
(“ELTE”) without further Congressional action. In your memorandum, you state that NTIR has
released a Comprehensive Management Plan/Environmental Assessment (“CMP”) for ELTE for
public review and that the CMP has elicited public comments requesting the addition of
additional routes to the trail. Ms. Johnson has referred your request to this office for a response.
I.

Background

The National Trails System Act (“NTSA”), Pub. L. No. 90-543, 82 Stat. 919 (1968), codified as
amended at 16 U.S.C. §§ 1241-51 (2006), establishes a national system of recreation, scenic and
historic trails “[i]n order to provide for the ever-increasing outdoor recreation needs of an
expanding population and in order to promote the preservation of, public access to, travel within,
and enjoyment and appreciation of the open-air, outdoor areas and historic resources of the
Nation.” Id. § 1241. Only Congress may designate national scenic and historic trails, id. §
1244(a) (“National scenic and national historic trails shall be authorized and designated only by
Act of Congress.”).
On November 17, 1993, Congress directed the Secretary of the Interior to conduct a feasibility
study for adding El Camino Real Para Los Texas (later, ELTE), a historic trail, to the National
Trails System. See Pub. L. 103-145, 107 Stat. 1496, codified at 16 U.S.C. § 1244(c)(36)(A).
Congress specifically charged the Secretary with determining “the individual or combined
suitability and feasibility of routes for potential national historic trail designation.” Id. §
1244(c)37(B)(3). In July 1998, the NPS completed the National Historic Trail Feasibility Study
and Environmental Assessment, El Camino Real de los Tejas, Texas – Louisiana (“the feasibility

Page 153

A ppendix C

study”). Congress designated ELTE as a national historic trail in the Act of October 18, 2004
(the “Act”), Pub. L. No. 108-342, 118 Stat. 1370, codified at 16 U.S.C. § 1244(a)(24).
II.

Discussion

There is evidence in the Act and the feasibility study that Congress did not intend the NPS to add
additional routes to ELTE. The Act describes ELTE as “a combination of historic routes totaling
2,580 miles in length ....” The Act describes the routes as passing “from the Rio Grande near
Eagle Pass and Laredo, Texas to Natchitoches, Louisiana and including the Old San Antonio
Road, as generally depicted on the maps ...” prepared by the NPS pursuant to the feasibility
study. The Act also describes ELTE as being “generally depicted” on the feasibility study maps.
This language indicates that Congress approved of the limitations placed by the NPS on the
number of routes to be designated for ELTE in the feasibility study. The Act requires that the
feasibility study describe “the individual or combined” routes that make up ELTE. Pursuant to
this explicit Congressional intent, the feasibility study does not contemplate multiple additional
routes, but instead specifically limits the routes comprising ELTE to those depicted in the maps
attached to the feasibility study. In addition, the Act describes with particularity the routes of
ELTE as “totaling 2,580” which reinforces that ELTE is fixed with determined start and end
points.
III.

Conclusion

Congressional action will be necessary to add additional routes to ELTE as designated in the
feasibility study. If you have any questions about this memorandum, please call Michael
Williams at (505) 988-6720.

Michael C. Williams
Attorney Adviser

2
Page 154

Appendix D: Mapping Historical Resources along El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail

APPENDIX D:
Mapping Historic Resources along
El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail
The accurate mapping of historic routes
associated with El Camino Real de los Tejas
National Historic Trail is a difficult task.
This section of the plan addresses some of
the major mapping issues. It provides
background information and a brief,
general description of a strategy for
mapping trail resources, with the purpose
of encouraging the trail community to use a
consistent approach in the identification of
trail routes.
Texas and Louisiana archeologists and
historians have been working for several
decades to document routes of exploration
and settlement. However, the extent and
complexity of the trail resources designated
as part of El Camino Real de los Tejas
National Historic Trail require the
development of strategies that bring
together trail advocates and scholars across
a variety of disciplines to collaborate in a
major integrated mapping effort. As with all
other units of the National Historic Trail
System, all decisions on routes (location,
alignment) will be based on the
preponderance of evidence. It is clear,
however, that certain issues or segments
will always be in contention.
In the last 20 years, new technologies
such as Geographic Information Systems
and Global Positioning Systems have
revolutionized mapping, making it easier to
develop a flexible and accurate
geodatabase. The new technology mostly
facilitates the storage, retrieval, and analysis
of information: it still depends on the
research of historians, archeologists, and
trail experts to document the path of
significant routes.
In the case of El Camino Real de los
Tejas National Historic Trail, which has in
excess of 2,500 miles of designated routes
and more than 300 years of historical
developments, the task is more complex.
There are four important factors:

1. The existence of an extensive
network of American Indian trails
before the arrival of the Europeans
While exploring Texas at the end of the
17th and beginning of the 18th centuries, the
Spanish relied exclusively on trails blazed
by American Indians, which, in turn, often
followed wildlife migration routes. Both
Texan and non-Texan Indian groups had
used these routes for years for a variety of
purposes, including travel, exchange of
goods, participations in trade fairs, road
networks for obtaining additional food, and
routes used by those taking part in
ceremonies. Accounts from the 17th and
18th centuries concur that Spanish
exploration of Texas was only possible
because of the knowledge and assistance of
Indian guides; yet, no maps have been
found identifying these pre-contact
American Indian routes. In those cases,
where Indian travel guidance was not
available, Spanish explorers wandered and,
inevitably, often lost their way. The ability
to communicate with the American Indians
was also crucial to the success of various
expeditions: Spanish explorers often waited
for translators before they would proceed
on their journeys.

2. A lengthy and complex period of
historic development
The Spanish explored and developed El
Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic
Trail routes for more than a century (1680s–
1820). The routes continually evolved, as
travelers made adjustments due to
environmental conditions, such as flooding
or drought. Indeed, routes varied from year
to year, depending on the season, real or
perceived threats from American Indian
groups, and the purpose of the trip. These
Spanish Colonial routes eventually linked
up with a number of secondary roads and
covered a sizable territory. The constant
shifting of these routes over a long period of
time greatly complicates mapping. Even
Page 155

A ppendixes

with the assistance of Geographic
Information Systems, it is a challenge to
create a single map that accurately reflects
complex conditions on the ground.

Louisiana. Mapping such a lengthy route,
which, in many locations, is more than 300
years old, requires consistency in approach
and methodology.

Widespread contraband and other illegal
commercial operations also complicate
mapping, as many of the routes used by
smugglers were chosen precisely to avoid
being observed by Spanish Colonial
authorities. Spain and France, the two
European powers that vied for control of
Texas and western Louisiana for most of
the 18th century, tried to enforce mercantile
policies that greatly limited opportunities
for trade and commerce. Such policies
made life hard in frontier communities,
where survival depended upon the
availability of supplies. Spanish authorities
were particularly keen to discourage
contraband and any other illegal activities
that could strengthen French claims. In
reality, though, the great distances involved
and the difficulty of access, particularly
along sections of El Camino Real de los
Tejas National Historic Trail in eastern
Texas and western Louisiana, meant that
local settlers were dependent on
merchandise and weapons illegally
purchased from merchants in Frenchcontrolled Louisiana. Smugglers used
less-traveled routes, away from official
thoroughfares, to avoid being detected by
Spanish troops garrisoned at presidios such
as Los Adaes. There is no official record of
smuggling routes but historic sources,
directly and indirectly, document the
existence of such activities. It is not clear if
there are any surviving traces of such
routes.

Spanish expeditions into Texas faced a
challenging environment. They had to cross
a series of major rivers—the Río Grande,
Nueces, Frío, San Antonio, Guadalupe, San
Marcos, Colorado, Brazos, San Jacinto,
Trinity, Angelina, Neches, and Sabine—
which often required the use of ferries.
Unexpected flash floods could strike at any
time of the year, instantly turning most of
these rivers into insurmountable obstacles.
Quite often, expeditions had to change
routes in order to find suitable places to
make their river crossing. Shifts in river
courses and changes in morphology since
the time of the original expeditions
challenge those trying to map and field-test
these historic routes today. For example, at
the Conquista Crossing of the San Antonio
River, debris washed downriver during
periods of high flow have created an island
that did not exist during the Spanish
Colonial period.

3. Special environmental conditions
El Camino Real de los Tejas National
Historic Trail covers more than 2,500 miles
and crosses the entire state of Texas in a
southwestern– northeastern direction,
beginning at the Río Grande and ending at
Natchitoches, in western Louisiana. The
trail traverses a variety of ecoregions, from
relatively arid and sparsely vegetated South
Texas to the humid and heavily vegetated
pine forests of East Texas and western
Page 156

As in the case of other historic trails,
rugged terrain often determined route
selection. Early travelers almost exclusively
followed already blazed Indian trails,
particularly since the rugged topography in
Central and East Texas greatly limited route
options. When looking at the topographic
information, it becomes clear why much
longer routes were selected. For example, in
the 1740s, the viceroy of New Spain ordered
Captain Joaquín Orobio y Basterra of the
Presidio at Bahía del Espíritu Santo to
explore the coastal area, where French were
supposedly getting established by way of
Matagorda Bay. After two failed attempts to
go directly east, Orobio finally traveled in a
northerly direction, a considerable distance
out of his way, to reach the crossing place
for the Trinity River (probably near
Robbin’s Ferry), then traveled back down to
his desired destination. The selected route
was much longer, but it was the only option
to reach the coast.

Appendix D: Mapping Historical Resources along El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail

4. Ephemeral Nature of Spanish
settlements

area, it is difficult to ascertain which
crossing was the most commonly used.

Finally, it should be noted that the
ephemeral nature of Spanish settlements
(missions, presidios, villages) resulted in a
multiplicity of short-lived roads that, like
the settlements they linked, are difficult to
document.

The original expedition diaries were in
Spanish or French; it is problematic to
depend on translations that were not
prepared with the idea of mapping routes
in mind. Translating historic documents
is a challenging task, and it is quite easy to
make mistakes that could complicate the
already-demanding task of historic mapping. Where there is conflicting evidence
or field testing is not conclusive, it might
be helpful to check the original documents for mistakes in translation.

Documenting A Historic Route
Historic documentation. The first step
in mapping is to gather appropriate
historic information to document the
location of historic routes. In the case of
Texas and western Louisiana pertinent
materials, including both primary and
secondary sources, are voluminous,
which adds to the challenge of mapping
routes. It is essential to ensure that the
historic evidence is solid and that more
than one independent source confirms
the location of the route. It is not enough
to know the beginning and the end of a
route; it is essential to have intermediate
points that allow the identification of the
specific route followed by the trail.
Expedition diaries. The traditional
historic sources used to reconstruct the
early Spanish routes into the Texas and
Louisiana territories are expedition
diaries. Unfortunately, surviving
documentations for the period 1680–1780
include no more than 40 descriptions of
routes of travel—many of them officials’
reports on the condition of missions and
presidios, which did not carefully detail
the routes they followed. Even detailed
descriptions of itineraries fail to provide
conclusive information about the exact
routes: distances were often misjudged,
river names were confused, travel
directions were not always correct,
among other problems. Diaries may
confirm that a certain river was crossed;
however, the exact location of the
crossing is much harder to identify.
Underwater or low-water rock ledges,
which created a shallow ford, were the
most common natural features found at
river crossings; but where there are
several fords within a small geographic

Historic maps. A fairly high number of
historic maps survive, but as in the case of
the diaries, they do not provide
conclusive evidence to clarify points of
contention. Such maps are often of a
scale that merely suggests the general
direction of travel and does not permit
field verification. In some cases, historic
maps may distort the relative location of
sites. As with all primary sources, it is
important not to rely on any one mapping
source as the sole determinant of a route.
General Land Office cadastral survey
plats. These documents are of great
assistance in mapping 19th- and
20th-century roads, and can be effective
tools in identifying some Spanish
Colonial roads. They are excellent
documents, but they are most helpful at
the individual-property level or in some
cases at the county level. Because of their
scale, it would be necessary to examine
thousands of plats to reconstruct the
congressionally-designated El Camino
Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail
route. To use these General Land Office
plats efficiently, it is important to have a
fairly clear idea of the location of the
trail in the area: not all plats include the
names of historic roads.
Secondary sources. Secondary sources
can be very helpful, but they should
be used with care. Even historians like
Herbert Bolton, who compiled the map
information for his work, modified the
data presented in the sources that he
used (such as the names of the roads
Page 157

A ppendixes

in Stephen Austin’s map). Of course,
Bolton’s main professional aim was the
analysis of historic political development
in early Texas history; the preparation of
accurate route maps was secondary to
his goals. Ethnographic studies may also
include information that can be used to
help clarify conflicting evidence.
Archeological Reports. Archeological
resources play an essential role in helping
historians verify the association of a site
or segment with El Camino Real de los
Tejas National Historic Trail. The State of
Texas has one of the nation’s best sources
of information on archeological sites at
the state level: the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory located in Austin1.
Texas archeologists have produced a
number of excellent reports confirming
the alignment of road segments linked to
El Camino Real de los Tejas National
Historic Trail, which can be used as
models to assist in the identification of
trail routes.2
Aerial photography. Aerial photography
became common in the 1930s, due to
important technical advances between
the two World Wars and its widespread
adoption for land surveys by U.S.
Government land-management agencies,
such as the Soil Conservation Service,
the U.S.D.A. Forest Service, and the
1 - TARL is a nationally recognized archeological
research facility and the largest archeological repository in the state. It is an organized research unit under
the College of Liberal Arts at the University of Texas
at Austin. Its mission is to collect, preserve, and curate
archeological specimens and records, train students,
conduct archeological research, and disseminate information about Texas’ archeological legacy. For additional
information, look at their Web site: http://www.utexas.
edu/research/tarl/
2 - Jeff Williams, “GIS-Aided Archeological Research”;
A. Joachim McGraw, John W. Clark Jr., and Elizabeth A.
Robbins (eds.), A Texas Legacy: The Old San Antonio
Road and the Caminos; James E. Corbin, Jeffrey M. Williams, Victor J. Galan, and Rebecca St. John, “Cultural
Resource Survey of Fort Boggy State Park”; Elizabeth
Erickson and James Corbin, “Archeological Survey and
Cultural Resource Assessment of Mission Tejas State
Historical Park”; Deirdre Morgan Remley’s “Cultural Resources Inventory of Previously Documented
Resources for El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail,” and available upon request at the National
Trails Intermountain Region.
Page 158

U.S. Geological Survey. Aerial
photography can be very helpful in areas
that have not been impacted by major
changes in land use, such as road
construction or urban development.
Where available, it can settle specific
issues in relatively small geographic
areas, especially in cases where there are
visible traces of the trail. Remote sensing
today often uses technology such as
LiDAR3 and has become one of the most
accurate, reliable, and cost-effective
mapping systems currently available. It
allows completing topographic surveys
significantly faster and at a lower cost
than using traditional survey methods. It
is particularly helpful in detecting
historic routes in heavily vegetated areas.
Stephen F. Austin University in
Nacogdoches, Texas, has pioneered the
use of this technique to identify El
Camino Real de los Tejas routes in East
Texas. 4
Putting the Lines on the Maps. Once
systematic historical documentation has
been collected, the route needs to be
marked, using an adequate resolution.
Because of the length of national historic
trails, it is usually recommended that the
route be plotted in maps of a scale of
1:100,000. For specific locations, it might be
appropriate to have finer resolution, such as
1:24,000. At this stage, the information can
also be captured and stored in a Geographic
Information System.
B. Verification of routes on the ground.
Ground truthing is an essential task if
historic trails are to be mapped with
precision. A substantial portion of original
routes are still visible today, but, in many
3 - LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) is an optical
remote sensing technology that measures properties of
scattered light to find the range and/or other information of a distant target. Like the similar radar technology, which uses radio waves instead of light, the range
to an object is determined by measuring the time delay
between transmission of a pulse and detection of the
reflected signal. LiDAR technology has application in
archeology, geography, geology, geomorphology, seismology, remote sensing, and atmospheric physics.
4 - Jeff Williams, “GIS-Aided Archeological Research,”
MS Thesis, Stephen F. Austin State University, August
2007.

Appendix D: Mapping Historical Resources along El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail

places, historic traces have been totally
obliterated either by extensive highway
construction or by changes in land use, such
as commercial agriculture or silviculture (tree
farming). Some of the obstacles facing those
interested in tracing the path of the routes of
El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic
Trail are dense vegetation, changing river
morphology, urban growth, even the
construction of reservoirs. Using the remotesensing technologies described above,
on-the-ground evidence can be gathered to
validate or modify, if necessary, the
information from the historical documents.
Swales, ruts, or remnants of old trails are
often still visible in the trail corridor;
however, not all visible road traces are
associated with El Camino Real de los Tejas
National Historic Trail. Trail advocates need
to search the historical records for
documents that provide information on the
development and use of such sites/segments.
In some cases, archeological investigations
are necessary to establish clearly how certain
sites/segments are linked to a particular
historic period. The widespread road
development that characterized Texas during
the mid-1800s included many railroad branch
lines and county roads, as well as an
extensive network of cattle trails. These
newer historic traces can be easily confused
with the Spanish Colonial roads established
in the previous century.
Conflicting evidence often challenges researchers. It is almost an unavoidable step in
the early stages of route documentation.
Only after systematically examining documents; checking archeological reports,
secondary sources, aerial photography, and
other remote sensing data; and field-checking the information obtained can we establish
with certainty the existence of the historic
roads linked to the development of El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail. It
is a time-consuming task, requiring the
collection and systematic analysis of pertinent data. The addition of new information,
as it becomes available, makes this a constant
work-in-progress. But it is a rewarding
activity, which can greatly assist in the protection of the nation’s significant resources.
Page 159

Page 160

APPENDIX E:
HIGH POTENTIAL SITES AND SEGMENTS

BRIEF DESCRIPTIONS AND MAPS
The process of selecting high potential
sites and segments for El Camino Real de
los Tejas National Historic Trail required
the analysis of historic and archeological
information for 40 Texas counties and two
Louisiana parishes. The list of high
potential sites and segments was developed
following an analysis of more than 500 sites.
The task involved a number of steps, two of
which were not discussed in the main text
of the document, but that are presented
here.
The first step took place early in the
planning process. Volunteers in the trail
community and individuals serving on
county historical commissions in Texas and
experts in Louisiana were asked to submit
sites and segments for the consideration of
the planning team. The information
received was voluminous and demonstrated
widespread enthusiasm for this project. It
included documentation on museums,
visitor centers, community events, and
festivals, as well as the description of
numerous sites and segments.
The second step involved the
development of inventories of resources.
Two professional archeologists worked in
Texas and Louisiana to identify historically
significant sites and segments that would
meet the criteria specified in the National
Trail System Act. This research yielded a
database of more than 500 sites for the 40
Texas counties and the two Louisiana
parishes. Of these 500 sites, 250 sites were
then tentatively selected for further
examination. The criteria for selection
included the following:
• site or segment association with the
trail;
• its historic significance;
• the existing level of information about
it;
• its confirmed location;
• its accessibility;
• its scenic quality;
• whether it is relatively free from

intrusion; and
• whether it has the potential to be
developed for visitor use.
During the review process the planning
team reexamined all the available evidence
about tentative sites and segments that had
been submitted and contacted individuals
who made additional suggestions for
inclusion. This thorough review process
and the analysis of often conflicting
information resulted in the addition of
several high potential sites to Appendix E,
most of which had already been included as
part of Appendix F. Maps at the end of this
appendix indicate the geographical location
of the final list of sites and segments that
meet the above criteria.

Page 161

A ppendixes

LOUISIANA

High Potential Segments
Natchitoches Parish
Name: Camino de la Laguna (part of
a series of trails located at Los Adaes
State Historic Site)

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This is a road that goes north
from Los Adaes to La Laguna de Los Adaes.
This road is clearly labeled on a map prepared by José de Urrutia in 1767. Its location
has been confirmed on the ground.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (Louisiana Office of
State Parks)

Name: Camino del Baño (part of a series of trails located at Los Adaes State
Historic Site)
Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This is a road that travels south
from Los Adaes to Rancho del Baño. This
road is clearly labeled on a map prepared by
José de Urrutia in 1767. Its location has been
confirmed on the ground.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (Louisiana Office of
State Parks)

Name: Camino del Bayuco (part of a
series of trails located at Los Adaes
State Historic Site)

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This is a road that travels south
from Los Adaes, then turns east to a destination named El Bayuco. The road is clearly
labeled on a map prepared by José de Urrutia in 1767. Its location has been confirmed
on the ground.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (Louisiana Office of
State Parks)

Name: Camino de Natchitois (part of
a series of trails located at Los Adaes
State Historic Site)
Page 162

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This is a road that travels east–
northeast from Los Adaes toward Natchitoches. This road is clearly labeled on a map
prepared by José de Urrutia in 1767. Its location has been confirmed on the ground.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (Louisiana Office of
State Parks)

Natchitoches/Sabine Parishes
Name: Camino de los Ais (part of a series of trails located at Los Adaes State
Historic Site)
Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This is a road that travels west–
southwest from Los Adaes toward Mission
Dolores de los Ais. The road is clearly labeled on a map prepared by José de Urrutia
in 1767. Its location has been confirmed on
the ground.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (Louisiana Office of
State Parks)

High Potential Sites
Natchitoches Parish
Name: American Cemetery

Historic use type: Cemetery/Second site of
Fort St. Jean Baptiste
Description: This cemetery, established
early in the 18th century, was the site of the
relocated Fort St. Jean Baptiste. It is the
oldest cemetery in Louisiana and includes
graves from the middle of the 18th century. It
was named the American Cemetery after the
Louisiana Purchase in 1803.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Public (City of Natchitoches)

Name: Los Adaes Village

Historic use type: Village
Description: This is the archeological site of
a village established by some of the residents
who left Los Adaes in the 1770s and returned
to Louisiana after the unrest associated with
the unsuccessful Gutiérrez-Magee Expedi-

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

tion of 1812–1813.
Time period: late 1700s–1800s
Ownership: Private

Name: Caddo Memorial Plaza

Historic use type: Sacred ground/historic
marker
Description: This is the site where more
than 100 American Indian graves were
unearthed in the 1930s, at the start of construction of the hatchery by the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service. At that time, the Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act was not in effect, and many human
remains, as well as funerary items, were
crushed, stolen, looted, or destroyed. Some
remains were transported to the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, DC, where
they were kept in “The Nation’s Attic” at the
National Museum of Natural History until
2007. In 2000, authorized by the Museum
of the American Indian Act, and supported
by the Caddo Nation’s Tribal Council and
Repatriation Committee, the Caddo Nation
Cultural Preservation Department began a
long journey to return these remains to their
ancestral home on Caddo Nation lands.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Public (U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service)

Name: Fort Claiborne

Historic use type: Fort
Description: Fort Claiborne was established
in 1804. It was named after William C. C.
Claiborne, then-governor of territorial Louisiana. The fort protected United States interests on the southwestern frontier. Troops
were garrisoned here almost continuously
until the establishment of Fort Jesup in 1822.
Time period: 1804–1822
Ownership: Public (City of Natchitoches)

Name: Fort Seldon

Historic use type: Fort
Description: This was an American fort first
occupied in 1816, and then again between
November 1820 and May 1822. The site
covers a square mile; a kitchen is the one
structure still standing. One of the Officer’s
Quarters has been reconstructed and serves
as a visitor center/museum.

Time period: 1816–1822
Ownership: Public (City of Natchitoches)

Name: Fort St. Jean Baptiste State Historic Site

Historic use type: Fort (reconstructed)
Description: French-Canadian trader Louis
Juchereau de St. Denis was on a mission
to establish trading ties with Mexico. After
traveling nearly 140 leagues up the Red River
he encountered an impenetrable logjam;
at this spot he hastily built two crude huts,
which became Fort St. Jean Baptiste and
the town of Natchitoches, the oldest permanent settlement in the entire Louisiana
Purchase territory. St. Denis was named
the commandant of the fort in 1722, and the
colony thrived until his death in 1744. In 1731,
an attack by the Natchez Indians exposed
the vulnerabilities of the small French fort,
prompting French officials to send engineer
François Broutin to oversee the construction
of a larger and stronger fortification. Spanish
officials charged it was an invasion of Spanish territory, but St. Denis politely ignored
their protests. The fort continued to be garrisoned by French marines until 1762, when
France’s defeat in the French and Indian War
forced it to cede Louisiana to Spain. Spanish
authorities continued to operate the fort as
a military outpost and trading center; however, the fort no longer protected a territorial
boundary, so its strategic importance was
diminished. Spain eventually abandoned
the fort, and by the time the United States
acquired the territory in 1803, it was in ruins
and no longer usable.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (Louisiana Office of
State Parks)

Name: Gorum Community

Historic use type: Community
Description: This community became the
home of Adaesanos, the former settlers at
Los Adaes, who moved here after El Presidio
de Nuestra Señora del Pilar de Zaragoza de
los Adaes was closed by Spanish authorities
in 1773.
Time period: Post-1773
Ownership: Private

Page 163

A ppendixes

Name: Mission San Miguel de Linares
de los Adaes

Historic use type: Mission site
Description: This National Historic Landmark was originally founded in 1717 by Diego
Ramón for the Adaes Indians near presentday Robeline, Louisiana. The mission was
abandoned a couple of years later, but it
was reestablished in 1721 by Marqués de San
Miguel de Aguayo. It remained active until
1773 when it was again abandoned. It is part
of Los Adaes State Historic Site.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (Louisiana Office of
State Parks)

Name: Presidio de Nuestra Señora del
Pilar de Zaragoza de los Adaes

Historic use type: Presidio site
Description: This National Historic Landmark was founded in 1721 by the Marqués
de Aguayo as a frontier outpost to check
French expansion in East Texas. It was
located a quarter league from the mission
of San Miguel de Linares de los Adaes, near
the site of present Robeline, Louisiana. The
presidio was built in the form of a hexagon
with three bastions or bulwarks, Six cannons
that the Marqués de Aguayo had brought
from Coahuila were left in the presidio,
which had an initial complement 100 men. In
1729, Spain designated Los Adaes the capital of the province of Texas. This made Los
Adaes the official residence of the governor, and a house was constructed for him
within the presidio. Los Adaes remained the
administrative seat of government for the
entire province for the next 44 years. In 1772,
ten years after Louisiana was transferred to
Spain, Los Adaes closed and the inhabitants
moved to San Antonio. However, many of
the 500 soldiers and family members soon
left San Antonio and returned to Louisiana,
where their descendants live today. The presidio is part of Los Adaes State Historic Site.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (Louisiana Office of
State Parks)

Name: François Roquier House

Historic use type: Trading post
Description: This is a National Register
Page 164

property that was a trading post where
members of the Appalachee, Coushatta, and
Biloxi tribes came to purchase and exchange
supplies. It is an excellent example of architecture in Louisiana with bousillage (mixture
of clay and Spanish moss or clay and grass
used as plaster to fill the spaces between
structural framing), half-timber, and postin the-ground, which were typical French
construction techniques.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Public (State of Louisiana,
Northwestern State University)

Name: Spanish Lake

Historic use type: Community
Description: This lakeside community was
originally called Laguna de los Adaes, later
Juan de Mora Lake, and finally Spanish
Lake. Bison are reported to have watered
at this site. In its report, the 1718 Alarcón
Expedition provided a full description of
the lake. The lake was about two leagues
from Presidio de Nuestra Señora del Pilar
de Zaragoza de los Adaes, and the expedition camped about a league from the presidio. The report noted that the Cadodachos
River flowed through the presidio and on
to Natchitoches. The distance between
presidios was 60 leagues. The nearest access point for the lake was four leagues
from Natchitoches. Various kinds of fish
are abundant year-round, along with many
ducks of various sizes, which overwinter
here.
Time period: 1718–1800s
Ownership: Private

Name: Tauzin-Wells House
Historic use type: Residence
Description: It is believed to be the oldest
standing building in Natchitoches and the
second oldest residence west of the Mississippi River. It was built by the Buard family
in 1776, and is one of the oldest examples
of a Creole cottage. It is a one story house
with half-timbered bousillage walls (mixture of clay and Spanish moss or clay and
grass used as plaster to fill the spaces between structural framing) and a low pitched
roof. The floor plan is centered around a
central chimney that is accessible by two

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

main rooms. Originally, the house had a full
gallery, wrapping around the entire building. In 1790, the side galleries were enclosed
to provide more living space. This property
was the site of a subsidiary trading post for
the Davenport-Barr mercantile operation.
Time period: 1776
Ownership: Private (not open for tours)

Sabine Parish
Name: Fort Jesup State Historic Site

Description: This Archeological and State
Historic Site was built in 1822 after the Sabine River was set as the boundary between
the United States and Spanish (Adams-Onis
Treaty of 1819) and after Mexico’s Independence from Spain was achieved in 1821. It
served as staging for the Mexican War in
1845.
Time period: 1822-1846
Ownership: Public (Louisiana Office of
State Parks)

Houston County
Name: Mission Tejas State Park Trail
Segment

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This 1.5-mile-long trail segment
crosses an area that has remarkable visual
integrity. The trail segment runs roughly
parallel to State Road 21 and at times crosses
the highway. A Caddo Indian site within the
state park appears to be adjacent to the trail.
Although the original site of the 1690 Mission San Francisco de los Tejas has not yet
been found, recent research conducted by
Historian Robert Weddle confirms that this
segment was part of El Camino Real de los
Tejas.
Time period: 1600s
Ownership: Public (Texas Parks and Wildlife Department)

Sabine County
Name: Lobanillo Swales

TEXAS

High Potential Segments
Bexar County
Name: Mission Road/Mission Trail
and Villamain

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This extensive National Historic district includes 52 contributing buildings and 39 contributing sites. Mission Road
follows part of the original route connecting
the five main missions. The Mission Parkway
study collected data on all of the local roads
that connect to the main road system and
documented the significance of these roads,
which are mostly now city streets or National Park Service roads.
Time period: 1718
Ownership: Public (National Park Service/
City of San Antonio)

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: Two sets of deep and parallel swales extend about one-quarter mile
through the forest. One set of swales has
seven parallel ruts reaching a depth of 18 feet
and 12 feet wide. A state historic marker in
nearby Geneva says that the historic Spanish
rancho known as El Lobanillo, was located
nearby. The rancho included the pueblo of
Gil Y’Barbo (1729–1809), a refuge used by
his ailing mother and other refugees in 1773,
when Spain evacuated colonists from western Louisiana and East Texas. It was given
as a land grant to Juan Ignacio Pifermo in
1794, and inherited in the early 1800s by John
Maximillian (ca. 1778–1866).
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Private

High Potential Sites
Bexar County
Name: Acequia Madre de Mission de
Valero
Historic use type: Irrigation structure

Page 165

A ppendixes

Description: This was part of a network of
ditches built by the Spanish and their Indian
charges after the founding of San Antonio
in 1718. Construction of the acequia began a
year later. Hand-dug and made of dressed
limestone, the acequia diverted water from
San Antonio River through agricultural fields
which belonged to San Antonio de Valero
Mission. Irrigation would be the key to the
growth of the missions and the town during
the initial settlement of the region.
Time period: 1690s
Ownership: Public (City of San Antonio/San
Antonio River Authority)

Name: Comanche Lookout

Historic use type: Natural landmark
Description: Comanche Lookout Park is a
96-acre public park owned by the City of
San Antonio. The Cibolo Creek floodplain
lies at the base of this escarpment, between
the Gulf Coastal Plain and the Edwards
Plateau. American Indians used this hill as
a vantage point for warfare and hunting.
Apache and Comanche Indians dominated
the area as they hunted along waterways,
including nearby Cibolo Creek. The hill
was also a prominent landmark for travelers
in the 18th and 19th centuries. It was noted
in early field survey notes and on Stephen
Austin’s map. Located on the original road
to San Marcos Spring, one of several routes
of El Camino Real de los Tejas extended past
the base of the hill.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Public (City of San Antonio)

Name: Dolores-Applewhite Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: Archival research and a review
of the Pérez family historical documents
have verified the location of this historic ford
of the Medina River. It was first identified in
the 1808 Spanish grant to Ignacio Pérez. It is
a beautiful crossing with swales and wheel
marks on the stones across the creek bed.
Time period: 1700-1800s
Ownership: Public (City of San Antonio)

Name: Iglesia de Nuestra Señora de la
Candelaria y Guadalupe/San Fernando Cathedral
Page 166

Historic use type: Church
Description: Listed in the National Register
of Historic Places, this was the parish church
of the villa of San Fernando de Bexar, which
was built between 1737 and 1749 and restored
in 1839. The gothic Cathedral of San Fernando, built between 1868 and 1873, incorporated portions of the existing Spanish church.
Time period: 1737–present
Ownership: Archdiocese of San Antonio

Name: La Villita Historic District/Villa
de San Fernando/El Pueblo de San
José y Santiago del Alamo/Las Islitas
Historic use type: Village/town
Description: Listed in the National Register
of Historic Places, these four settlements
are essentially contiguous and therefore are
counted together as a complex. The historic
district includes 27 contributing buildings,
structures, and archeological remains dating
to the Spanish period and later, with influences from later German settlements. La
Villita was the civil settlement that grew up
as a barrio around the Presidio San Antonio
de Bexar.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private

Name: Loma Alta

Historic use type: Natural landmark
Description: Legal documents indicate that,
in 1765, Loma Alta was used as a landmark
in determining the boundaries of Rancho
San Lucas of Mission San José in a dispute
involving Fray Pedro Ramírez de Arellano.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Private

Name: Main and Military Plazas

Historic use type: Main plaza/military plaza
Description: This National Historic Landmark is comprised of 13 whole blocks, two
plazas, and portions of two additional
blocks. The Military Plaza was established in
1722. The Main Plaza is associated with the
settlement of 16 Canary Island families and
the founding of Villa San Fernando on Main
Plaza in 1731. A portion of the 18th Century
Pajelache Acequia (San Pedro Ditch) runs
under Main Avenue. The Melchor de la
Garza house, built around 1800, is a small

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

one-story caliche block cottage that is a
remaining example of the type of homes that
once ringed the two plazas.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Public (City of San Antonio)

Name: Mission Espada Aqueduct

Historic use type: Irrigation structure
Description: This National Historic Landmark shows the vital role of water in the
survival of missions in the vicinity of San
Antonio. According to tradition, goat’s milk
served as a cementing agent in the mortar
used in constructing the aqueduct.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private (Espada Ditch Company, a cooperative in which the National Park
Service and others have shares)

Name: Mission Espada Dam

Historic use type: San Antonio River crossing/irrigation structure
Description: Listed in the National Register
of Historic Places, this dam is a Spanish Colonial irrigation structure, which served as a
river crossing, connecting the local network
of roads between missions on both banks of
the San Antonio River.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (National Park Service/
San Antonio River Authority)

Name: Mission Nuestra Señora de la
Purísima Concepción de Acuña

Historic use type: Mission
Description: Both a National Historic Landmark and State Archeological Landmark
the site includes a Spanish Colonial mission and associated grounds. The mission
was secularized in 1793 and the church was
completely abandoned by 1819. The church
has exceptional architectural preservation
(including intact frescos) and is the oldest unrestored stone church in the United
States. It was originally founded in 1716 in
East Texas as Concepción de los Ais, temporarily relocated to the area of present-day
Austin in 1730 before being reestablished
at its final location in Bexar County. The
church took about 20 years to build and was
dedicated December 8, 1755. ‘The facade was
originally covered with brilliant quarter-foils

and squares of red, blue, orange, and yellow.
The mission is still in use.
Time period: 1731–1824
Ownership: Private (Archdiocese of San
Antonio, but managed though a cooperative
agreement with the National Park Service)

Name: Mission San Antonio de Valero,
3rd Site (the Alamo)

Historic use type: Mission
Description: Started by Father Antonio de
San Buenaventura y Olivares in 1716 this
National and State Historic Landmark was
originally located west of San Pedro Springs.
It survived three moves and numerous
setbacks during its early years. Because the
Spanish government failed to complete or
adequately garrison the local presidio, the
mission had frequently to provide for its
own defense. Protective walls, eight feet high
by two feet thick, were erected enclosing a
main plaza located west of the convent and
guarded by small artillery and a fortified
gate. During the 19th century struggle for
political and military control of Texas, these
rudimentary fortifications made the old mission symbolically and strategically important. The site served a variety of functions,
including quarters for San Antonio’s first
hospital (1805 to 1812). Between 1810 and 1865
the former mission changed hands at least
sixteen times, belonging variously to Spanish, Mexican, Texas, Union, and Confederate
forces.
Time period: 1724-1793
Ownership: Public (State of Texas directly
through the Governor’s office, but is managed by the Daughters of the Republic of
Texas)

Name: Mission San Francisco de la
Espada

Historic use type: Mission
Description: Listed in the National Register
of Historic Places, this mission was originally
founded in 1690 as San Francisco de los Tejas
in present-day Houston County. It was reestablished in San Antonio in 1731 and changed
its name. The original buildings at Espada,
the farthest south of the five missions near
San Antonio, were undoubtedly of adobe. A
wall surrounded the church (usually called a
Page 167

A ppendixes

chapel), friary, granary, and workshops. Extensive farms and pastures lay nearby. One
of the few remaining early structures is the
southeast bastion (fortified round tower),
the only mission fort structure left intact in
San Antonio. Its three-foot-thick rock walls,
which contain holes for cannons and muskets, support a vaulted roof.
Time period: 1731–1824
Ownership: Private (Archdiocese of San
Antonio, but managed though a cooperative
agreement with the National Park Service)

Name: Mission San José Acequia

Historic use type: Irrigation structure
Description: Listed in the National Register of Historic Places, this is an acequia,
or irrigation ditch, constructed to serve
the current location of Mission San José. It
may have been in use until early in the 20th
century.
Time period: 1722–present
Ownership: Multiple (National Park Service, private and City of San Antonio)

Name: Mission San José y San Miguel
de Aguayo, 3rd Site

Historic use type: Mission
Description: This National Register property was established in 1720 on the east bank of
the San Antonio River but was removed to a
new site on the west bank around 1724-1727,
and again a second time to this present site
around 1739. The first buildings were constructed of palings, wattle and daub, thatch
and adobe. By 1749 the mission complex
consisted of a church, a friary, granary and
Indian habitations. The Indian houses were
integral with the ramparts and served to
enclose the large protected plaza. The present renowned church was begun in 1768 by
Fr. Pedro Ramírez de Arellano, and it was
completed sometime after 1778. By then the
purpose of the mission was largely fulfilled;
this fact, coupled with a great decline in the
Indian population, caused the mission to be
secularized in 1793.
Time period: 1739–1824
Ownership: Multiple (Archdiocese of San
Antonio, State of Texas, Bexar County, and
the San Antonio Conservation Society)

Page 168

Name: Mission San Juan Acequia

Historic use type: Irrigation structure
Description: Listed in the National Register
of Historic Places, this acequia is associated
with Mission San Juan.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (National Park Service)

Name: Mission San Juan Capistrano

Historic use type: Mission
Description: This site listed in the National
Register of Historic Places was formerly
the East Texas mission of San José de los
Nazonis. It was renamed in 1731, when it
was moved to the site of present San Antonio. San Juan Capistrano was exposed to
frequent Indian attacks and the lands allotted to the mission were not sufficient for
its horses and cattle and the raising of the
required crops. Construction of a separate
church was begun, but it was never completed, and services had to be held in a large
room in the monastery. The buildings of the
mission standing today have no sculpturing,
but the walls are thick and the rooms commodious. Most of the original square remains within the walls, offering an authentic
picture of the mission plan.
Time period: 1731–1824
Ownership: Private (Archdiocese of San
Antonio, but managed though a cooperative
agreement with the National Park Service)

Name: Mission San Juan Dam

Historic use type: Irrigation structure/river
crossing
Description: Listed in the National Register of Historic Places, this Spanish Colonial
irrigation structure served as a river crossing, connecting the local network of roads
between missions on both banks of the San
Antonio River. The feature was excavated in
1970s.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public/private (The property is
right on the edge of National Park Service
and San Antonio River Authority property)

Name: Nogales Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This ford is listed in the National Register of Historic Places. Archeolo-

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

gist Jake Ivey notes that the boundaries of
the mission lands of Nuestra Señora de la
Purísima de la Concepción extended to a
point called the Nogales Crossing, which
he states is at the San Juan Dam on the San
Antonio River, and that this spot marks one
of the boundaries for Mission San Juan.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (Multiple management
agencies)

Name: Padre Navarro House

Historic use type: Residence
Description: Listed in the National Register
of Historic Places, this was a residence constructed by the Mission Concepción parish
priest, Padre Navarro.
Time period: early 1800s
Ownership: Private

Name: Paso de los Tejas

Historic use type: Spring/paraje
Description: Materials for the construction
of missions were acquired from a series of
quarries in this location. There are remnants of
structures associated with the period of significance of the trail.
Time period: 1690s
Ownership: Public (City of San Antonio)

Name: Pérez Cemetery/Rancho de Pérez

Historic use type: Ranch/cemetery
Description: This is a state archeological landmark, a component of the ranch headquarters
of Rancho de Pérez, part of the Ignacio Pérez
land grant. The ranch was known as the Rancho de Piedra (Stone Ranch). The site is located north of the Medina River and has been
preserved and protected by the Pérez family
for more than a century. There is a chapel at
the cemetery, which was constructed on top of
the foundation of the original Spanish Colonial
period chapel. Some elements of the original
chapel remain.
Time period: late 1700s/early 1800s
Ownership: Cemetery is private (owned by
Pérez family descendants); ranch is public
(owned by the City of San Antonio).

Name: Presidio San Antonio de Bexar,
1st Site (San Pedro Springs)
Historic use type: Presidio/village/paraje

Description: This National Register Property
located five miles from the San Antonio River
has been inhabited since prehistoric times.
When Spanish explorers visited the springs in
the late 17th century the area was occupied by
the Payayas Indians who lived in the village of
Yanaguana. The area around the springs was
the original site of the present city of San Antonio and in 1729 it was dedicated as a public
space by the Spanish government.
Time period: 1692
Ownership: Public (City of San Antonio)

Name: Presidio San Antonio de Bexar,
2nd Site/Governor’s Palace/Casa del
Capitán

Historic use type: Presidio
Description: This National Historic Landmark
was the final site of the Presidio San Antonio
de Bexar. The building is primarily a 19th-century reconstruction on the foundation of the
original building. The site, known popularly as
the Governor’s Palace, was actually the residence of the captain of the presidio until 1773,
followed by the senior officer. Marqués de
Aguayo began construction in 1722, but there
is a date of 1749 over the doorway. Construction may never have been completed during
the Spanish period. The present building is a
reconstruction completed in 1930.
Time period: 1722
Ownership: Public (City of San Antonio).

Name: Sabinitas/Jett/Palo Alto Crossing

Historic use type: Connecting side trail/river
crossing
Description: This ford is a state archeological
landmark. It crossed the Medina River for the
Camino de los Palos Altos known to the Spanish as Paso Sabinitas.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private

Name: Yturri-Edmunds Historic Site

Historic use type: Mill/residence
Description: Part of the Mission Parkway Historic and Archeological District, this structure
was originally a mill that was later converted
to a residence. The mill was built in 1820 by
Manuel Yturri Castillo. It is part of a site with
several 19th-century buildings and is open to
the public. The site is located on former lands
Page 169

A ppendixes

of Mission Concepción.
Time period: 1820
Ownership: Public (San Antonio Conservation Society)

Brazos County
Name: Rye School Loop Swale

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This swale, parallel to a raised
road segment, is very easy to see when the
vegetation loses its leaves. The swale starts
very faintly but becomes more discernable
as it nears Rye Loop road (coming from the
southwest). At its most pronounced, it is
about 2-meters wide, almost 2-meters deep,
and is about 70-meters long before it curves
toward the northwest and angles into the
Rye Loop alignment. After the curve to the
northwest, it continues for about 30-meters before it is lost in a tangle of greenbrier
vines. In a diary entry from 1807 American
explorer Zebulon Pike made references to
camping in this area.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Public (City of College Station)

Cherokee County
Name: Caddo Mounds Trace No. 1

Historic use type: Road segment
Description: Both the magnetometer data of
existing subsurface swales and the 1806–1807
Juan Pedro Walker map clearly indicate the
relationship of El Camino Real de los Tejas
National Historic Trail to the three Caddo
Mounds. A preliminary survey of the surrounding landscape during a National Park
Service evaluation field trip confirmed that
there is only one possible route for the trail
to take north of the mounds. The mounds
and the trail’s relationship to them are also
discussed in primary Spanish documents.
For example, in 1767, Nicolás de Lafora
records passing just north of the mounds,
stating: “We forded this river [the Neches]
in shallow water and one league beyond we
climbed a hill. On the summit is a mound
which appears to be hand-made.” Recent
research conducted by Historian Robert
Weddle confirms the relationship of this site
to the trail.
Page 170

Time period: Pre 1700–1800s
Ownership: Public (Texas Historical Commission)

Name: Caddo Mounds Trace No. 2

Historic use type: Road segment
Description: Both the magnetometer data of
existing subsurface swales and the 1806–1807
Juan Pedro Walker map clearly indicate the
relationship of the trail to the three Caddo
Mounds. A preliminary survey of the surrounding landscape during a National Park
Service evaluation field trip confirmed that
there is only one possible route for the trail
to take north of the mounds. The mounds
and the trail’s relationship to them are also
discussed in primary Spanish documents.
Recent research conducted by Historian
Robert Weddle confirms the relationship of
this site to the trail. Time period: Pre 1700–
1800s
Ownership: Public (Texas Historical Commission)

Name: George C. Davis Site/Indian
Mounds

Historic use type: American Indian
village/paraje
Description: Listed in the National Register
of Historic Places, this site was the southwesternmost ceremonial center of the Caddoan peoples who flourished on the western
edge of the woodlands of eastern North
America between 1000 B.C. and A.D. 1550.
It consisted of three large earthen mounds,
as well as a large portion of a prehistoric village. One of the principal routes of the Old
San Antonio Road, which extended diagonally across southern Cherokee County,
ran along one edge of the mound site. The
earliest mention of the mounds was made by
Athanase de Mézières, a Frenchman in the
employ of Spain, who traveled from Louisiana to San Antonio in 1779. Recent research
conducted by Historian Robert Weddle confirms the relationship of this site to the trail.
Time period: Pre-1700s
Ownership: Public (Texas Historical Commission)

Name: Weeping Mary Crossing
Historic use type: River crossing

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

Description: This hard-rock crossing of the
Neches River has been identified by Archeologists J. Corbin and T. Campbell as following the portion of El Camino Real that
passed north of the Caddo mound complex,
an important landmark noted by many of
the early travelers.
Time period: 1718-1800s
Ownership: Private

Comal County
Name: Comal Springs

Historic use type: Springs/paraje
Description: Spanish explorers discovered
Comal Springs in 1691. The many American
Indian tribes they found living there referred to it as Conaqueyadesta, translated
as “where the river has its source.” In an
excerpt from his diary, Father Isidro Félix Espinosa, who accompanied Domingo
Ramón’s expedition in 1716, described it
this way: “Groves of inexpressible beauty
are found in this vicinity. The waters of the
Guadalupe are clear, crystal and so abundant
that it seemed almost incredible to us that
its source arose so near. It makes a delightful
grove for recreation.” Comal is the Spanish
word for “basin,” which somewhat describes
the local geography. In 1764, the springs were
visited by French explorer Louis Juchereau
de St. Denis. They eventually became a paraje, or resting place, on the El Camino Real
de los Tejas.
Time period: 1691–1800s
Ownership: Public (city of New Braunfels)

Name: Davenport Crossing (Nacogdoches Road Crossing at Cibolo Creek)
Historic use type: Creek crossing
Description: This crossing of Cibolo Creek
is located on the route that Governor Martín de Alarcón (1718) followed on his way to
exploring East Texas. There are swales and
wheel marks on the stones across the creek
bed.
Time period: 1718-1800s
Ownership: Private

Name: Guadalupe River Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This Texas Historic Landmark,

a major crossing of the Guadalupe River,
was used by travelers and caravans carrying
supplies to Spanish missions in East Texas. It
sometimes took weeks for the floodwaters to
recede so that travelers could cross.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private (The crossing can be
viewed from the Faust Street Bridge, a restored pedestrian bridge owned by the city
of New Braunfels).

DeWitt County
Name: Salt Creek Swales

Historic use type: Road segment
Description: Alonso de León’s expeditions of 1689 and1690 are supposed to have
camped on the banks of Salt Creek, an area
highly regarded as a salt deposit. The swales
that extend for about 1/2 mile are adjacent to
farm buildings, but the setting retains a high
degree of integrity.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private

Dimmitt County
Name: Crossing/Paraje at San Pedro
Creek

Historic use type: American Indian village/
Crossing/Paraje
Description: This is a site with petroglyphs.
It is referenced as “Campo de Cuervo” in the
Texas Historic Sites Atlas, but the location is
more consistent with the San Pedro paraje
on the Lower Presidio Road. The site is a
well-preserved late-period American Indian
site.
Time period: 1600–1700s
Ownership: Private

Frio County
Name: Frio Town Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This Frío River ford is north of
Old Frio Town, which was built primarily to
serve as a station along the Upper Presidio
Road.
Time period: 1691–1827
Ownership: Private

Page 171

A ppendixes

Goliad County
Name: Cabeza Creek Crossing on La
Bahía-Bexar Road and Trail Segment

Historic use type: Creek crossing and swales
Description: Part of a National Historic
District, this is a gravel bar ford on Cabeza
Creek that may have been associated with
the Bexar-La Bahia Road. Artifacts recorded
for the site are American Indian - likely prehistoric, but could also be protohistoric or
historic. Swales stretch on both sides of the
crossing.
Time period: ca. 1700s
Ownership: Private

Name: Confluence of Cabeza Creek &
San Antonio River

Historic use type: Natural landmark
Description: A component of a National
Historic District, this confluence site was
described by explorer Jean Louis Berlandier,
who mentioned that Indians were camped
on the banks of the river.
Time period: ca. 1700–early 1800s
Ownership: Private

Name: Mission Nuestra Señora del
Espíritu Santo de Zuñiga (La Bahía),
4th Site

Historic use type: Mission
Description: Listed in the National Register
of Historic Places, this site is the final location of Mission Nuestra Señora del Espíritu
Santo de Zuñiga.
Time period: 1749–1830
Ownership: Public (Goliad State Historic
Park – Texas Historical Commission)

Name: Mission Nuestra Señora del
Rosario de los Cujanes

Historic use type: Mission
Description: This National Register property was established in November 1754 by
Father Juan de Dios Camberos in an attempt
to make peace with the various Karankawan
tribes, who had been troublesome to the
Spaniards since the early eighteenth century.
The first buildings were made of timber and
whitewashed clay; later, stone and mortar
were used. Indians came to the mission from
Page 172

time to time but were reluctant to stay, especially when supplies gave out. They were difficult to control, and the fathers complained
of their indolence. The Indians came to the
mission in the winter, but most left when
spring came and they could produce their
own food. By 1781 the mission was virtually abandoned. Father José Mariano Reyes
reopened it in 1789 and built a small hut and
a log chapel among the ruins. In 1791 a new
church of stone and plaster was completed.
The Indians had argued for a mission closer
to their homes, and as a result Nuestra Señora del Refugio Mission was established in
1792. In 1797 all the Cocos at Rosario went to
Refugio. By 1804 the buildings were in need
of repair, especially after heavy rains caused
part of the front to collapse. After failing to
obtain money for repairs, Father Huerta, the
missionary in charge, took the remaining
Indians to Refugio. On February 7, 1807, Rosario was formally combined with Refugio.
Time period: 1764–1826
Ownership: Private (By appointment only)

Name: Presidio Nuestra Señora de
Loreto de la Bahía, 3rd Site

Historic use type: Presidio
Description: This National Historic Landmark dates from April 6, 1722, when the
Marqués de Aguayo laid out the plan for
construction of fortifications at the La Salle
settlement site, in southern Victoria County.
With construction begun, Aguayo turned his
attention to the founding of Nuestra Señora
del Espíritu Santo de Zúñiga Mission, close
to the presidio. The new presidio was to
guard the coast against possible French intrusion. Faced with continuing troubles with
the Karankawas, authorities moved the mission and presidio in 1726 to the Guadalupe
River, near Mission Valley (in present-day
Victoria County), twenty-odd miles farther
inland. For the next twenty-six years, the
mission and presidio prospered with farming and cattle ranching that furnished food
for themselves and the mission settlements
in East Texas and at San Antonio. In 1749 the
presidio and mission were again moved, this
time to a place called Santa Dorotea, the site
of present-day Goliad, as part of colonizer
José de Escandón’s plan to make them the

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

northern anchor of the colony of Nuevo
Santander. The captain of Presidio la Bahía,
Joaquín del Orobio Basterra, oversaw the
move, but the plan to bring the presidio under the Nuevo Santander jurisdiction failed.
Capt. Manuel Ramírez de la Piscina, the new
commander, undertook physical improvements, including temporary housing for the
soldiers and their families, the captain’s own
house, and a chapel. He also directed the
building of permanent structures for Missions Espíritu Santo and Nuestra Señora del
Rosario. The garrison of fifty men guarded
not only the presidio but also the two missions and the horse herd pastured several
leagues downriver and were sent occasionally to escort travelers and supply trains between San Antonio and San Juan Bautista on
the Rio Grande. As Mexico’s political unrest
intensified, ultimately leading to revolution,
La Bahía was involved in episodes, such as
the Gutiérrez-Magee expedition of 1812-13,
the Henry Perry campaign of 1821 and the
James Long expedition of 1821. After Mexico
won independence from Spain, the presidio
assumed a new role: protecting and supervising the various colonists coming into the
region.
Time period: 1749-1830
Ownership: Catholic Diocese

Name: Rancho Señor San José/Rancho
de Capitán Piscina
Historic use type: Ranch headquarters
Description: Part of a national register historic district, sites at this ranch headquarters
were recorded as archeological site numbers
41GD84, 41GD85, and 41GD86. Another site
that may be associated with this ranch is NO.
41GD49, which is a burial site containing
both prehistoric and historic artifacts. The
description of the historic artifacts suggests
that they may be from an early period.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private

Hays County
Name: McGehee Crossing

Historic use type: River Crossing
Description: This is a ford of the San Marcos River, located on the Old Bastrop Road.

There is a state historic marker that indicates
that Louis Juchereau de St. Denis traveled
this route to establish trade between the
French in Louisiana and the Spanish of
Coahuila Province on the Rio Grande in
1714. The first settlement at the San Marcos
River crossing along the trail route was Villa
San Marcos de Neve, established by Spanish authorities in 1808. It was abandoned
just four years later, as the Mexican Revolution began to brew. In 1820 and 1821, Texas
colonists Moses Austin (1761–1821) and his
son, Stephen F. Austin (1793–1836), very
likely crossed the San Marcos River near this
point. About 1846, Thomas Gilmer McGehee (1810–1890) settled on a Mexican land
grant on the east side of the river. In 1859,
Charles L. McGehee, Jr. (1837–1929), Thomas’s nephew, acquired 1,200 acres of land
bordered by El Camino Real de los Tejas and
the river.
Time period: 1690s
Ownership: Private

Name: Old Bastrop Road/County Line
Road Trail Segment
Historic use type: Trail Swales

Description: This 20-foot long intact segment is in the right-of-way of Old Bastrop
Road. The segment, as well as the crossing,
is northeast of Lover’s Land just beyond a
right-hand turn at the end of the access for
Route 71. The road is also known as CR 266
in Hays County. Numerous primary and secondary sources have been used to track the
road. This is the route of the Old San Antonio Road from the York Creek Cemetery in
Comal County, following Old Bastrop Road
past the San Marcos River where its name
becomes County Line Road. Swales have
been recorded along this stretch of road at
various points.
Time period: 1600s
Ownership: Private

Name: San Marcos de Neve

Historic use type: Village/town
Description: A study conducted in the
1990s indicates that the site is eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places under
criteria A, C, and D. Aerial photos from 1951
show intact road segments. It was intended
Page 173

A ppendixes

as part of a chain of defensive settlements
stretching from Bexar to Nacogdoches and
was personally funded by the Spanish governor of Texas, Manuel Antonio Cordero y
Bustamante. Cordero charged Felipe Roque
de la Portilla with leadership of the expedition to reestablish a Spanish presence on
the San Marcos River, where the San Xavier
missions had been temporarily relocated fifty
years earlier. Colonists for the San Marcos
villa were recruited from south of the Rio
Grande rather than from Bexar and Louisiana. The first group of colonists set out from
Refugio (now Matamoros) in December 1807
and by February 1808 had settled near the San
Marcos crossing. Lt. Juan Ignacio Arrambide
was appointed justicia (magistrate) of the
town, with power to issue titles to land. Estimates of the villa’s size vary from about fifty
to eighty people, including perhaps a dozen
families and servants and as many as 1,700
animals-cattle, horses, and mules. A central
plaza had been laid out and titles issued to
thirteen town lots when a flood on June 5,
1808, nearly wiped out the nascent community. The colony held out for several years,
but harassment by Comanche and Tonkawa
Indians finally forced its abandonment in 1812.
Time period: 1808-1812
Ownership: Private

Name: San Marcos Spring

Historic use type: Paraje
Description: This paraje was used by several
of the early expeditions into Texas. Domingo
Terán de los Ríos and Father Damián Massanet (1693), Governor Gregorio de Salinas
Varona (1693), and Captain Pedro de Aguirre
and Father Isidro Félix Espinosa (1709) were
some of the many who camped at this site.
Immense springs rise at the Balcones Escarpment, a geologic fault that slices across
the state, separating upland from lowland
Texas. The abundance of freshwater attracted
American Indians of the Central Texas region,
and later European explorers and settlers.
The name San Marcos first appears in the
records of the Alonso de León Expedition of
April 26, 1689 (Saint Mark’s Day), marking
another Texas river; it was first applied to this
river in 1709. Following later explorations,
several Spanish missions were temporarily
Page 174

located here in 1755.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (Texas State University)

Name: Willow Springs Creek Crossing
Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This archeological site yielded
lithic scatter near a ford of El Camino Real
de los Tejas, and includes a well-preserved
segment of the trail.
Time period: 1690s
Ownership: Public (Texas Department of
Transportation)

Houston County
Name: Hurricane Shoals

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: Corbin and Williams believe
this river crossing is located at Kickapoo
Shoals (Kickapoo Rapids), and that the
crossing was used by the 1716 Ramon Expedition. Montgomery (1995) notes that he
found maps showing that one of the routes
of the La Bahia Road passed through Walker
County to join the Kickapoo Shoals Crossing. Recent research conducted by Historian
Robert Weddle confirms the site’s relationship to the historic period of the trail.
Time period: 1600s
Ownership: Private

Name: Rattlesnake Ranch Swale

Historic use type: Trail swale
Description: Archeological investigation
has established a historic relationship to the
trail. It is a short segment. Visual integrity is
partially compromised due to the presence
of oil-drilling equipment on the site.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Private

Karnes County
Name: Carvajal Crossing

Historic use type: Creek crossing
Description: This rock-bottomed ford
across Cibolo Creek in north central Karnes
County was the best-known ford along the
old cart road that traveled from the Texas
coast to San Antonio. Situated halfway be-

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

tween Goliad and San Antonio, the crossing was close to the old Fuerte del Cíbolo
(also known as Fuerte del Santa Cruz) and
the ranch headquarters of Andrés Hernández, who may have owned the first ranch in
Texas. According to old maps and journals,
at different times the crossing was called
Tawakoni Crossing, the Crossing of the
Tehuacanas, or Cibolo Crossing. About 1830,
José Luis Carvajal, scion of a Canary Island
family from San Antonio, acquired the ranch
property adjoining the crossing; since that
time the ford has been called Carvajal Crossing. The crossing is located south of the
Farm to Market Road 887 bridge over Cibolo
Creek.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private

Name: Fuerte del Cíbolo

Historic use type: Fort
Description: This fort was not a formally
designated presidio; however, it played an
important role in protecting San Antonio
and La Bahía at a time of increasing Spanish
settlement in this area, following the decommission of missions and presidios in East
Texas, including Orcoquisac/Anahuac, San
Sabá, and Cañón. The original fort may have
been established in 1735 and abandoned in
1737, but it is not clear if it was reestablished
on the same site. Fuerte del Cíbolo was
located at a natural ford of Cibolo Creek
known as Carvajal Crossing (see above entry). This fort likely had more than one location and has been confirmed archeologically.
Time period: 1770s–1780s
Ownership: Private

Leon County
Name: Kickapoo Rapids

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: Corbin and Williams believe
this river crossing is located at Kickapoo
Shoals (Kickapoo Rapids), and that the
crossing was used by the 1716 Ramón Expedition. Montgomery (1995) notes that he
found maps showing that one of the routes
of the La Bahia Road passed through Walker
County to join the Kickapoo Shoals Crossing. Recent research conducted by Historian

Robert Weddle confirms the site’s relationship to the historic period of the trail.
Time period: 1600s
Ownership: Private

Maverick County
Name: Paso de Francia* 1

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This ford of the Río Grande
may have been used by Alonso de León’s
third entrada in 1689 in search of La Salle’s
colony.
Time period: 1689-1836
Ownership: Private

Name: Paso de las Islas*

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This ford of the Río Grande
was one of five crossings that served Spanish travelers between San Juan Bautista at
the site of present Guerrero, Coahuila, and
the Texas settlements. At this point the river
spreads out in shallow branches that flow
among several islands (islas).
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private

Name: Paso de los Pacuaches*

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: It is located six miles upstream
from Paso de Francia near the mouth of
Cuervo Creek. During the early years of
San Juan Bautista Presidio, it was called the
Paso de Diego Ramón. The ford was used
by General Adrian Woll and his army when
he raided San Antonio in 1842. San Antonio Crossing was the name given to each of
several fords on the Rio Grande in present
Maverick County.
Time period: 1691-1916
Ownership: Private

* The team responsible for evaluating high potential
sites and segments was not able to visit these sites during
the evaluation period due to hunting activities on this
privately owned property; however, other National Park
Service staff from the National Trails Intermountain
Region office in Santa Fe and a photographer working in
association with this project have visited the river crossing site and confirm its integrity.

Page 175

A ppendixes

Milam County
Name: Apache Pass

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This historic ford is located
within the San Xavier Mission Complex
National Archeological District that includes
three missions and a presidio. This crossing
of the San Gabriel river is near archeological site 41MM10 (a possible presidio) and
41MM18 (possibly Mission Candelaria) and
upstream from Missions San Francisco and
San Ildefonso. The ford can be easily observed from a point on a suspension bridge
just downstream of the crossing.
Time period: Unclear
Ownership: Private

Name: Mission Nuestra Señora de la
Candelaria

Historic use type: Mission
Description: This mission is listed in the
National Register of Historic Places as
part of the San Xavier Mission Complex
Archeological District. Located on the
south bank of the San Gabriel River, it was
founded in July 1749 to congregate Coco
Indians and their allies, including the Tops
and Karankawas. Mission Candelaria had a
particularly unfortunate association with the
soldiers sent to protect it. When a presidio
was established near the mission in 1751 the
commander of the presidio, Capt. Felipe de
Rábago y Terán, decided upon his arrival
that the missions should be moved, and
constantly undermined the work of the missionaries. Relations continued to deteriorate
as reports of lewd behavior among the Spanish troops spread to the mission community.
Mission Candelaria was occupied intermittently by Bidais, Orocoquisas, and Cocos. It
was finally abandoned in 1755 after a severe
drought and epidemic.
Time period: 1749–1755
Ownership: Private

Name: Mission San Francisco Xavier
de Horcasitas

Historic use type: Mission
Description: This mission is listed in the
National Register of Historic Places as part
of the San Xavier Mission Complex ArcheoPage 176

logical District. The impetus for the mission
came in June 1745 when a group of Indians
came to San Antonio de Valero to ask for a
mission in their own territory. Father Francisco Xavier Ortiz favored the idea because
it would convert a new group of Indians,
would stop apostates from San Antonio missions from taking refuge with those Indians,
and would help break Indian commerce
with the French. After a protracted debate
over location the viceroy approved and
supported the mission establishment. San
Francisco Xavier Mission was founded on
the south bank of the San Gabriel River in
February 1748. It served the Yojuane, Mayeye, Ervipiame, Asinia, Top, and Nabedache
groups. Missionary work suffered as a result
of conflict between the missionaries and
military authorities. A small detachment of
soldiers proved inadequate to ward off the
frequent Lipan Apache attacks, but royal
officials refused to send additional troops.
Although the missionaries urged the Viceroy
to establish a presidio to guard the missions,
they complained about lack of cooperation
and the immoral behavior of the soldiers
and their commander. In 1752, an attack on
Mission Candelaria, which resulted in the
deaths of a missionary and a soldier, further
undermined morale. Drought and epidemics also plagued the missions between 1752
and 1755 and eventually drove the Spanish
to move the presidio and the missions to the
San Marcos River in August 1755.
Time period: 1746–1756
Ownership: Private

Name: Mission San Ildefonso

Historic use type: Mission.
Description: This mission is listed in the
National Register of Historic Places as part
of the San Xavier Mission Complex Archeological District. Begun on December 27, 1748,
and formally established on February 25,
1749, it was located on the south bank of the
San Gabriel River, near the mouth of Brushy
Creek (Arroyo de las Ánimas). Gathered at
this site were Orocquisac, Bidai, and Deadose Indians, who spoke a similar dialect and
intermarried. These Indians had extensive
trading contacts with the French, and when
the mission ran out of food the soldiers and

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

missionaries were forced to trade with the
Indians for supplies. Missionaries claimed
this undermined their authority with their
neophytes. A group of Coco Indians, also
gathered here awaiting establishment of a
separate mission, fled in March 1749 because of harassment from soldiers charged
with protecting the missions. The remaining
Indian groups, unable to adjust to sedentary life, left the mission in October 1749.
Missionaries managed to recongregate the
Indians by 1750, but shortly after the Indians
abandoned this mission to join their allies in
a campaign against the Apaches. The missionary in charge of San Ildefonso, Father
Juan José Ganzabal, was killed at Mission
Candelaria in 1752. This incident did much
to destroy the morale of both the missionaries and the Indians. When the Bidais tried to
return to the mission in 1753, the fathers sent
them back to their lands because the mission
lacked supplies. In August 1755 unhealthy
conditions at the site forced the missions
and the presidio to withdraw to the San
Marcos River.
Time period: 1749–1755
Ownership: Private

Name: Presidio San Francisco Xavier
de Gigedo

Historic use type: Presidio
Description: This property, listed in the National Register as part of the San Xavier Mission Complex Archeological District was a
Spanish military outpost founded on March
30, 1751, on the south bank of the San Gabriel
River to protect and aid the San Xavier missions. The garrison remained at the presidio
until 1755, when disease and drought forced
the soldiers to flee with the missionaries and
their neophytes to the San Marcos River.
Time period: 1750–1757
Ownership: Private

Name: Sugarloaf Mountain

Historic use type: Natural landmark
Description: It is located near the confluence of the Little and Brazos rivers where a
system of trails developed by American Indians was eventually used by the Spanish until
late in the 18th Century. The hill is capped
with red sandstone and overflows a broad

stretch of the floodplain. This landmark
is apparently linked to the Ervipiame who
were eventually absorbed by the Tonkawa,
who refer to Sugarloaf as Turtle Mountain.
References to this landscape feature date
from the 1750s.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private

Nacogdoches County
Name: Acosta-Durst-Taylor House

Historic use type: House
Description: Archeological investigations
have shown that the 1820s-era Durst-Taylor
House was built upon the dirt floor belonging to the 1790s-era Acosta House that
preceded it.
Time period: 1790s
Ownership: Public (City of Nacogdoches).

Name: Adolphus Stern House

Historic use type: House
Description: This state historic landmark is
listed in the National Register Historic Properties. It consists of a 19th-century house
that belonged to Adolphus Stern, a prolific
writer who took part in the Fredonia Rebellion. Archeological investigations verify
the authenticity of the structure. It is now a
private museum, open to the public.
Time period: 1820s
Ownership: Private

Name: Bernardo D’Ortolan Rancho
and Swales

Historic use type: Ranch
Description: This site is associated with the
Spanish Colonial–period ranch belonging
to Bernardo D’Ortolan. This site contains
swales, the main ranch house and out buildings occupied by Bernardo D’Ortolan from
1796 until he left Texas as a result of his involvement with the failed Magee-Gutiérrez
Rebellion in 1813. This ranch is significant because it one of the only Spanish ranchos ever
to be identified with archeological remains
on the eastern segments of El Camino Real
de los Tejas.
Time period: 1796–1840s
Ownership: Private

Page 177

A ppendixes

Name: Mission Nuestra Señora de la
Purísima Concepción de los Hainais
(Gallant Falls)

Historic use type: Mission
Description: It is the oldest Mission site yet
discovered in Spanish Texas, the oldest European site yet discovered in East Texas and the
oldest site yet discovered known to bear the
name Tejas. It served as the headquarters of
the three western College of Queretaro Missions under the direction of Fray Isidro Félix
Espinosa.
Time period: 1716-1730
Ownership: Private

Name: Old Stone Fort/La Casa de Piedra

Historic use type: Trading post
Description: Built by Antonio Gil Y’Barbo as a
market or storage area for the town of Nacogdoches, the trading post is located on Old San
Antonio Road and La Calle del Norte. This
location may have also been associated with
the Barr and Davenport Trading Post. The
original post was torn down in 1902. The Stone
Fort Museum is a replica constructed on the
grounds of Stephen F. Austin State University.
Time period: 1779–1902
Ownership: Public (Stephen F. Austin State
University)

Name: Pocket Park Site

Historic use type: House site
Description: This is a site with Spanish Colonial–period artifacts.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Public (City of Nacogdoches)

Name: Washington Square Moundsite

Historic use type: Burial and temple site
Description: This is a Southeastern Ceremonial Complex affiliated with the Caddo Nation
of Oklahoma. The ceramic styles are identified
as Caddo, which date approximately from A.D.
1200 to 1400. In 1985, human remains representing a minimum of three individuals were
removed from two burials at the Washington
Square Site in Nacogdoches during excavations under the direction of Dr. James Corbin.
No known individuals were identified. The
122 associated funerary objects included 49
Page 178

ceramic vessels; marine shell beads and fragments, one pendant, and several tools.
Time period: Pre-1700s
Ownership: Public (Nacogdoches Independent School District)

Rusk County
Name: Mission San José de los Nazonis

Historic use type: Mission
Description: This mission was founded by
the Domingo Ramón Expedition in 1716. It
served the Nazoni Indians, on a branch of
Shawnee Creek, in what became northwestern Nacogdoches County. The mission was
abandoned in 1719, following French incursions from Louisiana, but was restored by
the Marqués de Aguayo in 1721. In 1730, it
was removed to the Colorado River in Texas,
near the site of Austin’s Zilker Park, where
it stood alongside the San Francisco de los
Neches and Nuestra Señora de la Purísima
Concepción de los Hasinai missions. The
following year, all three Austin missions were
moved to the San Antonio River and reestablished as San Juan Capistrano Mission.
Time period: 18th century
Ownership: Private

Sabine County
Name: Oliphant House

Historic use type: Residence of ferry operator
Description: Listed in the National Register
the Oliphant House was built in 1818 and
is one of the earliest pre-Republic, AngloAmerican structures in Texas. The log house,
once part of the early settlement of Gaines
Ferry, is the only surviving structure of
James Gaines’ large plantation and ferry-tavern enterprise on the Sabine River crossing
of the El Camino Real. James Gaines built
the house for his in-laws.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private (Daughters of the Republic of Texas)

San Augustine County
Name: Garrett Trace

Historic use type: Trail swale

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

Description: The trail swale is located in
front of a two-story house belonging to William Garrett (1808–1884) that is now a state
historic landmark. Garrett purchased this
land soon after coming to Texas in 1830. In
1861, he erected the house using pine boards
from his nearby sawmill. Built by slave labor,
the structure had unusual free-standing columns in front and carved mantels over its six
fireplaces. Garrett’s home was often a stop
for travelers on the Old San Antonio Road.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Private

Name: Mission Nuestra Señora de los
Dolores de los Ais, 2nd Site

Historic use type: Mission
Description: This National Register property and state historic landmark was first
established in January of 1717. It was abandoned in 1719 with the advent of hostilities
between Spain and France. When the mission was reestablished in August 1722, Father
Antonio Margil de Jesús moved it east of the
previous site near a stream and a large tract
of level land that could be used for cultivation. Recent research has located the site on
a hill next to Ayish Bayou within the present
city limits of San Augustine. Archeological
research has enhanced our view of everyday
life at Mission Dolores. Cow and ox bones,
common in the excavated trash pits, give
clues on butchering techniques and preferred cuts of meat. Such recovered items
as gun flints and other parts, broken knife
blades, and horse trappings were probably
associated with the soldier guards living
at the mission. Pieces of broken pottery,
especially Indian-made wares, are plentiful.
It would appear that the inhabitants relied
heavily on locally made utensils
Time period: 1717–1773
Ownership: Public

Travis County
Name: McKinney Falls State Park/Onion Creek Crossing
Historic use type: Road swale
Description: The arroyo/río de las Garrapatas (present-day Onion Creek) was first
described in 1709 by Father Isidro Félix Es-

pinosa with the Olivares-Aguirre expedition,
and it is mentioned in several other Spanish
texts. Recent research conducted by Robert
Weddle reveals that in 1716 the expedition
of Domingo Ramón followed the left bank
of Onion Creek along the western edge
of McKinney Falls State Park to its junction with Williamson Creek. Recent images
clearly document the rock indentations that
resulted from extensive use of the area.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Public (Texas Parks and Wildlife Department)

Victoria County
Name: Guadalupe River Dam

Historic use type: Irrigation structure
Description: This irrigation structure is associated with a significant mission site and
is listed in the National Register of Historic
Places.
Time period: ca. 1726–1749
Ownership: Private

Name: Mission Creek Dam and Acequia Site

Historic use type: Irrigation structure
Description: This is a dam reportedly constructed by Araname Indian converts from
the nearby mission. It is listed in National
Register of Historic Places.
Time period: ca. 1726–1749
Ownership: Private

Name: Mission Espíritu Santo de
Zúñiga Quarry

Historic use type: Quarry
Description: This Spanish quarry is associated with important local missions closely
tied to the early history of the trail.
Time period: ca. 1722–1749.
Ownership: Private

Name: Mission Nuestra Señora del
Espíritu Santo de Zúñiga (Tonkawa
Bank), 2nd Site

Historic use type: Mission
Description: This mission is listed in the
National Register of Historic Places. It was
moved from the original location on GarciPage 179

A ppendixes

tas Creek around 1726. It was constructed
of mortared stone on a bluff called Tonkawa
Bank near a popular low-water crossing. The
original mission, which appears in Spanish
records also as La Bahía del Espíritu Santo
de Zúñiga, was a reference to its location
on La Bahía del Espíritu Santo (the Bay of
the Holy Spirit, now called Matagorda Bay
and Lavaca Bay) and also honored Báltasar
de Zúñiga, viceroy of New Spain. The
establishment remained at its original site
only about four years and was relocated at
least twice. As early as April 1725 the padres
recommended moving it and its presidio to a
location more favorable to their missionary
efforts. They had been unable to induce the
wandering Karankawas to accept Christian
teachings or stay at the mission, and there
had also been incidents of ill feeling and
violence between the Indians and the Spaniards.
Time period: 1725–1726
Ownership: Private

Name: Mission Nuestra Señora del
Espíritu Santo de Zúñiga, 3rd Site

Historic use type: Mission
Description: This mission was occupied
from 1726-1749 by Franciscan missionaries
along with Aranama and Tamique Indians.
The archeological record of the mission
offers a unique opportunity to examine the
processes of change at work and their affects
on both the mission Indians and the friars.
Through the examination of the material
and faunal remains, questions of the effects
of contact and long-term interaction are
addressed. This research adds to our knowledge of the mission era in south Texas and
contributes to the cultural history of Texas.
This site is also significant for its extensive
ruins that have not been reconstructed as
most missions with standing architecture
were during the WPA years. It represents
an excellent example of unaltered Spanish
Colonial Architecture.
Time period: ca. 1726–1749
Ownership: Private

Name: Presidio Nuestra Señora Santa
María de Loreto de la Bahía del Espíritu Santo, 1st Site (Fort Saint Louis)
Page 180

Historic use type: Presidio
Description: This site, listed in National
Register of Historic Places, was the original
location of French Fort St Louis established
by La Salle in 1685. When the Spanish finally
discovered the remains of the French settlement in 1689, they buried the cannons and
burned the buildings. The Spanish established a presidio on the site in April 4, 1721,
when Capt. Domingo Ramón occupied the
site of La Salle’s Texas Settlement on the
right bank of Garcitas Creek five miles above
its mouth in Lavaca Bay. Ramón, as part
of the Marqués de San Miguel de Aguayo
expedition, was to hold this crucial site while
the main thrust of the expedition, led by
Aguayo, proceeded into East Texas. Aguayo’s
purpose was to drive out any French and
reestablish the missions abandoned in 1719.
A year after Ramón’s occupation, on April 6,
1722, Aguayo laid out the plan for construction of fortifications at the La Salle settlement site. The new presidio was to guard
the coast against possible French intrusion:
a prescient move in view of the fact that
French maritime expeditions had probed
the coast in 1720 and 1721, seeking “La Salle’s
bay” with expectations of building fortifications. Faced with continuing troubles with
the Karankawas, authorities moved both the
mission and presidio in 1726 to the Guadalupe River.
Time period: 1721–1726
Ownership: Private

Name: Presidio Nuestra Señora de
Loreto de la Bahía, 2nd Site

Historic use type: Presidio
Description: This is the second site of the
Presidio Nuestra Señora de Loreto de la
Bahía.
Time period: 1726–1749
Ownership: Private

Webb County
Name: El Paso de Jacinto/Paso de los
Indios

Historic use: River crossing
Description: Around 1746, explorer Jacinto
de León discovered a ford that allowed safe
passage across the Río Grande in this vicin-

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

ity. It came to be known as Paso de Jacinto,
but it had probably been used for centuries
before by American Indians. The Laredo
community, which began as a ranch established by Tomás Tadeo Sánchez de la Barrera, grew up around it. In 1754, colonizer Jose
de Escandón asked Sánchez to find a place
for a settlement along the Nueces River. Sanchez failed to identify a suitable location on
the Nueces, and instead, in May 1755, settled
along the Río Grande, downstream of Paso
de Jacinto. Two years later, Agustín López de
la Cámara Alta reported that the settlement
at the crossing was important in sustaining what had become a major business and
military route across the Río Grande. He
also stated that the settlers’ pursuits mainly
involved breeding cattle and gathering salt
from regional salt lakes. By the turn of the
19th century, the crossing was marked on
maps as Paso de los Indios; a century later,
the Old Indian Crossing, as it was known in
English, was a well-known landmark near
the northern edge of Fort McIntosh. In 1757,
this ford was recorded by Tienda de Cuervo
as being the river crossing used by people
with horses.
Time period: 1740s
Ownership: Private (Laredo Community
College allows public access to the site)

Name: Rancho los Ojuelos

Historic use type: Ranch
Description: This National Historic district
consists of 13 stone houses (several in ruins)
constructed from hewn sandstone blocks,
chinked and plastered, ranging from rectangular flat roofed Colonial Style buildings
to hip roofed two room structures. It was
temporarily settled in 1810 by Eugenio Gutierrez who received a grant from the Spanish Crown for two sitios (ca. 8,856 acres).
The ranch headquarters were located near
a large natural spring (ojuelos). This site is a
good example of the type of multipurpose
hacienda (socio-economic-agriculturalreligious establishment) that evolved close to
Dolores in South Texas, adjacent to the Río
Grande.
Time period: Post-1750s
Ownership: Private.

Name: Republic of the Río Grande
Museum/Villa Antigua Border Heritage Museum

Historic use type: Residences
Description: Located in the downtown San
Agustin Historical District it was once the
Republic of the Río Grande capitol building. It now showcases memorabilia from
the short-lived Republic of the Río Grande
and displays pictures, books, and furniture
from the 19th century Laredo area. There
are three restored rooms: an office and sitting area, a bedroom, and a kitchen. Casa
Ortiz, a component of this complex, is a
state historic landmark.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private (Webb County Heritage Foundation), but open to the public.

Name: San José de Palafox

Historic use type: Village/town/paraje
Description: This National Register Archeological and Historic District was an
unsuccessful settlement on land that the
Spanish crown granted to Mexican settlers
during the early nineteenth century. In 1810
the Spanish government ordered the establishment of a new town on the margin of
the Río Grande, named Palafox, in honor
of a Spanish general, Francisco de Palafox
y Melci. Juan José Díaz was to administer justice and distribute land to settlers,
mostly families from the older settlements
of Coahuila, though no money was available
to fund the construction of public buildings.
The settlers themselves built a church in the
center of town. The townspeople prospered
by raising livestock, especially sheep and
goats, and the town grew from almost 240
inhabitants in 1815 to 277 by the end of 1816.
The townspeople, however, soon faced
depredations by Comanches who burned
the village in 1818. Some families returned by
1824, and in 1826 sixty soldiers were ordered
to Palafox to build barracks, but the town
was finally destroyed in 1829.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private
Note: The evaluating team was not granted
permission to access this site.

'

Page 181

A ppendixes

Wilson County

Name: Rancho de las Cabras

Historic use type: Ranch
Description: This National Register Property and State Archeological Landmark is
a ranching outpost of the San Francisco
de la Espada Mission in San Antonio. Missionaries and Indians raised livestock at the
ranch from 1731 to 1794. The site originally
included fortifications and a chapel, but only
a few foundations remain. It was located on
the west bank route of the Bexar–La Bahía
Road.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (National Park Service)

Zapata County
Name: Jesús Treviño Fort and Ranch

Historic use type: Fort and ranch
Description: This site is a national historic
landmark. It was settled in 1830 by former
residents of Revilla (now Nuevo Guerrero,
Tamaulipas) under the leadership of Jesús
Treviño. The site was in the southwest corner of the original Hacienda de Dolores, a
grant made in 1750 by Col. José de Escandón
to José Vázquez Borrego, and was named for
the patron saint of Guerrero, Saint Ignatius
Loyola. In 1830 Treviño built a sandstone
home, known as Fort Treviño, 100 by 140
feet. José Villarreal placed a sundial at the
home in 1851; the timepiece has become a
tourist attraction. San Ygnacio became a
center of trade by the mid-1800s, and the
town was the scene of several border skirmishes throughout the years.
Time period: 1830s
Ownership: Private

Name: Nuestra Señora de los Dolores
Hacienda/Rancho Viejo/Dolores Viejo
Historic use type: Village/ranch
Description: This National Historic Register property was a ranch settlement crucial
to the Spanish colonial government plan to
settle a region between the Nueces River
in the north and Tampico in the south. In
1750 the Hacienda de Nuestra Señora de
los Dolores was founded by a grant of land
Page 182

from the crown of Spain to José Vázquez
Borrego, a wealthy rancher from Coahuila.
This settlement, at the junction of Dolores
Creek and the Rio Grande, is considered to
be the first Spanish colonial venture on the
north bank of the Rio Grande. The name
Hacienda Dolores dates to 1757, when the
settlement was so labeled by José Tienda de
Cuervo on his inspection tour of the newly
founded settlements that were part of the
colonizing program of José de Escandón.
However, given the fact that Dolores was the
headquarters for an outpost ranching operation and that the owner, Vázquez Borrego,
lived at his Hacienda de San Juan del Álamo
in Coahuila, it might more properly be called
Rancho Dolores.
Time period: 1750–1851
Ownership: Private
Note: The evaluating team was not granted
permission to access this site.

Name: San José de los Corralitos

Historic use type: Residence
Description: This property is listed in the
National Register of Historic Places. The
first building erected on this land grant was a
fortified ranch structure to protect the family
from Indians and marauders from across the
Rio Grande. It dates from 1753, when Colonel
José de Escandón donated a 350,000-acre
grant, a portion of which would eventually
become the village of Corralitos (little corrals)
and part of an effort to hold title to the Borrego family grant known originally as Nuestra
Señora de los Dolores. Don José Fernando
Vidaurri, grandson of the original Borrego
grant owner, built the single-room dwelling of
sandstone, mud mortar, mesquite and Montezuma cypress. It had 33-inch thick walls; one
door on the east elevation; no windows; six
gun ports; and a flat, 11-foot tall ceiling. The
gun ports facilitated the muzzle of a blackpowder firearm, which extended through the
opening to be visible from the outside.
Time period: Post-1750
Ownership: Private (It is open to the public
and is part of the National Ranching Heritage Center, Texas Tech University in Lubbock)

ane

tor

Irion

Sterling

Mitchell

Scurry

Tom Green

Coke

Nolan

Fisher

Coahuila De Zaragoza

Edwards

Callahan

Shackelford

Webb

L aredo

Dimmit

Gillespie

Mills

Map E-5

Frio

Medina

Map E-2

Hays

Duval

McMullen

Jim Hogg

Wilson

Hidalgo

Brooks

Jim Wells

Live Oak

Jackson

Aransas Calhoun

Calhoun

Vic toria

Aransas Aransas

Refugio

Goliad

Victoria

Colorado

Madison

Fort Bend

Matagorda

Waller

Brazoria

Harris

Montgomery

Walker

Galveston

Galveston

Hardin

Tyler

Sabine

Jefferson

Newton

Cameron

Calcasieu

Beauregard

Jefferson Davis

Allen

Rapides

Map E-14

La Salle

Catahoula

Lafayette

St. Landry

Was hington

Texas

Oklahoma

Kansas

Tenness ee

NewYork

£
¤

Pennsylvania

North Carolina

Virginia

Wes tVirginia

Ohio
Kentucky

Indiana

Gulf of Mexico

Louisiana
Florida

South Carolina
Missis sippiAlabama Georgia

Arkansas

Illinois

Michigan

Michigan
Wisconsin

Missouri

Iowa

Minnesota

25

50
Miles

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

NewMexico

Colorado

Nebraska

South Dakota

North Dakota

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

0

Arizona

Utah

Wyoming

Montana

Pacific Ocean

California

Nevada

Oregon Idaho

Iber

S

S

Co

Franklin

Richland

Avoyelles

Vermilion

Acadia

Evangeline

Grant

Caldwell

Ouachita

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

Orange

Jasper

Sabine
Vernon

Many

Winn

Natchitoches
Natchitoches

Red River

Bienville

Jackson

Lincoln

LOUISIANA

Webster

San Augustine

San Augustine

Bossier

De Soto

Nacogdoc hes

Angelina

Chambers

Liberty

Polk

Galveston

San Jacinto

Trinity

Shelby

Caddo

Map E-13

Panola

Harrison

Marion

Nacogdoches

Rusk

Alto

C rockett

Houston

Cherokee

Map E-12

Smith

Gregg

Upshur

Gulf of Mexico

Wharton

Austin

Wood

Map E-11

B renham

Grimes

B ryan

Brazos

Washington

Map E-8

Fayette

Lavaca

Cuero

Kleberg
Kleberg

Cameron

Willacy

Kenedy

Nueces

San Patricio

Bee

Goliad

De Witt

Map E-7
Karnes

Lee

Bastrop
Bastrop

Map E-9

Gonzales

Gonzales

Guadalupe

Comal

Caldwell

Travis

Robertson

Anderson

Henderson

Van Zandt

Leon

Freestone

Kaufman

Navarro

Limestone

Burleson

Milam

Falls

Ellis

Dallas

Map E-10

C ameron

Bell

Hill

McLennan

Johnson

Tarrant

New B raunfels

Aus tin

Karnes City

Tamaulipas

Starr

Z apata

Zapata

Map E-3

Atascosa

Pears all

La Salle

Blanco

Map E-6
Bexar

Williamson

Coryell

Bosque

Somervell

Hood

Parker

G eorgetown

Burnet

Lampasas

Hamilton

Erath

Palo Pinto

San Marcos

Kendall

Llano

San Saba

Brown

S an Antonio

Bandera

Kerr

Mason

McCulloch

Coleman

Comanche

Eastland

Stephens

C arrizo Springs

Zavala

Uvalde

Real

Kimble

Menard

Concho

Runnels

TEXAS

Taylor

Jones

Nuevo Leon

Map E-4

Maverick

Kinney

Sutton

Schleicher

Eagle Pas s

Val Verde

Crockett

Reagan

MEXICO

Terrell

Upton

Glasscock

Howard

Martin

Midland

Borden

Dawson

Map E-1: El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT High Potential Sites and Segments

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

Map E-1

Page 183

Nuevo
León

Tamaulipas

MEXICO

El Paso de Jacinto/
Paso de los Indios

G ra
nde

R ίo

k

B

k

ree

Dolores Creek

Webb

reek
S
k

Jesús Treviño Fort and Ranch

San José de los Corralitos

Zapata

Nuestra Señora de los Dolores Hacienda/Rancho Viejo

sC
ca
al n

O’Keefe Lake

Republic of the
Río Grande Museum/
Villa Antigua Border
Heritage Museum

Laredo

n Cree
Chaco
Lake Casa Blanca

TEXAS

Cree
ma
Reta
urro
Arroyo
B

Map E-2

ito C
an J
uan

Creek
Salado

Page 184
Salomoneno Creek

0

5

MILES

Arroyo
de los
Angele
s

1.25 2.5

High Potential Site

Duval

59

£
¤

LOUISIANA

Gulf of Mexico

59

£
¤

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

MEXICO

TEXAS

Jim Hogg

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

Rancho Los Ojuelos

•

Town or City

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

A ppendixes

Map E-2

5
MILES

59

£
¤

Nuevo
León
Nuevo Leon

SanJosé
JosédedePalafox
Palafox
!
( San

LOUISIANA

Gulf of Mexico

59

£
¤

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

MEXICO

TEXAS

Jim Hogg

1.25 2.5

High Potential Site

TEXAS
TEXAS

0

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

Coahuila De Zaragoza

Coahuila de Zaragoza

MEXICO

R ioG
Grra
andned

•

Tamaulipas
Tamaulipas

Webb
Webb

83

83

£
¤

Chacon C

reek

Lake
LakeCasa
Casa Blanca
Blanca

35
¥

Jaboncillo Creek

ek

Town or City

rri
Ca

La Salle

La Salle

Los Olm

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

Cre
zito
s

k
os Cree
c

Río

Be

e

ee

k
err
aC
r

sC

ek

£
¤59
59

Cre
do

re
olo

Sala

Map E-3

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

Map E-3

ree
k

D

Page 185

Page 186
o
Rí

59

£
¤

LOUISIANA

Gulf of Mexico

£
¤

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

MEXICO

nde
Gra

59

Indio Creek

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

k

Paso de los Pacuaches

5
MILES

Paso de las Islas
Paso de Francia

Maverick

TEXAS

1.25 2.5

277

Dimmit

reek

Turkey
C

Crossing/Paraje at San Pedro Creek

eek

e Cr

anch

Com

Carrizo Springs

83

Webb

83

Zavala

Nuec es River

ek
Cre
ito
n
o
B

ek

TEXAS

0

High Potential Site

San
Am
sio
bro

Jim Hogg

•

Town or City

Cree

Coahuila de Zaragoza

MEXICO

Eagle Pass

Saus

gh
El

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

an
Slou
ek

Map E-4

a Cre

San Lorenzo Creek

Esp
tosa
Cre

g
Tortu

Mo
ro

A ppendixes

Map E-4

Negro C
reek

Cre
ek

0

er

Fri
r

olo

Cre
ek

MILES

La Salle

a
anz
per

Cib

5

High Potential Site

o sa

Atascosa

A t as c

Pleasanton

Bexar

59

£
¤

LOUISIANA

Gulf of Mexico

59

£
¤

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

MEXICO

TEXAS

Jim Hogg

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

Ri v e r

Pérez Cemetary/
Rancho de Pérez

k

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

iv
oR

ee

1.25 2.5

k

Riv
e

ck C

na

Bla

Leo

nil
agu

Frio

Pearsall

L

Pa
Cr

Town or City

Cree

Frio Town Crossing

k

ee

Cr

Medina

San Miguel Cree

La
rita

•

rel

uir

Cre

ek

Sq

Seco

Hon
do

Map E-5

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

Map E-5

la C
reek

Cre
ek

Es

k
ree
k

R
Frio
iver

Page 187

Page 188
Ri

ve

i
noion
tno t
A
n
S annA
Sa

r
ve
Ri

¥

r

410

o

MILES

1604

Calaveras Lake

10
¥

Willow S

Guadalupe River Crossing

New Braunfels

New Braunfels

York C
reek

! Old Bastrop Road
Old Bastrop Road

£
¤

Mission Road/Mission Trail
and Villamain

Mission San José y
San Miguel de Aguayo, 3rd site
Nogales Crossing
Mission San Juan Dam
Mission San José Acequia
Mission Espada Dam
Mission Espada Aqueduct
Mission San Juan Acequia

(
!

Mission San Juan
Capistrano

!

Comal
ComalSprings
Spring !

Comanche Lookout

Randolf
Airforce
Randolph Air Force Base
Base

!

Fort Sam Houston
Fort Sam Houston

Comanche
Lookout

!

5

Comal

o
Cib

lo C

Bexar

Sabinitas !
Sabinitas
Ignacio Pérez Spanish
Dolores-Applewhite
Crossing!
Colonial Home Site
Pérez
/ Rancho de
de Pérez
PérezCemetery
Cemetery/Rancho
Pérez !

35
¥

Mitchell
Lake
Mitchell Lake

¥

Paso
de los Tejas

Braunig
Braunig
Lake Lake

Calaveras Lake

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

MEXICO

Gulf of Mexico

59

£
¤

Mission San Francisco
(
!
Mission Road
Presidio San Antonio
de Bexar
Site (San
Pedro Springs)
de la Espada
Presidio
San 1st
Antonio
de Béxar,
1st Site !
MissionSan
SanAntonio
Antoniode
deValero,
Valero,3rd
3rdSite
Site(the Alamo)
Main and Military Plazas
Mission
(the Alamo)
La Iglesía de Presidio
Nuestra San
Señora
de
la
Candelaría
y
Guadalupe
Antonio de Bexar, 2nd site
!!! Villa
de San
Fernando
La Villita
Historic
District/Villa de San Fernando/El Pueblo de San José y Santiago del Alamo/Las Islitas
Presidio San Antonio de Béxar, 2nd Site
Iglesia de Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria y Guadalupe/
Yturri-Edmunds Mill
Historic Site
Yturri-Edmunds
!
!
San Fernando Cathedral
MissionNuestra
Nuestra
Señora
la Purísima
Concepción
de Acuña
Señora
dede
la Purísima
Concepción
de Acuña
! ! Mission
Rancho San Lucas
Kelly
Force Base
KellyAir
Airforce
PadreNavarro
NavarroHouse
House
Padre
El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
Base
!
87
!
Brooks
Air
£
¤
High Potential Sites & Segments
Brooks
!
Force Base
Airforce
!
!
!
r
e
Lackland Air Force Base
!!
a Riv
Base
er
Jim Hogg
Medin
Riv
a
LOUISIANA
Medin
!
410
59
TEXAS

San
SanAntonio
Antonio

1.25 2.5

k

Davenport Crossing

0

Military Base

ree

AcequiaMadre
MadrededeMissión
MissiondedeValero
Valero
Acequia

1604

Camp Bullis
Camp Bullis

Town or City

High Potential Site

281

¤
•£

High Potential Segment

lo C

LomaAlta
Alta !
Loma

10
¥

Comal
El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

o
Cib

a Lake

Map E-6
Map 5

!
!

A ppendixes

Map E-6

ree

k

ni

o
nt
nnAt
a
A
S a nS

o

i

Wilson
Wilson

Rancho de
delas
las Cabras
Cabras
Rancho

i
RR
noio

vvee

rr

io
Med

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

Bee
Bee

!

!

!
!

r

Goliad
( Goliad
!

183

183

£
¤

k

R iv e

59

59
£
¤

(
!

Cuero
Cuero

Live
Live Oak L
Oak
Lake
Hackberry La

Presidio Nuestra
Nuestra Señora
Señora de
de
Loreto de
de la
la Bahía,
Bahía, 3rd
3rd Site
Site
Loreto

!

k

Mission
Espíritu
Mission Nuestra Señora del Espíritu
(La Bahía),
Bahía),4th
3rdSite
Site
Santo de Zuñiga (La

Mission
delos
losCujanes
Cujanes
MissionNuestra
NuestraSeñora
Señoradel
delRosarion
Rosario de
Blan

MEXICO

Gulf of Mexico

£
¤

59

Rancho
Señor
San
José
/ Rancho de
Piscina !
Rancho
Señor
San
José/Rancho
de Capitán
Capitán Piscina

Confluence of
of Cabeza
Cabeza Creek
Creek and
River
Confluence
and San
San Antonio
Antonio River

reek

LOUISIANA

Cabeza Creek Crossing on
La Bahía-Bexar
Road
Cabeza
Creek Crossing
andTrail
TrailSegment
Segment
and

Goliad

mil
eC
ree

lvem
ile
Cre
e

Goliad

een

Fift

Twe

£
¤

8787

( Yorktown
!
Yorktown

Salt Creek Swales

De Witt
De Witt

MILES

za C

59

5

k

Cre
e

k

£
¤

181
181

1.25 2.5

e
Cab

Cree

£
¤

City
( Karnes
!
Karnes City

0

High Potential Site

Cle
ar

uila

TEXAS

Karnes
Karnes

ek

Carvajal
CarvajalCrossing
Crossing

Cre

ek

!

Fuerte
Fuertedel
delCíbolo
Cíbolo

•

Town or City

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

Guadalu p e

Jim Hogg

Cib
Cre

ah
Man

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

!
olo

Ecl
eto

Map E-7
Map 6

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

Map E-7

co C
reek

Cre
ek

Page 189

87

87
£
¤

k

ee

Cr

1.25 2.5

tas

rci

Ga

0
77

£
¤

5
MILES

High Potential Site

! Guadalupe
Guadalupe River
RiverDam
Dam

•

Town or City

LaLva v
ac
ac R
a ivR
eirv e
r

ile Creek

Sann A
Anntot no n i o R i v e r
io Rive
r

Sa

Rive
reek

87

£
¤87

Cr
e
Green Lakeek

ma

olo

tC

We
s

Calhoun
Calhoun
Green Lake

u

Hackberry
Lake
Hackberry Lake

Lott Lake
Lott

lupe

da
Gua
Kuy
C

yo

Live Oak Lake

Horseshoe Lake

Ba

77

77

£
¤

oc

£
¤

Ch

Victoria

Victoria

e

o
e
lat

59

ek

Cr

ek

59

59

59
£
¤

Jackson

Naav
viidd a
ad d
RivR
evr e
r

N

Lake Texana
Lake

Calhoun

Chocolate Bay

Chocolate Bay

Mission Nuestra Señora ! Tonkawa Bank Site
del Espíritu Santo de Zúñiga
Venado
Lakess
Venado
de laNuestra
Bahia, 1st
Site !
(
(Tonkawa Bank), 2nd Site Presidio Nuestra Señora de Loreto
Presidio
Señora
Lakes
Santa María de Loreto
de la Bahía del Espíritu Santo,
Coleto
First Site (Fort Saint Louis)
Cre
P

lac

o
ed

Goliad
Goliad

Fifteen M

Mission Creek Dam and Acequia Site
Mission Creek Dam
and Acequia Site
( Victoria
!
Victoria

77
Mission Nuestra Señora
del Espíritu
Santo
de
Zuñiga
Mission Nuestra Señora
del Espiritu
Santo
dede
Zuñiga
(LaQuarry
Bahia),Site
2nd Site
Mission
Espíritu
Santo
Zuñiga
(La Bahía), 3rd Site
Mission Espiritu Santo de Zuñiga Quarry Site
!
!
( Presidio
Presidio Nuestra
!
Nuestra Señora
Señora de
de Loreto
Loretode
dela
la Bahía,
Bahia,2nd
2ndSite
Site

dalu
pe R
iver

Gua

De Witt
De Witt

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

Car
an
Cre

ek
Lavaca River

Redfish Lake
Redfish Lake

Cre

ek
59

£
¤

LOUISIANA

Gulf of Mexico

59

£
¤

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

MEXICO

TEXAS

Jim Hogg

ahua B
El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

Lavac a River

!
!

(
!

183

183
£
¤

Cuero

( Cuero
!

Map E-8
Map 7

reek

Hu

sa C

isac
he

no
Are

r

a

Kel
le

Page 190
eek

We
st

y Cr

k

i

cah
ua

sh
Bru

Cre
e

A ppendixes

Map E-8

r

!

!

San
SanMarcos
Marcos

San Marcos
Marcos Springs
Springs
San

(
!

!
McGehee Crossing
Crossing
McGehee

Plum C
reek

k

San
San Marcos de Neve
Willow
WillowSprings
Springs Creek
Creek Crossing
Crossing

!
!

to

l
B
Bla

k

ree

Cree

iv
eRr e r

er

reek

nC

rger C

o
Oni

Walter
WalterE.
E.Long
LongLake
Lake

£
¤
183
183

Caldwell
Caldwell

•

ar
Ced

0

1.25 2.5

High Potential Site
5

MILES

Military Base

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
Town or City

ek

Cre

Bastrop

Bastrop

290

290
£
¤
y Cr

59

£
¤

LOUISIANA

Gulf of Mexico

59

£
¤

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

MEXICO

TEXAS

Jim Hogg

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

Lake
LakeBastrop
Bastrop

!
(
Bastrop
Bastrop

CampSwift
SwiftN.G.
N. G.Facility
Facility
Camp

eek

State Park/
Park/Onion CreekCrossing
! McKinney
McKinney Falls
Falls State
Onion Creek Crossing

35
¥

Wilba

Bergstrom Air Force Base (Closed)
Bergstrom Airforce Base (Closed)

( Austin
!

Austin

Travis
Travis

Cot
od
nwo

rR iv
ivoe
a Rd
o
r
l road
CCoolo

Lake Travis

and

oiv
ocR
ancn

Lake Travis

S
Big

Hays
Hays

Lake Travis

Map E-9

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

Map E-9

Page 191

Page 192

l

0

r

1.25 2.5

5
MILES

High Potential Site

Town or City

a Cr

Ea
Lee

gu
st Ye

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

Alcoa Lake

Burleson

reek

nC

idso

Dav

k

a

r

reek
Reed C

Ce

Cr
ee

k

Bryan

190

Brazos

da
r

eek
59

£
¤

LOUISIANA

Gulf of Mexico

59

£
¤

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

MEXICO

TEXAS

Jim Hogg

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

Rye School Loop Swale

79

reek

77

Presidio San Fransisco Xavier de Gigedo

ree

rC

da

Ce

l

Mission Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria

Mission San Ildefonso

Mission San Franscisco Xavier de Horcasistas

Br

s R
i

e

•

ve

79

zo

Riv

Turkey Creek

r
Rive

Sugarloaf Mountain

tle

Apache Pass

L

e Bra

s
zo

iel River

Ri

Cameron

Milam

77

reek

W
nC

Williamson

e

k

Cr
ee

Pond
C

o
icks

San Ga
br

Elm

it

Litt

Bell

Big

Litt

v

er

Donahoe Creek

190

Map E-10

A ppendixes

Map E-10

•

Eas
tC
ane
yC
ree
k

Lowe
r Keec
hi Cre
ek

MILES

LEON

5

Bogg
y Cre
ek

ek
Cre
i
h
c
Kee

River
sota
Nava

BRAZOS

1.25 2.5

National Forest

Buffalo Creek

MADISON

Lar
riso
nC
ree
k

Hurricane Shoals

Rattlesnake Ranch Swale

Kickapoo Rapids

Up
per
Kee
chi
Cre
ek

Big Elkhart Creek

ROBERTSON

0

High Potential Site

Town or City

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

Lin
nC
ree
k

r
ive
ty R
i
n
i
Tr
Bedias Creek

59

£
¤

LOUISIANA

Gulf of Mexico

59

£
¤

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

MEXICO

TEXAS

Jim Hogg

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

HOUSTON

CROCKETT

u
Bayo
ane
c
i
r
r
Hu

Hickory Creek

k
Cree
dro
e
P
San

Wh
ite
R
o
c
kC
ree
k

Map E-11

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

Map E-11

Tantabogue Creek

ek
Cre
ey
n
a
C

Page 193

Map E-12

Gum C
reek

Page 194

N

84

h

e

Ri

Lake Jacksonville

ve

r

ec

s

Sa

•

k

ree

1.25 2.5

5
MILES

Wilderness Area

High Potential Site

0

National Forest

e
Ri

ve

Town or City

h

69

el
i

Lake Nacogdoches

Ri

ve

r

Angelina

na

High Potential Segment

N
ec

Coching Bayou

Davey Crockett National Forest
El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

r

Hicko

Big Slough
Wilderness

ek
y Cre

Washington Square
Moundsite

Nacogdoches

Old Stone Fort/
La Casa de Piedra

Pocket Park Site
Adolphus Stern House

Acosta-Durst-Taylor House

59

Kurth Lake

59

Bernardo D’Ortolan Ranch and Swales

A

n

oC

Houston

Duren Lake

George C. Davis/Indian Mounds

Alto

Mission Tejas State Park Trail Segment

Caddo Mounds Trace #1

Mission San José de los Nazonis

g

r

s

59

£
¤

LOUISIANA

Gulf of Mexico

59

£
¤

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

MEXICO

TEXAS

Jim Hogg

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

Nacogdoches

Nacogdoches

Mission Nuestra Señora de la Purísima Concepción de los Hainais (Gallant Falls)

Rusk

Cherokee

Caddo Mounds Trace #2

Box Creek

Bayou Loco

edr
nP

69

84

arrizo

Weeping Mary Crossing

Anderson

Tailes C
reek

ek
Cre
d
Mu

Bayou C

Larrison
Creek

A ppendixes

Map E-12

0

1.25 2.5

MILES

59

£
¤

MEXICO

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

Gulf of Mexico

Sam Rayburn Reservoir

TEXAS

59

£
¤

LOUISIANA

Angelina
National
Forest

Sabine

•
Lobanillo Swales

ne
San Augustine

•

Sabine

u La
Bayo

LOUISIANA

a
Nan

Toledo
Bend
Reservoir

•Twin Islands No.1

•Negreet Community

Bayou San Patricio
Indian Mounds
Wilderness

Oliphant Hous e

r

Turkey Hill
Wilderness

Garrett Trace

• •!

Sabine
National
Forest
Patro
on B
ayou

ne
ve

Jim Hogg

Shelby

k
ee
Cr
k
Lic

Mission Nuestra Señora
de los Dolores de los Ais,
2nd Site

San Augustine

5

Wilderness Area

National Forest

High Potential Site

ek
Cre
ha
a
Ten

bi
Ri

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

•

Town or City

High Potential Segment

TEXAS

Migu
el
Bayou
San

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

Sa

Many

Ha
rpo
o
nB
ay
ou

Bayou
Toro

Map E-13

Appendix E: High Potential Sites and Segments

Map E-13

Bayou
Ayish

Page 195

De Soto

Map E-14

Spanish Lake

ek
s Cre
Rock

49

Red River

ay

t
o u D u p on

Los Adaes Village

B

Many

1
Bayou Pie
rre

Red

Fort Seldon

Old River

River

Clear Lake

Saline Lake

Camino
Camino del
del Baño
Baño !

Kisatch
ie Bayo
u

Vernon

Kisatchie
National Forest

Kisatchie Hills Wilderness

Los Adaes State Historic Site

Camino del Bayuco

! Camino del Bayuco

Natchitoches
Presidio de Nuestra Señora del Pilar de Zaragoza
de los Adaes
Camino de la Laguna
Camino de la Laguna
Mission San Miguel de
!
Linares de los Adaes
Camino
Caminode
delos
losAis
Ais !
!
Caminode Natchitois
Camino
Los Adaes SHS ! 485 de Natchitois
485

Robeline

Fort Polk Military Reservation

Fort Jesup
State Historic Site

h
nc
Bra
n
o
rpo
Ha

171

Li
t
t
l
eR
ive
r

84

River
Cane

8

Rapides

Lake Latt

167

Kisatchie
National Forest

MILES

k
ee
Cr
s
’
vil
De

59

£
¤

LOUISIANA

Gulf of Mexico

59

£
¤

National Trails Intermountain Region,
National Park Service - July 2011

MEXICO

TEXAS

Jim Hogg

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT
High Potential Sites & Segments

Nantachie Lake

Grant

1.25 2.5

Wilderness Area

• High Potential Site
0

National Forest

5

High Potential Segment

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

Town or City

Winn

Gorum Community

River
Little

71

Kisatchie
American Cemetery
Tauzin-Wells House National Forest
Fort Claiborne
Natchitoches
Fort St. Jean-Baptiste State Historic Site
Los Adaes State Historic Site
Caddo Memorial Plaza
Sibley Lake
François
Roquier House

Jims River

ek
Cre
ie
h
c
nta
Na

Ha
rpo
o
nB
ay
ou

ek
Cre
igo
t
r
Da

Bay
ou
Tor
o

Page 196
k
ee
Cr
t
t
Ia

Tor
oC
ree
k

A ppendixes

Map E-14

APPENDIX F: ADDITIONAL SITES AND SEGMENTS
THAT COULD BE ELIGIBLE FOR INCLUSION

The section below includes segments and sites that might merit inclusion later on, but at this time, fail to
meet some of the criteria for high potential segments and sites identified in the National Trails System Act.
During the planning process an effort was made to explore potentially significant resources for which
there was no confirmed location or which had an unclear relationship to the trail during the period of
significance (1680-1845). National Trails Intermountain Region planners consulted with trail experts to
ensure that all resources were properly evaluated. Additional research and field reconnaissance conducted
after the public review process led the planning team to modify list of tentative sites and segments that is
presented in this section of the document. For example, some great sites, like Conquista Crossing appear
at this time to be outside the period of significance of the trail. Additional research might confirm its
status. Others, like the Navasota River Swales and the Lucky Loop Swales, need additional research
linking them to the period of significance of the trail.

LOUISIANA

Segments
Natchitoches/Sabine Parishes
Name: Ormigas Road (Latham’s Trace)
Historic use type: Road
Description: This road spanned the Ormigas
land grant from the Indian Crossing on the
Sabine River to Bayou Tassan on the way to
Los Adaes.
Time period: late 18th Century-early 19th
Century
Ownership: Public
Reason for questionable status: More
research is needed to link this road to trail
activities during the period of significance of
the trail.

Name: Patroon Road (Zwolle-EbarbHamilton)

Historic use type: Road
Description: Before the construction of the
Toledo Bend Reservoir this was one of the
roads in Louisiana that would have linked
with El Camino Real de los Tejas in presentday Texas.
Time period: Post-1812
Ownership: Public
Reason for questionable status: More
research is needed to link this road to trail
activities during the period of significance.

Name: Texas Star Road

Historic use type: Road
Description: This road runs between Fort
Claiborne (marker in downtown Natchitoches) and Belmont, northwest of Los
Adaes. It was built to intercept any movement coming from the west and to aid
Spaniards living in the community of Bayou
Pierre.
Time period: Post-1812
Ownership: Public
Reason for questionable status: More
research is needed to link this road to trail
activities during the period of significance.

TEXAS

Segments
Lavaca/Fayette counties
Name: Round Top Segment

Historic use type: Road
Description: This segment stretches over 65
miles across Fayette and Lavaca counties.
This trail realignment has been digitized as
part of the NTIR database although it parallels closely the designated route. It has not
been possible to verify its level of integrity
and its association to the trail during the
period of significance.
Time period: 1700s?
Ownership: Unclear
Reason for questionable status: More
research is needed to link this road to trail
activities during the period of significance.
Page 197

A ppendixes

LOUISIANA

Sites
Natchitoches Parish
Name: Arroyo Hondo

Historic use type: Boundary
Description: Between 1806 and 1820, Arroyo
Hondo marked the border between Spain
and France on the Neutral Strip. It is located
east of the bridge crossing at Young’s Bayou
(Arroyo Hondo). A pink granite marker
commemorates the site.
Time period: 1806–1820
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: It is only
one point along the boundary line. The
marker is located next to a public road, but it
may be difficult to create a safe public access.

Name: Bayou Amulet

Historic use type: Bayou/Creek
Description: Bayou Amulet was the main
drainage canal into Red River from Lac Terre
Noire, now Sibley Lake. During the French
and Spanish Colonial periods, this bayou
emptied into the Red River, now Cane River
Lake. River trade from New Orleans and
pack animal trains from Mexico used the
location as a rendezvous; in fact, the stream
was named “Bayou A Mule” on early maps, a
reference to the many mules usually tied up
along its banks. The name was later changed
to “Bayou Amulet.”
Time period: 1714–1803
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historic information is necessary to link
this area specifically to trail activities.

Name: Bayou Pierre Settlement

Historic use type: Community
Description: This settlement is thought to
be one of the locations where the Adaeseños went after the closing of Los Adaes. It is
between Lake End and Frierson along Bayou
Pierre, which drains into the Red River at
Natchitoches.
Time period: 1770s
Page 198

Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Location
has not been confirmed.

Name: Camp Sabine

Historic use type: Archeological site
Description: Zachary Taylor built Camp
Sabine in 1822 at the place where General
James Wilkinson had camped in 1808. Metal
artifacts have been recorded.
Time period: 1808–1822
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historic information is necessary to link
this area specifically to the period of significance of the trail.

Name: Darby’s Trace

Historic use type: Road
Description: William Darby traveled south
from the settlement at Bayou Pierre to pick
up El Camino Real de los Tejas near the old
presidio and mission at Los Adaes. The road
retains some integrity of setting.
Time period: 1812
Ownership: Public
Reason for questionable status: Additional historic information is necessary to link
this area specifically to the period of significance of the trail.

Name: Goat Hill (New Spanish Town)

Historic use type: Landmark
Description: Goat Hill is the current designation for the high area where the New
Spanish Town church was located. It is
located on SR120 (the original alignment of
El Camino Real de los Tejas in Louisiana),
about three miles from Robeline. The landowners suggest that an area with elongated
sunken areas is the old cemetery for the
church, which was vandalized by treasure
hunters.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historic information is necessary to link
this area specifically to the period of significance of the trail.

Name: La Gran Montaña

Historic use type: Natural landmark

Appendix F: Additional Sites and Segments That Could be Eligible for Inclusion

Description: La Gran Montaña (Big Mountain) was described by Pichardo as a landmark located at the boundary between
France and Spain, halfway between the two
forts at Natchitoches and Los Adaes. The
specific location is uncertain: it is said to be
near the Old Fire Tower, which can be accessed by driving south from SR6. Pichardo
writes that French settlers had houses and
other possessions built up to the foot of La
Gran Montaña.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Unclear
Reason for questionable status: Specific
location is not clear and more research is
necessary to link this site to trail activities.

Name: Vincent Micheli Grants (Salinas Land Grant on both sides of the
Sabine River)

Historic use type: Ranch
Description: The ranch on this land grant
connected to El Camino Real de los Tejas
and included fords of the Sabine River and
Borregas Creek. The land grant included
more than 27,000 acres of land on both sides
of the Sabine River.
Time period: 1797–1802
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Specific
location is not clear and more research is
necessary to link this site to trail activities.

Name: Rancho del Baño

Historic use type: Ranch
Description: Governor Jacinto de Barrios
Jaúregui was accused of charging for the
issue of land titles in 1954. He named this
ranch and four others (Rancho de Llano
Ondo, Rancho de los Tres Llanos, Rancho
de Pan y Agua, and Rancho de San José) as
examples that he did not charge to issue land
titles. These sites could be located in either
Louisiana or Texas since the governor at Los
Adaes had jurisdiction for the entire province.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Unclear
Reason for questionable status: Specific
location is not clear and more research is
necessary to link this site to trail activities.

Name: St. Denis’ Vâcherie

Historic use type: Ranch
Description: This site is associated with
Louis Juchereau de St. Denis.
Time period: first half of 18th century
Ownership: Public (Northwestern Louisiana State University)
Reason for questionable status: More historic information is needed to link this site to
St. Denis.

Sabine Parish
Name: Juan Maximillian Bayou Cie

Historic use type: Bayou
Description: The John Maximillian land
claim is bounded on the south by the claim
belonging to David Waltman, brother-inlaw of Guillaume Babe, and on the east by
the claim belonging to Patterson and Baucus. Maximillian was born at Las Cabañas.
It is said that, when he was eight years old,
he helped his Uncle Cabin (Charbonneau)
build the Cabin Road.
Time period: pre-1809
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Specific
location is not clear. More research is necessary to link this site to trail activities.

Name: Negreet Community

Historic use type: Village/town
Description: It was established in 1822 and
was located 12 miles southwest of Many.
Time period: 1822Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: The
relationship of the town to the period of
significance of the trail has not been clearly
established at the time this document s being
prepared.

Name: La Nana Ranch

Historic use type: Ranch
Description: The ranch was owned by William Barr and located south of El Camino
Real de los Tejas. In 1803, an outpost was
established by Spanish General Salved; by
1805, 10 Spanish troops were stationed here.
In 1806, they were expelled by American
General James Wilkinson.
Time period: 1800s
Page 199

A ppendixes

Ownership: Unclear
Reason for questionable status: Specific
location is not clear. More research is necessary to link this site to trail activities.

Ownership: Public (Sabine River Authority)
Reason for questionable status: The
resource is beneath the Toledo Bend Reservoir.

Sabine, Texas/
Sabine, Louisiana

TEXAS

Name: Crow’s Ferry

Historic use type: Sabine River crossing
Description: This ford of the Sabine River
is visible on 1936 aerial photographs. It was
in use until the river valley was flooded by
Toledo Bend Reservoir in the late 1960s.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Public (Sabine River Authority)
Reason for questionable status: The
resource is beneath the Toledo Bend Reservoir.

Name: Gaines’ Ferry

Historic use type: Sabine River crossing
Description: This ford of the Sabine River
is visible on 1936 aerial photographs. It was
in use until the river valley was flooded by
Toledo Bend Reservoir in the late 1960s.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Public (Sabine River Authority)
Reason for questionable status: The
resource is beneath the Toledo Bend Reservoir.

Atascosa County
Name: Atascosa River Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing
Description/Background: Research has
been done to try to identify the crossing
place for the Atascosa River because it may
be associated with the headquarters of the
Atascosa Ranch. Physical evidence of the
river crossing has not yet been found.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Unknown, but likely private
Reason for questionable status: Specific
location of this site is not known.

Name: Lagunilla Creek Swales

Historic use type: Sabine River crossing
Description: This ford of the Sabine River
is visible on 1936 aerial photographs. It was
in use until the river valley was flooded by
Toledo Bend Reservoir in the late 1960s.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Public (Sabine River Authority)
Reason for questionable status: The
resource is beneath the Toledo Bend Reservoir.

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description/Background: Clark states that
segments of undisturbed road were found
on either side of Lagunilla Creek. According
to Pressler’s (1867) travel map, the only route
that would have crossed Lagunilla Creek
would have been the Lower Presidio Road,
which should have passed the creek in the
vicinity of present-day Charlotte. This route
would have likely followed a general alignment similar to present day SH 97 and SH85/
FM140 in this general area.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Unknown, but likely private
Reason for questionable status: Specific
location of this site is not known.

Name: Patterson’s Ferry

Name: Poteet Segment

Name: Paso de las Sabinas

Historic use type: Sabine River crossing
Description: This ford of the Sabine River
is visible on 1936 aerial photographs. It was
in use until the river valley was flooded by
Toledo Bend Reservoir in the late 1960s.
Time period: 1800s
Page 200

Sites

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description/Background: This trail segment
is possibly associated with the headquarters
of Atascosa Ranch.
Time period: 1600s
Ownership: Mostly private

Appendix F: Additional Sites and Segments That Could be Eligible for Inclusion

Reason for questionable status: The
relationship of this segment to the trail during the period of significance needs to be
established. This segment is about 4 miles in
length. Evaluating team did not have the opportunity to view during visits to the area.

Bastrop County
Name: Bastrop State Park

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: Unclear
Time period: Unclear
Ownership: Public (Texas Parks and Wildlife Department)
Reason for questionable status: Additional historic information is necessary to
link this site to the period of significance of
the trail.

Name: Bastrop Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing near fort
Description/Background: This river crossing may have been associated with a garrison
at a ford on the Colorado River in presentday Bastrop. Archeological evidence of an
undisturbed road segment has been recorded as No. 41BP85; however, the garrison has
not been confirmed.
Time period: Unclear
Ownership: Public (city of Bastrop)
Reason for questionable status: Specific
location of this site is not known; further
research is necessary to understand the site
and its relationship to the trail.

Bexar County
Name: Cassín Crossing/Rancho de
Costales west boundary

Historic use type: River crossing/paraje
Description: The names Cassin and Cassin
Siding appear on maps on either side of the
river, near the town of Earle, which corresponds with the two sites. Modern aerial
photographs of Earle show a possible ford
east of/parallel to Pleasanton Road. McGraw
and Hindes note that Johnson and Ward’s
1866 map shows the San Antonio–Laredo
Road merging with the Presidio del Rio
Grande Road in this vicinity; however, they
note that the actual fork in the road was far-

ther south, based on Roessler’s map of 1865.
This crossing is said to be on the “Atascosa”
route to the Río Grande. The name itself describes the area as a boggy barrier to travel,
and a wide right-of-way may have been
necessary to ensure the two roads could be
passable under extreme wet-weather conditions.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Unknown
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is necessary to link this site with the
designated trail.

Name: Concepción Creek Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: Ivey notes that mission records
indicate that pasture lands granted to Mission Concepción extended to “the ford of
the arroyo at the edge of the lands of Mission San José.” Ivey interprets the arroyo to
be Concepción Creek and mentions a river
crossing at Concepción dam. He states that
Presa Street is named for the Concepción
dam. Presa Street follows the alignment of
the road labeled Camino de la Bahía del
Espíritu Santo on Menchaca’s 1764 map.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: San Antonio River Authority
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is necessary to establish the specific
geographic location of this site.

Name: El Monte/Monte Galván

Historic use type: Ranch
Description: This ranch is one of several
belonging to Mission San Antonio de Valero,
and is located northeast of the mission. A
report in 1762 notes that a stone house and
chapel were associated with the ranch; the
description may have referred to the site as la
Mora or el Monte. One of the boundaries of
the ranch may have been an upper route to
La Bahia. The ranch extended from Salado
Creek, on the west, to Cibolo Creek, on the
northeast, and possibly to Martinez Creek,
in eastern Bexar County. McGraw believes
the El Camino de los Tejas/Nacogdoches
Road may have been one of the boundaries. Ivey states that the northern boundary
of the ranch was probably Rosillo Creek,
near the town of Kirby in northeast Bexar
Page 201

A ppendixes

County. The mission lands of San Antonio
de Valero were bordered on the south by the
Compuerta de Concepción (sluice-gate of
Mission Concepción), extending to a ford
where an upper road to La Bahia crossed
Salado Creek. The so-called Cabello 1780
map shows two crossings of Salado Creek.
The map is extremely inaccurate in that area,
but it shows a road extending from Cibolo
Creek to Mission San Antonio Valero. DeLorme maps show a foot trail that was visible
at least once in recent history. The foot trail
extends from the area depicted as a ranch on
Cibolo Creek, near La Vernia or Sutherland
Springs (probably Rancho Paistle). It follows
the creek for approximately 30 miles and
connects with Houston/Commerce streets
in San Antonio. Extrapolating from this, it
would likely run directly west toward Mission Valero, crossing the Salado Creek. The
contemporary Delorme map shows a route
named Camino de los Mochos following the
alignment of Commerce Street on a modern map generated from 1837 maps of San
Antonio.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Unknown
Reason for questionable status: The
evaluating team was not able to access this
site and its integrity could not be verified.

Reason for questionable status: Further
research on this site is needed to associate it
with the period of significance of the trail.

Name: Losoya Crossing

Name: Paso de la Garza/Garza’s
Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This crossing of the Medina
River was identified by Stephen F. Austin as
one league west of the San Antonio/Medina
confluence in the vicinity of Losoya.
Time period: 1700s-1800s
Ownership: Public (City of San Antonio)
Reason for questionable status: Further
research on this site is needed to associate it
with the period of significance of the trail.

Name: Loma de Padrón

Historic use type: Natural landmark
Description: Site might have been used as
a landmark in determining the boundaries
of Rancho San Lucas of Mission San José in
a dispute involving Fray Pedro Ramírez de
Arellano.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Public (City of San Antonio
landmark)
Page 202

Name: Nogalitos Ford

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: Ivey notes that this is a ford
on San Pedro Creek in Bexar County mentioned in mission records. Based on his
description of the location, this appears to
be a different crossing from the Nogales
Crossing.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Unknown
Reason for questionable status: Further
historic research is necessary to link this site
with trail; the location has not been verified.

Name: Olmos Basin Road Segment

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: A branch of the old Nacogdoches Road used to run from Olmos Dam to
Hildebrand Avenue. The trail segment can
be seen from the right-of-way.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Further
historical research is necessary to link this
site with the period of significance of the
trail.

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This is a ford of the Medina
River along the Upper Laredo Road, located
near present-day Somerset Road. Garza’s
Crossing was the name of the first post office (1872) in the modern community of Von
Ormy.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Unclear
Reason for questionable status: Further
historical research is necessary to link this
site with the period of significance of the
trail.

Name: Talón Crossing/Paso de Talón/
Pampopa

Historic use type: River crossing/paraje
Description: Records indicate that this ford

Appendix F: Additional Sites and Segments That Could be Eligible for Inclusion

and rest stop were part of the Ranchería of
the Pampopa, which was well known historically. It is also a historic site with ruins.
Time period: pre-1700s
Ownership: Unknown
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is necessary to link this site with
trail; the location has not been verified.

Name: Upper Presidio Road Crossing
of the Medina River

Historic use type: Medina River Crossing
Description: This ford is located at a giant bend in the Medina River and offered a
more predictable crossing place of the river.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Specific
historic information is necessary to link this
site with the trail.

Brazos County
Name: Navasota River Swales

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This trail segment is located
between the irrigation ditch and the Old
San Antonio Road, leading west into Brazos
County. It runs through dense forest, between the barbed wire fence and the cleared
Old San Antonio Road right-of-way. The
swale is very shallow and rally faint: the trace
varies in depth between 20 and 45 centimeters, sometimes only on one side for about
200 meters. It ascends a slight slope. Other
small drainage features that also crosscut the
shallow swale. This is a very good example
of Major Ivey’s 1916–1917 work in locating
the old road because the Daughters of the
American Revolution marker is right on the
north side of the old road. Satellite imagery indicates this forested area between the
fence line and the Old San Antonio Road
may be Brazos County or Texas Department of Transportation property because
the only fence line is south of the old road.
There used to be a modern rest stop at this
location, with several run-down stone picnic
tables. The old road becomes a deep swale
as it heads west. The deepest area reaches a
depth in excess of 15 feet and is more than
20 feet wide. About one-quarter mile west

from the Daughters of the American Revolution marker, the swale braids out into three
parallel swales. They run almost one-half
mile before topping the rise to the west and
disappear into the present alignment of the
Old San Antonio Road.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is necessary to document the association of this site to the period of significance of the trail.

Burleson County
Name: Moseley’s Ferry

Historic use type: River crossing/paraje
Description: This is a multicomponent site
at a natural ford, which was later made into
a ferry station (1846–1912). It is not known if
this river crossing is on the main route or on
a connecting route. More research is needed
to determine if it was used during the Spanish Colonial period.
Time period: Unclear
Ownership: Public (Texas Department of
Transportation)
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is necessary to document the site.

Cherokee County
Name: Alto Swales

Historic use type: Road segment
Description: Unclear
Time period: Unclear
Ownership: Private?
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is necessary to document this site
and its relationship to the trail.

Name: Indian Mound Spring

Historic use type: Spring/paraje
Description: Unclear
Time period: pre-1700s
Ownership: Public (Texas Historical Commission)
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is necessary to document this site
and its relationship to the trail.

Page 203

A ppendixes

DeWitt County
Name: Vado de los Adaesanos

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This was a crossing used by
several Spanish expeditions in the late 1600s
and early 1700s. The site also appears on
Manuel Agustín Mascoro’s map. It is on the
west side of the Guadalupe River, approximately 11 miles northwest of Cuero.
Time period: 1680s-1700s
Ownership: Private.
Reason for questionable status: The
specific location of this site has not been
archeologically verified. Additional research
is necessary to confirm the use of this site
during the period of significance of the trail.

Name: Camp Cuero

Historic use type: Spring/camp site
Description: This paraje is located approximately 5-6 miles from present day Cuero.
After crossing the Guadalupe in 1689 Fray
Gaspar José de Solís continued a short distance to the camp site that was well known
to his Indian guides.
Time period: 1680s-1700s
Ownership: Private/unclear
Reason for questionable status: The
specific location of this site has not been
archeologically verified. Additional research
is necessary to confirm the use of this site
during the period of significance of the trail.

Name: Vado del Gobernador

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This crossing of the Guadalupe
River is located near the present-day bridge
on Highway # 183 about two miles south of
the city of Cuero. According to local sources
the name gobernador was given to this
crossing because governors had crossed the
river at this location on expeditions in 1689,
1690, and 1693. It was at this crossing that
Alonso de León named the river, Our Lady
of Guadalupe. This crossing has been identified by name on Manuel Agustín Mascoro’s
map.
Time period: 1680s-1700s
Ownership: Private/unclear
Reason for questionable status: The location of this site has not been archeologically
Page 204

verified. Additional research is necessary to
confirm the use of this site during the period
of significance of the trail.

Dimmitt County
Name: Espantosa County Park

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: (on Road 1433, off highway 83).
There appears to be no visible trail remnants and no archeological investigations
that would confirm its period of use and
its relationship to the trail. Further archival
research, remote sensing and archaeological investigations in the area could come up
with information directly linking this immediate area with the crossing of the creek. The
site is in public land, and if future investigations can definitely tie it to the trail, it could
be considered high potential.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Public (Dimmit County)
Reason for questionable status: The location of this has not been archeologically
verified. Additional research is necessary to
confirm the use of this site during the period
of significance of the trail.

Name: Laguna Espantosa/Espantosa

Historic use type: Paraje
Description: Clark and McGraw noted that
this paraje was referenced in multiple historic documents, and that they were able to
locate it. Espantosa appears on GLO County
Sketch No. 11337. A 1973 report mentions the
site as a famous camping ground on one of
the earliest route between Texas and Coahuila.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Further
investigation is needed to determine its association with the trail.

Name: Presidio Crossing (Nueces
River)

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: on Road 1433, off highway 83).
There appears to be no visible trail remnants
although Richard thinks that there might be
something across the river and in the park itself. There are currently no archeological in-

Appendix F: Additional Sites and Segments That Could be Eligible for Inclusion

vestigations that would confirm its period of
use and its relationship to the trail. The site is
located on a county road that continues on
from the Espantosa County Park road. There
are plans to build a trail on the west bank of
the river to link this site with Midway Park,
another Dimmit County Park.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: The location of this has not been archeologically
verified. Additional research is necessary to
confirm the use of this site during the period
of significance of the trail.

Name: Midway County Park

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: (on Road 1433, off highway
83). There appears to be no visible trail
remnants and no archeological investigations that would confirm its period of use
and its relationship to the trail. It is located
on a county road. There are plans to build
a trail on the west bank of the river to link
this site with Presidio County The owner is
considering allowing the county to construct
a recreational trail connecting Midway to
Espantosa Creek. Local trail advocates have
indicated that somewhere between the two
places there is a historic paraje.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: The location of this has not been archeologically
verified. Additional research is necessary to
confirm the use of this site during the period
of significance of the trail.

Frio County
Name: Frio County road with associated artifacts and features

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: Located roughly where the
Lower Presidio Road is expected to have
crossed Frio County, this site is described
as a hard-packed road surface with a hearth
and lithic tools.
Time period: Not clear
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Site
should be revisited to confirm its location

and condition; evaluating team was not given
permission to enter this site; further research
is necessary to confirm its relationship to the
trail.

Goliad County
Name: Villa La Bahia

Historic use type: Village
Description: This was the Spanish village
associated with Presidio La Bahia and Mission Espíritu Santo and Mission Rosario in
Goliad County.
Time period: 1749–1821
Ownership: Unknown
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is necessary to document this site;
the location has not been verified.

Hays County
Name: Manchaca Springs

Historic use type: Spring/paraje
Description: Unclear
Time period: Unclear
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is necessary to document this site
and its relationship to the trail.

Name: Redwood Road Ruts

Historic use type: Trail swales
Description: These trail swales are on both
the east and west sides of the road.
Time period: 1600s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is necessary to document this site
and its relationship to the trail.

Name: Stagecoach Park

Historic use type: Swales and river crossing
(tributary of Onion Creek)
Description: This site has impressive swales
that have left indentations on the stones by
the creek.
Time period: 1690s
Ownership: Public (Hays County)
Reason for questionable status: Although
this is an excellent site, at the time this document was being prepared there was not
enough historic information linking it with
the period of significance of the trail.
Page 205

A ppendixes

Name: Uhland Road Segment (near
Kyle) – Plum Creek

Historic use type: Trail swales
Description: This swale is partially paved,
but it has retained some integrity of setting.
Time period: 1690s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: There is
not enough historic information at this time
linking the segment to the period of significance of the trail.

Houston County
Name: Box Creek Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: According to Dr. James Corbin,
there was a ford at the Box Creek confluence
with the Neches.
Time period: 1600s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is needed to pinpoint the location
of the creek crossing and establish a clear
relationship to the trail.

Karnes County
Name: Brockman Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: Not clear
Time period: Not clear
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is needed to establish the time
period for this river crossing and its relationship to the trail.

Name: Conquista Crossing and Swales

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This ford of the San Antonio
River is located at a distinct bend in the river.
According to information on an 1867 travel
map, the ford seems to have been located
at the junction of the Laredo Road (just
south of its junction with the Lower Presidio
Road) and the road to Goliad County on the
west bank. The route crossed the river to the
east bank to join the road to Goliad. By 1867,
therefore, the ford sat at the junction of at
least three roads, and two of these roads are
designated routes of the trail. The site has
Page 206

a remarkable degree of visual integrity, and
several swales are evident on both sides of
the river. This crossing may have been associated with Mission San Antonio de Valero’s
Rancho de la Mora.
Time period: Not clear
Ownership: Private.
Reason for questionable status: This is a
beautiful site, but it is not clear that it can be
linked to the period of significance of the
trail. More research is necessary to clarify
this question.

Name: Rancho Cibolo [Rancho] del
Castro (with river crossing)

Historic use type: Ranch headquarters
Description: The site is a possible rancho or
may have been an extension of the military
settlement of Santa Cruz de Cibolo. In historic studies, fuertes are described as “military towns” and may have had multiple sites.
It is possible that this site predates the other,
because it is not known if the 1735–1737 occupation was at the same site as the 1770s
occupation.
Time period: 1735–1778
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is needed to establish the time period when this site was used and its location.

Name: Site Associated with Fuerte del
Cibolo

Historic use type: Fort
Description: This site contains a tomb associated with the Fuerte del Cibolo. Both have
been excavated, and their significance is well
documented. This site is located more than
one-half mile from the congressionally designated El Camino Real de los Tejas National
Historic Trail; however, the Cabello and
other maps, as well as historic documents,
indicate that this was a site on the main historic trail from Bexar to La Bahia.
Time period: 1770 or 1780s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is needed to establish its relationship to the trail.

Appendix F: Additional Sites and Segments That Could be Eligible for Inclusion

La Salle County
Name: Frio River Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This location, if it is a Spanish
Colonial–period crossing, would have been
on the Laredo Road.
Time period: Not clear
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is needed to establish the time
period when this crossing was used and its
location.

Name: La Salle County Trail Segment

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This location, if it is a Spanish
Colonial–period trail segment, would have
been on the Laredo Road.
Time period: Not clear
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is needed to establish the time
period when this segment was used and its
specific location.

Name: Cotulla at Mustang Creek

Historic use type: Creek crossing
Description: This segment is located in the
city of Cotulla itself (Pecos and Poole Streets
at Mustang Creek). Trail remnants appear
to cross the creek and the road itself seems
to have been built on top of the trail. There
are no visible trail remnants and no archeological investigations that would confirm its
period of use and its relationship to the trail.
The city of Cotulla plans to acquire some
property along the creek and develop the
site.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Further
research is needed to establish the time
period when this segment was used and its
relationship to the trail during the period of
significance.

Lavaca County
Name: Crossing on Mustang Creek

Historic use type: Creek crossing
Description: This crossing is south of the

community of Shiner.
Time period: Unclear
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Historical
information is necessary to link this site to
the period of significance for the trail.

Name: La Cabeza

Historic use type: Creek crossing
Description: This crossing is northwest
of the community of Shiner at the head of
Boggy Creek. This crossing was used when
the lower crossing had too much water.
Time period: Unclear
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Historical
information is necessary to link this site to
the period of significance for the trail.

Name: La Vaca Crossing

Historic use type: Creek crossing
Description: This crossing is near the community of Moulton..
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Historical
information is necessary to link this site to
the period of significance for the trail.

Name: Los Ramitos Camp/Crossing

Historic use type: Camp and creek crossing
Description: There is not enough information on this site at this time.
Time period: Unclear
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Historical
information is necessary to link this site to
the period of significance for the trail.

Lee County
Name: The Knobs

Historic use type: Natural landmark
Description: This is a natural landmark that
is visible for a considerable distance.
Time period: 1600–1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Historical
information is necessary to associate site to
the period of significance for the trail.

Page 207

A ppendixes

Name: West Yegua Swale

Historic use type: Road swale
Description: This road swale is a well-identified crossing of West Yegua Creek, east of
current SR21 in the old community of Lincoln.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Historical
information is necessary to link this site to
the period of significance for the trail.

Leon County
Name: Dillard’s Trace

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: The trail segment is in a wooded location, with an old road running north
of Black Lake.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Historical
information is necessary to link this site to
the period of significance for the trail.

Name: Fort Boggy State Park Swales

Historic use type: trail segment
Description: These trail segments were
recorded in a report by Corbin. The road
segment would have run perpendicular to
the trail, and it is unclear if these swales predate the 1839 establishment of Fort Boggy.
All archeological sites and historic structures
recorded along these trail segments date to
the mid- to late-1800s. A state historic marker indicates that pioneers settled in this area
about 1840. Nearby, Kowhai and Kakapo
Indian camps afforded these early settlers
little sense of security. On February 5, 1840,
Christopher C. Staley was ambushed and
killed by a group of Indians while out hunting near his home. This incident led to the
construction of Fort Boggy for the protection and safety of the settlers. Named for its
proximity to Boggy Creek, the fort consisted
of two blockhouses with 11 dwellings inside a
footprint of about 5,000 square feet. A military company, authorized by Texas president
Mirabeau B. Lamar, was formed to protect
the fort under the leadership of Captain
Thomas Greer. According to one account, 77
people moved into the fort upon its complePage 208

tion, but many were struck by illness. The
following year, Captain Greer was killed in
an Indian attack while leading a scouting
party beyond the fort. Soon after, the threat
of raids lessened and Fort Boggy languished.
For many years, a community church and
school retained the name “Boggy.” As an
aid in the early settlement of this area, Fort
Boggy remains significant to the history of
Leon County.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Public (Texas Parks and Wildlife Department)
Reason for questionable status: Research
conducted while this document was being
prepared appears to indicate that the swales
are outside the period of significance of the
trail.

Madison County
Name: Madison Swale

Historic use type: trail segment
Description: This trail segment is a shallow
swale leading out of Navasota River.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Historical
information is necessary to link the site to
the period of significance for the trail.

McMullen County
Name: Herrera’s Road

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This is a variation of the Laredo Road referenced in early 19th-century
maps. TSLAC map no. 1608 (ca. 1810–1820)
dates the road at 1805. The source of the
road name is slightly more confusing. In
1805, both the outgoing governor and incoming governor of Nuevo Leon had the
name Herrera. The outgoing governor, Simon de Herrera, transferred to Texas in 1805,
so it was likely a reference to him. This road
seems to be generally in the same alignment
as the designated Laredo Road, with the exception of a segment in McMullen County,
where the road travels in a more northeasterly direction than the designated trail. The
two roads meet at a point on the Frio River
generally aligned with FM99, within Choke

Appendix F: Additional Sites and Segments That Could be Eligible for Inclusion

Canyon Reservoir in the northeastern corner of that county. The meeting point would
have likely been a ford associated with a rock
formation known locally as Rock Falls (see
entry below). From Rock Falls, the route
would have turned northward to join the
designated trail.
Time period: 1805
Ownership: Unknown
Reason for questionable status: The
evaluating team was unable to visit area. It is
not clear if the trail segment is visible above
water or under Choke Canyon Reservoir.

Name: Rock Falls Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: A bedrock formation formed
a pavement in the Frio River in McMullen
County to create a natural ford. The crossing is likely submerged under Choke Canyon
Reservoir.
Time period: 1805
Ownership: Public (Choke Canyon Reservoir)
Reason for questionable status: The
evaluating team was unable to visit area. It
is not clear if the segment is above water or
under Choke Canyon Reservoir.

Medina County
Name: Chacon Creek Crossing, Upper
Presidio Road

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This resource was located in
the field, using General Land Office maps
(especially GLO no. 31454). The site is a
sandstone or sandy limestone ford, which
forms a natural impoundment of Goose
Creek at its confluence with Chacon Creek.
A few lithic artifacts were observed in the
general area. The site was visited in June
2008, but overgrown vegetation prevented
a thorough investigation. Another visit is
recommended in winter, after vegetation has
died back.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: The
evaluating team was unable to visit the crossing; the researcher who visited area in 2008
reported that overgrown vegetation prevented thorough investigations.

Name: Hondo Creek Crossing

Historic use type: River crossing
Description: This creek crossing has a nearby Indian petroglyph and historic carvings.
Time period: 1600s–1800s
Ownership: Unknown
Reason for questionable status: The evaluating team was unable to visit the crossing;
its exact location needs to be confirmed.

Name: Landmark Inn Complex

Historic use type: River crossing
Description:
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Public (Texas Historical Commission)
Reason for questionable status: More information is needed in order to link the site
to the period of significance for the trail.

Name: Medina County Trail Segment

Historic use type: Trail Segment
Description: This is a trail segment that
Al McGraw identified in the field in 1991,
probably near the Hondo Crossing near FM
2200.
Time period: 1600s
Ownership: Unknown
Reason for questionable status: The
evaluating team was unable to visit the trail
segment; its exact location needs to be confirmed.

Milam County
Name: Ranchería Grande

Historic use type: American Indian Village/
Paraje
Description: Ranchería grande was a Spanish term used to describe the association of
several large American Indian villages where
multiple tribes settled together. There are
two such sites in Milam County. At least
one of them figures very prominently in the
trail’s history. It was visited at least as early as
1721 by the Aguayo Expedition, and a paraje,
or rest stop, grew up here. The presence of
these affiliated Indian villages is likely one of
the reasons that Milam County was chosen
as a mission site, beginning in 1746; however,
no one has recorded this site.
Time period: pre-1700s
Page 209

A ppendixes

Ownership: Unknown
Reason for questionable status: The location of this ranchería grande has not been
clearly established.

Nacogdoches County
Name: Barr and Davenport Rancho

Historic use type: Ranch
Description:
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Historical
information is needed to link this site to the
period of significance for the trail.

Name: Byrd’s Trace

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: A trail swale travels north of
SR21 and makes a north-south road intersection leading to an upper and parallel old
road.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Historical
information is needed to link this site to the
period of significance for the trail.

Name: Eden Swales

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This trail segment exhibits old
swales located using LIDAR remote-sensing
technology.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail. Recent archeological investigations
have identified the site of Mission Concepción in the vicinity of these swales.

Name: Legg Plantation Swales

Historic use type: Trail swales
Description: These old swales were located
using LIDAR remote-sensing technology
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.
Page 210

Name: Mayhew Site

Historic use type: Village/town
Description: This is a late, possibly historic,
American Indian site located near the trail.
Time period: pre-1700s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.
Name: Melrose Swales
Historic use type: Trail swales
Description: Legal deed shows “OSR” information on plat map.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Private
Comment: Owner would be interested in
working with trail administration to interpret the site.
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to link the
site to the period of significance for the trail.

Nacogdoches/Cherokee
Counties
Name: Concepción Crossing

Historic use type: Angelina River crossing
Description: This is a hard-rock crossing of
the Angelina River near a very narrow portion of river.
Time period: 1600–1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Robertson County
Name: Burnett Shoals

Historic use type: Brazos River crossing
Description: Swales lead to and from this
shallow natural ford of the Brazos River.
Time period: 1600–1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Appendix F: Additional Sites and Segments That Could be Eligible for Inclusion

Name: Iron Mountain

Historic use type: Natural landmark
Description: Iron Mountain displays old
swales located using LIDAR remote-sensing
technology.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Robertson/Leon Counties
Name: Grayson’s Crossing

Historic use type: Navasota River crossing
Description: This ford of the Navasota River
heads directly towards the Kickapoo Crossing of the Trinity River, farther to the east.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Sabine County
Name: Camino Carretera

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: This road segment dates back
to 1818.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Name: County Line Swales

Historic use type: Trail swale
Description: This site has two parallel swales
cross-cut by SR21 and is threatened by the
expansion of SR 21 right-of-way.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Name: Gazby/New Zion Swales

Historic use type: Trail swale
Description: This site displays deep parallel
swales indicating single-file travel.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Name: Geneva Swales

Historic use type: Trail swale
Description: The site contains a trail swale
next to SR 21 that leads to Carter’s Ferry
Road.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Name: La Cuesta Alta

Historic use type: Natural landmark
Description: This cuesta, or knoll, is a high
point over the Sabine River bottom that contains swales running between two hills.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Name: Lucky Loop Swales

Historic use type: Trail swales
Description: These parallel trail swales
are found in the front yard of an occupied
house.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Name: Milam Swales

Historic use type: Trail swales
Description: Segments of this route have
been mapped and recorded as dating to 1818.
Time period: 1800s
Page 211

A ppendixes

Ownership: Multiple
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Name: Pendleton Swales

Name: Skillern’s Trace

Historic use type: Trail swales
Description: These parallel swales lead from
the shoreline of Toledo Bend Reservoir towards the 1800s Gaines-Oliphant House.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Sabine/San Augustine Counties
Name: Attoyac crossing

Historic use type: Attoyac Bayou crossing
Description: This hard-rock ford was identified by an elderly informant interviewed and
videotaped by the Stone Fort Museum.
Time period: 1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: There is
no historical information to link this specific
crossing to the period of significance for the
trail.

San Augustine County
Name: Niciper Swales

Historic use type: Road swale
Description: The old road swung south
away from the present SR21 road alignment.
It parallels CR256, curving back and forth.
There road swales on both sides of CR 256.
Time period: 1700–1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Name: San Augustine Swales

Historic use type: Road swale
Description: This road swale is south of East
Planters Road and runs behind individual
properties.
Time period: 1800
Page 212

Historic use type: Road swale
Description: Kenneth Skillern mapped an
old road across his property and an adjoining property.
Time period: 1800
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to
link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Travis County
Name: Arroyo de las Garrapatas

Historic use type: Paraje
Description: The Arroyo de las Garrapatas
paraje was first described in 1709 by Father
Espinosa with the Olivares-Aguirre Expedition, and it is mentioned in several other
Spanish texts. A creek named Garrapatas,
off Texas’ Colorado River, can be seen on
Stephen F. Austin’s 1829 map of the area, but
it is shown to be north of his “Camino de
Arriba.” Clark and McGraw (1991) noted that
it was referenced in multiple historic documents. More research is needed to confirm
the exact location of this paraje. It is located
along Onion Creek and I-35. Two crossings
are found in the area. They are recorded as
site no. 41TV411 (which includes historic
graffiti) and no. 41TV431. Site no. TV431 is
located on Burleson Road.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Not clear
Reason for questionable status: The location of this paraje needs to be verified.

Name: Pilot Knob

Historic use type: Natural landmark
Description: This natural feature would
have been visible to trail users from many
miles away.
Time period: 1600–1800s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: Additional historical information is needed to

Appendix F: Additional Sites and Segments That Could be Eligible for Inclusion

link this site to the period of significance for
the trail.

Webb County
Name: El Paso de las Mujeres/Santa
Cruz y Paso de las Mujeres/Calvillo
Ranch

Historic use type: River crossing/paraje
Description: This was a ranch at a ford
between the west bank and east bank routes
of the Bexar–La Bahia Road. The secular
ranch was leased to the Calvillo family at
least as early as 1774 (see Rancho de Las
Cabras landscape study in NPS San Antonio
National Historical Park files). The name “El
Paso de las Mujeres” is referenced repeatedly in land grants, and a house just north
of the crossing is shown on a General Land
Office sketch (GLO no. 1034436) at least as
early as 1838. This appears to be the same location as a ranch headquarters depicted on
a map that has been attributed to Domingo
Cabello, ca. 1780 (see Jackson 2003).
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: The location of the ford needs to be confirmed.

Wilson County
Name: LODI

Historic use type: Village/town
Description: The historic marker text for
Lodi has “41WN64” handwritten on it. The
marker is more than a mile from this site,
according the Texas Historical Commission
Historical Atlas. The site is located on the
San Antonio River. It is at the end of a road
with a marker describing a ferry supposedly used in the 1870s. The site is adjacent
to a historic cemetery (mid-1800s) that also
has had a new marker erected this year. The
site was recorded as an Anglo site with stone
ruins. It is possible that the site was inhabited earlier than the ferry markers indicate.
The Lodi marker refers to the townsite being
inhabited in the 1700s, which would likely
have been the Mission San Juan ranch of
Pataguilla. Colonel Jesse Pérez says the ferry
location was the same as the river crossing
that is known locally as “Paso de los Mu-

jeres,” which is located on private land.
Time period: 1700s
Ownership: Private
Reason for questionable status: The location of this site needs to be confirmed.

Name: Rancho de Pistole (Rancho
Pastle, Moss Ranch)

Historic use type: Ranch
Description: This ranch belonged to Mission Concepción. According to information
received during the public review period,
this site can be confirmed by documents.
However, a search through the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Historical and
Archeological Atlases as well as Texas Beyond History and the Handbook of Texas
Online yielded no information linking this
site to the period of significance of the trail.
Time period: 1700s?
Ownership: Unknown
Reason for questionable status: The location of the ranch needs to be confirmed; additional research is necessary to link the site
to the period of significance of the trail.

Name: Rancho de San Rafael de Pataguilla/Patoquilla/Palahuilla (see also
Lodi)

Historic use type: Ranch
Description: This ranch belonged to Mission
San Juan Capistrano. In 1768, Solis visited the
ranch headquarters, which was located on
the east bank of the San Antonio River. The
site has not been confirmed archeologically,
but historical maps place it near the historic
town site of Lodi, possibly near either the
crossing known as Paso de las Mujeres” or
“Caballo Crossing.” The ranch was deeded
to Simón de Arocha in 1791.
Time period: 1758
Ownership: Unknown
Reason for questionable status: The location of the ranch site needs to be confirmed.

Name: Seguín Trace

Historic use type: Trail segment
Description: The Cabello Map (ca. 1780?)
depicts a road going to an area that appears
to be Gray Crossing. People from Wilson
County believe that Seguín Trace crossed at
Gray Crossing. They noted that Gray CrossPage 213

A ppendixes

ing is just below Rocky Ford, which is also
known a Peacock Crossing. Wilson County
provided a map of Seguín Trace, noting that
the original source/documentation was not
known. The map depicts the same route as
the Cabello Map. This would have been a
connecting route, likely used to access one
of the sites at Fuerte del Cibolo. The fort
location would probably have been between
Gray Crossing and a hot springs known
locally as Ojo de Santa Cruz—the original
name of the town of Sutherland Springs.
Note that one of the names for Fuerte del
Cibolo is Fuerte de Santa Cruz.
Time period: 1774
Ownership: Unknown
Reason for questionable status: The location of this trail segment needs to be confirmed.

Page 214

APPENDIX G: SAMPLE COOPERATIVE AGREEMENT

Cooperative Agreement
Between the

National Park Service

National Trails Intermountain Region
And the
Texas Historical Commission
ARTICLE I. BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES
A. This Agreement is entered into by and between the UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF
THE INTERIOR, NATIONAL PARK SERVICE, hereinafter referred to as “the Service,”
and the TEXAS HISTORICAL COMMISSION, hereinafter referred to as “the Commission.”
B. Through this Agreement, the parties wish to:
1. Exchange their knowledge, skills, and resources to promote, recognize, and preserve the
significant historical and recreational resources related to El Camino Real de los Tejas
National Historic Trail, hereinafter referred to as "the Trail."
ARTICLE II. AUTHORITY
WHEREAS, the Service is the Federal agency assigned the principal responsibility of
administering the Trail which provides for the identification, documentation, preservation, and
interpretation of the Trail’s historic buildings, sites, objects, structures, and districts, in Texas
and Louisiana; and
WHEREAS, the objectives of the Commission are to promote preservation and heritage tourism
in the State of Texas, and to do all things necessary to accomplish this purpose; and
WHEREAS the Commission shall, as provided for by Section 442.021 of the Government Code
of Texas establish by the Texas legislature through H.B. 3269 and signed by the governor on
6/18/2005, "administer and coordinate the efforts of state and local public and private entities in
[Texas] regarding the preservation of" [the Trail], and shall develop educational and interpretive
programs relating to" the Trail.
WHEREAS, the roles of the two organizations are complimentary in the area of historic
preservation and in carrying out these roles the two entities have developed complimentary
expertise and experience,

Page 215

A ppendixes

WHEREAS, the National Trails System Act of 1968, as amended, 16 U.S.C. § 1241 et seq,
provides for the promotion of trail resource preservation, provisions for recreational access and
travel opportunities on the trail, promotion of enjoyment and appreciation of the trails and their
related resources, and empowerment of individuals and groups in trail development.
WHEREAS, the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, 16 U.S.C. § 470 et
seq., provides for the dissemination of information about historic preservation and encourages
the long range preservation of nationally significant properties; and
WHEREAS, the Historic Sites Act of 1935, 16 U.S.C. § 461 et seq., directs the Service to make
necessary investigations and researches in the United States relating to particular sites, buildings,
or objects to obtain true historical and archeological facts and information concerning the same,
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the above premises and in the interest of mutual
advantage in attainment of common objectives, the parties agree as follows:
ARTICLE III. STATEMENT OF WORK
A. The Commission agrees to:
1. Work cooperatively with the Service in the fields of Trail preservation, marketing, and
education
2. Promote and publicize the Trail through its agency networks which include its newsletter,
list-serves, website, and other public outreach programs.
3. Undertake and perform in a professional manner additional work or projects related to
historic preservation in Texas in accordance with Task Agreements executed by the parties
under article VI of this agreement.
4. Participate with the Service in joint strategic, interpretive, and other planning for the Trail
and assist in setting of priorities for joint efforts and assuming responsibility to take the lead
on implementation, as appropriate.
5. Assist with developing visitor use opportunities and support facilities, including educational
and interpretive opportunities for the public on and helping to insure that educational and
interpretive efforts are accurate and sensitively done and that the necessary consultation has
occurred.
B. The Service agrees to:
1. Work cooperatively with the Commission to help it achieve its legislated mandates with
respect to the Trail in the State of Texas.

Page 216

Appendix G: Sample Cooperative Agreement

2. Involve the Commission in a meaningful way in the development of the Comprehensive
Management and Use Plan for the Trail to the extent permitted under Federal law
3. Assist the Commission by allowing use of the El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic
Trail marker for appropriate purposes, once it is developed, as requested in writing.
4. Provide financial support to the Commission for additional work or projects related to
historic preservation in Texas in accordance with Task Agreements executed by the parties
under article VI of this agreement.
5. Assist the Commission by facilitating joint planning in order to carry out joint trail programs
and assist in setting of priorities for joint efforts,
C. The Service and the Commission agree to:
1. Promote the sharing of information, knowledge, and methodology among public officials,
private organizations, educators, and individuals active in the fields of history, archeology,
historic preservation, cultural resources management, and interpretation by means of
seminars, conferences, workshops, site visits, lectures, and symposia related to the Trail.
2. Assist each other in efforts to obtain cooperation and assistance from other federal, state, and
local, agencies; organizations; elected officials; or individuals to help advance trail purposes.
3. Evaluate, redesign, and develop educational and interpretive research, exhibits, films,
publications, and other public media for the Trail.
4. Share resources, facilities, information and expertise to enhance the public’s understanding
of history and historic preservation of the Trail.
5. Design a research agenda and projects, undertake research and review its quality to enhance
mutual awareness of the value of, and access to, the Service’s historic preservation efforts for
the Trail.
6. Share Trail technical information, educational materials, and research results with historic
preservationists and the public.
ARTICLE IV. TERM OF AGREEMENT
1. This Agreement shall become effective on the date of the last signature on this document and
shall continue in full force and effect for a period of five (5) years unless terminated earlier in
accordance with Article X of this Agreement.
ARTICLE IV. KEY OFFICIALS

Page 217

A ppendixes

The key officials specified in this Agreement are considered to be important to ensure maximum
coordination and communication between the parties and the work being performed hereunder. However,
upon written notice, either party may designate an alternate to act in the place of the designated key
official, in an emergency or otherwise.

A. For the Service:
Technical:
[Name]
National Trails Intermountain Region
National Park Service
P. O. Box 728
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504
[phone number]
Management
[Name] Superintendent
National Trails Intermountain Region
National Park Service
P. O. Box 728
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504
[phone number]
Signatory/Administrative:
[Name]
Contracting Officer (primary)
Intermountain Support Office
National Park Service
P. O. Box 728
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504
[phone number]
[Name]
Contracting Officer (secondary)
Intermountain Support Office
2968 Rodeo Park Drive West
P. O. Box 728
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504
[phone number]
B. For the Commission:
[Name]. Executive Director
State Historic Preservation Officer
Texas Historical Commission

Page 218

Appendix G: Sample Cooperative Agreement

P.O. Box 12276
Austin, Texas 78711-2276
In the absence of the primary contracting officer the secondary contracting officer has the same
authority as the primary.
ARTICLE VI. AWARD AND PAYMENT
Upon signature of this agreement by both parties, the Service will obligate […] through account
number […] for the activities described in this Agreement per the attached Challenge Cost-Share
Program Proposal and budget.
The commitment of additional funds in furtherance of this Agreement will be authorized by
individual Task Agreements issued against this Agreement identifying each project or group or
projects, amount of financial assistance and any other special term or condition applicable to that
project.
Payments will be made on a reimbursable basis and upon submission of a completed Standard
Form 270, Request for Reimbursement and Advance of Funds, as well as an itemized invoice to
the Contracting Officer's Technical Representative [name], P. O. Box 728, Santa Fe, New
Mexico 87504-0728. Financial status reports and final documents will be provided by the
Commission to the same address. The Cooperative Agreement number and/or applicable Task
Agreement or modification number should be cited. Any future Task Agreements or
modifications to this Agreement will be mutually agreed upon and executed in writing by both
parties based on the allocation of funds by Congress. Changes resulting in time and funding
must be approved by the Contracting Officer.
ARTICLE VII. PRIOR APPROVAL
Changes in budget (reallocation of a specific line item expenditure), scope (subject matter or
product alteration), or schedule (change within the allotted time) of a Task Agreement or
modification must be mutually agreed upon and approved by the Contracting Officer.
When developed during the trail planning process, use of the El Camino Real de los Tejas
Historic Trail marker symbol by the Commission will require written permission of the NPS.
The NPS will provide the Commission with appropriate digital files as needed.
ARTICLE VIII. REPORTS AND/OR DELIVERABLE
Reports and other deliverables will be identified in each Task Agreement and/or modification to this
Agreement. They may include, but are not limited to, performance reports, technical reports, oral
briefings, photographs, slides, charts, maps, and data.

The delivery schedule and receiving location of reports and other items will be set forth in each

Page 219

A ppendixes

Task Agreement or modification to this Agreement.
The recipient shall submit an original and two copies of a Financial Status Report (SF-269A) 15
days following the end of each fiscal quarter.
The recipient shall submit an original and two copies of the Minority Business Enterprise Report
(DI-1925) 15 days following the end of each quarter.
ARTICLE IX. PROPERTY UTILIZATION AND DISPOSITION
Property management standards set forth in OMB Circular A-110 and 43 CFR 12 apply to this
Agreement.
ARTICLE X. TERMINATION AND MODIFICATION

A. This agreement may be modified only by a written instrument executed by both parties.
B. Either party may terminate this Agreement by providing the other party with sixty (60) days
advance written notice. In the event that one party provides the other party with notice of its
intention to terminate, the parties will meet promptly to discuss the reasons for the notice and
to try to resolve their differences.
ARTICLE XI. REQUIRED AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS

1. OMB CIRCULARS AND OTHER REGULATIONS
The following OMB Circulars and other regulations are incorporated by reference into this
Agreement:
(a) OMB Circular A-87, “Cost Principles for State, Local and Indian Tribal Governments”.
(b) OMB Circular A-102, “Grants and Cooperative Agreements With State and Local
Governments”.
(c) OMB Circular A-133, “Audits of States, Local Governments, and Non-Profit
Organizations”.
(d) 43 CFR Part 12, Subpart D, “Government-wide Debarment and Suspension (Nonprocurement) and Government-wide Requirements for Drug-Free Workplace (Grants).
(e) 43 CFR Part 12, Subpart E, “Buy American Requirements for Assistance Programs”.
(f) FAR Clause 52.203-12, Paragraphs (a) and (b), “Limitation and Payments to Influence
Certain Federal Transactions”.

Page 220

Appendix G: Sample Cooperative Agreement

2. NON-DISCRIMINATION:
All activities pursuant to this Agreement and the provisions of Executive Order No. 11246, 3
C.F.R. 339 (1964-65) shall be in compliance with the requirements of Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (78 Stat. 252; 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000d et seq.); Title V, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (87 Stat. 394; 29 U.S.C. §§ 794); the Age Discrimination Act of
1975 (89 Stat. 728; 42 U.S.C. §§ 6101 et seq.); and with all other Federal laws and
regulations prohibiting discrimination on grounds of race, color, national origin, disabling
condition, religion, or sex in providing for facilities and service to the public.
3. CONSISTENCY WITH PUBLIC LAWS:
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to be inconsistent with or contrary to the purpose
of or intent of any Act of Congress or the laws of the District establishing, affecting, or
relating to the Agreement.
4. APPROPRIATIONS (Anti-Deficiency Act, 31 U.S.C. §§ 1341):
Nothing contained in this Agreement shall be construed as binding the Service to expend in
any one fiscal year any sum in excess of appropriations made by Congress, for the purposes
of this Agreement for that fiscal year, or other obligation for the further expenditure of
money in excess of such appropriations.
5. OFFICIALS NOT TO BENEFIT (41 U.S.C. §§ 22):
No Member of, Delegate to, or Resident Commissioner in, Congress shall be admitted to any
share or part of this Agreement or to any benefit to arise therefrom, unless the share or part or
benefit is for the general benefit of a corporation or company.
6. LOBBYING PROHIBITION: The parties will abide by the provisions of 18 U.S.C. §§ 1913
(Lobbying with Appropriated Moneys) which states:
No part of the money appropriated by any enactment of Congress shall, in the absence of
express authorization by Congress, be used directly or indirectly to pay for any personal
service, advertisement, telegram, telephone, letter, printed or written matter, or other
device, intended or designed to influence in any manner a Member of Congress, to favor
or oppose, by vote or otherwise, any legislation or appropriation by Congress, whether
before or after the introduction of any bill or resolution proposing such legislation or
appropriation; but this shall not prevent officers or employees of the United States or of
its departments or agencies from communicating to Members of Congress on the request
of any Member or to Congress, through the proper official channels, requests for
legislation or appropriations which they deem necessary for the efficient conduct of the
public business.

Page 221

A ppendixes

7. MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT (Executive Order 12432)
It is the national policy to award a fair share of contracts to small and minority firms. The
Service is strongly committed to the objectives of this policy and encourages all recipients of
its Cooperative Agreements to take affirmative steps to ensure such fairness by ensuring
procurement procedures are carried out in accordance with 43 CFR § 12.944 for Institutions
of Higher Education, Hospitals and Other Non-Profit Organizations.
8. LIABILITY: The Parties accept responsibility for any property damage, injury or death, caused
by the acts or omissions of their respective employees, acting within the scope of their
employment, to the fullest extent permitted by law. To the extent work is to be provided by a
non-governmental entity or person, the Department will require that entity or person to:
(1)

Procure public and employee liability insurance from a responsible company
or companies with a minimum limitation of One Million Dollars
($1,000,000) per person for any one claim, and an aggregate limitation of
Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000) for any number of claims arising from
any one incident. The policies shall name the United States as an additional
insured, shall specify that the insured shall have no right of subrogation
against the United States for payments of any premiums or deductibles due
thereunder, and shall specify that the insurance shall be assumed by, be for
the account of, and be at the insured's sole risk. Prior to beginning the work
authorized herein, the contractor shall provide the Service with confirmation
of such insurance coverage; and

(2)

Pay the United States the full value for all damages to the lands or other
property of the United States caused by such person or organization, its
representatives, or employees; and

(3)

Indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the United States against all
fines, claims, damages, losses, judgments, and expenses arising out of, or
from, any omission or activity of such person organization, its
representatives, or employees.

9. ADVERTISING AND ENDORSEMENTS
a. The Commission shall not publicize, or otherwise circulate, promotional material (such as
an advertisements, sales brochures, press releases, speeches, picture, movies, articles
manuscripts or other publications) which states or implies Governmental, Departmental,
bureau or Government employee endorsement of a product, service, or position which
Commission represents. No release of information relating to this agreement may state or
imply that the Government approves of the work product of Commission to be superior to
other products or services.
b. The Commission will ensure that all information submitted for publication or other public
releases of information regarding this project shall carry the following disclaimer:

Page 222

Appendix G: Sample Cooperative Agreement

The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the U.S. Government.
Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by
the U.S. Government.
c. The Commission will obtain prior Service approval from the National Trails System –
Santa Fe for any public information release which refers to the Department of the
Interior, any bureau or employee (by name or title), or to this Agreement. The specific
text, layout, photographs, etc. of the proposed release must be submitted to the Service
along with the request for approval.
d. The Commission further agrees to include the above provisions in any sub-award to any
sub-recipient, except for a sub-award to a state government, a local government or to a
federally recognized Indian tribal government.
10. PUBLICATIONS OF RESULTS OF STUDIES: No party shall unilaterally publish a joint
publication without consulting the other party. This restriction does not apply to popular
publication of previously published technical matter. Publication pursuant to this Agreement
may be produced independently or in collaboration with others, however, in all cases proper
credit will be given to the efforts of those parties contribution to the publication. In the event
no agreement is reached concerning the manner of publication or interpretation of results,
either party may publish data after due notice and submission of the proposed manuscripts to
the other. In such instances, the party publishing the data will give due credit to the
cooperation but assume full responsibility for any statements on which there is a difference
of opinion.
11. ACCESS TO RECORDS: The Secretary of the Interior and the Comptroller General of the
United States, or their duly authorized representatives, shall have access for the purpose of
financial or programmatic review and examination to any books, documents, papers, and
records of QV that are pertinent to the Agreement at all reasonable times during the period of
retention in accordance with OMB Circular A-110 and 43 CFR 12.
12. DI-2010 CERTIFICATION: The Department of the Interior's certification form, DI-2010,
"Certifications Regarding Debarment, Suspension and Other Responsibility Matters, DrugFree Workplace Requirements, and Lobbying" enclosed with this Agreement must be
completed and signed by the Commission. The signed DI-2010 shall be part of this
Agreement.
13. RIGHTS OF DATA: The Commission grants the United States of America a royalty-free,
non-exclusive and irrevocable license to publish, reproduce and use, and dispose of in any
manner and for any purpose without limitation, and to authorize or ratify publication,
reproduction, or use by others, of all copyrightable material first produced or composed
under this Agreement by the cooperator, its employees, or any individual or concern
specifically employed or assigned to originate and prepare such material.

Page 223

A ppendixes

ARTICLE XII. ATTACHMENTS
In addition to the attachments previously specified in this Agreement, the following documents, provided
by Commission are attached to or incorporated by reference and made a part of this Agreement:

a. Standard Form 424, Application for Federal Assistance - The form must completed and
signed by the Commission. The signed SF-424 shall be part of this Agreement.
b. The Commission's Challenge Cost Share Program proposal and budget.

ARTICLE XIII. SIGNATURES
IN WITNESS HEREOF, the parties hereto execute this Agreement on the date(s) set forth below.

NATIONAL PARK SERVICE
Name:

_____________
Superintendent___________

__________________

Signature:
Title:

____________

Date:
Name:

__________________

Signature:
Title:
Date:

Page 224

____________

Title: __Executive Director_________________
Date:

Date:
Name:

Name:
Signature:

Signature:
Title:

TEXAS HISTORICAL COMMISSION

____________

APPENDIX H:

POTENTIAL ATTRIBUTE LIST FOR SITE IDENTIFICATION AND MONITORING
Date

Detriments to Viewshed

Site Name

Potential Long-Term Threats to Resource

Identification Number

Threats to Resource Requiring Immediate
Attention

GPS Latitude & Longitude
Survey Document Number
Survey Team Members
Legal or Physical Location Description
GPS Location
USGS 100K Quad
USGS 24K Quad
County
State
High-Potential Site/Segment
Congressional District
Access Code

Subjective Physical Assessment of the Site
Directional Signage
Site Identification Signage
Local Signage/Marker
State Signage
Daughters of the American Revolution
(DAR) Marker
Daughters of the Republic of Texas Marker
Other Existing Markers or Signage
State Historic Site (yes or no)
State Archeological Landmark

Land Ownership

Listed in National Register of Historic
Places (yes or no)

Current Stakeholders

Existing Interpretive Media and Condition

Contact Information
Historical Significance

Further interpretation or replacement
needed (yes or no)

Existing Historical Assets

Recommended Interpretation

Natural Features
TREES
SOIL
GRASS
ROCK FEATURES
ELEVATIONS
POND
SPRING
STREAM
RIVER

Potential Themes and Topics

Built Environment
BUILDINGS
FENCING
OVERHEAD LINES
ROADS
OTHERS

NHT Certification

NHT Site Name
NHT Site Number
NRHP (National Register of Historic
Places) Criteria
NRHP Property Category
NHT Public Use Site
Handicap Accessibility Status (ADA)

View North
View South
View East
View West
Page 225

Page 226

APPENDIX I:
POSSIBLE VENUES FOR TRAIL INTERPRETATION
Table I-1, Louisiana
Venue

Address

City

Parish

Cane River Creole National Historical Park

400 Rapides Drive

Natchitoches

Natchitoches

Creole Heritage Center
(Northwestern State University)

NSU Box 5675

Natchitoches

Natchitoches

Adai Indian Nation
Cultural Center

4460 Hwy. 485

Robeline

Natchitoches

Los Adaes State Historic Site

6354 Hwy. 485

Robeline

Natchitoches

Old Courthouse Museum Louisiana State Museum

600 Second Street

Natchitoches

Natchitoches

Fort Jesup State Historic Site

32 Geoghagan
Road

Many

Sabine

Fort St. Jean Baptiste
State Historic Park

155 Rue Jefferson

Natchitoches

Natchitoches

Williamson Museum
(Northwestern State University)

Keyser Hall

Natchitoches

Natchitoches

Table I-2, Texas
Venue

Address

City

County

Longhorn Museum

1959 Hwy. 97 E

Pleasanton

Atascosa

Bastrop County Museum

702 Main Street

Bastrop

Bastrop

Casa Navarro State Historic Site

228 S. Laredo Street San Antonio

Bexar

Hispanic Heritage Center of
Texas

10,000 W.
Commerce Street

San Antonio

Bexar

Institute of Texan Culture

801 East Durango
Boulevard

San Antonio

Bexar

Land Heritage Institute

1349 Neal Road

San Antonio

Bexar

San Antonio Academy Museum

117 E. French Place

San Antonio

Bexar

San Antonio Missions National
Historic Park

2202 Roosevelt
Avenue

San Antonio

Bexar

Spanish Governor’s Palace

105 Plaza de Armas

San Antonio

Bexar

Texas Transportation Museum

11731 Wetmore
Road

San Antonio

Bexar

The Alamo

300 Alamo Plaza

San Antonio

Bexar

University of Texas at San Antonio

1 UTSA Circle

San Antonio

Bexar

Witte Museum

3801 Broadway
Street

San Antonio

Bexar

Brazos Valley Museum of Natural
History

3232 Briarcrest
Drive

Bryan

Brazos

Star of the Republic Museum

23200 Park Road 12

Washington

Brazos

Caddo Mounds State Historic Site 1649 State Hwy 21 W Alto

Cherokee

Heritage Center of Cherokee
County

Cherokee

208 S. Henderson
Street

Rusk

Page 227

A ppendixes

Venue

Page 228

Address

City

County

Jim Hogg Historic Site

RR 5, Box 80

Rusk

Cherokee

Rusk & Palestine State Park

RR 4, Box 431

Rusk

Cherokee

Heritage Museum of the Texas
Hill Country

4831 FM 2673

Canyon Lake

Comal

Sophienburg Museum and Archives

401 W. Coll Street

New Braunfels

Comal

DeWitt County Historical Museum

312 E. Broadway

Cuero

DeWitt

Cuero Heritage Museum

124 E. Church Street Cuero

DeWitt

Chisholm Trail Museum

302 N. Esplanade

Cuero

DeWitt

Nordheim History Museum

Highway 72

Nordheim

DeWitt

Yoakum History Museum

312 Simpson Street

Yoakum

DeWitt

Old Stone Church Museum

1764 Meyersville
Road

Meyersville

DeWitt

Yorktown Historical Museum

143 Main Street

Yorktown

DeWitt

Wade House Memorial Museum

200 North 9th
Street

Carrizo Springs

Dimmit

Fayette Heritage Museum and
Archives

855 S. Jefferson

La Grange

Fayette

Old Frio County Jail Museum

503 E. Trinity

Pearsall

Frio

Goliad State Historical Park

108 Park Road 6

Goliad

Goliad

Markethouse Museum

205 S. Market
Street

Goliad

Goliad

Presidio La Bahia

PO Box 57

Goliad

Goliad

Gonzales Memorial Museum

414 Smith Street

Gonzales

Gonzales

Lyndon Baines Johnson Museum
of San Marcos

601 University Drive San Marcos

Hays

Crockett Depot & Museum

303 S. First

Houston

Mission Tejas State Park

120 State Park Road Grapeland
44

Houston

Karnes County Museum

8167 N FM 81

Karnes City

Karnes

Harlingen Arts and Heritage
Museum

2435 Boxwood

Hallettsville

Lavaca

Lavaca Historical Museum

413 N. Main Street

Hallettsville

Lavaca

Yoakum Heritage Museum

312 Simpson Street

Yoakum

Lavaca

Donna Hooks Fletcher Museum

PO Box 174

Dime Box

Lee

Fort Boggy State Park

4994 Highway 75
South

Centerville

Leon

Madison County Museum

201 N. Madison
Street

Madisonville

Madison

Fort Duncun Museum

1095 Avenue B

Eagle Pass

Maverick

McMullen County Historical
Museum

301 W. Missouri

Tilden

McMullen

Medina County Museum

2202 18th Street

Hondo

Medina

Landmark Inn State Historic Site

402 E. Florence
Street

Castroville

Medina

Milam County Museum

201 E. Main Street

Cameron

Milam

Crockett

Appendix I: Possible Venues for Trail Interpretation

Venue

Address

City

County

Sterne-Hoya Library & Museum

211 S. Lanana
Street

Nacogdoches

Nacogdoches

Stone Fort Museum

Stephen F. Austin
State University

Nacogdoches

Nacogdoches

The Carnegie Library of Robertson County

315 E. Dechard
Street

Franklin

Robertson

Bremond Historical Society

217 S. Main Street

Bremond

Robertson

Sabine County Jail Museum and
PO Drawer 580
Vergie Speights Memorial Library

Hemphill

Sabine

Mission Dolores Visitor Center
& Archives

701 S. Broadway

San Augustine

San Augustine

Bob Bullock Texas State
History Museum

1800 N. Congress
Avenue

Austin

Travis

Center for American History

University of TexasAustin

Austin

Travis

Lyndon Baines Library and
Museum

2313 Red River
Street

Austin

Travis

McKinney Falls State Park

5808 McKinney
Falls Parkway

Austin

Travis

Republic of Texas Museum

510 E. Anderson

Austin

Travis

Texas Capitol Visitors Center

112 E. 11th Street

Austin

Travis

Texas Military Forces Museum

2200 W. 35th Street Austin

Travis

Texas Natural Science Center

University of TexasAustin

Austin

Travis

The French Legation Museum

802 San Marcos

Austin

Travis

Anderson Mill Museum

502 N. Liberty
Street

Victoria

Victoria

Museum of the Coastal Bend

2200 E. Red River

Victoria

Victoria

Brenham Heritage Museum

105 S. Market
Street

Brenham

Washington

Laredo Children’s Museum

5300 San Dario
Avenue

Laredo

Webb

Republic of the Rio Grande Museum

1005 Zaragoza
Street

Laredo

Webb

Villa Antigua Border Heritage
Museum

810 Zaragoza Street Laredo

Webb

Williamson County Historical
Museum

716 S. Austin
Avenue

Georgetown

Williamson

La Vernia Heritage Museum

PO Box 513

La Vernia

Wilson

Colonel Antonio Zapata Museum PO Box 2325

Zapata

Zapata

La Paz County Historical Museum 305 Lincoln Street

San Ygnacio

Zapata

Page 229

Page 230

APPENDIX J: SAMPLE TRAIL SIGNS
Figure J-1. Original Route Sign

Page 231

A ppendixes

Figure J-2. Crossing Sign

Page 232

Appendix J: Sample Signs

Figure J-3. Local Tour Route Sign

Page 233

A ppendixes

Figure J-4. State Historic Site Sign

Page 234

Appendix J: Sample Signs

Figure J-5. Site Directional Sign

Page 235

Page 236

APPENDIX K: THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES
El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail crosses 40 counties in Texas and
two parishes in Louisiana. Texas has 105 species of flora and fauna listed as Threatened or
Endangered species. There are 32 species of plants, of which seven are listed as
Endangered. There are 73 species of fauna, of which two species are listed as Threatened
and 35 listed as Endangered. There are eight candidate species: two are plants; the other six
are animals.
Table K-1, Federally Listed Threatened and Endangered Plant Species
Common Name

Scientific Name

Federal Status

Location

Critical Habitat

Ashy dogweed

Thymophylla tephroleuca

Endangered

TX

No

Johnston’s
frankenia

Frankenia johnstonii

Endangered

TX

No

Large-fruited
sand verbena

Abronia macrocarpa

Endangered

TX

No

Navasota ladies’
tresses

Spinranthes parksii

Endangered

TX

No

Texas wild-rice

Zizania texana

Endangered

TX

Yes

White
bladderpod

Lesquerella pallida

Endangered

TX

No

Zapata
bladderpot

Lesquerella thamnophilia

Endangered

TX

No

Endangered Species

Table K-2, Federally Listed Threatened and Endangered Animal Species
Common Name

Scientific Name

Federal Status

Location

Critical Habitat

[unnamed] ground
beetle

Rhadine exilis

Endangered

TX

No

[unnamed] ground
beetle

Rhadine infernalis

Endangered

TX

Yes

Attwater’s greater
prairie-chicken

Tympanuchus cupido
attwateri

Endangered

TX

No

Barton Springs
salamander

Eurycea sosorum

Endangered

TX

No

Bee Creek Cave
harvestman

Texella reddelli

Endangered

TX

No

Black-capped vireo

Vireo atricapilla

Endangered

TX

No

Bone Cave
harvestman

Texella reyesi

Endangered

TX

No

Bracken Bat Cave
meshweaver

Cicurina venii

Endangered

TX

Yes

Coffin Cave
mold beetle

Batrisodes texanus

Endangered

TX

No

Cokendolpher Cave
harvestman

Texella cokendolpheri

Endangered

TX

Yes

Endangered Species

Page 237

A ppendixes

Table K-2, Federally Listed Threatened and Endangered Animal Species
Common Name

Scientific Name

Federal Status

Location

Critical Habitat

Comal Spring
dryopid beetle

Stygoparnus comalensis

Endangered

TX

No

Comal Spring
riffle beetle

Heterelmis comalensis

Endangered

TX

No

Endangered Species

Page 238

Fountain darter

Etheostoma fonticola

Endangered

TX

Yes

Golden-cheeked
warbler (wood)

Dendroica chrysaparia

Endangered

TX

No

Government
Canyon bat cave
meshweaver

Cicurina vespera

Endangered

TX

No

Government Canyon bat cave spider

Neoleptoneta microps

Endangered

TX

No

Gulf Coast
jaguarundi

Herpailurus (=Felis
yagouaroundi cacomitli)

Endangered

TX

No

Helotes mold
beetle

Batrisodes venyivi

Endangered

TX

Yes

Houston toad

Bufo houstonensis

Endangered

TX

Yes

Interior least tern

Sterna antillarum athalassos

Endangered

LA

No

Jollyville Plateau
salamander

Eurycea tonkawae

Endangered

TX

No

Kretschmarr Cave
mold beetle

Texamaurops reddelli

Endangered

TX

No

Least tern

Sterna antillarum

Endangered

TX

No

Madla’s Cave
meshweaver

Cicurina madla

Endangered

TX

Yes

Ocelot

Leopardus (=Felis pardalis)

Endangered

TX

No

Peck’s Cave
amphipod

Stygobromus
(=Stygonectes) pecki

Endangered

TX

No

Red-cockaded
woodpecker

Picoides borealis

Endangered

LA-TX

No

Red wolf

Canus rufus

Endangered

LA

No

Robber Baron Cave
meshweaver

Cicurina baronia

Endangered

TX

Yes

San Marcos
gambusia

Gambusia georgei

Endangered

TX

Yes

Texas blind
salamander

Typhlomolge rathbuni

Endangered

TX

No

Tooth Cave ground
beetle

Rhadine persephone

Endangered

TX

No

Tooth Cave
pseudoscorpion

Tartarocreagris texana

Endangered

TX

No

Tooth Cave spider

Neoleptoneta myopica

Endangered

TX

No

Warton’s Cave
meshweaver

Cicurina wartoni

Endangered

TX

No

Whooping crane

Grus americana

Endangered

TX

No

Appendix K: Threatened and Endangered Species

Table K-2, Federally Listed Threatened and Endangered Animal Species
Common Name

Scientific Name

Federal Status

Location

Critical Habitat

Louisiana
black bear

Urus americanus huteolus

Threatened

TX

No

San Marcos
salamander

Eurycea nana

Threatened

TX

Yes

Threatened Species

Table K-3, Proposed and Candidate Endangered Animal Species
Common Name

Scientific Name

Federal Status

Location

Critical Habitat

Austin blind
salamander

Eurycea waterlooensis

Candidate

TX

No

Georgetown
salamander

Eurycea naufragia

Candidate

TX

No

Louisiana
pine snake

Pituophis ruthveni

Candidate

LA-TX

No

Neches River
rose-mallow

Hisbiscus dasycalyx

Candidate

TX

No

Sharpnose shiner

Notropis oxyrhynchus

Candidate

TX

No

Smalleye shiner

Notropis buccula

Candidate

TX

No

Texas golden
gladecress

Leavenworthia texana

Candidate

TX

No

Texas hornshell
(mussel)

Popenaias popei

Candidate

TX

No

Candidate Species

Page 239

Page 240

Map L-3:

Map L-3: Ecological Regions Crossed by the Designated Routes

APPENDIX L: Environmental Assessment – Maps & Tables

Page 241

Page 242
e R iver

p

toni
n
M
co

s

Ga briel
S an

z

B ra

S anA
n

G uadalu

TEXAS

iver

o rad

b ine

Nec h
e s Ri
ver

d

oR

iver

Tr
Col

er
iv
os R

ar

Sa

ver
oR i

iver
N ueces R

er
F rio R i v

oG
Rí

de
ran

LOUISANA

0

25

50

Miles

N

El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

Gulf of Mexico

R iver
ve r
Ri

MEXICO

lor
Co

ad
o

ini
ty
R

Sa
Re

R iver

Map L-4: Major Rivers along El Camino Real de los Tejas NHT

A ppendixes

Map L-4:

Appendix L: Environmental Assessment – Maps & Tables

Map L-5: Population Growth by County/Parish

Map L-5

Page 243

Map L-6: Median Household Income by County/Parish

A ppendixes

Map L-6

Page 244

Appendix L: Environmental Assessment – Maps & Tables

Map L-7: Percentage of Families Below Poverty Line by County/Parish

Map L-7

Page 245

Map L-8: Percentage of Civilians Employed by County/Parish

A ppendixes

Map L-8

Page 246

Appendix L: Environmental Assessment – Maps & Tables

Map L-9: Percentage of High School Graduates by County/Parish

Map L-9

Page 247

Map L-10: Percentage of Hispanic Population by County/Parish

A ppendixes

Map L-10

Page 248

Appendix L: Environmental Assessment – Maps & Tables

Table L-1. Median Household Income and Percentage of Families Below the Poverty
Line by County/Parish, 2000

County/State

Median
Household
Income

% Difference from
Statewide Median
Income

% Families Below
Poverty Rate

Difference from
Statewide
Percentage

Atascosa

$33,081

-17.1

-16.1

+4.1

Bastrop

$43,578

+9.1

+8.4

-3.6

Bee

$28,392

-28.9

-19.7

+10.5

Bexar

$38,328

-4.0

-12.7

+.7

Brazos

$29,104

-27.0

-14.0

+2.0

Burleson

$33,026

-17.2

-13.2

+1.2

Caldwell

$36,573

-8.0

-10.4

-1.6

Cherokee

$29,313

-26.0

-13.7

+1.7

Comal

$46,147

+15.6

+6.4

-5.6

DeWitt

$28,714

-28.0

+15.3

+3.3

Dimmit

$21,917

-45.1

+29.7

+17.7

Fayette

$34,526

-13.5

-8.1

-3.9

Frio

$24,504

-38.6

+24.5

+12.5

Goliad

$34,201

-14.3

-11.9

-.1

Gonzales

$28,368

-28.9

+13.8

+1.8

Guadalupe

$43,949

+10.1

-7.3

-4.7

Hays

$45,006

+12.7

-6.4

-5.6

Houston

$28,119

-29.6

+15.6

+3.6

Karnes

$26,526

-33.6

+18.5

+6.5

La Salle

$21,857

-45.2

+28.2

+16.2

Lavaca

$29,132

-27.0

-10.2

-1.8

Lee

$36,280

-9.1

-9.7

-2.3

Leon

$30,981

-22.4

+12.6

+.6

Live Oak

$32,057

-19.7

+14.1

+2.1

Madison

$29,418

-26.3

+12.3

+.3

Maverick

$21,232

-48.8

+32.0

+20.0

McMullen

$32,500

-18.6

+15.9

+3.9

Medina

$36,063

-9.7

12.0

=

Milam

$33,186

-16.9

+12.2

+.2

Nacogdoches, TX

$28,301

-29.1

+15.5

+3.5

Natchitoches, LA

$25,722

-21.0

15.8

=

Robertson

$28,886

-27.6

+17.3

+5.3

Sabine, LA

$26,655

-14.8

+20.9

+5.1

Sabine, TX

$27,198

-31.9

-11.8

-.2

San Augustine, TX

$27,025

-32.3

+15.6

+3.6

 In 2000, the median household income for the United States was $41,994, for Texas was $39,927, and for Louisiana it was $32,566. Percentage values for this column were calculated as follows: (County Median Household
Income – Texas Median Household Income) Texas Median Household Income.

 In 2000, the percentage of families below poverty rate for the United States was 9.2%, for Texas it was 12%, and
for Louisiana it was 15.8%.

Page 249

A ppendixes

County/State

Median
Household
Income

% Difference from
Statewide Median
Income

% Families Below
Poverty Rate

Difference from
Statewide
Percentage

Travis

$46,761

+17.1

-7.7

-4.3

Victoria

$38,732

-3.0

-10.5

-1.5

Webb

$28,100

-29.6

+26.7

+14.7

Williamson

$60,642

+51.9

-3.4

-8.6

Wilson

$40,006

+.02

-9.2

-2.8

Zapata

$24,635

-38.3

+29.3

+17.3

Zavala

$16,844

-57.8

+37.4

+27.4

 In 2000, the median household income for the United States was $41,994, for Texas was $39,927, and for Louisiana it was $32,566. Percentage values for this column were calculated as follows: (County Median Household
Income – Texas Median Household Income) Texas Median Household Income.

 In 2000, the percentage of families below poverty rate for the United States was 9.2%, for Texas it was 12%, and
for Louisiana it was 15.8%.

Table L-2. Population Data for Counties and Parishes Crossed by the Trail, 1990–2000

County/State

1990
Population

2000
Population

Population Change
1990–2000

% Change in
Population
1990–2000 †

Atascosa, TX

30,533

38,628

+8,095

+26.5

Bastrop, TX

38,263

57,733

+19,470

+50.9

Bee, TX

25,135

32,359

+7,224

+28.7

1,185,394

1,392,931

+207,537

+17.5

121,862

152,415

+30,553

+25.1

Burleson, TX

13,625

16,470

+2,845

+20.9

Caldwell, TX

26,392

32,194

+5,802

+22.0

Bexar, TX
Brazos, TX

Cherokee, TX

41,049

46,659

+5,610

+13.7

Comal, TX

51,832

78,021

+31,799

+75.0

DeWitt, TX

18,840

20,013

+1,173

+6.2

Dimmit, TX

10,433

10,248

-185

-1.8

Fayette, TX

20,095

21,804

+1,709

+8.5

Frio, TX

13,472

16,252

+2,780

+20.6

5,980

6,928

+948

+15.8

Gonzales, TX

17,205

18,628

+1,423

+8.2

Guadalupe, TX

64,873

89,023

+24,150

+37.2

Hays, TX

65,614

97,589

+31,975

+48.7

Houston, TX

21,375

23,185

+1,810

+8.5

Karnes, TX

12,455

15,446

+2,991

+24.0

La Salle, TX

5,254

5,866

+612

+11.6

Goliad, TX

Lavaca, TX

18,690

19,210

+520

+2.8

Lee, TX

12,854

15,657

+2,803

+21.8

Leon, TX

12,665

15,335

+2,670

+21.1

Live Oak, TX

9,556

12,309

+2,753

+28.8

Madison, TX

10,931

12,940

+2,009

+18.4

† Percentage population change has been computed in the following manner – (2000–1990)/1990.
Page 250

Appendix L: Environmental Assessment – Maps & Tables

1990
Population

County/State

2000
Population

Population Change
1990–2000

% Change in
Population
1990–2000 †

36,378

47,297

+10,919

+30.0

817

851

+34

+4.2

Medina, TX

27,312

39,304

+11,992

+43.9

Milam, TX

22,946

24,238

+1,292

+5.6

Nacogdoches, TX

54,753

59,203

+4,450

+8.1

Maverick, TX
McMullen, TX

Natchitoches, LA

36,689

39,080

+2,391

+6.5

Robertson, TX

15,511

16,000

+489

+3.1

Sabine, LA

22,646

23,459

+813

+3.4

Sabine, TX

9,586

10,469

+883

+9.2

San Augustine, TX

7,999

8,946

+947

+11.9

576,407

812,280

+235,873

+40.9

74,361

84,088

+9,727

+13.1

Travis, TX
Victoria, TX
Webb, TX

133,239

193,117

+59,878

+44.9

Williamson, TX

139,551

249,967

+110,416

+79.1

Wilson, TX

22,650

32,408

+9,758

+43.1

Zapata, TX

9,279

12,182

+2,903

+23.9

Zavala, TX

12,162

11,600

-562

-4.6

† Percentage population change has been computed in the following manner – (2000–1990)/1990.

Table L-3. Percentage of Civilian Population Employed
and Percentage of High School Graduates, 2000
County

Employed Civilian Pop
(over 16)

% High school grad. or
higher

% Employed

Atascosa

15,430

59.3

65.2

Bastrop

26,529

63.6

76.9

9,944

42.0

73.7

Bexar

595,911

63.4

76.9

Brazos

72,096

64.1

81.3

Burleson

7,024

58.3

71.1

Caldwell

13,403

59.0

71.4

Cherokee

18,691

55.5

68.4

Comal

36,319

62.8

83.9

DeWitt

7,893

52.8

67.9

Dimmit

3,342

54.1

54.3

Fayette

10,039

59.5

71.3

Frio

5,257

47.1

57.7

Goliad

2,949

56.8

72.4

Gonzalez

8,315

59.1

62.0

Bee

 In 2000, the average percentage employed for the United States was 65%, the average for Texas was 65.6%, and
the average for Louisiana was 61%.
 In 2000, the average percentage of high-school graduates for the United States was 84.1%, the average for Texas
was 78.6%, and the average for Louisiana was 79.4%.

Page 251

A ppendixes

County

Employed Civilian Pop
(over 16)

% High school grad. or
higher

% Employed

Guadalupe

40,845

66.4

78.1

Hays

50,484

70.2

84.7

Houston

7,958

45.9

70.0

Karnes

4,705

40.2

59.1

La Salle

1,826

45.7

50.1

Lavaca

8,677

58.5

68.6

Lee

7,309

63.3

71.7

Leon

6,012

52.2

73.8

Live Oak

4,244

45.3

67.1

Madison

4,186

42.4

72.8

Maverick

13,161

50.7

42.1

347

51.8

74.7

Medina

16,168

58.6

72.2

Milam

10,305

58.5

70.9

Nacogdoches

25,637

61.7

73.7

Natchitoches, LA

14,909

54.8

72.7

Robertson

6,318

56.4

68.1

Sabine, LA

8,466

51.2

70.8

Sabine, TX

3,258

41.9

72.5

San Augustine

3,210

48.8

69.9

McMullen

Travis

441,161

72.0

84.7

Victoria

38,646

64.8

76.2

Webb

62,558

53.0

53.0

129,192

72.8

88.8

Wilson

13,939

61.2

73.8

Zapata

3,384

43.9

53.1

Zavala

3,034

44.9

43.4

Williamson

 In 2000, the average percentage employed for the United States was 65%, the average for Texas was 65.6%, and
the average for Louisiana was 61%.
 In 2000, the average percentage of high-school graduates for the United States was 84.1%, the average for Texas
was 78.6%, and the average for Louisiana was 79.4%.

Table L-4.
Percentage of Ethnic Groups in Counties and Parishes Crossed by the Trail, 20001
County/State

Whites

%
White

Black

%
Black

Hispano

%
Hispano

Other

%
Other

Atascosa

28,286

73.3

230

0.6

22,620

58.6

9,001

22.7

Bastrop

46,327

80.2

5,072

8.8

13,845

24

5,090

8.9

Bee

21,957

67.9

3,203

9.9

17,450

53.9

6,510

20.1

Bexar

959,122

68.9

100,025

7.2

757,033

54.3

283,061

20.3

Brazos

113,479

74.5

16,333

10.7

27,253

17.9

19,597

12.9

12,199

74.1

2,481

15.1

2,411

14.6

1,474

9.0

Burleson

1
Census data consider in “hispano” a subset of “white”. The percentage figures in Table L-4 report the information as presented by Census Bureau.
Page 252

Appendix L: Environmental Assessment – Maps & Tables

County/State

Whites

%
White

%
Black

Black

Hispano

%
Hispano

13,018

40.4

6,000

18.6

%
Other

Caldwell

22,577

70.1

2,735

Cherokee

34,685

74.3

7,446

16

6,178

13.2

3,902

8.4

Comal

69,501

89.1

741

0.9

17,609

22.6

6,246

8.0

DeWitt

15,293

76.4

2,209

11

5,454

27.2

2,160

10.7

Dimmit

7,886

77

90

0.9

8,708

85

2,015

19.7

Fayette

18,442

84.6

1,528

7

2,786

12.8

1,592

7.4

Frio

11,679

71.9

792

4.9

11,987

73.8

3,375

20.8

Goliad

8.5

Other

5,724

82.6

334

4.8

2,439

35.2

750

10.7

Gonzales

13,458

72.2

1,563

8.4

7,381

39.6

3,069

16.5

Guadalupe

69,122

77.6

4,460

5

29,561

33.2

12,705

14.3

Hays

77,014

78.9

3,588

3.7

28,859

29.6

14,557

15

Houston

15,899

68.6

6,476

27.9

1,739

7.5

633

2.8

Karnes

10,588

68.5

1,667

10.8

7,324

47.4

2,842

18.4

La Salle

4,779

81.5

208

3.5

4,524

77.1

754

12.8

Lavaca

16,686

86.9

1,305

6.8

2,183

11.4

1,000

5.2

Lee

11,992

76.6

1,892

12.1

2,848

18.2

1,503

9.6

Leon

12,809

83.5

1,593

10.4

1,213

7.9

770

5.0

Live Oak

10,743

87.3

301

2.4

4,683

38

1,026

8.3

Madison

8,642

66.8

2,959

22.9

2,042

15.8

1,339

10.3

Maverick

33,529

70.9

146

0.3

44,938

95

12,228

25.8

McMullen

752

88.4

10

1.2

282

33.1

78

9.1

Medina

31,200

79.4

866

2.2

17,873

45.5

6,108

15.5

Milam

19,121

78.9

2,678

11

4,516

18.6

2,044

8.4

Nacogdoches

44,405

75

9,908

16.7

6,660

11.2

4,056

6.9

Natchitoches, LA

22,608

57.9

15,017

38.4

566

1.4

957

2.4

Robertson

10,592

66.2

3,871

24.2

2,359

14.7

1,250

7.9

Sabine, LA

17,048

72.7

3,958

16.9

642

2.7

1,942

8.2

Sabine, TX

9,197

87.8

1,039

9.9

189

1.8

141

1.3

San Augustine

6,196

69.3

2,500

27.9

320

3.6

183

2.7

554,058

68.2

75,247

9.3

229,048

28.2

41,529

19.8

62,406

74.2

5,297

6.3

32,959

39.2

14,519

17.2

Webb

158,670

97.5

713

0.4

182,070

94.3

28,823

15.3

Williamson

205,994

82.4

12,790

5.1

42,990

17.2

25,899

8.4

Wilson

26,311

81.2

392

1.2

11,834

36.5

4,917

17.5

Zapata

10,241

84.1

50

0.4

10,328

84.8

1,607

13.1

Zavala

7,547

65.1

57

0.5

10,582

91.2

3,688

31.8

Travis
Victoria

Table L-5: Public Land Ownership in Texas and Louisiana
State

Federal

%

State

%

USFS

LA

1,387,100 acres

TX

2,391,400 acres

NPS

NWR

Army Corps

4.97

744,600

2.67

604,210

10,100

463,180

20,140

1.43

825,000

.49

755,100

1,172,600

463,700

945,870

Page 253

A ppendixes

Table L-6. Recreational Visits to Public Sites along El Camino Real de los Tejas
National Historic Trail, 2007–2008
Management Entity

Location
(or nearest)

Park

Texas Parks & Wildlife

Bastrop, Texas

158,036
(FY 2008)

Archeological
site

Texas Historical
Commission

Alto, Texas

5,660
(FY 2008)

Park

Texas Parks & Wildlife

Centerville, Texas

9,055
(FY 2008)

Goliad State
Historical Park

Historic missionpresidio complex
and park

Texas Parks & Wildlife

Goliad, Texas

50,999
(FY 2008)

McKinney Falls
State Park

Park

Texas Parks & Wildlife

Austin, Texas

128,454
(FY 2008)

Historic mission
site and interpretive center

City of San Augustine

San Augustine,
Texas

500
(FY 2008)

Historic mission
and park

Texas Parks & Wildlife

Alto, Texas

15,478
(FY 2008)

Reconstructed
historical
building

Stephen F. Austin
State University

Nacogdoches,
Texas

6,116
(Scholastic Year
2007–2008)

Historic missionfortress
compound

Daughters of the
Republic of Texas

San Antonio,
Texas

2.5 million
visitors a year
consistently over
the last decade

Federal historic
park

National Park Service

San Antonio,
Texas

1,303,212
(Year 2008)

Reservoir

Sabine River Authority –
State of Louisiana (Texas
does not have a visitor
center on their side of
the river.

Texas-Louisiana
border

16,488
(Year 2007)
average for
the last decade:
16,899

Fort Jesup State
Historic Site

Historic site and
park

Louisiana Department
of Culture, Recreation &
Tourism

Many, Louisiana

5,059
(FY 2007-2008)

Los Adaes State
Historic Site

Historic site and Louisiana Department of
park
Culture, Recreation
& Tourism

Natchitoches,
Louisiana

2,700
(FY 2007-2008)

Fort St. Jean
Baptiste State
Historic Site

Historic site and Louisiana Department of
park
Culture, Recreation
& Tourism

Natchitoches,
Louisiana

12,344
(FY 2007-2008)

Natchitoches,
Louisiana

24,587
(Year 2008)

Feature Name
Bastrop State Park
Caddo Mounds
State Historic Site
Fort Boggy State
Park

Mission Nuestra
Señora de los
Dolores de los Ais
Mission Tejas State
Park
Old Stone Fort/
Stone Fort
Museum
The Alamo

San Antonio
Missions National
Historical Park
Toledo Bend
Reservoir

Cane River Creole
National Historical
Park

Page 254

Feature Type

Federal historic
park

National Park Service

Latest Visitation
Figures (2007)

APPENDIX M:
Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI)

Page 255

A ppendix M

Page 256

Appendix M: Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI)

Page 257

A ppendix M

Page 258

Appendix M: Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI)

Page 259

A ppendix M

Page 260

Appendix M: Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI)

Page 261

A ppendix M

Page 262

Appendix M: Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI)

Page 263

A ppendix M

Page 264

Appendix M: Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI)

Page 265

A ppendix M

Page 266

Appendix M: Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI)

Page 267

A ppendix M

Page 268

Appendix M: Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI)

Page 269

A ppendix M

Page 270

Appendix M: Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI)

Page 271

A ppendix A

Page 272

REFERENCES
Almaraz, Felix. D. Jr. Crossroads of Empire, The
Church and State on the Rio Grande
Frontier of Coahuila and Texas, 17001821. Report No. 1. San Antonio: Center
for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio,
1979.
Anderson, H. Allen. “The Delaware and
Shawnee Indians and the Republic of
Texas, 1820–1845” in Southwestern
Historical Quarterly. Vol. 94, pp.
231–260. Denton: Texas State Historical
Association, 1990.
Armistead, Samuel G. The Spanish Tradition in
Louisiana: Isleno Folkliterature. Juan de
La Cuesta, Newark, Delaware, 1992.
Armistead, Samuel G. and Hiram F. Gregory.
“French Loan Words in the Spanish
District of Sabine and Natchitoches
Pairishes,” in Louisiana Folklife 10:21-30,
1986.
Arricivita, Juan D. Apostolic Chronicle of Juan
Domingo Arricivita: The Franciscan
Mission Frontier in the Eighteenth
Century in Arizona, Texas, and the
Californias. Translated by George P.
Hammond and Agapito Rey.
Introduction and Notes by Michael
Mathes. Berkeley, California: Academy
of American Franciscan History, 1996.
Avery, George. Annual Reports for the Los Adaes
Station Archaeology Program. Dept. of
Social Sciences, Northwestern State
University, Natchitoches, Louisiana,
1995-2005.
Avery, George. “Archival Investigations of the
People of Los Adaes,” in Southern
Studies 7 (1):65-88, 1996.
Avery, George. “More Friend than Foe:
Eighteenth Century Spanish, French,
and Caddoan Interaction at Los Adaes,
A Capital of Texas Located in
Northwestern Louisiana,” in Louisiana
Archaeology :163-193, 1997.
Ballejo, Francisco Fr., Fr. Juan Gregorio de la
Campa Cos, Fr. Yldephonso Joseph
Marmolejo, and Fr. Gaspar Joseph Solis.
“Memorial to the King.” In The Texas

Missions of the College of Zacatecas in
1749–1750. pp. 170. Fr. Benedict
Leutenegger trans. San Antonio, Texas:
Old Spanish Missions Historical
Research Library at San José Mission,
1979.
Barr, Alwyn. Black Texans: A History of AfricanAmericans in Texas, 1528–1995. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 1996.
Barr, Juliana. Peace Came in the Form of a
Woman. Chapel Hill: Universtiy of
North Carolina Press, 2007.
Bat Conservation International. Bracken Bat
Cave & Nature Reserve.
Web site: http://www.batcon.org/home/
index.asp?idPage=56
Berlandier, Jean L. Journey to Mexico During the
Years 1826 to 1834. Vols. I and II.
Translated by Sheila O. Ohlendorf.
Denton: Texas State Historical
Association, 1980.
Berthelot, Raymond Octave. A Comparison of
the Archaeological and Documentary
Evidence relating to the Material Culture
from Nuestra Señora del Pilar de los
Adaes, an Eighteenth Century Spanish
Colonial Frontier Presidio. Unpublished
M.A. thesis, Dept. of History, Louisiana
State University, Baton Rouge, 2001.
Berthelot, Raymond Octave. “The Presidio
Nuestra Señora del Pilar de los Adaes
and the Spanish Colonial Presence in
Northwestern Louisiana,” in Southern
Studies 7(1):25-43, 1996.
Blaine, Jay C. and George Avery. “Conservation
and Identification of Metal Artifacts
from Los Adaes,” in Southern Studies
7(1):97-119, 1996.
Bolton, Eugene H. Athanase de Mézières and the
Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768–1780.
Vols. 1 and 2. Cleveland, Ohio: The
Arthur H. Clark Company, 1914.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene. Spanish Exploration in
the Southwest,1542–1706. New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1916.

Page 273

R eferences

Bolton, Herbert Eugene. Texas in the Middle
Eighteenth Century: Studies in Spanish
Colonial History and Administration.
Austin: University of Texas Press, 1970.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene. The Hasinais: Southern
Caddos as Seen by the Earliest
Europeans. Introduction and edited
byRussell Magnaghi. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 2002.
Bond, Clell L. and William Moore.
Archaeological Investigations in the Davy
Crockett National Forest. Document on
File, Texas Historical Commission in
Austin. College Station: A&M
University, 1980.
Brown, David E. Biotic Communities
Southwestern United States and
Northwestern Mexico. Lake City:
University of Utah Press, 1994.
Bureau of Land Management. Land and
Mineral Use Records Viewer. Web site:
http://www.geocommunicator.gov
Cabello y Robles, Domingo. “Ynforme of the
Governor of Texas Don Domingo
Cabello regarding the peace with the
Lipan Apaches in the Colony of Nuevo
Santander” in AGN, Provincias Internas,
tomo 64, exp. 1, 1784.
Campbell, Linda. Endangered and Threatened
Animals of Texas Their Life History and
Management. Austin: Texas Parks &
Wildlife, Wildlife Division, 2003.
Campbell, T. N. Ethnohistoric Notes on Indian
Groups Associated With Three Spanish
Missions at Guerrero, Coahuila.
Archaeology and History of the San
Juan Bautista Mission Area, Coahuila
and Texas, Report No. 3. San Antonio:
Center for Archaeological Research,
University of Texas at San Antonio,
1979.
Campbell, T.N. The Indians of Southern Texas
and Northeastern Mexico, Selected
Writings of Thomas Nolan Campbell.
Austin: Texas Archaeological Research
Laboratory, University of Texas
at Austin, 1988.
Campbell, Thomas N. and T. J. Campbell.
Indian Groups Associated with the
Page 274

Spanish Missions of the San Antonio
Missions National Historical Park.
Special Report No. 16. San Antonio:
Center for Archaeological Research,
University of Texas at San Antonio,
1985.
Campbell, Thomas N. and William T. Field.
“Identification of Comanche Raiding
Trails in Trans-Pecos, Texas” in West
TexasHistorical Association Yearbook.
Vol. 44, pp. 28–49. Lubbock: West Texas
Historical Association, 1968.
Canedo, Lino G. Primeras Exploraciones y
Poblamiento de Texas,1686–1694.
Monterrey, Mexico: Publicaciones del
Instituto Tecnológico y de Estudios
Superiores de Monterrey, Serie
Historia, 1968.
Casañas, de Jesús María Fr. Relación. 2B141.
Austin: Center for American History,
The University
of Texas at Austin, 1691.
Chafe, Wallace. “Caddo Names in the de Soto
Documents” in The Expedition of
Hernando de Soto West of the Mississippi,
1541–1543, Proceedings of the de Soto
Symposia. Edited by Gloria A. Young
and Michael P. Hoffman. Fayetteville:
University of Arkansas Press, 1993.
Chipman, Donald E. Spanish Texas,1519–1821.
Austin: University of Texas Press,1992.
Chipman, Donald E. and Harriett Denise
Joseph. Explorers and Settlers of Spanish
Texas. Austin: University of Texas Press,
2001.
Christianson, James, ed. Swedes in Texas in
Words and Pictures,1838–1918. Austin:
New Sweden 88 Austin Area
Committee, 1994.
City of San Antonio. Viewshed Protection
District. Web site: http://epay.
sanantonio.gov/historic/
viewshedindex.aspx
Clark John W. and A. Joachim McGraw.
“Identifying the Disposition:
Methodology” in A Texas Legacy, the
Old San Antonio Road and El Caminos
Reales: A Tricentennial History, 1691–
1991. Edited by A. Joachim McGraw,

References

John W. Clark, Jr., and Elizabeth A.
Robbins. Austin: Texas State
Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, 1991.
Corbin, James. “Retracing El Camino de los
Tejas from the Trinity River to Los
Adaies: New Insights into East Texas
History” in A Texas Legacy, the Old San
Antonio Road and El Caminos Reales: A
Tricentennial History, 1691–1991. Edited
by A. Joachim McGraw, John W. Clark,
Jr., and Elizabeth A. Robbins. Austin:
Texas State Department of Highways
and Public Transportation, 1991.
Daigle, J. J., G. E. Griffith, J. M. Omernik, P. L.
Faulkner, R. P. McCulloh, L. R.
Handley, L. M. Smith, and S. S.
Chapman. “Ecoregions of Louisiana.”
Color poster with map, descriptive text,
summary tables, and photographs. Map
scale 1:1,000,000. Reston,Virginia: U.S.
Geological Survey, 2006.
Davies, W.E., J. H. Simpson, G. C. Ohlmacher,
W. S. Kirk, and E. G. Newton.
“Engineering aspects of karst,” in U.S.
Geological Survey National Atlas. Map
scale 1:7,500. Reston, Virginia: U.S.
Geological Survey, 1984.
Davis, Graham. Land:Irish Pioneers in Mexican
and RevolutionaryTexas.Number 92,
The Centennial Series of the
Association of Former Students.
College Station: Texas A&M University
Press, 2002.

de la Teja, Jesús F. “Forgotten Founders: The
Military Settlers of Eighteenth-Century
San Antonio de Bexar” in Tejano
Origins in Eighteenth-Century San
Antonio. Edited by Gerald E. Poyo and
Gilberto M. Hinojosa. Austin:
University of Texas Press, 1991.
de la Teja, Jesús F. San Antonio de Béxar: A
Community on New Spain’s Northern
Frontier. Albuquerque: University of
New Mexico Press, 1995.
Delisle, Guillaume. Carte de la Louisiana et du
Cours du Mississippi. Map No. 362.
Austin: Texas State Library and
Archives, 1718.
DeLorme. Texas Atlas and Gazetteer. Second
Edition. Yarmouth, Maine: Delorme,
1998.
Dunn, William E. “Apache Relations in Texas,
1718–1750” in Texas Historical
Association Quarterly. Vol. 14, pp.
198–274. Denton: Texas State Historical
Association, 1911.
Elliott, William R. Overview of Texas Caves &
Karst. Austin: Texas Speleological
Survey. Web site: http://www.utexas.
edu/tmm/sponsored_sites/tss/
cavesandkarst/index.html
Engerrand, George C. The So-Called Wends of
Germany and Their Colonies in Texas
and Australia. Bulletin No 3417. Austin:
University of Texas, 1934.

De León, Alonso. “De León’s Expedition of
1689” in The Quarterly of the Texas State
Historical Association. Vol. VIII, pp.
199–224. Translated by Elizabeth
Howard West. Lubbock: West Texas
Historical Association, 1905.

Espinosa, Isidro Felis de. “Ramón’s Expedition:
Espinosa’s Diary of 1716” in Spanish
Borderlands Sourcebooks. Translated by
Rev. Gabriel Tous. Edited by Arthur C.
Gómez. Reprint. New York: Garland
Publishing, 1991.

De León, Arnoldo. Mexican Americans in Texas:
A Brief History. Wheeling, Illinois:
Harlan Davidson, Inc., 1999.

FEMA. Federal Fire Suppression Funds
Authorized for Louisiana. Web site:
http://www.fema.gov/news/
newsrelease.fema?id=8231
Flannery, John B. The Irish Texans. San Antonio:
University of Texas Institute of Texan
Cultures at San Antonio, 1980.
Foik, Paul J. “Captain Don Domingo Ramón’s
Diary of his Expedition into Texas in
1716” in Preliminary Studies of the Texas
Page 275

R eferences

Catholic Historical Society Vol. 2 (5).
Austin: Texas Catholic Historical
Society, 1933.
Foster, Morris W. and Martha McCollough.
“Plains Apache” in Handbook of North
American Indians. General editor:
William C. Sturtevant, volume editor:
Raymond J. DeMallie. Vol. 13, Part 2, .
926-940. Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution, 2001.

d)

Foster, William C. Spanish Expeditions into
Texas,1689–1768. Austin: University of
Texas Press, 1995.

e)

Gadus, Eloise F. and Elton R. Prewitt [Principal
Investigator]. An Archeological Survey of
the Existing and Proposed Texas
Eastman Pipeline Easement through
Portions of the Sam Houston and Davy
Crockett National Forests, Walker and
Houston Counties, Texas. Document on
file at Texas Historical Commission.
Austin, Texas: Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., 1988.
Galán, Francis X. “Last Soldiers, First Pioneers:
The Los Adaes Border Community on
the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1721–
1779.” Ph.D. dissertation. Dallas, Texas:
Southern Methodist University, 2006.
Galindo, Mary Jo. “Con Un Pie En Cada Lado:
Ethnicities and the Archaeology of
Spanish Colonial Ranching
Communities Along the Lower Rio
Grande Valley.” Ph.D. Dissertation.
Austin: University of Texas at Austin,
2003.
Geologic Atlas of Texas (GA), V.E. Barnes,
Project Director, color, topographic
base, folded, scale 1:250,000.
a) Laredo Sheet. J. L. Brewton,
F. Owens, S. Aronow, and
V. E. Barnes. GA0019.
University Station, Texas: Bureau of
Economic Geology, 1976, reprinted
1993.
b) Beeville-Bay City Sheet.
S. Aronow, T. E. Brown, J. L.
Brewton, D. H. Eargle, and V.
E. Barnes. GA0005. College
Station, Texas: Bureau of
Economic Geology, 1975,
revised 1987, reprinted 1998.
c) Crystal City-Eagle Pass Sheet.
Page 276

f)

g)

T. E. Brown, N. B. Waechter, F.
Owens, I. Howeth, and V. E. Barnes
(and others credited on the map
sheet). GA0011.
College Station: Bureau
of Economic Geology,
1976, reprinted 2002.
San Antonio Sheet. T. E. Brown, N.
B. Waechter, and V. E. Barnes.
GA0029.
College Station: Bureau of
Economic Geology, 1974, revised
1983, reprinted
2000.
Seguin Sheet. C. V. Proctor, Jr., T.
E. Brown, N. B. Waechter, S.
Aronow, and V. E. Barnes. GA0030.
College Station: Bureau of
Economic Geology, 1974, reprinted
2001.
Austin Sheet. C. V. Proctor, Jr.,
T. E. Brown, J. H. McGowen, N.
B. Waechter, and V. E. Barnes.
GA0003. College Station: Bureau
of Economic Geology, 1974,
revised 1981, reprinted 2002.
Palestine Sheet, by C. A. Shelby, M.
K. Pieper, A. C. Wright (and East
Texas Geological Society
geologists), D. H. Eargle, and V. E.
Barnes. GA0024. College Station:
Bureau of Economic Geology, 1968,
revised 1993.

Gilmore, Kathleen Kirk. “The San Xavier
Missions: A Study in Historic Site
Identification” Archeological Program
State Building Commission, Report #16,
1969.
Graham, Joe S. El Rancho in South Texas:
Continuity and Change from 1750.
Denton: University of North Texas
Press, 1997.
Gregory, Hiram F. Eighteenth Century Caddoan
Archaeology: A Study in Models and
Interpretation. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University. University
Microfilms, Ann Arbor, 1973.
Gregory, Hiram F. “Los Adaes, the Archaeology
of an Ethnic Enclave,” in Historical
Archaeology of the Eastern United States,
edited by Robert W. Neuman. School of
Geoscience, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, 1983.

References

Gregory, Hiram F. (editor). Excavations:
1979-Presidio de Nuestra Señora del Pilar
de Los Adaes Report. Williamson
Museum, Northwestern State
University, Natchitoches, Louisiana,
1980.
Gregory, Hiram F. (editor)1982 Excavations 198182, Presidio de Nuestra Señora del Pilar
de los Adaes. Williamson Museum,
Northwestern State University,
Natchitoches, Louisiana, 1982.
Gregory, Hiram F. (editor). Los Adaes: The
Archaeology of An Ethnic Enclave.
Geoscience and Man 23:53 - 57, 1983.
Gregory, Hiram F. (editor). Excavations: Presidio
de Nuestra Señora del Pilar de los Adaes.
Williamson Museum, Northwestern
State University, Natchitoches,
Louisiana, 1984.
Gregory, Hiram F. (editor). Excavations, Unit
227, Presidio Nuestra Señora del Pilar de
los Adaes (16NA16). Williamson
Museum, Northwestern State
University, Natchitoches, Louisiana,
1985.
Gregory, H. F., George Avery, Aubra L. Lee, and
Jay C. Blaine. Presidio Los Adaes:
Spanish, French, and Caddoan
Interaction on the Northern Frontier, in
Historical Achaeology 38(3):65-77, 2004.
Gregory, Hiram F. and James McCorkle. Los
Adaes: Historical and Archaeological
Background. Louisiana Office of State
Parks, Baton Rouge, 1981.
Griffith, G. E., S. A. Bryce, J. M. Omernik, J. A.
Comstock, A. C. Rogers, B. Harrison, S.
L. Hatch, and D. Bezanson. “Ecoregions
of Texas.” Color poster with map,
descriptive text, and photographs. Map
scale 1:2,500,000. Reston, Virginia: U. S.
Geological Survey, 2004.
Habig, Marion A. Spanish Texas Pilgrimage: The
Old Franciscan Missions and Other
Spanish Settlements of Texas 1632–1821.
Chicago, Illinois: Franciscan Herald
Press, 1990.
Haggard, Villasana. J. “The Neutral Ground
Between Louisiana and Texas, 1806–

1821.” M.A. Thesis. Austin: University of
Texas at Austin, 1942.
Hardin, Stephen L. “People and Events along El
Caminos Reales” in A Texas Legacy, the
Old San Antonio Road and El Caminos
Reales: A Tricentennial History, 1691–
1991. Edited by A. Joachim McGraw,
John W. Clark, Jr., and Elizabeth A.
Robbins. Austin: Texas State
Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, 1991.
Hatcher, M. A. “The Expedition of Don
Domingo Terán de los Ríos into Texas”
in Preliminary Studies of the Texas
Catholic Historical Society. Vol. 2 (1), pp.
3–67. Austin: Texas Catholic Historical
Society, 1932.
Hewitt, W. Phil. The Czech Texans. Austin:
University of Texas Institute of Texan
Cultures at San Antonio, 1983.
Hinojosa, Gilberto M. and Anne A. Fox.
“Indians and Their Culture in San
Fernando de Bexar” in Tejano Origins in
Eighteenth-Century San Antonio. Edited
by Gerald E. Poyo and Gilberto M.
Hinojosa. Austin: University of Texas
Press, 1991.
Hoffmann, Fritz L., Diary of the Alarcón
Expedition into Texas, 1718–1719 by
Francisco Céliz. Volume V. Translation.
Los Angeles, California: Quivira Society
Publications, 1935.
Hoffmann, Fritz L., “The Mezquia Diary of the
Alarcón Expedition into Texas, 1718” in
Southwestern Historical Quarterly. Vol.
41 (4), pp.312–323. Denton: Texas State
Historical Association, 1938.
Humboldt, Alexander von. General Chart of the
Kingdom of New Spain Between the
Parallels of 16 and 38˚ from Materials in
Mexico at the Commencement of Year
1804. The Luso Hispanic-World Maps
in the U.S. Library of Congress.
Washington, D.C., 1804.
Hume, Gary and Marsha Jackson. “Dolores
Viejo (41ZP77).” National Register of
Historic Places Nomination.
Washington, D.C.: National Park
Service, Department of the Interior,
1973.
Page 277

R eferences

Hunter, Marvin J., comp. and ed. The Trail
Drivers of Texas. Austin: University of
Texas Press, 2000.
Ivey, James. “The Mission Landscape of San
Antonio, Texas” in The Community in
the Spanish Americas: Selected Papers
and Commentaries from the November
1991 Quincentenary Symposium. Edited
by Howard Benoist. Document on file
at San Antonio Missions National
Historic Park. Washington, D.C.:
National Park Service, Department of
the Interior, 1991.
Jackson, Jack. “The 1780 Cabello Map: New
Evidence That There Were Two Mission
Rosarios, and a Possible Correction on
the Site of El Fuerte del Cíbolo” in
Southwestern Historical Quarterly. Vol.
107 (Oct. 2003), pp. 203–16. Denton:
Texas State Historical Association,
2003.
Jackson, Jack. Los Mesteños, Spanish Ranching in
Texas, 1721–1821. College Station: Texas
A&M University Press, 2006.
Jackson, Jack and William C. Foster, eds.
Imaginary Kingdom, Texas as Seen by
the Rivera and Rubí Military
Expeditions, 1727 and 1767. Denton:
Texas State Historical Association, 1995.
Jackson, Robert. Missions and the Frontiers of
Spanish America. Scottsdale, Arizona:
Pentacle Press, 2005.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr. and Thomas M. Campbell.
“Sanan: Traces of a Previously
Unknown Aboriginal Language in
Colonial Coahuila and Texas” in Plains
Anthropologist. 37 (140), pp.185–212.
Norman, Oklahoma: Plains
Anthropological Society, 1991.
Kavanagh, Thomas W. The Comanches: A
History, 1706–1875. Lincoln: University
of Nebraska Press, 1999.
Kenmotsu, Nancy A. “Helping Each Other Out:
A Study of the Mutualistic Relations of
Small Scale Foragers and Cultivators in
La Junta de Los Ríos Region, Texas and
Mexico.” Ph.D. dissertation. Austin:
Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin, 1994.
Page 278

Kenmotsu, Nancy A. and Mariah F. Wade.
Amistad National Recreation Area, Del
Rio, Texas, American Indian Tribal
Affiliation Study Phase I: Ethnohistoric
Literature Review. The Texas
Department of Transportation,
Archaeological Studies Program,
Report No. 34. Washington, D.C.: The
National Park Service, Department of
the Interior, 2002.
Kennedy, William. The Rise, Progress and
Prospects of the Republic of Texas. Fort
Worth, Texas: The Molyneaux
Craftsmen, Inc., 1841, reprinted in 1925.
Krieger, Alex D. “Krieger to Louis B. Caywood,
July 12, 1944.” Correspondence on file,
National Park Service, Santa Fe.
Krieger, Alex D. “Krieger to George A. Moore,
January 29, 1945.” Correspondence on
file, National Park Service, Santa Fe.
Landfire 2008a. Rapid Assessment Reference
Condition Models. LANDFIRE Project,
U.S.DA. Forest Service, U.S.
Department of the Interior.
Web site: http://www.landfire.gov/zip/
SC/R5MQSA.pdf
Landfire 2008b. Rapid Assessment Reference
Condition Models. LANDFIRE Project,
U.S.D.A. Forest Service, U.S.
Department of the Interior.
Web site: http://www.landfire.gov/zip/
SC/R5PRBL.pdf
Landfire 2008c. Rapid Assessment Reference
Condition Models. LANDFIRE Project,
U.S.D.A Forest Service; U.S. Department of the Interior.
Web site: http://www.landfire.
gov/zip/SC/R5OASA.pdf
Landfire 2008d. Rapid Assessment Reference
Condition Models.LANDFIRE Project,
U.S.D.A. Forest Service, U.S.
Department of the Interior.
Web site: http://www.landfire.gov/zip/
SC/R5GCPP.pdf
Latorre Felipe A. and Dolores L. Latorre. The
Mexican Kickapoo Indians. New York:
Dover Publications, 1991.
Lee, Aubra L. Floral and Faunal Analyses of
House Remains at Los Adaes,

References

Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana.
Unpublished M.A. thesis, Northwestern
State University of Louisiana,
Natchitoches, 1986.
Lemée, Patricia R. “Tíos and Tantes: Familial
and Political Relationships of
Natchitoches and the Spanish Colonial
Frontier,” in Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 101(3):341-350, 1998.
Lemmon, Alfred E., John T. Magill, and Jason
R. Wiese. Charting Louisiana: Five
Hundred Years of Maps. Historic New
Orleans Collection, New Orleans, 1995.
Levy, J. E. “Kiowa” in Handbook of North
American Indians,Vol. 13, Part 2, .
907–925. General editor: William C.
Sturtevant, volume editor: Raymond J.
DeMallie. Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution, 1999.
L’Herisson, Lawrence E. “The Evolution of the
Texas Road and the Sequential
Occupancy of the Adjacent Strip of
Northwestern Louisiana: 1528-1824.”
M.A. Thesis, Louisiana State University,
1981.
Louisiana Department Environmental Quality.
Web site http://www.deq.louisiana.gov/
portal/
Louisiana Department of Wildlife & Fisheries.
Threatened and Endangered Species
Table. Web site: http://www.wlf.state.
la.us/experience/threatened/
threatenedandendangeredtable/
Louisiana Division of Outdoor Recreation of
the Office of State Parks. State
Comprehensive Outdoor recreation Plan
(SCORP), Baton Rouge, Louisiana,
2009.
Maas, P. Otto. Viajes de misioneros franciscanos
a la conquista del Nuevo Mundo:
Documentos del Archivo General de
Indias (Sevilla). , Spain: Imprenta de San
Antonio, 1915.
Maestas, Enrique, G. “Culture and History of
Native American Peoples of South
Texas.” Ph.D. Dissertation. Austin:
University of Texas at Austin, 2003.
Massanet, Damián. “Carta de Don Damián
Manzanet a Don Carlos de Sigüenza

Sobre el Descubrimiento de la Bahía del
Espiritu Santo” in Quarterly of the Texas
State Historical Association. II (4), pp.
253–312. Translated in 1899 by Lilia M.
Casís. Denton: Texas State Historical
Association, 1690.
Massey, Sara R. ed. Black Cowboys of Texas.
Centennial Series of the Association of
Former Students, No. 86. College
Station, Texas: Texas A&M University
Press, 2003.
McGraw, A. Joachim. “Early Roads across the
South Texas Landscape” in A Texas
Legacy, the Old San Antonio Road and El
Caminos Reales: A Tricentennial History,
1691–1991. Edited by A. Joachim
McGraw, John W. Clark, Jr., and
Elizabeth A. Robbins. Austin: Texas
State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, 1991a.
McGraw, A. Joachim. “Spanish Mission
Ranchos Along El Camino Pita and
Camino de en Medio (or Lower
Presidio Road)” in A Texas Legacy, the
Old San Antonio Road and El Caminos
Reales: A Tricentennial History, 1691–
1991. Edited by A. Joachim McGraw,
John W. Clark, Jr., and Elizabeth A.
Robbins. Austin: Texas State
Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, 1991b.
McGuire, James P. The Hungarian Texans. San
Antonio: The University of Texas
Institute of Texan Cultures at San
Antonio, 1991.
Meacham, T. L. “The Population of Spanish and
Mexican Texas, 1716–1836.” Ph.D.
dissertation. Austin: University of Texas
at Austin, 1999.
Mulroy, Kevin. Freedom on the Border: The
Seminole Maroons in Florida, the Indian
Territory, Coahuila and Texas. Lubbock:
Texas Tech University Press, 1991.
National Park Service. National Historic Trail
Feasibility Study and Environmental
Assessment: El Camino Real de los Tejas,
Texas and Louisiana. Document on file
at National Trails—Intermountain
Office. Santa Fe, New Mexico: National
Park Service, 1998a.
Page 279

R eferences

National Park Service. Rancho de las Cabras
Cultural Landscape Report. Document
on file at San Antonio Missions
National Historical Park. San Antonio,
Texas: National Park Service, 1998b.
National Park Service. “Draft Comprehensive
Management Plan/Environmental
Assessment/Environmental Impact
Statement for Ala Kahakai National
Historic Trail.” Washington, D.C.:
National Park Service, Department of
the Interior, 2008.
National Park Service. National Parks of Texas.
Web site: http://www.nps.gov/state/tx
Nesmith, Samuel P. The Belgian Texans. San
Antonio: The University of Texas,
Institute of Texan Cultures at San
Antonio, 1982.
Nesmith, Samuel P. The Mexican Texans. The
University of Texas, Institute of Texan
Cultures at San Antonio, 1986.
Omernik and Bailey. “Distinguishing between
watersheds and ecoregions” in Journal
of American Water Resources
Association. Vol. 33 (5), pp. 935–949.
Middleburg, Virginia: American Water
Resources Association, 1997.
Olsen, R. Dale. “French Pirates and Privateers
in Texas” in The French in Texas:
History, Migration, Culture. Edited by
François Lagarde. Austin: University of
Texas Press, 2003.
Parks, Douglas R. “Kitsai” in Handbook of
North American Indians. Vol. 13, Part 2,
pp. 953–964. General editor: William C.
Sturtevant, volume editor: Raymond J.
DeMallie. Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution, 2001.
Perttula, Timothy K. The Caddo Nation:
Archaeological and Ethnohistoric
Perspectives. Austin: University of Texas
Press, 1992.
Perttula, Timothy K. and James E. Bruseth, eds.
The Native History of the Caddo: Their
Place in Southeastern Archeology and
Ethnohistory, Studies in Archeology No.
30. Austin: Texas Archaeological
Research Laboratory, University of
Texas at Austin, 1998.
Page 280

Pike, Zebulon M. The Boy’s Story of Zebulon M.
Pike. Edited by Mary Gay Humphreys.
New York: Scribner’s Sons, 1911.
Poyo, Gerald E. “The Canary Islands
Immigrants of San Antonio: From
Ethnic Exclusivity to Community in
Eighteenth-Century Bexar” in Tejano
Origins in Eighteenth-Century San
Antonio. Edited by Gerald E. Poyo and
Gilberto M. Hinojosa. Austin:
University of Texas Press, 1991.
Poyo, Gerald E. and Gilberto M. Hinojosa.
“Introduction” in Tejano Origins in
Eighteenth-Century San Antonio. Edited
by Gerald E. Poyo and Gilberto M.
Hinojosa. Austin: University of Texas
Press, 1991.
Price, Byron B. “Introduction” in The Trail
Drivers of Texas. Austin: University of
Texas Press, 2003.
Ricklis, Robert A. The Karankawa Indians of
Texas, An Ecological Study of Cultural
Tradition and Change. Austin:
University of Texas Press, 1995.
Sabo, George III. “The Structure of Caddo
Leadership in the Colonial Era” in The
Native History of the Caddo: Their Place
in Southeastern Archeology and
Ethnohistory. Studies in Archeology No.
30. Austin: Texas Archaeological
Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin, 1998.
Sancee, Melvin M., Jr. The Afro-American
Texans. San Antonio: The University of
Texas Institute of Texan Cultures at San
Antonio, 1987.
Santos, R. G. Aguayo Expedition into Texas, 1721:
An annotated translation of the five
versions of the diary kept by Fr. Juan
Antonio de la Peña. Austin: Jenkins
Publishing Company, 1981.
Schuetz, Mardith K. “The Indians of the San
Antonio Missions, 1718–1821.” Ph.D.
Dissertation. Austin: The University of
Texas at Austin, 1980.
Scott, Florence J. Royal Land Grants North of
the Río Grande. Rio Grande City, Texas:
La Retama Press, 1969.

References

Scott, Samuel Parsons, transl. Kingdom of
Castile Las Siete Partidas. New York:
Commerce Clearing House, Looseleaf
Service Division of the Corporation
Trust Co., 1931.
Sjoberg, Andrée F. “The Bidai Indians of
Southeastern Texas.” MA Thesis.
Austin: The University of Texas at
Austin, 1951.
Smith, Foster T. The Caddo Indians, Tribes at the
Convergence of Empires,1542–1854.
College Station: Texas A&M University
Press, 1995.
Smith, Foster T. The Caddos, the Wichitas, and
the United States, 1846–1901. College
Station: Texas A&M University Press,
1996.
Spearing, Darwin. Roadside Geology of Texas.
Missoula, Montana: Mountain Press
Publishing Company, 1998.
Stephenson, Lane B. and Gilberto Rafael Cruz.
Let there be Towns: Spanish Municipal
Origins in the American Southwest,
1610–1810. College Station: Texas A&M
University Press, 1997.
Story, Dee Ann, ed. The Deshazo Site:
Nacogdoches County, Texas: Vol. 1,
Permit Series Report 7. Austin: Texas
Antiquities Committee, 1981.
Swanton, John R. Linguistic Material From the
Tribes of Southern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin No. 127.
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
Institution, 1940.
Swanton, John R. Source Material on the History
and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin
No. 132. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
Institution, 1942.
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
Air Quality Index.
Web site: http://www.tceq.state.tx.us/
cgi-bin/compliance/monops/aqi_rpt.pl
Texas Parks and Wildlife. State Comprehensive
Outdoor Recreation Plan (SCORP),
Texas 2005.

Texas Parks and Wildlife. Texas State Park
Guide.
Web site: http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/
publications/parkguide
Texas Parks and Wildlife. Endangered and
Threatened Species.
Web site: http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/
huntwild/wild/species/endang/index.
phtml
Texas Parks and Wildlife. Wildlife Fact Sheets:
Texas Blind Salamander (Eurycea
rathbuni).
Web site: http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/
huntwild/wild/species/
The Institute of Texan Cultures. The German
Texans. San Antonio: The University of
Texas, Institute of Texan Cultures at
San Antonio, 1970.
The Institute of Texan Cultures. The Norwegian
Texans. San Antonio: The University of
Texas, Institute of Texan Cultures at
San Antonio, 1970a.
The Institute of Texan Cultures. The French
Texans. San Antonio: The University of
Texas, Institute of Texan Cultures at
San Antonio, 1973.
The Institute of Texan Cultures. The Italian
Texans. The University of Texas,
Institute of Texan Cultures at San
Antonio, 1973a.
The Institute of Texan Cultures. The Greek
Texans. The University of Texas,
Institute of Texan Cultures at San
Antonio, 1973.
Thonhoff, Robert H. The Texas Connection with
the American Revolution. Austin: Eakin
Press, 1999.
Tous, Gabriel. “The Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre
Expedition of 1709” in Preliminary
Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical
Society. . 1 (3). Austin: Texas Catholic
Historical Society, 1930.
Troike, Rudolph C. “Karankawa Linguistic
Data: in La Salle, the Mississippi and the
Gulf, pp.288–301. Edited by R. S.
Weddle. College Station: Texas A&M
University Press, 1988.
Page 281

R eferences

Tunnell, Curtis. Record of Site Survey and
Reconnaissance Work in Houston
County. Document on file at National
Trails—Intermountain Region, Santa
Fe, New Mexico. Washington D.C.:
National Park Service, Department of
the Interior, 1965.
Urrutia, Joseph de and Nicolas LaFora, Mapa,
que comprende la Frontera, de los
Dominios del Rey, en la America
Septentrional, según el original que hizo
D[on] Joseph de Urrutia, sobre varios
puntos observados por èl, y el Capitán de
Yngenieros D[on] Nicolás Lafora, y sobre
los más verídicos, y diarias noticias, que
pudieron recojer en el tiempo de la
Expedición, que hizieron por dicha
Frontera à las ordenes del Mariscal de
Campo, Marques de Ruby. Madrid 1769.
Scanned copy courtesy of the U.S.
Library of Congress. Washington, D.C.
U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. Corps Lakes
Gateway, Louisiana.
Web site: http://corpslakes.usace.army.
mil/visitors/states.cfm?state=LA
U.S. Bureau of Land Management.
GeoCommunicator National Integrated
Land System.
Web site: www.geocommunicator.com
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Critical Habitat
Portal.
Web site: http://criticalhabitat.fws.gov/
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Southeast Region
Web site: http://www.fws.gov/
southeast/es/
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Southwest Region
Ecological Services.
Web site: http://www.fws.gov/
southwest/es/
U.S. Forest Service. National Forests &
Grasslands in Texas.
Web site: http://www.fs.fed.us/r8/texas
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Primary Distinguishing Characteristics
of Level III Ecoregions of the Continental
United States. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency,
Department of the Interior.

Page 282

U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land
Management, New Mexico State Office.
Decision Record and Resource
Management Plan Amendment for Fire
and Fuels Management on Public Land in
New Mexico and Texas. No. BLM-NMPL-013-2824. Washington D.C.; Bureau
of Land Management, Department of
the Interior, 2004.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Draft
Primary Distinguishing Characteristics
of Level III Ecoregions of the Continental
United States. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency,
Department of the Interior, 2002.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The
Green Book Nonattainment Areas for
Criteria Pollutants. Web site: http://
www.epa.gov/air/oaqps/greenbook/
index.html
Wade, M. F. “The Native Americans of the
Texas Edwards Plateau and Related
Areas: 1582–1799.” Ph.D. dissertation.
Austin: The University of Texas at
Austin, 1998.
Wade, M. F. The Native Americans of the Texas
Edwards Plateau, 1582–1799. Austin: The
University of Texas Press, 2003.
Walter, Tamra L. The Dynamics of Culture
Change and its Reflection in the
Archeological Record at Espíritu Santo de
Zuñiga, Victoria County, Texas. Special
Publication No. 7, Southern Texas
Archeological Association, and Studies
in Archeology No. 23. Austin: Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin, 1997.
Walter, T. M. Espíritu Santo de Zúñiga: A
Frontier Mission in South Texas. Austin:
University of Texas Press, 2007.
Webb, Walter Prescott. The Texas Rangers: A
Century of Frontier Defense. Austin:
University of Texas Press, 2000.
Weddle, Robert S. Wilderness Manhunt: The
Spanish Search for La Salle. Austin:
University of Texas Press. Austin, 1973.
Weddle, Robert S. San Juan Bautista: Gateway
to Spanish Texas.Austin: University of
Texas Press, 1991.

References

Weddle, Robert S. and Patricia R. Lemée.
“Exploring the Texas Coast: Bellisle,
Béranger, and La Harpe (1719–1721)” in
The French in Texas: History, Migration,
Culture. Edited by François Lagarde.
Austin: University of Texas Press, 2003.
Weddle, Robert S. and Patricia R. Lemée.
“Nuevo Santander” in The Handbook of
Texas Online.
Web site: http://www.tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/NN/usnue.
html
West, Elizabeth H. “De León’s Expedition of
1689” in Texas Historical Association
Quarterly. Vol. 8 (3), pp.199–224.
Denton: Texas State Historical
Association, 1905.
Wild and Scenic Rivers Council. National Wild
& Scenic Rivers System.
Web site: www.rivers.gov
Williams, Jeffrey M. “GIS Aided Archeological
Research of El Camino Real de los Tejas
with Focus on the Landscape and River
Crossings along El Camino Carretera.”
M.S. thesis. Nacogdoches: Stephen F.
Austin State University, 1997.
Winfrey, D. H.and James M. Day. The Indian
Papers of Texas and the Southwest,
1825–1916. Vols. 1–4. Austin, Texas:
Pemberton Press, 1966.
Wright, H. A., Bailey, A. W. Fire Ecology: United
States and Southern Canada.New
Jersey: John Wiley and Sons, 1982.
Wright, M. H. A Guide to the Indian Tribes of
Oklahoma. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press, 1951.

Page 283

Page 284

Planning Team and Preparers

PLANNING TEAM AND PREPARERS
Planning Team
The principal authors of this document
were Susan C. Boyle, Sharon A. Brown, and
Aaron Mahr. All of the team members
contributed to the development of
alternatives, sections of text, and draft
reviews.

National Park Service,
Washington D.C. Office
Tokey Boswell
Steve Elkinton

Petroglyph National Monument
Joseph Sánchez

National Trails
Intermountain Region

Federally Recognized Tribes

Consultants

State of Texas
Texas Historical Commission

Aaron Mahr
Susan C. Boyle
Sharon A. Brown
John Cannella
Otis Halfmoon
Brooke Safford

National Trails
Intermountain Region
Steve Burns Chavez
Carol S. Clark
Patrick Johnston
Lee Kreutzer
Lynne Mager
Josina Martinez
Frank Norris
Michael Romero Taylor

Bureau of Land Management,
New Mexico State Office
Sarah Schlanger

San Antonio Missions
National Historical Park
Jim Oliver
Al Remley
Susan Snow

Cane River Creole
National Historical Park
Laura Gates
Dustin Fuqua

Alabama-Coushatta Tribe of Texas
Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma
Comanche Nation
Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas
Kiowa Indian Tribe of Oklahoma
Tonkawa Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma
Tunica-Biloxi Tribe
Wichita and Affiliated Tribes

Jim Bruseth
Terry Colley
Brett Cruse
April Garner
Janie Hedrick
Ramona Hutchinson
Jennifer Price
Susan Shore
Greg Smith
Donna Williams
Mark Wolf

Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department
Cindy Brandimarte
Ellen Buchanan
John Ferguson
Wesley Hamilton
Rich Mahoney
Todd McMakin
Shane Mooneyham
Barbara Parmley
Janie Reeh
Tara Tucker
Karen Watson

Page 285

P lanning T eam

and

P reparers

Texas Department
of Transportation
Michael Chacon
Lisa Hart
Al McGraw

The Alamo

Craig Stinson

State of Louisiana

Raymond Berthelot
Linda Curtis Spark
Rhonda Gauthier
Irish Harper
Jeremy McCormick
Chip McGimsey
Rick Seales

Consultants

Rufus Davis
Bill Foster
Robert Hicks
Connie Hodges
Meredith Kaplan
Jere L. Krakow
Deirdre Morgan-Remley
John Purcell
Robert Shook
Robert Thonhoff
Mariah Wade
Maureen Winn

University of Utah
Phoebe McNeelly
Adam Naisbitt

Stephen F. Austin State University
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
Southwest Regional Office
Louella Roberts

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
Southeast Regional Office
John Gruhala

El Camino Real de los Tejas
National Historic Trail Association
Duke Lyons
Lucile Estell
Gary Dunnam
Steven Gonzáles
Joy Graham
Jean M. Heide
Burma Hyde
Kate Johnson
Lila Knight
Patsy Light
Bea McKinney
Andrew Samson
Richard Santos
Raymond Starr
John Stockley
Willene Taylor
Margaret Trouart
Mary Waters
Maureen Winn

Page 286

George Avery
Carolyn Spears
Chris Talbot
Jeff Williams

Northwestern Louisiana
State University
Peter Gregory
Sheila Richmond
Jeffrey S. Girard
Rhonda Gauthier

Texas State University
Frank de la Teja

Document Design/Production
Mark Talbot, Erin Lakai
Xplore-Design.com

Logo Design
Paul Singer

INDEX
A

I

African Americans
air quality
Alto

Interpretation
iv , 18 , 40 , 47 , 48 , 50 , 59 , 105 , 115 ,
211 , 213 , 246 , 259 , 260

85

27 , 92 , 97

98 , 105 , 73 , 161 , 190 , 213 , 240

Austin
10 , 16 , 21 , 23 , 76 , 80 , 83 , 85 , 92 , 93 , 94 , 96 ,
97 , 98 , 102 , 103 , 104 , 152 , 160 , 164 , 166 , 167 , 199 , 214 , 215 ,
225 , 240 , 244 , 245 , 246 , 247 , 248 , 249 , 250 , 251 , 252 , 253 ,
256

B

L
Los Adaes State Historic Park
106

M
Many

Bastrop
23 , 98 , 102 , 103 , 104 , 164 , 187 , 188 , 213 , 235 ,
236 , 237 , 238 , 240
Bastrop State Park

187 , 240

42 , 51 , 105 ,

213 , 240

McKinney Falls State Park

167 , 215 , 240

Mission Espíritu Santo de Zúñiga

9 , 168

Mission Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe
12

C
Caddo Mounds State Historic Site
240

105 , 213 ,

Cane River Creole National Historical Park
139 , 213 , 240
Casa Navarro State Historic Site

9,

Mission Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria
9 , 165
Mission Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria
del Cañón
9
Mission Nuestra Señora de la Luz

9 , 12

106 , 213

Mission Nuestra Señora de la Purísima
Concepción
9 , 159

cultural resources
5 , 24 , 27 , 28 , 31 , 37 , 41 , 49 ,
53 , 60 , 71 , 86 , 87 , 111 , 116 , 119 , 133 , 134

Mission Nuestra Señora de la Purísima
Concepción de Acuña
9

E

Mission Nuestra Señora de los Dolores de
los Ais
105 , 167

Centerville

214 , 240

Environmental Justice
ethnographic overview
Ethnographic Resources

25 , 31 , 103
24
7 , 61 , 113

152 , 193 , 214 , 240

Fort Jesup State Historic Site

213 , 240

Fort St. Jean Baptiste State Historic Site
105 , 157

G
Goliad
10 , 11 , 12 , 14 , 21 , 24 , 79 , 86 , 89 , 90 , 93 , 95 ,
96 , 98 , 101 , 140 , 163 , 165 , 191 , 192 , 214 , 235 , 236 , 237 , 239 ,
240
Goliad State Historical Park
Grapeland

51 , 106 , 214

214

9 , 13 ,

Mission Nuestra Señora del Rosario de los
Cujanes
9 , 163
Mission San Antonio de Valero
160 , 188 , 192

F
Fort Boggy State Park

Mission Nuestra Señora del Refugio
79

Mission San Bernardo

9 , 10 , 89 ,

9 , 92

Mission San Francisco de la Espada
160 , 169
Mission San Francisco de los Tejas

9 , 14 ,
8, 9

Mission San Francisco Solano

9

Mission San Francisco Xavier

9 , 11 , 83 , 166

Mission San Francisco Xavier de Nájera
9
Mission San Ildefonso

9 , 166

Mission San José de los Nazonis (de los
Nacogdoches)
9
Mission San Juan Bautista
Mission San Juan Capistrano

9
9 , 86 , 160 , 199
Page 287

I ndex

R

Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz
9 , 12
Mission San Miguel de los Adaes
Mission Santa Cruz de San Sabá

Robeline

9 , 12

Mission Santísimo Nombre de María
9
Mission Tejas State Park
240

recreation

9
8,

51 , 106 , 158 , 214 ,

51 , 105 , 106 , 185 , 213

S
San Antonio
51 , 72 , 73 , 75 , 76 , 77 , 78 , 81 , 82 , 83 ,
85 , 86 , 92 , 93 , 94 , 95 , 96 , 97 , 98 , 99

N

San Antonio Missions National Historical
Park
6 , 37 , 51 , 105 , 132 , 133 , 139 , 244 , 249

Nacogdoches
9 , 10 , 12 , 15 , 20 , 24 , 76 , 77 , 80 , 81 ,
82 , 86 , 88 , 98 , 106 , 73 , 152 , 166 , 167 , 188 , 189 , 195 , 196 ,
214 , 235 , 237 , 238 , 239 , 240 , 251 , 253

Stone Fort Museum
106 , 166 , 198 , 214 . See
also Old Stone Fort/Stone Fort Museum

Natchitoches
i , iii , 3 , 5 , 7 , 9 , 10 , 15 , 19 , 23 , 24 ,
72 , 78 , 80 , 81 , 83 , 86 , 88 , 92 , 94 , 96 , 98 , 99 , 100 , 101 ,
103 , 104 , 105 , 107 , 108 , 139 , 150 , 156 , 157 , 158 , 185 , 186 ,
187 , 213 , 235 , 237 , 238 , 239 , 240 , 243 , 246 , 247 , 248

soils

28 , 29 , 92 , 93 , 94 , 95 , 96 , 102

T
threatened and endangered species
139

National Environmental Policy Act
i , iii ,
iv , 5 , 6 , 25 , 26 , 30 , 32 , 39 , 55 , 56 , 111 , 112 , 124 , 125

Toledo Bend Reservoir

National Historic Preservation Act
i , iii ,
6 , 25 , 30 , 32 , 45 , 111 , 116 , 117 , 118 , 119 , 120 , 121 , 130 , 141

V

National Register of Historic Places
45 ,
116 , 119 , 159 , 160 , 161 , 162 , 163 , 164 , 165 , 166 , 167 , 168 ,
169 , 170 , 211 , 247
National Trails System Act of 1968
Natural Resources

97

27 , 29 , 64 , 65 , 122 , 124 , 125

Nomadic American Indian Tribes

73

O
Old Stone Fort/Stone Fort
Museum
240

P
Presidio Nuestra Señora de Loreto

9

Presidio Nuestra Señora de Loreto (La
Bahía)
9
Presidio Nuestra Señora de los Dolores
9
Presidio Nuestra Señora del Pilar
247

9 , 243 ,

Presidio San Agustín de Ahumada

9 , 12

Presidio San Antonio de Bexar
161 , 162

9 , 10 , 13 ,

Presidio San Francisco Xavier

9 , 166

Presidio San Juan Bautista del Río Grande
9 , 12
Presidio San Luis de las Amarillas

Page 288

3 , 23 , 26 , 30

9 , 12

32 ,

100 , 197 , 198

vegetation
28 , 32 , 37 , 64 , 92 , 93 , 94 , 95 , 96 , 101 ,
102 , 103 , 111 , 122 , 123 , 124 , 153 , 194 , 195
visitor experience
128
visual resources
Visual Resources

29 , 35 , 37 , 52 , 66 , 126 , 127 ,
30 , 92 , 98
30

INDEX TO FIGURES, MAPS & TABLES
FIGURES
Figure 1-1. Ranches and Roads in Wilson
and Karnes Counties page 13
Figure 2-1. Logo for El Camino Real de los
Tejas National Historic Trail page 38
Figure J-1. Original Route Sign
Figure J-2. Crossing Sign

page 231

page 232

Figure J-3. Local Tour Route Sign

page 233

Figure J-4. State Historic Site Sign

page 234

Figure J-5. Site Directional Sign

page 235

Map L-9: Percentage of Hispanic
Population by County/Parish page 247
Map L-10: Major Rivers Along El Camino
Real de los Tejas page 248

TABLES
Table 1-1. Presidios and Missions
Associated with El Camino Real de los
Tejas National Historic Trail (1690–
1793) page 9
Table 1-2. High Potential Sites and
Segments page 24

MAPS

Table 2-1. Alternative A: Annual
Operations Costs page 41

Map 1-1. Congressionally Designated
Routes, page 4

Table 2-2. Alternative B: Annual
Estimated Costs page 54

Map 1-2. Individual Trail Routes

Table 2-3: Comparison of
Alternatives page 56 - 60

page 421

Map 2-1. Possible Venues for Trail
Interpretation page 50

Table 2-4. Comparison of Impacts of
Alternatives page 62 - 69

Map E-1: El Camino Real de los
Tejas NHT High Potential Sites and
Segments page 183
Map E-2. Detailed Area of Study

page 184

Map E-3. Detailed Area of Study

page 185

Map E-4. Detailed Area of Study

page 186

Map E-5. Detailed Area of Study

page 187

Map E-6. Detailed Area of Study

page 188

Map E-7. Detailed Area of Study

page 189

Map E-8. Detailed Area of Study

page 190

Map E-9. Detailed Area of Study

page 191

Map E-10. Detailed Area of Study

page 192

Map E-11. Detailed Area of Study

page 193

Map E-12. Detailed Area of Study

page 194

Map E-13. Detailed Area of Study

page 195

Map E-14. Detailed Area of Study

page 196

Map L-3: Ecological Regions Crossed by
the Designated Routes page 241
Map L-4: Population Growth by County/
Parish page 242
Map L-5: Median Household Income by
County/Parish page 243
Map L-6: Percentage of Families below
Poverty Line by County/Parish page 244
Map L-7: Percentage of Civiliance
Employed by County/Parish page 245
Map L-8: Percentage of High School
Graduates by County/Parish page 246

Table 3-1: Major Rivers along El Camino
Real de Los Tejas National Historic
Trail page 102103
Tables showing Possible Venues for Trail
Interpretation:
Table I-1, Louisiana
Table I-2, Texas

page 227;

page 227

Table I-1, Federally Listed Threatened
and Endangered Plant Species page 237
Table K-2, Federally Listed Threatened
and Endangered Animal Species page 237
Table K-3, Proposed and Candidate
Endangered Animal Species page 239
Table L-1. Median Household Income and
Percentage of Families Below the Poverty
Line by County/Parish, 2000 page 249
Table L-2. Population Data for Counties
and Parishes Crossed by the Trail, 1990–
2000 page 250
Table L-3. Percentage of Civilian
Population Employed and Percentage of
High School Graduates, 2000 page 251
Table L-4. Percentage of Ethnic Groups
in Counties and Parishes Crossed by the
Trail, 2000 page 252
Table L-5: Public Land Ownership in
Texas and Louisiana page 253
Table L-6. Recreational Visits to Public
Sites along El Camino Real de los Tejas
National Historic Trail, 2007–2008 page 254
Page 289

The National Park Service cares for the special places saved by the American People
so that all may experience our heritage.

Experience your America™

As the Nation’s principal conservation agency, the Department of the Interior has
responsibility for most of our nationally owned public lands and natural resources.
This includes fostering sound use of our land and water resources; protecting our fish,
wildlife and biological diversity; preserving the environmental and cultural values
of our national parks and historical places; and providing for the enjoyment of life
through outdoor recreation. The department assesses our energy and mineral resources
and works to ensure that their development is in the best interest of all our people by
encouraging stewardship and citizen participation in their care. The department also
has a major responsibility for American Indian reservation communities and for
people who live in island territories under U.S. administration
930/107,170 September 2011

A This publication printed with 30% post-consumer recycled paper

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail

Comprehensive Management Plan/Environmental Assessment
Louisiana • Texas

