The Oklahoma
Anthropological
Society

Trowel Marks

Quarterly News

Vol. 5 No. 2

OAS Fall Meeting
to explore rock art
value to archeology

Rock art and it’s
value to regional archeology will be the theme of the
Oklahoma Anthropological
Society Fall Meeting.
Set Saturday, Nov. 2
at the University of Oklahoma in Norman, the session
will draw on speakers with
varied backgrounds. They
will share the dias with a
brief OAS board meeting.
OAS President
Debra Baker will preside.
The meeting’s title
is “Petroglyphs and pictographs: A rock art update.”
Open to the public as well as
OAS members, admission
will be a small charge at the
door.
Among speakers will
be Leland Bement, a staff
member of the Oklahoma Archeological Survey; George
Sabo, director of the Arkansas Archeological Survey;
Gary Moeller, art professor
at Rogers State University,
Claremore; and K.C. Carlson, a Ph.D. candidate at
the University of Oklahoma.
Dr. Bement will
discuss rock art of the South
Texas region. Dr. Sabo will
present an update on rock
art in Arkansas.
Moeller, long a student of rock art drawing of
examples he has examined
in Oklahoma, New Mexico
and Hawaii, will discuss the
art of rock art. Carlson will
address rock art of Oklahoma’s Black Mesa.
Advising on the program are OU anthropologists
Bement, Susan Vehik and
Bonnie Pitblado.

Summer 2013

Dig proves battleground

Longest site yields
Wichita fort features,
many buffalo bones

Volunteers found more features than artifacts at the 2013 OAS
Spring Dig on the Red River.
Archeologist Richard Drass
led the May 24-June 2 excavation at
the Longest site 34JFI.
Located adjacent to Texas,
Longest is on the north bank of the
Red River in Jefferson County.
On a terrace above the
stream’s sandy banks, a trading fort
built by Wichita Indians and their allies
successfully repulsed an attack by
Spanish soldiers in 1759. Today the
landscape is a smooth, sandy wheat
Charles Cheatham, Oklahoma City, talks screenfield owned by several generations of
ing techniques with Jordan and Rhett Longest,
farmers.
Ringling, children of the Longest farm family,
“We want to thank the Lonnamesake of the dig site.
gest family for their interest and
hospitality in allowing OAS
to excavate,” Dr. Drass said.
“Brenda and Robin Longest
gave us permission to dig.
It’s a tale of two visitor centers.
Robin’s son, Rhett and his
Honey Springs has a beautiful parking lot yet lacks a
sister, Jordan, helped in
building. While Fort Towson has a fine new building, there’s
the excavations. And Rhett
no money to design and display exhibits.
backfilled the excavations on
Therein lies the quandary of two of the state's most
Sunday before we left.”
historic sites, each benefitting in the past from archeological
Dr. Drass, a staff
research. It’s a challenge to finish construction and exhibits in
member of the Oklahoma Ara time of fiscal austerity, said Kathy Dickson, Museums and
cheological Survey, directed
Historic Sites Director at the Oklahoma Historical Society.
the dig. As they have in the
“I think we’ve done an incredible amount of work with
past, joining him as dig leadthe staff and money we have,” she says of historic Fort Towers were Steven Perkins of
son, one of the earliest military outposts in the region.
Oklahoma State University
As for Honey Springs, the state’s ranking Civil War
and Susan Vehik of the Unibattle site, construcversity of Oklahoma.
tion is still awaiting final
Although dug by
paperwork.
University of Oklahoma
“We just have to
anthropologist Robert Bell at
Simply fill out the OAS
get a deed signed and
mid-century, the site drew its
Membership Form in
we can start construcfirst appearance from OAS.
this newsletter, add a
tion as early as this fall,”
Volunteers saw enough
check, and mail. That
she says of the Honey
artifacts to convince them of
will do it for another
Springs visitors center.
habitation.
year. We thank you.
After that, it’s about 18
Digging squares as
(See Spring Dig Page 4)
(See Centers Page 8)

Limited funds slow completion
of historic sites visitor centers

Time to renew

Events of Interest
August

Trowel Marks Newsletter
A quarterly publication
of The Oklahoma Anthropological Society

Executive Officers

Debra Baker, Lawton, President (580) 678-1416
Ed Mayfield, Oklahoma City, Vice President (405) 525-3343
Cathy Compton, Oklahoma City, Treasurer (405) 308-2829
Cari Foster, Oklahoma City, Secretary (405) 320-1993

		
Membership
You can find an application to join OAS or renew your
membership, and information about its contribution to
Oklahoma archeology, in this OAS Newsletter and on
the OAS Website www.okarcheology.org. Visitors are
always welcome at Chapter Meetings.
OAS offers varied memberships. All members receive
the Society’s annual Bulletin of Oklahoma Archeology
and quarterly Trowel Marks Newsletter. Contributing,
Sustaining, Life, and Institutional members also receive OAS Memoirs. For more information, contact
Cathy Compton at (405) 308-2829
		
Publications
Order handbooks, point guides, memoirs and other
publications and material of the Society from the Publications Director. Contact Amanda Regnier at aregnier@ou.edu. OAS publications and materials are
listed on the OAS Website.
OAS Newsletter
Editors Jon and Diana Denton, Mustang
(405) 376-0074 or jonrdenton@aol.com
Opinions in this publication, unless otherwise identified, are those of the editor and contributors and do
not necessarily reflect the policies of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society.

OAS Website www.okarcheology.org
Miss your OAS Newsletter? Call (405) 376-0074

2

Trowel Marks Summer 2013

31 Plains Moccasin Class, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., Oklahoma History Center, 800 Nazih Zuhdi Drive, Oklahoma City. Web site
www.okhistory.org. Call (405) 522-0791.

September
22-23 Autumn Equinox Walks, guided tours at 11 a.m.,
2 and 7 p.m., Spiro Mounds Archaeological Center, Spiro.
Guides recount the powerful Caddoans who created the
mounds between 900 and 1450 A.D See www.okhistory.org or
call (918) 962-2062.
28 Fort Reno Candlelight Tour, 7 p.m. (arrive early). Reenactors portray individuals at Historic Fort Reno, including
Boomer David Payne, the Buffalo Soldiers, the Cheyenne
people, a Quartermaster Remount Cowboy and the Fort Reno
Gossips. Call (405) 262-3987 or 826-6426.

October
2-5 Plains Anthropological Conference, Loveland, Colo.
Papers and posters on peoples and cultures of Great Plains
area; field trips to ice age sites and trading posts; lithic raw
material exchange, keynote banquet. Web site:		
http://anthropology.colostate.edu/pages/archaeology
4-5 Fall Traders Encampment at Woolaroc Museum and
Wildlife Preserve, Bartlesville. Living history with 125 tents
and teepees set up for annual Western heritage event. Participants recreate rugged early pioneer life of trappers and
traders, with crafts, wares, food. Call (918) 336-0307
23 “Ancient Roman Gardens and the Green Ideal,” 7:30
p.m., guest lecture by Annette Giesecke sponsored by
Archaeological Institute of America, University of Oklahoma,
Norman. Location TBA. Contact fstanley@ou.edu.
25-27 Texas Archeological Society Annual Meeting, Del
Rio, Texas. Public session Friday evening, research papers
Saturday, a banquet with a nationally prominent speaker, and
tours Sunday. Web site:
www.txarch.org/Activities/AnnualMeeting/index.php.
26 “Carved in Stone: the Meaning of Gravestone Graphics,” 1-3 p.m., Oklahoma History Center, 800 Nazi Zuhdi
Drive, Oklahoma City. Acquire the skills to investigate the past
through tombstones. Contact Jason Harris at:
www.okhistory.org or at (405) 522-0765.

November
2 OAS Fall Meeting, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., University of Oklahoma, Norman. “Petroglyphs and Pictographs: A rock art update”
Speakers include Leland Bement, George Sabo, Gary Moeller
and K.C. Carlson. Public invited. See www.okarcheology.com
or call (405) 376-0074

Trowel Marks
The OAS has made
a lot of changes, or shall we
say improvements, in these
past couple of years.
Society members are
now able to pay membership
dues and purchase publications using credit cards. We
have a good start on copying all our publications into
a digital format. That makes
available past issues of publications that are no longer in
our inventory of printed originals.
* * *
Many of you know
as of January 2014, the OAS
newsletter Trowel Marks will
no longer be printed and
mailed out. It will be sent
electronically to member
email addresses.
This was a hard decision, but a feasible one, and
the bottom line is that printing
costs just became prohibitive.
However, we do realize that there are still some
people who prefer to receive
their newsletters in a hard
copy format. So we will provide this service at an additional small cost. It is added
to the membership form and
you will need to select it when
sending in your membership
application.
By the way, membership renewals will begin in
the month of October.
* * *
We have had a lot inquiries about the OAS Certification Program. I just wanted
to remind everyone that this
will not be an easy and fast
step to improvement. Yet we
are moving forward.
We also realize this
is a very important aspect
of our society, not only to
the members, but for public
awareness of archeology in

or even a newspaper on it, I
would have thought you were
insane. For most, now these
electronic devices seem to
be in every part of our daily
functions of survival.
How we read, how
we pay for things, how we socialize and communicate has
changed a lot in the past halfcentury. Therefore the Society is adapting, and much for
the better.

President Debra Baker

Debra Baker

Oklahoma. Therefore careful
consideration is being applied
in all areas of this effort.
* * *
At this time, the OAS
is planning a Fall Survey for
our 2013 fall activity. We are
planning to be surveying the
property of a long time society member Scott Roberts

near Cushing.
I want to give a special thank you to Scott for offering the property to us for
this activity. I would also like
to thank State Archeologist
Robert Brooks for his generous time in taking the lead in
supervising this activity for
the Society.
* * *
As I stated earlier, a
lot of changes are happening in the OAS. Some really
need to be made in order to
provide a better Society to
members.
We can all attest that
things that were created 3040 years ago tend to become
a little outdated, but it doesn’t
mean you get rid of it — just
improve it.
If you would have given
me an electronic device 10 or
20 years ago and told me to
read a book, a newsletter,

OAS
Membership Form

Notice
As of January 2014
OAS will switch to
an electronic version of its Trowel
Marks Newsletter.
However, printed
copies will continue
to be available for
$7.50 a year. Check
the box on the OAS
Membership Form
and add the newsletter fee to the
annual Membership
fee. Thank you.

Send a printed version of Trowel
Marks to me for an additional cost
of $7.50 a year.

( ) Active $20 Receive the annual OAS Bulletin and quarterly OAS Newsletter Trowel Marks.
( ) Student $10 Same as Active, but limited to full-time students. Enclose copy of Student ID.
( ) Contributing $35 Receive issues annually of the OAS Bulletin, the quarterly OAS Newsletter 		
Trowel Marks, and all Memoirs published by the Society during the subscription period.
( ) Sustaining $45 Receive issues the annual OAS Bulletin, the quarterly Newsletter Trowel Marks,
and all Memoirs published by the Society during the subscription period.
( ) Associate $5 for one additional member of your immediate family, $10 for two or more.
( ) Life $500 Provides all benefits of a Sustaining membership throughout the lifetime of member.
( ) Institutional Domestic $35 ( ) Institutional Canada/Mexico $40 ( ) Institutional Other $45
( ) OAS New Member Handbook $6. Recommended for new members. Everything you need to
know about the Society: its history, meetings, field activities, publication series, and more.
Name _______________________________________ Address __________________________
City ______________________ State ____________________ Zip ________________ _____
Home Phone (

) _____________ Cell (

) _______________

Email address ___________

To renew membership or join the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, fill out this form and
send it with a check or money order to Cathy Compton, OAS Membership, 401 NW 46 Terrace, Oklahoma City OK 73118.

Trowel Marks Summer 2013

3

Longest site yields signs of Wichita fort
(Continued from Page 1)
deep as 130 centimeters (4.3 feet), they turned up three copper or brass pieces in a moat. They also found pottery, lead
musket balls, iron and chert arrow heads, broken tobacco
pipes and decorative gun parts.
And buffalo.
“Buffalo bone was probably the most abundant material we found,” said Dr. Drass. There were a few mussel shell
and bird bones. In the lab, the animal remains will undergo a
microscopic search for cutting and butchering.
As for features, they appeared where the radar and
magnetic surveys suggested. Most were related to the fort.
Digging opened five excavation points. Only one was a dry
hole – a search for a house.
However, there’s promise of finding the horse corral,
Dr. Drass said. On the site’s north side, typical loamy sand
was compacted. Soil tests for phosphorus will help decide if
animals were corralled there.
Three ditches appeared, each about 10 feet apart. An
inner ring represents a subterranean apartment, one of four
mentioned in historic descriptions within the fort.
Excavations revealed an apartment measured 7.5
meters wide (24.6 feet) and about 1.3 meters (4.3 feet) deep.
A garbage pit yielded little material – organic trash long ago
turned to soil.
"Most of the excavation units inside the fort had very
few artifacts, possibly indicating people did not live there but
only used it for protection,” Dr. Drass said.
“Probably few people, if any, lived inside the fort. They
lived outside the stockade, and there is some evidence of this
from historic descriptions of the site.”
Spanish records describe a formidable stockade fort,
the village and the Indians living there. The soldiers never returned after their failure to punish the Indians for raiding south
of the river.

Directing the OAS Spring Dig were Richard Drass, left,
Stephen Perkins, center, and Susan Vehik, right. Below, OAS
Dig Chairman Andy Slaucitajs, left, and Bill Hartley prepare
an 1/8-inch screen mesh for the fine grain Longest site soil.

Above, student Matthew Davis holds a Gary metal point he
found in a north square. Below, OAS member Gerald Franklin presents a blacksmith demonstration for a fun ending to
a hard day of digging.

OAS President Debra Baker and her husband, Randy,
are flanked by volunteers Caleb at the screen and Gerald
Franklin.

4

Trowel Marks
Summer 2013

Texas ghost town
across Red River
from Longest site

Those who cross the Red River in search
of Spanish Fort, Texas, will find more than a ghost
town. They may feel they are in a state of confusion.
Located about a mile southwest of Oklahoma’s Longest archeological site, the town’s tumbledown buildings and overgrown lanes are flanked by
two Texas historical markers.
Their engravings tell of an attack on an
Photo by Sharon McAllister
Indian fort by Spanish Col. Diego Oritz Parrilla in
1759. According to the legend, well-armed Wichita
A park at Spanish Fort invites visitors to read a Texas' historical marker's version of the attack by Spanish Col. Diego Oritz Parilla against a
and Comanche Indians easily repulsed the Spanish
Wichita Indian village on the Red River, today identified as Oklahoma's
and sent them running back to their presidio.
Longest archeological site.
The markers say the battle happened in
Texas. But there’s evidence to the contrary, said
Richard Drass, a staff member of the Oklahoma
mated the native population. Those who survived moved on to join the
Archeological Survey in Norman.
nearby Wichitas. By the 1870s, the town adopted the name Burlington
“It appears, based on the Spanish descripand prospered as a supply station for drovers heading north along the
tions, that the village in the Spanish Fort area was
Chisholm Trail.
not present in 1759 when the attack occurred. We
After postal authorities rejected the name Burlington, already a
know from later visitors to Longest that a village
town in Texas, residents selected the misnomer Spanish Fort in recogniwas present at Spanish Fort for most of the period
tion of ruins nearby.
between about 1760 and 1811,” Dr. Drass said.
The town is best known as the home of a boot factory. HerDespite the Texas story carved in bronze,
man J. Justin took orders from cowboys going north. By the time they
there’s no doubt in his mind where Col. Parrilla atreturned, with cattle sold and cash in their pockets, he had their custom
tacked. It was north,
boots ready.
across the Red
When the cattle trails moved farther west and the
River in Oklahoma.
railroads bypassed the settlement, the town died. Justin
“It is now
moved his boot company to nearby Nocona. The post ofpretty much acceptfice closed by 1970.
ed that Longest was
Spanish Fort was a ghost town by 1990. Today
the site attacked by
a few families live there, although it is said to be attractthe Spanish. Only
ing attention from retirees escaping the busy Dallas-Fort
Longest matches
Worth metroplex.
the descriptions of
the setting in the
Spanish accounts
of the conflict,” Dr.
Drass said.
According
to Texas history, the
Texas town went
through several
incarnations before
settling on the name
Spanish Fort. It
started as a village
site farmed by the
Taoyayas Indians.
Photo by Sharon McAllister
Photo Courtesy Red River Historian
After the Spanish
According to a Texas History Markmade peace, the
A ghost town store at Spanish Fort, Texas.
er, Spanish Fort started as Fort Tetown became San
odoro under the Spanish, but Texas
Teodoro.
settlers gathering at the town site in
Small pox
Trowel Marks Summer 2013
the 1850s renamed it.
epidemics deci-

5

Awards recognize service to the Society

Updating Certification Program, Ethics Code
focus of annual Board, Membership meetings
Topics ranging from reorganizing the
Certification program to updating the OAS ethics statement drew discussion at the Spring 2013
OAS Board Meeting.
Held April 20 at Dale Hall at the University
of Oklahoma in Norman, the business session
anchored an all-day meeting.
The day’s theme was “OAS – A is for Anthropology: How the past informs the present, and
how research impacts current living populations as
well as an understanding of the prehistoric human
condition.”
OAS Treasurer Cathy Compton and OU
Professor Susan Vehik planned the program.
Speakers were Lauren Cleeland, Susan Vehik,
Patrick Livingood, Asa Randall, Bonnie Pitblado
and Holly Andrew.
The annual Membership Meeting followed
the regular Board Meeting.
Awards Chairman Mary McHard
drew on 2013 nominations for special
recognition.
Presented Golden Trowel awards
were Charles and Nita Cheatham, Larry
Shaver, Bill Johnson, Andy Slaucitajs and
Cathy Compton.
The Buck Wade Award recognized outstanding service by Cathy
Compton.
Certificates of Certification went
to Tom Purdin and Connie Masters for developing expertise as Level 2 Lab Techs,
Level 1 and 2 Crew Members, and Level
1 and 2 Surveyors.
In addressing the difficulty of achieving
Certification, President Baker told Board members
“Certification needs updating. The purpose is the
same – we need to develop amateur archeologists who can join professionals to document and
preserve Oklahoma’s archeological heritage. But
we want to do that in a more efficient way.”
The Certification program is largely
unchanged since its start in 1983. Today technology allows participants easier access to skills and
knowledge, Baker said.
Asked to revamp OAS certification are
Professor Bonnie Pitblado of the OU Anthropology
department and masters’ graduate degree student
Holly Andrew. They will bring a proposal back to
the OAS Board and lead the new program, Baker
said.

6

Trowel Marks Summer 2013

Former OAS President Charles
Cheatham and his wife, Nita, Oklahoma City, received Golden Trowel
awards at the annual Spring Meeting.

Elsbeth Dowd, Norman; and
Alisa Hines, Perkins.
Amanda Regnier,
Publications Chairman,
said OAS materials have
been successfully moved
to Norman for storage with
the Oklahoma Archeological
Survey.
The former storage site, a public rental in
Bethany, was no longer
satisfactory as safe. Access
to storage is available with
Regnier at the Survey office.
She said publication sales in the last quarter
totaled $283.They included
handbooks, Bell Perino Point
guides, Small Point guides,
Memoirs and Bulletins.
Copies of Memoirs
no longer in print are now
offered in a digital format
through compact disk. The
OAS Web site has been
updated to show available
materials, Regnier said.
At the Membership
Meeting, members approved
nominations as prepared by
the committee.
John Davis and
Cathy Compton volunteered
to arrange an autumn activity, possibly a survey.
Jon Denton volunteered to organize the
annual Fall Meeting. Ed
Mayfield and Larry Shaver
have agreed to help.

In another effort at updating, Ethics Committee Chairman Curt
Hendricks sought final comments on a
rewritten OAS ethics statement. Care
must be taken not to curtail legal collecting and collections, he said.
“Collectors have always been
welcome in the Society. They provide
a great resource of knowledge and
experience. It would be beneficial if they
properly record and catalogue their collections for
the advancement of archeology,” Hendricks said.
New Board members were approved as
presented by the Nominating Committee of Jon Denton, Cathy Compton, John
Davis, Nita Cheatham and
Mimi Hendricks.
Reelected to twoyear terms ending in 2015
are Debra Baker, Lawton,
President, and Ed Mayfield,
Oklahoma City, Vice President.
Newly elected
Bill Johnson, Cleveland, a stalwart
At-Large-Directors serving
OAS excavator, received a Golden
three-year terms to 2016 are
Trowel award at the 2013 Spring
Stephen Perkins, Edmond;
Membership meeting.
Francie Sisson, Anadarko;

Summer Board gets down to business,
addresses challenge and opportunity

Changing to an all-electronic newsletter, finding a way to promote and
sell memoirs, and a question about who’s responsible for leading field activity
dominated discussion at the OAS summer quarterly board meeting.
Held July 20 at the Oklahoma Archeological Survey in Norman, the
1:30 p.m. session addressed the topic of expanding support for digs. President
Debra Baker said it is the board’s responsibility, not others, to make digs happen.
In recent years, most professional OAS dig leadership has come from
the Oklahoma Archeological Survey with additional support from the Oklahoma
Historical Society. Perhaps more guidance can come from the Army Corps of
Engineers, doctoral candidates at nearby universities, or even field archeologists.
“We need to contact them and tell them we are available for digs and
surveys,” Baker said. “It’s up to us to initiate information.”
Past President Charles Cheatham suggested a letter be drafted and
sent to archeologists who might lead OAS in a dig and explain the OAS dig
schedule, purpose and capability.
“Tell them we are open to providing a service. Also put the information
on our web site,” Cheatham said.
Another topic of interest is the need to make the OAS quarterly newsletter Trowel Marks available in print as well as a digital format. Although the
newsletter becomes a digital publication in January, some members say they
prefer a hard copy.
Editor Jon Denton suggested making printed newsletters available to
members for $7.50 a year in addition to the regular membership fee. The sum
should cover printing and mailing costs.
The board approved the option of a printed newsletter.
Publications chairman Amanda Regnier noted online offers selling OAS
memoirs at a cost of $400 – far more expensive than ordering through the Society web site. She will look for a book store that might take a percentage of each
sale to list OAS publications, whether digital or printed versions.
Stillwater chapter president Alisa Hines said she is preparing an
Oklahoma Horizons report for public television. It will cover the 2012 Fall
Dig at Rose Hill Plantation near Hugo.
Scott Roberts, a Central Chapter member, suggested an OAS Fall
Survey on his ranch near Cushing. Pre-historic and historic evidence exists there, he said. He will be in contact with Oklahoma State Archeologist
Robert Brooks.
Board member John Davis suggested a 4-day survey at Honey
Springs Civil War battlefield near Checotah.

Certificates of
Certification
went to Connie
Masters and Tom
Purdin for developing expertise
as Level 2 Lab
Techs, Level 1
and 2 Crew Members, and Level 1
and 2 Surveyors.

Dig Chairman Andy Slaucitajs and Treasurer Cathy Compton each received
Golden Trowel Awards at the 2013
Spring Meeting

Central Chapter member Curt
Hendricks said he is completing an update
of the OAS Ethics statement. Final approval
will be sought at a Membership Meeting.
Chapter reports were made on
Oklahoma City, Tulsa, Stillwater and Law-

7

Officer Cathy Compton presented a Golden
Trowel Award to Webmaster Larrry Shaver at
the 2013 OAS Spring meeting.

Trowel Marks Summer 2013

7

Visitor Centers
(Continued from Page 1)
months to the finish line.
In a phrase, she says of Honey Springs, “It’s complicated.”
Fort Towson has already completed its new,
$900,000 visitors center building. Robinson and Associates of Oklahoma City did the design. Larry Finch Building Corp. of Boswell was the builder.
Dickson said the 6,000-square-foot structure simply lacks money to showcase exhibits. They will include
remnants of the 1832 paddlewheel Heroine, one of the
first steamboats to navigate the upper Red River. Oklahoma and Texas Marine archeologists dug it out of the
muddy water in 2006.
Also on display will be artifacts from the Rose Hill
cotton plantation, for several seasons an OAS dig site,
and the story of the Choctaws who resettled the area
after traveling the infamous Trail of Tears.
John Davis, Fort
Towson’s Historical Properties Manager and an OAS
Board member, said a security system is being installed.
When finished, it will allow
him to move the archeological collection into the Visitors
Center.
“If everything runs
right, by late this fall we hope
to start processing Rose Hill
Plantation artifacts,” Davis
said. “That’s something I can
do now, and I’ve got everything I need to do it with.”
Kathy Dickson
Dickson said Fort
Towson is moving into its
next phase, fund raising. She hopes to open the center in
2014.
Meanwhile, months of negotiation are almost over
at the Honey Springs Battlefield. The pact is between the
property owner, the Oklahoma Historical Society; the buyer,
Friends of Honey Springs; and the state and federal government holding the purse strings.
The arrangement calls for Friends of Honey Springs
to own and operate the 4.5-acre building site. Architectural
Design Group is the designer. Bids for prospective builders
will be advertised when all funds are arranged.
“We have a beautiful new parking lot that is finished,”
Dickson said. “We thought it would be slow to finish. What we
need now is to meet federal requirements to access the funds
for the visitors center.”
The parking lot cost $475,000. The 6,000-square-foot
building will be about $1 million for design and construction.
Another $300,000 will go to showcase exhibits.
“All together, it’s almost a $2 million project,” Dickson
said.

8

Trowel Marks Summer 2013

Photo By John Davis
Fort Towson's new Visitors Center and Musuem stands ready to
receive exhibits but awaits funds to complete the project.

Reenactment to commemorate
historic Battle of Honey Springs
Visitors are invited to participate in the 150th anniversary of the Battle of Honey Springs of July 17, 1863.
Events will culminate Nov. 9-10 with a battlefield reenactment.
Christopher Price, Honey Springs Director, is promoting the two-day event with guided and self guided tours
through the Union, Confederate and civilian camps.
Visitors also will witness military drills, cooking demonstrations and living history programs. Sutler’s Row will sell
19th century reproductions of clothing,
books and souvenirs.
In the battle,
a Union force of
3,000 troops defeated nearly 6,000
Confederates. The
victory paved the
way for the Union to
capture Fort Smith
and much of Arkansas.
Now a National Historic Landmark, the site has
also been accepted
in the Network of
Freedom. 		
The National
Park Service Underground Railroad
program attempts
to tell the comprehensive story of the
people and events
Honey Springs reenactors will
associated with the
soon march again to commemostruggle for freedom
rate a historic Civil War battle.
from enslavement.

Board adopts updated OAS Code of Ethics;
members to vote on it in November meeting
Changes in the Oklahoma Anthropological Society Code of Ethics will soon go
before the general membership for a vote.
The ballot will follow discussion at the
Fall Meeting of the Society on Nov. 2, 2013.
For those who want an advance reading, access the OAS web site at www.okarcheology.
org.
Curt Hendricks, a veteran OAS Board
Member, has simplified the Code’s wording
and added several key passages including
changes by Board members. Approval came
at the July 20 Summer Board Meeting.
“Our Society’s Code of Ethics guides
all members as we carry out the mission to increase and protect Oklahoma’s archeological
and anthropological heritage,” Hendricks said.
“Take a look at the proposed update. Please
let us know if you have any comments, questions or concerns.”
The Code’s wording can still be
changed by majority vote as part of the approval process.
What is different? Hendricks set out
an overview of each numbered paragraph in
the Code. Important changes are:
1. This paragraph adds Indian tribal

antiquities and preservation laws to the
list of laws to be complied with as Society
members or applicants for membership.
This reflects our desire to do the right thing
when Indian law applies.
2. Added to the list of Code violations are removal of artifacts from a dig site
without approval of the senior archeologist;
collection of artifacts from privately owned
land without approval of the landowner; and
the sale or trade of artifacts as a business
with the primary purpose of commercial
gain.
3. The Ethics Committee will investigate possible ethics violations and make
recommendations to the Board for a decision to continue membership, deny membership, or expel a member. The affected
person may appear before the board and
present his or her case. Expulsion or denial
of membership will still require a two-thirds
vote of the Board, as set out in the Bylaws.
4. Paragraph four was added to
highlight the positive importance of ethical
private collectors of artifacts to the promotion of archeology and the Society. It
outlines non-binding best practices for col-

Curt Hendricks

lectors so that their contributions to archeology are
enhanced and preserved for
future generations.
5. A member or
applicant for membership
can make an inquiry with the
Ethics Committee for guidance on a Code of Ethics
question.
-- Hendricks can be contacted at curtbh@cox.com

OAS Code of Ethics
Approved by the Board
Oklahoma Anthropological Society
July 20, 2013

1. Membership in the Oklahoma Anthropological Society (“the Society”) is open to any person, firm, corporation,
or other entity that supports the aims and objectives of the Society. In joining the Society, members agree to comply
with applicable federal, state, local, or Indian tribal antiquities and historic preservation laws.
2. The disregard for proper archeological field techniques; the willful destruction or distortion of archeological
data; the willful violation of applicable law noted above; removal of artifacts from a dig site without proper approval of the
senior archeologist; collection of artifacts from private land without approval of the landowner; sale or trade of artifacts as
a business with the primary purpose of commercial gain; and/or the unauthorized use of the Society’s name is a violation
of this Code.
3. A possible violation of this Code will be investigated by the Ethics Committee, which will then report its findings and recommendations to the Board of Directors. The affected person may appear before the Board to present facts
and arguments pertinent to a review. The Board may then by a two-thirds vote deny an application for membership in
the Society or expel a member for violation of the Code.
4. The Society has always welcomed those who have private artifact collections. The collection and the collector’s knowledge of its provenance, when known, have often proved invaluable to the aims of the Society and Oklahoma
archeology when examined by a professional archeologist. A member of the Society with a collection of artifacts is encouraged, but not required, to properly record and catalogue the collection for the advancement of archeology. A member
has control over the member’s lawful, private collection, of course, but is encouraged to donate or devise at death the
collection to an institution involved in the long-term furtherance of archeology and anthropology.
5. A member or applicant may request advice on a question under the Code as it concerns a proposed action or
inaction by the requestor. The request will be submitted in writing to the chair of the Ethics Committee. The Ethics Committee will then respond in writing with its opinion.

Trowel Marks Summer 2013

9

performed all menial tasks.
But the women were never
thought of as servants. They
were much respected and
their craft work was highly
valued.
Most of these
tribes were matriarchal –
the woman’s lineage was
most important. The different clans that the women
belonged to determined who
Author Kathy Gibbs, Bethany, a former OAS and Central
her son or daughter married
Chapter President, draws on several sources for the article
or could not marry. If two
below, including the authoritative “Mystic Warriors of the
young people were related
Plains” by Thomas E. Mails. She is author of “Journey of the
by their mothers’ clan, then
Cheyenne Warrior” and is now at work on her second novel.
they could not marry. The
Kathy Gibbs
most important bond led
According to many Hollywood movies, Indian women
from the mother to her child
typically sit in front of the tepees all day, tanning hides or
and to her grandchildren.
cooking while their warrior husbands go off on a dangerous
Women, as a whole, were more in touch with their
buffalo hunt or a raid with other fierce warriors.
spiritual selves than the men. A woman listened to the voice
One would think these women led a dull and unhappy
of the Spirit and her powers were greatly amplified. During
existence full of drudgery, and were dutifully bound to answer
the woman’s Moon Cycle, she became more powerful than
their husband’s beck and call.
a man. A woman had a vision quest each month of her adult
But this is not so. In the Cheyenne tribe, as well as in
life. A woman’s healing circle followed the moon and Mother
other Plains Indian cultures, the woman had a major role in
Earth.
the family and in the society. True, she did all the hard camp
A recently wedded couple usually stayed near the
work, but she was not at all as often portrayed.
wife’s mother’s dwelling, and a child was born into the wife’s
The women cooked, gathered wood and water, dried
clan. While the husband treated his mother-in-law with rethe meat, dressed the robes, made clothing, collected lodge
spect, he also preserved his ties with his own mother and with
poles, packed horses, cultivated the ground and generally
his sister’s sons.
In dating, the women were usually shy. Feminine chastity was highly prized. A suitor would only offer gifts for a virtuous girl. In the Cheyenne
marriage ceremony, it was the grandmother who performed the ceremony,
and it was the grandmother who gave the children their names.
Wives were always consulted on intimate family affairs, and many
times in general matters. Women shared in sacred rituals. Women did not
hesitate to interrupt and correct their husbands, and the husbands listened.
Contrary to the Hollywood image, women had quite a pleasurable
life. They found time to contribute, to gossip, to gamble at games.
Women readily agreed to the idea of polygamous marriages. They
had a very practical reason: Battles and raids left many more women in
camp than men. Why should a marriageable woman be left alone when
she was still valuable to the band? And life was easier when chores were
divided among all the married women.
Tradition gave the woman’s husband the first claim on her sisters,
but if she had no sisters, she could find a second wife for him from among
friends. She was always remembered as the number one wife. She was
happy that there was less work for her to do, and she had someone to talk
to when the husband was away.
White men misunderstood many things they witnessed in camps.
One misconception was seeing a woman trudge along behind her husband,
carrying a bulky load on her back while the man carried only his weapons.
Once again the arrangement was practical. People explained, if they were
Courtesy Gilcrease Museum
asked, that he was in front to break the trail for her in the summer and the
winter, and he carried his weapon ready to defend her against attacks.
Cheyenne beaded dress
While a faithful and hard working woman usually was cherished, a
marriage could be dissolved without a fuss. If a woman wished to leave her
husband, she merely moved his weapons and bed outside the teepee, for
she owned the lodge and everything else in it.
Trowel Marks Summer 2013

Window on the Past

By Kathy Gibbs

The Plains Indian: The role
of women in Cheyenne culture

10

(Continued on Page 11)

The Plains Indian: Women in Cheyenne culture
(Continued from Page 10)
As far as the children were concerned, the wife was the major caregiver
since the father was often away. The mother
became the source of wisdom, affection
and comfort. She was the one who taught
her child to be healthy, and encourage her
son to fight and be strong. She saw that her
daughters knew how to cook and sew. She
urged her children to be respectful, with strict
discipline also coming from other relatives.
Plains women enjoyed playing
games in which they had to guess which
hand hid a bone or small object. They would
make noises and clap to distract others from
seeing which hand held the object, and they
would bet their combs, beadwork, and other
personal items in friendly competition.
As the men became preoccupied
with hunting, horse trading and coup counting, the women of the Plains became more
compelled to find new ways to assert their
role in the society. So a woman’s worth to
her family and the community came to rest
on her ability to make and decorate a wide
range of items – not only for the family but
for trade. A woman’s reputation rose from
her artistic talents.
One very important organization for
Cheyenne women was the Quillers Society.
Women got together and invited a
young woman to come to a feast celebrating
the quilling of her first robe.
The society offered graded memberships, based on particular items the woman
learned to make. In order, they were for
moccasins, baby cradles, stars for orna-

Courtesy Woolaroc Museum
Cheyenne buckskin shirt

ments on a lodge, buffalo robes, lodge linings, back rests and parfleches. This society
became as important to the women as the
warrior societies were for the men.
The women met at certain times to
exhibit and talk over their work and explain
how they did it. They had a feast and distributed gifts.
A woman’s quilling and beading
expertise was valued as she decorated her
husband’s shirts, leggings and moccasins

Oklahoma Horizon to showcase OAS at Rose Hill
By Alisa Hines
Something exciting
is about to happen for the
Oklahoma Anthropological
Society!
OAS is going to be
showcased on the Oklahoma
Horizon television show. We
will be covering the Rose Hill
Plantation Dig the Society
completed last autumn.
Viewers will be able
to see what our volunteer
group does during a dig and
the important assistance we
provide archeologists.
The show airs at
3 p.m. Sundays on OETA
and many times throughout
the week on different sta-

tions in many communities.
The OAS story isn't on the
schedule yet, so be watching
Trowel Marks newsletter, the
OAS web site www.okarcheology.org, and email to find
out when it will air.
The show visits with
OAS Vice President Ed Mayfield and Treasurer Cathy
Compton, both of Oklahoma
City, to get their take on why
they do it and how much
they enjoy working with the
Society. Our archeology
friends at the Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Amanda
Regnier and Scott Hammerstedt, will also be a part of
the story.

Oklahoma Horizon
is a nationally televised
weekly program that explores economic and social
trends. Host Rob McClendon
and a team of multiplatform
journalists cover stories
across Oklahoma, the nation
and the world. They showcase people, organizations,
schools and businesses that
contribute to our country's
economic success and quality of life.
-- Alisa Hines, a
Perkins resident, directs
New Media production at the
state Department of Career
Tech and is President of the
OAS Stillwater chapter.

as well as her own dresses,
leggings and moccasins – or
anything else that could be
quilled or beaded.
Quill designs were
considered a woman’s
personal property and were
never copied. Her designs
she received through
dreams, and thus she
claimed ownership.
Before European
beads came to the village
from traders, the women
sewed porcupine quills
for decorations, flattening
the quills by drawing them
between teeth or fingernails.
Some women’s teeth became dark stained from this
practice.
The woman would
keep a number of quills in
one cheek, points protruding
from between their lips, and
pull out one as needed –
saliva made the quills more
pliable.
It was generally conceded that Sioux, Cheyenne
and Arapaho were the best
quillers.
The woman’s awl,
scraper, and flesher were
her prized possessions. Her
flesher displayed black dots
of one side to show how
many robes she had made.
The other side was filled with
red dots to signify teepees
she had made.
The woman made
the buffalo hide teepee from
six to eight animals. In a
matter of minutes she could
set up the lodge and take it
down.
The woman’s role
in Cheyenne culture, as
well as in the other nomadic
Plains tribes, was very different than often portrayed.
Woman worked very hard,
yet they were also respected
and extremely valued as
part of their society. Their
lives were very full and their
contributions many.

Trowel Marks
Summer 2013

11

State Archeologist
speaks in Weatherford
Showcase Series

Oklahoma archeology
in the news
OAS fall speaker cited
on Arkansas rock art
Rock art is easily
seen in Arkansas if you know
where to look, according to
George Sabo of the Arkansas Archeological Society.
Dr. Sabo, a speaker
at the OAS Fall Meeting in
Norman (see article on Page
1), is cited in an “Off The
Grid” article in the July/August edition of Archaeology
Magazine.
Among rock art little
known to visitors is Rock
House Cave in Petit Jean
Mountain State Park, Ark.
According to Dr.
Sabo and Ann Marie Early,
Arkansas State Archeologist,
dozens of beautiful old Native American rock art sites
are accessible in Arkansas.
At Rock House Cave alone,
visitors can see more than
a hundred pictographs that
date to the first half of the
17th century.
An unrelated article
in the June 17 Arkansas
Business Blog reports Dr.
Sabo’s promotion to new
director of the Arkansas
State Archeological Survey.
Dr. Sabo replaced Thomas
Green, who retired June 30
after holding the position for
more than two decades.
Dr. Sabo is a professor of anthropology and
environmental dynamics at
the University of Arkansas.
He has written, co-written
and edited 12 books and
monographs. He has also
directed a number of archeological research projects and
excavations in Arkansas.

12

Trowel Marks
Summer 2013

George Sabo, new Director of the Arkansas Archeological Survey, inspects one
of his favorite subjects, rock art.

Oklahomans combine
archeology, adventure
Bishop McGuinness
Highschool buddies Cody
Barnett and Ryan Leonard
enjoy archeology so much
they’ve set up a nonprofit
organization to share their
enthusiasm with college
students.
To that end they’re
guiding expeditions to research in Italy, according to
a May 7 story in The Oklahoman. Their program, the
Institute for Mediterranean
Archaeology, or IMA, also
helps fund the excursions.
Their excavations
are directed by professional
archeologists. A recent
excavation went to Coriglia,
Italy, about an hour north of
Rome.
Another is under the
city of Orvieto, where 1,300
caves were found and believed to have been dug by
the Etruscans. A third is near
Allerona, Italy. There a 13th
century Christian church is
built atop a Roman structure,
thought to be Etruscan.
“The most fulfilling
thing is opening up these opportunities for students from

Oklahoma to
participate,”
said Leonard.
The attorney
from Beaver
told reporter
Ashley Gibson “This is
such a unique
thing that if
you’re into
history, this is
really a once
in a lifetime
opportunity.
It’s something they will
never forget.”

Archeology students
help solve cold case

University of Oklahoma
archeology students joined
law officers and medical
examiners searching for the
remains of two women and a
girl missing since 1992.
Staff writer Nolan
Clay of The Oklahoman said
the students joined a team
looking for Wendy Camp, 23;
her daughter, Cynthia Britto,
6; and Camp’s sister-in-law,
Lisa Renee Kregear, 22.
The May 3 story said
the trio’s skeletal remains
were found 8 feet deep in a
rural grassy field near Jennings. Charged as an accessory to first degree murder
after the fact was the property’s former owner, Grover
Prewitt Jr., 60, Bristow.
Prosecutors allege
Prewitt helped his mother
and other family members
avoid prosecution. Officials
said he helped conceal the
bodies and he interfered with
the investigation this year.
Prewitt’s mother,
Ida, died in 2011. In a court
appearance, Grover Prewitt
pleaded not guilty to the accessory charge.

Oklahoma State
Archeologist Robert Brooks
spoke in the Harris Library
Showcase series at Southwestern Oklahoma State
University.
Brooks discussed
“From Mounds to Mammoths” March 26 on the
Weatherford campus, according to a March 23 story
in The Oklahoman. Brooks
is coauthor with Claudette
M. Gilbert on a book of the
same title, a field guide to
Oklahoma prehistory.
Brooks conducts
research on Oklahoma
archeological history and
teaches at the anthropology
department at the University
of Oklahoma. His current
research includes a study of
people critical to the developmental history of Oklahoma archeology.

Archeologists confirm
Marlow mystery cave
Archeologists are
credited with confirming the
hiding place of the Marlow
outlaw brothers in Stephens
County.
Writer Ron Jackson
cites the researchers' contribution in a March 17 edition
of The Oklahoman.
“Stories of the Ages:
Hidden Tunnels,” one of a
series from the newspaper’s
archives, says despite no
evidence, rumors of the
Marlow cave persisted for
decades. According to the
legend, the men hid in a
cave between forays of rustling stray longhorns on the
Chisholm Trail.
In 2004, the tire of
a city lawn mower plunged
into a sinkhole, exposing
what historians believed was
the hiding place. Archeologists were called in to reveal
a 10-by-10 foot dugout.
Today the cave is a tourist
site for the City of Marlow.

Master player organ rolls irreplaceable

Endangered artifacts draw attention to state heritage
By Elsbeth Dowd
Registrar Sam Noble Museum

Sam Noble Museum’s Spiro Lace recently
placed high in the state’s new Endangered Artifacts
Master Player
Program. After review by conservators and profesOrgan Rolls
sionals in the museum, library, and archives field, the
The American Orrare artifact, dated 1400 AD, won listing in the Top 10
gan Institute Archives
entries.
and Library in NorThe program is sponsored by the Oklahoma
man houses rare, irCultural Heritage Trust. The Top 10 winning entries
replaceable master
will be recognized at the Sept. 25-27 Oklahoma
organ rolls. They are
Museum Association Annual Conference at Enid’s
significant for their
Convention Hall.
musical content and
The Top 10 Program brings attention to Oklatheir value to the hishoma's endangered cultural heritage in museums,
tory of the process inlibraries, and archives across the state. The compevolved. Cut by hand,
tition started with online voting by the public on 25
the rolls represent the
different entries.
work of many wellWinning the People’s Choice Award was the
known artists at the
Army Pigeon Basket from American Pigeon Museum
turn of the 20th cenand Library. It won despite the Sam Noble Museum’s
tury.
best efforts to rally the public around the Spiro artifact, the oldest item in the competition.
Through this program the Sam Noble Museum also
participated in a May Day Call to Action at the State Capitol.
All participants had the opportunity to contact their represenOklahoma's Top Ten
tatives and make a case for cultural heritage preservation.
Marc Levine, Noble Museum’s Archeology Curator,
Endangered Arifacts
Elsbeth Dowd and Lindsay Palaima represented Sam Noble
Master Organ Player Rolls, Circa 1920, AmeriMuseum at the event.
can Organ Institute Archives and Library at the UniverThe Spiro Lace is a unique textile fragment from the
sity of Oklahoma, Norman.
Spiro Mounds archeological site in southeast Oklahoma. This
Glass Plate and Nitrate Negatives, Museum of
the Western Prairie, Altus.
Oklahoma Land Run Registers, circa 18891895, Oklahoma Department of Libraries and Archives, Oklahoma City.
Pawnee Bill’s Calliope, circa 1910, Pawnee
Bill Ranch and Museum, Pawnee.
Cheyenne War Bonnet, circa 1872, Philbrook
Museum of Art, Tulsa.
Oklahoma State Flag, circa 1925, Pioneer
Woman Museum, Ponca City.
Spiro Lace, circa 1400 AD, Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History, Norman.
Spiro Lace, the oldest item in the competition, placed in
Payne County, Oklahoma Territory Agricultural
the Top 10 entries of the Endangered Artifacts program.
Photograph by Elsbeth Dowd, copyright Sam Noble
Census Volumes, circa 1898-1906, Stillwater Public
Oklahoma Museum of Natural History, University of OklaLibrary, Stillwater.
homa, Norman.
U.S. Army Pigeon Basket, circa 1944 (winning
the People’s Choice award) American Pigeon Museum
site, occupied from around A.D. 800-1450, was one of the
and Library, Oklahoma City.
most significant ceremonial centers in eastern North America.
Will Roger's Polo Suit, Will Rogers Memorial
Fabric and textiles have been an important part of
Museum, Claremore.
the human experience for millennia, yet few archaeological
samples exist because of their rapid deterioration.
Spiro Lace represents an important pathway to learning about native history of Oklahoma. Although the specimen
was conserved by Joan S. Gardner in 1979, it is time to reasTrowel Marks Summer 2013
sess the conservation needs of this exquisite material.

13

Historical fiction

An autumn tale of the people of the Caddo
By Seth Hawkins

There is a chill
in the evening air as
dusk gathers around
and nighthawks swoop
and dive high overhead,
their white, banded
wings illumined by the
last rays of the summer
sun. The calm night and
encroaching darkness
holds a certain magic,
for the long awaited
arrival of the autumnal

equinox announces a new
season, a time of vibrant
change and enchantment, of
celebration and rejoicing, of
hearth and home, family and
friends.
As I stand gazing at
the darkening purple hues of
the eastern sky, a chorus of
chirping crickets begins its
evening serenade, ushering
in the amber fullness of the
harvest moon, that harbinger
of nature's abundance, and
with it, visions of cornucopias filled to overflowing.
As that golden sphere
takes its place among the
sparkling jewels of the night
sky, through the trees below
a black specter flitters nervously, delicate wings bearing it on a circuitous course
through the shadows.
Its presence signals
a change in the moon's
appearance, a paled countenance taking on more clearly
the mysterious features of
the old man.
But, in another
place, another time, the old
man had another tale to tell,
another story to weave. To
the south and east, beyond
the Washita's merging with
the Red, lived a people of

14

Trowel Marks
Summer 2013

the Caddo, the Hasinai.
Prior to their residence in this place of plenty,
of warmth and light, the
Hasinai dwelled in a land of
darkness.
It was only through
the leadership of Moon, the
first among the Hasinai, that
the People were able to find
their way to that world of
light far to the west. Some
say they emerged into this
new world from a cave on
the south bank of the Red.
Upon entering this
wondrous new place, the
Hasinai were given a sense
of vision by a powerful new

creation, Sun.
* * *
While living in the
lodge of his parents, Moon
would go each night to
his younger sister, forcing
himself upon her. Night after
night this continued, but,
because of the darkness, the
young girl did not know her
assailant. In time, she made
up her mind to find out who
was doing this to her.
One night, before
Moon came to his sister, the
young girl smeared black
soot on her forehead. The
next day, on approaching
her brother, the sister was

startled and angered to see
the soot smeared on his
face. Unable to live alone
with this terrible secret, she
told others.
It was not long
before Moon realized his
deeds had become common
knowledge, fodder for camp
gossip and ridicule.
Out of deep shame,
Moon decided to leave his
people. He soon passed
away, called by the Father
Above, but his infamous act
would be remembered by
all the Hasinai when they
looked upon the darkened
face of the full moon rising.

Can you name the Top Oklahoma Indian attractions?
The Tourism and Recreation Department offers a list of the Top Indian Attractions
in Oklahoma. It invites travelers to “Experience sacred American Indian traditions and
view authentic cultural displays at top Native American museums, cultural centers and
attractions …”
The selection is not without controversy. Commenter Kim Dresser wonders why
there are no listings from western Oklahoma. What happened to Indian City in Anadarko
and the Cheyenne Arapaho Museum in Clinton?
The answer? Tourism and Recreation records show Indian City is closed, and
with 39 tribes calling Oklahoma home, the state agency says it is difficult to chose the top
candidates.
Is your favorite Indian attraction here? Here’s Oklahoma Travel and Tourism's list:
Cherokee Heritage Center, Tahlequah
Chickasaw Cultural Center, Sulphur
Red Earth Museum, Oklahoma City
Sequoyah’s Cabin, Sallisaw

Gilcrease Museum, Tulsa
Spiro Mounds Archaeological Center, Spiro
Five Civilized Tribes Museum, Muskogee
Standing Bear Park & Museum, Ponca City

Reviews
Journey of the Cheyenne
Warrior
By Kathleen Gibbs
4RV Publishing 2012
ISBN-10: 0985266104
ISBN-13: 978-0985266103
Paperback 256 Pages
$18.99
-- Review By Ed Mayfield
This is Kathleen
Gibbs’ first fictional endeavor, a historical novel
spanning most of the 1800s
on the North American Great
Plains.
First, an admission: I
know the author as a friend,
spending a decade or so
with her in the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society.
Even so, I’ve tried to see her
novel as something I’d seek
as a historian intrigued by
the American West.
After thousands of
years life on this continent,
the Native Americans entered the 19th century with
no idea of what was coming
at them. Ahead were changes – catastrophic changes
forever altering their way of
life.
Gibbs brings to life
a Cheyenne family living
somewhere on the Southern Plains, also referred to
as the Staked Plains. The
principal character is Little
Eagle, later to become Brave
Eagle as an adult in Indian
society.
The story begins
with Little Eagle as a boy of
10 or so. His achieving manhood is the crux of the book.
Male roles in any
native American society
consisted of becoming a
good provider-hunter, then
as good a warrior as possible. A man's stature hinged
on these two things. Some
became outstanding at both,

Jon Denton
Reviews Editor

which was the case with
Brave Eagle.
At any other time
pre-1800s, the story would
have played out with a
predictable end. Not so
here. The inevitable collision
with white culture made for
encounters good, bad, and
very ugly. Usually the very
ugly part happened to the
Indians.
It’s uncertain what
audience the author has
targeted. The first chapters
seem styled for a juvenile
reader, a typical novel found
in a high school library. Then
wham! All hell brakes loose
and you are in the middle
of the violent post-Civil War
Indian conflicts.
What was charming in the book becomes
brutal. For a quarter century,
a seething conflict follows,
mainly between the military
and the those who called the
Great Plains home.
The novel is deeply
researched and expertly
revealed. The mixture of fact
and fiction is convincing. The
style starts a bit uneven but
smooths out.
-- Ed Mayfield is Vice
President of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society.

Across Atlantic Ice
The Origin of America's
Clovis Culture
By Dennis Stanford and
Bruce Bradley
Hardcover 336 pages
February 2012
ISBN 9780520227835
$34.95
-- Review by Jon Denton
Authors Stanford
and Bradley masterfully
lay out their argument for a
European origin of the Clovis
culture in North America. In
their pursuit they are pedantic, exhaustive and at times
downright repetitive. Yet
that’s what they need to do
to make their case.
They contend Clovis
people might not have
originated in Asia, as long
ascribed, but in the western
reaches of Europe. The reason there is no precedent, or
for that matter descendant
culture to Clovis in America,
is the brief flaring of a small
Solutrean subset in both
places.
The book puts Clovis people among the first
Americans. According to
the thesis, they came from
France and Spain about
20,000 years ago, riding the
icy margins of the Atlantic
glacial entry route. They
quickly swept west toward
the Rockies, then died off
about 13,000 years ago.
It’s not clear how
many of them made the
trek, or why they perished.
Most likely they succumbed
to harsh climate changes in
their new land.
Thinking this way
will no doubt infuriate those
who have built careers
around the assumption that
everything points to an Asian
origin of aboriginal Americans. Yet the authors, both
respected scientists, fasten
common sense to academic
rigor.
Perhaps their biggest weakness is found
in genetics. Recent DNA
studies conclude the Amerin-

dians originated in Asia. It’s
tough to argue. Yet there is a
scarcity of Solutrean bones
in America. Full DNA comparisons will have to wait until more American Solutrean
remains are identified.
As for the existing
evidence, the case is much
more convincing. Clovis
technology looks more
European, like nothing else
in America. Clovis material is
abundant in Eastern United
States, then diminishes as
it approaches the Pacific
Coast.
Among Solutrean findings is a tool kit of bone needles. They closely resemble
those used by modern day
Inuit to make waterproof
clothing and kayaks.
An expanse of European coastline lies beneath
the sea, hidden by the rising
oceans. Water covers much
of the Solutrean homeland
as if it never existed. It
also may hide much of the
Solutrean evidence in North
America.
Buy this book if you
value a solid addition to your
archeological library. Otherwise, a trip to the library
should satisfy your curiosity.
And stand by for a
long and noisy argument.
-- Jon Denton is
Review Editor and Editor of
the OAS Trowel Marks

Trowel Marks
Summer 2013

15

Trowel Marks

Oklahoma Anthropological Society
11550 Bartons Butte Road
Mustang OK 73064

Mailing
Permit

Return Service Requested

OA S C hapters
ARKOMA CHAPTER, Ft. Smith, Ark.
Meetings 7 p.m. 3rd Thursdays
Echols Building, University of Arkansas, Ft. Smith
Contact Tim Mulvihill at tim.mulvihill@uark.edu

KAY COUNTY CHAPTER, Ponca City
Meetings 6:30 p.m. 3rd Thursdays
Public Library 5th and Grand, Ponca City
Contact Richard Sherrod (580) 765-9661

BYRDS MILL CHAPTER, Ada
Meetings 7:30 p.m. 2nd Tuesdays
Valley View Hospital Conference Room, Ada.
Contact Carl Gilley at (580) 332-3812

MCALESTER ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, Krebs
Meetings 7 p.m. 2nd Thursdays
Krebs City Hall, Krebs
Contact Guy Folger at guyfolger@aol.com
See websites for McAlester and Tahlequah Chapters

CENTRAL CHAPTER, Oklahoma City
Meetings 7 p.m. first Thursdays
Will Rogers Garden Center, 3400 NW 36
Contact Curt Hendricks at mcokc@cox.net
CLEVELAND COUNTY CHAPTER, Norman
Meetings 7 p.m. first Mondays
Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History,
Norman
Contact Simone Rowe at simone.rowe@ou.edu
GREATER SOUTHWEST CHAPTER, Lawton
Meetings 2 p.m. on 4th Saturdays
Museum of the Great Plains, 601 NW Ferris Avenue, Lawton
Contact Matt Griffin at matthehat2000@gmail.com
See website Greater Southwest Chapter OAS

STILLWATER CHAPTER, Stillwater
Meetings 7 p.m. 3rd Thursdays
First Presbyterian Church, 524 S Duncan, Stillwater
Contact Alisa Hines at alisa-hines84@yahoo.com
TAHLEQUAH ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, Tahlequah
Meetings 7 p.m. 4th Thursdays
Tahlequah Public Library, Tahlequah
Contact Thomas Purdin at (918) 284-2410
TULSA ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, Tulsa
Meetings 7 p.m. 4th Mondays
Aaronson Auditorium, Central Library, 400 Civic Center, Tulsa
Before meetings at 5 p.m. at Baxters Interurban 727 S Houston
Contact Pam Proctor at pamela.proctor@cnent.com

