The Oklahoma
Anthropological
Society

Trowel Marks

Quarterly News

Vol. 4 No. 4 Winter 2012

Oklahoma
archeology
in brief

The OAS Winter
Board Meeting will be held
Jan. 26 in Norman. All members are welcome.
The session begins
at 1:30 p.m. at the Oklahoma
Archeological Survey, Norman.
* * *
“OAS is for Anthropology” is the title of the
OAS Annual Spring Meeting, Program Director Cathy
Compton said.
The 2013 session is
April 20 in Dale Hall on the
OU campus.
“We’re still working
on speakers, but we know we
have some excellent choices”
she said. “Our theme is how
the past informs the present,
and how research impacts
current populations as well
as understanding the prehistoric human condition.”
* * *
Rebuilding the historic barracks at Fort Washita may be possible with a
$250,000 challenge grant
from a foundation, plus other
donors.
The barracks are well
worth doing again, according
to Oklahoma Historical Society Executive Director Bob
Blackburn.
Arsonists burned the
barracks in 2010. OHS manages the site.
It’s the best place in
the country for reenactments,
Blackburn said in a November 2011 article in The Oklahoman. Thomas Small Architects in Edmond has plans
drawn up.

Conservation a major issue

Museum grant boosts
Spiro, WPA research

Collection Manager Elsbeth Dowd
holds a delicate Spiro Mounds
engraved shell stored at the Sam
Noble Museum in Norman.

OAS Spring Dig
at Longest Site

The Spring Dig is set May
24-June 2 at the Longest site, an
18th century French and Indian village on the Red River.
Richard Drass of the Oklahoma Archeology Survey is Dig
Director. It will mark his first time to
excavate at the site, as it will for the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society.
Excavators initially worked
the area in 1965-1966, Dr. Drass
said. Prompting another look
are anomalies appearing in
recent magnetic and radar
surveys.
“What we expect
to find is similar to BrysonPaddock, but even more
European,” he said.
The Society has
(See Spring Dig Page 4)

Oklahoma’s Museum of Natural History has
won a grant to inventory, catalog and database materials gathered at Spiro Mounds and Works Progress
Administration sites.
We're looking at a three-year challenge, said
Elsbeth Dowd, Collection Manager for archeology at
the Sam Noble Museum, University of Oklahoma campus, Norman.
New chapter grows
“It’s a large
quantity
of material, and
as Stillwater builds
some
of
the delicate
membership base
artifacts will require careChapter membership is
ful handling for preseralmost at the two dozen
vation,” Dr. Dowd said.
mark, Stillwater interim
“That’s especially true of
President Alisa Hines
such things as textiles,
said.
basketry, copper, wood
The Anthropological
and engraved shells.”
Society’s newest chapter
Head curator
meets at 7 p.m. on the
Dr. Janet Braun and Liz
third Thursday of each
Leith, former Collecmonth. Members gather
tion Manager, applied
at Stillwater’s First Presfor the grant. They won
byterian Church, 524 S
$149,956 from the fedDuncan.
eral Institute of Museum
Visitors are always
and Library Services.
welcome. Admission is
The museum matched
free.
the sum with $210,494.
Stephen Perkins,
Funding includes
Oklahoma State Univerhiring Emily Turiff as a
sity anthropologist, is
full time Collection Asthe Chapter Advisor and
sistant.
Program Chairman. Lisa
Conservation is
Hines is Interim Presia major issue for some
dent.
objects in the Spiro
“We keep getting
collection, particularly
(See Stillwater Page 8)
textiles, Dr. Dowd said.
The museum will look to
other funding sources for
that task.
According to
Simply fill out the OAS
an
article
in the fall isMembership Form in
sue
of
the
museum’s
this newsletter, add a
Tracks
Magazine,
the
check, and mail. That
federal
grant
will
cover
will do it for another
seven sites of the Spiro
year. We thank you.
(See Museum Page 4)

Time to renew

Events of Interest
Standing Exhibits

Trowel Marks Newsletter
A quarterly publication
of The Oklahoma Anthropological Society

Artifacts from the Bryson-Paddock Site. A choice
showing of objects from a Wichita village occupied from 1680
to 1760 in Kay County demonstrating the role of the Wichita
people in conveying goods and technology from Spanish
colonial New Mexico and French colonial Arkansas into Oklahoma. American Indian Gallery, Oklahoma History Center.

Executive Officers

Hall of People of Oklahoma traces 30,000-year history of state natives, including archeological evidence, 10,000year-old painted Cooper bison skull, Mississippian culture and
Spiro Mounds, pre-Columbian art work, and traditional and ceremonial activity of Western tribes. Sam Noble History Museum,
Norman (405) 325-4712.

		
Membership
You can find an application to join the Society or renew your membership, and information about OAS
activities, publications and its contribution to Oklahoma archeology in this OAS Newsletter and on the
OAS Website www.okarcheology.org.

December

Debra Baker, Lawton, President (580) 678-1416
Ed Mayfield, Oklahoma City, Vice President (405) 525-3343
Cathy Compton, Oklahoma City, Treasurer (405) 308-2829
Cari Foster, Oklahoma City, Secretary (405) 320-1993

OAS offers varied memberships. All members receive
the Society’s annual Bulletin of Oklahoma Archeology
and quarterly Trowel Marks Newsletter. Contributing,
Sustaining, Life, and Institutional members also receive OAS Memoirs. For more information, contact
Cathy Compton at (405) 308-2829
		
Publications
Order handbooks, point guides, memoirs and other
publications and material of The Society from the
Publications Director. Contact Cathy Compton at
cathy-compton@ouhsc.edu. OAS publications and
materials are listed on the OAS Website.
Contact the OAS Newsletter
Editor Jon Denton and Co-Editor Diana Denton
(405) 376-0074 or jonrdenton@aol.com.
Opinions in this publication, unless otherwise identified, are those of the editor and contributors and do
not necessarily reflect the policies of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society.

OAS Website www.okarcheology.org

2

Trowel Marks Winter 2012

Miss your OAS Newsletter? Call (405) 376-0074

21 Winter Solstice Walk, 11 a.m. at Spiro Mounds
Archaeological Center, Spiro. Archeologist Dennis Peterson
leads two-hour tour and talks about the mounds, the people
who created them, excavations, and why some mounds align
with solstice and equinox sunsets. Call (918) 962-2062.
31 OAS nomination deadline for awards to be presented at the Annual Spring meeting in April. Contact Awards
Chairman Mary McHard at dmmchard@flash.net

January
26 OAS Winter Board Meeting at 1:30 p.m. at Oklahoma Archeological Survey, University of Oklahoma South
Campus, Norman.

February
09 Annual East Texas Archeological Conference
at Ornelas Activity Center, Tyler, Texas. Keynote speaker is
F. Kent Reilly III, PhD., Professor and Director of the Center
for the Arts and Symbolism of Ancient America, Texas State
University. Contact Thomas Guderjan at guderjan@gmail.com
16 "Journey of the Cheyenne Warrior" Book Launch
by author Kathy Gibbs, 2 p.m., Fairfield Inn, Airport Marriott,
4521 SW 15, Oklahoma City.
22 – 23 Annual Caddo Conference, Gilcrease
Museum, Tulsa. Poster and paper presentations on recent
research in the Caddo archeological region. Access www.caddoconference.org.
26 Gladiators at Pompeii: Roman Spectacle in a
Small Town, 7:30 p.m. guest lecture by Steven Tuck, Associate Professor of Classics and History, Miami University.
Sponsored by Archaeological Institute of America, University
of Oklahoma campus, Norman. Contact Farland Stanley at
(405) 325-6921 or fstanley@ou.edu

Trowel Marks

OAS President Debra Baker

This has been an
exciting and busy year for
the Oklahoma Anthropological Society.
For those of you
who missed it, we had a
great Fall Meeting at Oklahoma State University in
Stillwater. We welcomed a
new chapter, Stillwater, to
the Society.
I want to give a special thank you to Dr. Stephen
Perkins for setting everything
up for the Fall Meeting and
the Chapter meeting there.
Congratulations to all for
the hard work forming this
important new OAS chapter,
No. 10 in the state.
* * *
The OAS Fall Dig
wrapped things up at Rose
Hill Plantation. We appreciate not only the Oklahoma
Historical Society for letting
us participate, we want to
give a special thank you to
Dr. Amanda Regnier for her
outstanding supervision.
Also contributing to
the success of the project
were her colleagues, Dr.
Scott Hammerstedt, also of
the Oklahoma Archeological Survey in Norman, and
John Davis of the Oklahoma
Historical Society.
Members of OAS
put in some hard hours at
the old cotton plantation near
Hugo. Digging was never
easy, given the age of the
site, the fire that destroyed
the property, the presence
of squatters and the looting
and vandalizing over the
years.
What the Historical
Society will do at the site remains a question. We can be
certain of at least one thing:
We wore out our T-shirts on
that one.

Debra Baker

The exciting news
that I would like to announce
is that Richard Drass has
formally proposed having the
OAS Spring Dig 2013 at the
Longest site in southwest
Oklahoma.
This is a mid-17th
century to early 18th century

Wichita village attacked, unsuccessfully, by the Spanish
in 1759.
The initial excavation took place in 1965-1966.
A sponsoring National Science Foundation research
grant involved the University
of Oklahoma, Texas Memorial Museum at the University
of Texas, Southern Methodist University, and Museum
of the Great Plains, Lawton.
Other studies have
been conducted at this site
throughout the years. However, just recently a student
has been conducting remote
sensing, specifically in the
fortification area. Even while
he is still analyzing the data,
several interesting features
have appeared.
What makes this so
amazing at this time is that
the Longest collection from

OAS
Membership Form

the 1965-1966 excavation
was placed at the Museum
of the Great Plains, Lawton.
Just recently the
staff there has completed
cataloging over 7,000 artifacts in the collection. Currently the original archives,
including photographs, are
going through the same
process.
* * *
During our OAS
digs we always see the
field work that goes into a
project, while the thought
of what happens to all this
information, and the artifacts
involved, flies out the door,
so to speak.
There is one saying I hear that I can almost
completely agree with as an
archeologist: We need to
excavate the museums.
The information that
is excavated from the past
can always give new light for
excavations for the future. I
encourage you, if you have
an opportunity to work with a
particular collection in a lab,
the Survey or at a museum,
take it.

I would like my copy of OAS
Trowel Marks emailed to me at:

( ) Active $20 Receive the annual OAS Bulletin and quarterly OAS Newsletter Trowel Marks.
( ) Student $10 Same as Active, but limited to full-time students. Enclose copy of Student ID.
( ) Contributing $35 Receive issues annually of the OAS Bulletin, the quarterly OAS Newsletter 		
Trowel Marks, and all Memoirs published by the Society during the subscription period.
( ) Sustaining $45 Receive issues the annual OAS Bulletin, the quarterly Newsletter Trowel Marks,
and all Memoirs published by the Society during the subscription period.
( ) Associate $5 for one additional member of your immediate family, $10 for two or more.
( ) Life $500 Provides all benefits of a Sustaining membership throughout the lifetime of member.
( ) Institutional Domestic $35 ( ) Institutional Canada/Mexico $40 ( ) Institutional Other $45
( ) OAS New Member Handbook $6. Recommended for new members. Everything you need to
know about the Society: its history, meetings, field activities, publication series, and more.
Name _______________________________________ Address __________________________
City ______________________ State ____________________ Zip ________________ _____
Home Phone (

) _____________ Cell (

) _______________

Email address ___________

To renew membership or join the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, fill out this form and
send it with a check or money order to Cathy Compton, OAS Membership, 401 NW 46 Terrace, Oklahoma City OK 73118.

Trowel Marks Winter 2012

3

Museum
(Continued from Page 1)
Mounds Group and 272 sites
recovered by the WPA from
1934-1942.
Spiro Mounds State
Park is Oklahoma’s only
prehistoric, Native American
archeological site open to
the public.
Some of the Spiro
material was assembled
after the WPA era when Don
Wyckoff and Dan Rogers led
excavations, assisted by the
late OU Prof. Robert Bell. Dr.
Bell retired as Head Curator
of Social Sciences and Curator of Archeology in 1980.
Dr. Bell led establishment
of the Oklahoma Archeological Survey, stationed on the

University of Oklahoma campus, and the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society.
The museum grant formally promotes use of technology to facilitate discovery of knowledge and cultural heritage.
It supports the care and management
of the collection to expand and sustain
access. The database will eventually be
accessible on the Museum’s website
According to Tracks Magazine, the
museum’s archeology collection includes
at least 80 percent of all prehistoric and
early contact period material recovered
in Oklahoma. Collected artifacts have
reached the 5 million count.
While much of the Spiro Mound
and WPA acquisitions went to the Norman
museum, research material also reached
the Smithsonian Institution in Washington,
D.C., Gilcrease Museum in Tulsa, and the
Oklahoma Historical Society in Oklahoma

A delicate engraved shell from the Spiro area.

City.

“Our grant is just for our collections,” Dr.
Dowd said. “Year one will be devoted to Spiro.
We’re still working out the plan for years two and
three. We think everyone will be excited by the
results of this project.”

2013 Caddo Conference to meet at Tulsa's Gilcrease Museum
The 55th Annual
Caddo Conference will meet
at Gilcrease Museum in
Tulsa, said Scott Hammerstedt.
A call for papers is
under way for the Feb. 22-23
meeting. Conference preregistration deadline is Feb. 10.
A book and display
area will be set up in an
adjoining room. While there

is no table fee, space is limited, said Dr. Hammerstedt,
Norman.
A silent auction during the meeting will support
the Conference and Caddo
Nation participation. Donated items are sought for the
auction.
Deadline for paper
titles and abstracts is Jan.
25. Invited are papers, sym-

posia and posters that relate
to the archeology, history,
culture, and language of the
Caddo Indians and the area
of the Caddo homelands in
Arkansas, Louisiana, Texas,
and Oklahoma. Presentations should be 20 minutes
long.
Hotel room blocks
have been set aside a short
distance from the museum.

Mention the Caddo Conference for group rates at
Hampton Inn, 7852 West
Parkway Blvd., and Holiday
Inn Express Downtown,
2316 W Cameron.
Rates require early
registration.
Information on deadlines, forms and payments is
available from Amanda Regnier at aregnier@ou.edu.

Spring Dig
(Continued from Page 1)
joined Dr. Drass several seasons at
Bryson-Paddock, a French-Wichita
Village near today’s Ponca City. The
principal inhabitants of both sites are
thought to be Wichitas.
Escaping harassment by the
Osage, they migrated south from
their Arkansas River home. They
continued trade with Europeans who
sought abundant buffalo meat and
hides from America’s southern Great
Plains.
Of particular interest at the 		

4

Trowel Marks
Winter 2012

A brass gun ornament from the
Longest site in Jefferson County.

horses and were well-armed. A Comanche camp of tall tipis along with
the village of another band of Wichita
were reported in the immediate area.
According to the Spanish, the
stockade had underground tunnels
in which people sheltered during an
attack. Round, grass-thatch houses
made up the Taovayas village outside
Oklahoma Archeological Survey
the stockade.
Located on a broad terrace
Longest site are the interior of the fortification area
above the Red River, the 40-acre site
and a possible house, Dr. Drass said.
The villagers were well prepared for an as- is protected from flooding by its elevasault. In an attack on the village, the Spanish report- tion. It was named for the Longest
family who farmed the area for many
ed extensive corn fields near the villages.
years.
The Wichita and their allies had many

The Battle on the Red
By Seth Hawkins

While traveling many days under a broiling sun, this
Plains armada wreaked havoc on a Tonkawa village lying
somewhere along the upper Brazos. Captives in tow, the campaign continued the northward trek.
Then, on Oct. 7, as they neared the Red River, that
meandering boundary separating the French and Spanish
New World empires, they found themselves confronted by a
fearsome force of native warriors.
These Nortenos – Indian nations of the north, including Comanche, Wichita and affiliated tribes – were prepared
to do battle. Yet even more imposing, when the Spanish
gazed across the Red they saw a barricade bristling with
lance, bow, war club and musket.
The fortification, encircled by a ditch, revealed exca-

(Second of a two-part historical fiction series on the
Longest archeological site in Jefferson County).
The sly Apache had given the Spanish the impression that what is now central Texas was still within the range
of Apacheria. In truth the Comanche bands had driven the
Apacheria to the fringes of the Plains as the Comancheria
reached a zenith. Ensuing events would soon settle this
vague issue of boundaries.
It was 1757 when Spanish Col. Don Diego Ortiz de
Parilla and a contingent of troops escorted Padre Alonso Geraldo Terreros and a handful of his brothers north.
There they were to establish San Luis de las Amarillas and Mission Santa Cruz de San Saba, with a
few miles separating the two.
Upon completion, the mission occupants
waited anxiously for arrival of their Lipan wards
to begin instruction. But their new flock remained
suspiciously absent.
Then on March 2, 1758, a surprise raid on
the presidio resulted in the loss of 62 horses. The
perpetrators of this strike were not Lipan but their
fierce rivals, the Comanche.
For a time, there was an unsettling quiet.
But with the rising of a full Comanche moon, thunderous hoof-beats resonated over the Plains.
On March 16, Padre Terreros and the
brothers greeted an awesome horde of mounted
Comanche. Impulsively but tragically, the friars
and the small detachment of soldiers allowed their
haughty guests to enter the compound.
In an attempt to accommodate, gifts were made.
vated soil thrown up against a vertical log wall, forming an addiOne of the brothers offered to escort the unwanted intrudtional bulwark. Within the stockade the Spanish force could make
ers to the Presidio, but after he mounted his horse, the
out the conical shapes of Taovaya houses. The village itself was
visitors struck, leaving the padre's lifeless body slumped
surrounded by Comanche lodges scattered along the river.
from his horse.
Yet the proud colonel did not pause. Hardly had the battle
Instantly, the wild throng began their rampage,
lines been drawn and met, as charging Spanish hooves churned
and within moments, the mission was in flames. All but a
up the shallow, muddy red waters flowing through the sandy riverhandful able to hide amidst the murderous confusion were
bed, than Spain's native allies began to melt away. They headed
killed.
south, over the plains and to safety.
After suffering several casualties, a troop from the
Mercifully, with the setting of the sun and the encroaching
Presidio on their way to the mission's relief were turned
blanket of darkness, Col. Parilla's remaining forces retreated to
back by a party of warriors.
the wooded bottoms to lick their wounds. The noise of celebration
The destruction was complete. The mission was
drifted across the river to those waiting fearfully for dawn. With his
never rebuilt. However, it was not forgotten. Officials in
train of supplies gone and cannons lost to the muck of the Red,
San Antonio and Mexico City were appalled at the carCol. Parilla thought it wise to retire to San Antonio. He did so in
nage and this slap in the imperial face by these "heathen
haste.
savages."
Although this battle was one of the least deadly encounCol. Parilla was commanded to organize a masters of the Europeans and Plains Indians, it did much to mold
sive force for a punitive raid against those who had
attitudes about the Spanish in their reach for conquest.
committed this outrage. After lengthy preparation, Parilla
As the dust settled on the trail of the retreating soldiers,
assembled a force of some 600 men drawn from Texas
once-haughty contempt of the Comanche and Wichita settled with
garrisons and native Coahuiltician and Lipan.
it. North of the Red, Spanish military prowess was forever disFinally, the coming of August witnessed a pondercounted.
ous force stretching over the prairie heading north, avoidOAS member Seth Hawkins, Weatherford, is a historian,
ing the vast flats of the High Plains. There converged a
writer and illustrator with an avid interest in the Southwest.
train of 1,600 horses, mules and cattle; 200 pack mules
carrying corn, biscuits, and frijoles; 4,000 pounds of shot
Trowel Marks Winter 2012
and powder; and two shiny brass cannons.

5

Fall Meeting examines Civil War archeology in the region
Board members covered
Oklahoma Anthropological Society
topics before turning over the Fall
Meeting to speakers on the Civil
War.
Gathering Nov. 3 in Stillwater, about 40 people attended
the all-day session. The new OAS
Stillwater Chapter was host. Chapter advisor Stephen Perkins of
Oklahoma State University served
as session moderator.
John Davis of the Oklahoma
Historical Society assisted in meeting plans. Jon Denton was Program
Chairman.
OAS President Debra Baker
welcomed the audience to Murray
Hall on the OSU Campus and conducted the board meeting.
Keynote speaker was Steve
Dasovich, department chairman of
anthropology and sociology at Lindenwood University in St. Charles,
Mo.
He discussed “Searching
Forgotten Battles: Recent Archeological Surveys of Missouri’s Civil
War Battlefields.”
Also at the lectern were:
– Bob Rea, Historic Sites

Keynote speaker Steve Dasovich discussed technical
advances in battlefield archeology during the OAS Fall
Meeting in Stillwater.

Director at the Oklahoma Historical Society, speaking on
“Battlefield Archeology in Oklahoma;”
– Bruce Fisher, curator for development of the new
African American Exhibit at the Oklahoma History Center.
His topic was “The African American Perspective in Civil
War Oklahoma;”
– Bill Corbett, Northeastern State University, discussed “Courting Disaster: The Five Civilized Tribes and

the Civil War.”
Among highlights of the OAS Board
Meeting:
Under direction of President Debra
Baker, the Lawton chapter is creating a digitized
record of all OAS Bulletins. They will join digitized copies of all OAS
Newsletters. Current
Trowel Marks Newsletters are already posted
in the OAS archives.
The annual
OAS Bulletin has two
manuscripts in hand and
another expected soon,
said Bob Brooks, Editor.
The OAS Newsletter is
moving toward four publications in 2012, said Jon
Denton, Editor.
Upon recommendation of Treasurer Cathy
Compton, OAS will now
accept credit cards (service fees apply) and the
usual cash, check and
money orders.

Historic Fort Sill Museum hires Scott Neel as new director
An anthropologist
who coordinated museum
displays of 11 different tribes
in Alaska and helped direct
reassembly of the bomber
Enola Gay at the Smithsonian in Washington D.C.
is new director of the Fort
Sill Historic Landmark and
Museum.
Scott A. Neel follows
Towana Spivey, who stepped
down to take advantage of
an early buyout package
offered by the Army. Last
year Spivey ended a nearly
30-year career at the Lawton
museum.
Dr. Neel arrived
at the museum in May. He
has a strong background in
cultural anthropology and a

6

Trowel Marks
Winter 2012

commitment to a harmonious
relation with Native Americans. He has developed a
knack for displaying historical artifacts.
“I’ve not had time
to get into the history of
Oklahoma and its Native
American cultures,” he said.
“I look forward to helping the
cultures tell their side of the
story.”
He arrived at Fort
Sill from the Alaska Native
Heritage Center in Anchorage. There he served as
Curator of Collections and
Exhibits. He oversaw installation of four major exhibits
during his tenure, working
with cultural groups that
spoke 21 different languages.
Before his Alaska
job, he was a Museum
Specialist at the Smithsonian

Scott Neel

Institution’s National Air and
Space Museum in Washington. Among major displays
he oversaw was the reassembly of the B-29 Superfortress Enola Gay, the plane

that dropped the first atomic
bomb.
"I was one of the
crane operators who put the
wings back onto the Enola
Gay,” Dr. Neel said in a July
interview published on the
military website www.army.
mil.
“I also sat in the
cockpit and worked the throttles back and forth so that
the technicians could hook
up the cables to the engines.
That was pretty exciting.”
His interest in
culture and history ignited
when he earned a degree
in Cultural Anthropology at
the University of California,
Santa Barbara.
He followed with
a Master's of Arts and a
Doctorate in Archaeology at
the University of Nottingham,
England.

Display planned at nearby Fort Towson

OAS wraps up Rose Hill Plantation Dig
Excavation at Rose Hill is drawing to a close for the Oklahoma Anthropological Society after four field seasons at the old cotton plantation.
OAS volunteers gathered Sept. 19-23 at the site near Hugo. They turned up
more foundation stone, glass, nails and brick. Very little antebellum material of
value surfaced, despite hopes of finding remains of a buried kitchen area.
Dig coordinator Cathy Compton signed in 31 people, three of them new
members, she said. Andy Slaucitajs served as Dig Committee Chairman.
Archeological director Amanda Regnier continues lab work on Rose Hill
artifacts. A display is planned at nearby Fort Towson.
Arranged by John Davis of the Oklahoma History Society, volunteers were
able to visit the Gardner Mansion in Eagletown. Lewis Stiles led the group on an
hour-long tour. Stiles is the third generation owner of the property.
The two-story home remains much as it appeared when Choctaw Chief
Jefferson Gardner built it in 1884, although today it is full of historic items, natural curiosities and mementoes – among them pioneer cultural material, period
furnishings, dinosaur bones, petrified wood and wall displays.
As customary at the Rose Hill Digs, volunteers also attended a chuck
wagon Dinner at Fort Towson. Chief cook was Robert Wallas, assisted by Davis
and Eddie Horton. As usual, the meal of authentic frontier food was prepared to
pioneer perfection.
Above, antique bottle and bottle fragments unearthed at the Rose Hill
cotton plantation near Hugo. Below, owner Lewis Stiles identifies objects his father built into a fireplace at the Gardner Mansion in Eagletown. His hand rests on a ball made for an Indian gambling game.

OAS Vice President Ed Mayfield, Oklahoma
City, shows artifacts he's retrieved at the
Rose Hill dig site to Edmond dig volunteers
Tyler Pollock, University of Oklahoma freshman, and Cara Alizadeh-Ford, University of
Central Oklahoma freshman.

Among items Mayfield unearthed at the Fall
OAS Dig at Rose Hill was a white novaculite
point. The barbs were missing and the point
had been reworked.

Trowel Marks
Winter 2012

7

Historical novel has true grit, she says

Kathy Gibbs publishes novel on Cheyenne
The first thing Kathy Gibbs wants
readers to know is her novel is not a bodice
ripper.
“I know it looks like a romance novel,
but it’s got blood and guts and war and fighting” says the former OAS president. “It’s
about the Cheyenne people, a man and his
family, and all the things that happen to them
in the mid-19th century.”
Her book launch party is 2 p.m. Saturday, Feb. 16 at Fairfield Inn, Airport Marriott, 4521 SW 15, Oklahoma City.
As most members of the OAS Central
Chapter know, Gibbs has been working on
her historical novel for years. Edmond publisher 4RV is launching Gibbs' “Journey of the
Cheyenne Warrior” just in time for Christmas.
“I started it right after I got my
master’s degree,” she said. That was in the
1980s.
“I put it off and on, and wrote some
other things, but I finally finished it. That’s
how long it takes to be an overnight success.”
In her case, success is in getting it
published. She hasn’t paid a dime, but then
she hasn’t shown a profit, either.
“I haven’t planned on tons of money.
It would be nice, though” she laughs.
Gibbs’ interest in Native American
culture stretches back to even before she
became active in the Anthropological Society.
Then for years she attended digs and OAS
meetings. She capped her leadership as

Newly minted author Kathy Gibbs autographs her first published novel for Don
Stanek while Mary McHard waits her turn
at the December Central Chapter meeting
in Oklahoma City.

Central Chapter President with terms as OAS
President.
She’s always found Indians, and
especially their apparel and social setting, a

fascinating study, she said.
That’s put to good use in her
novel about Brave Eagle, a
boy “who grows to manhood
amid the constant changes
and turmoil on the Plains,”
according to the book jacket.
He interacts with
Black Kettle, Roman Nose,
and the Dog Soldiers. He
experiences the infamous
Sand Creek Massacre and
the Battle of the Washita. His
choice is not easy: Be a man
of peace or war? Can he
adapt to the pioneer life?
“The hardest part is
probably writing the massacre scenes. They are very
graphic. I did a lot of research, and I know the horrible things that happened,”
Gibbs said. “It’s pretty darn
accurate. I think people will
see that.”
Just to be sure, she
sent her manuscript to a recognized authority, Lawrence
Hart of Clinton, a Peace
Chief of the Cheyenne.
“He said I got it
right,” she said.
“Journey of the
Cheyenne Warrior” is available at 4RV Publishing,
Barnes & Noble, and Amazon.com.

Stillwater
Continued from Page 1
more and more people interested,” she said. “People are
coming from as far as Ponca
City, and we’re getting students from Oklahoma State
University and the University
of Oklahoma.”
The topic people seem
to show most intrigued about
is the OAS Spring and Fall
Digs, Hines said. More than
just a chance to learn how to
excavate, it’s an opportunity
to support archeology and
history in a hands-on approach.

8

Trowel Marks
Winter 2012

Speakers at the first
three meetings included Jon
and Diana Denton with a
background program on the
Anthropological Society titled
“Digging Into History;” Dr.
Richard Drass of the Oklahoma Archeological Survey
speaking on “Plains Villagers;” and Dr. Scott Hammerstedt, also of the Survey,
speaking on "The Reed Site:
Ceremonialism in the Neosho Valley of Northeastern
Oklahoma."
The next session
is Jan. 17 with the speaker
to be announced. Chapter
officers will be elected at that
time.
Alisa Hines can be
reached at alisa_hines84@
yahoo.com.

Charter members at the first meeting of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society Chapter in Stillwater are, from left,
Stephen Perkins, Dustin Holt, Alisa Hines, Tom Stevens,
Nancy Stevens, Melissa Agnew, Judy Varnum, Janette
Sagersa, Diana Denton, Helen Clements and Curt Hendricks.

Tulsa University grows anthropology department
Adds doctorate in archeology,
expands faculty and facilities

a position held by the late George Odell,
an anthropology professor for more than
25 years at the school. A loyal friend of
the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Dr.
Tulsa University has added a docOdell died Oct. 14. He led studies of historic
toral program with emphasis in archeology,
and prehistoric sites across Oklahoma and
hiring archeologists Thomas Foster and
beyond.
Miriam Belmaker.
From 2008-2012 Dr. Foster was
Anthropology Department Chairman
assistant professor of anthropology at the
Michael Whalen welcomed them to the facUniversity of West Georgia. His advanced
ulty in mid-August. He noted Dr. Foster has
degrees are from Pennsylvania State Uniexpertise in North American Archeology and
versity.
Dr. Belmaker is an old world paleoecologist
He is at work on a three-year,
and zooarcheologist.
$211,000 National Science Foundation
Hiring of others is under way, said
grant. It’s seeks to identify the resilience of
Dr. Foster, contacted at his office.
Thomas Foster
the Muscogee Creek people in the face of
As an associate professor, he fills
economic change and anthropogenic effects
on their environment, he said.
His research has appeared in two books and
the journals Human Ecology, Human Organization,
American Antiquity, the Journal of Anthropological
Archeology, and the Journal of Anthropological Research.
In 2007 he published “Archaeology of the
Lower Muskogee Creek Indians, 1715-1836.” The
book suggests there is significant continuity between
the culture of the historic period Indians and the prehistoric and protohistoric peoples. He argues that the
study of Creek Indian history should be at the level of
towns instead of archaeological phases.
Dr. Belmaker, an Assistant Professor of Anthropology, previously taught at the College of William
and Mary. She followed a BA in prehistoric archaeology at Haifa University, Israel, with advanced degrees
at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.
A Paleolithic archaeologist and paleoanthropologist, her research focus is on environmental
Thomas Foster, new archeology professor at Tulsa University,
change in the past 2 million years and how it affected
trowels soil during a dig.
hominid biological and cultural evolution.

Labor report predicts more jobs in archeology
Today there is an
increase in demand for applied archeology and cultural resource management,
according to Dr. Michael
Whalen, Chairman of the
Tulsa University anthropology department.
He cited a report by
the federal Bureau of Labor
Statistics. It predicts a nearly
30 percent growth in job opportunities in the field.
Tulsa University now
has the largest archeology program of any private
university in the state, said
Assistant Professor Thomas

Foster.
Adding a doctoral degree is a challenge.
“This is a big step
for this department. We
have long had very successful bachelor’s and master’s
programs,” Dr. Foster said.
The doctoral program will initially focus on
applied archeology. Core
courses will provide an
understanding of theory and
offer practical skills to help
students implement research
in their specialty.
The school’s physical plant for archeology has

added five new laboratories,
among them specific areas
for high tech equipment.
The doubling of
space has added new offices, Dr. Foster said.
TU manages the Gilcrease Museum, maintains a
large Near Eastern archeological collection, and holds
extensive Native American
collections from the Southern Plains.
TU archeology
faculty members are presently conducting research in
Jordan, Mexico and Armenia
as well as the U.S.

Time to renew?
If you missed your
OAS Bulletin or your
OAS Trowel Marks
Newsletter, you know
it's time to renew your
membership. Look for
a Membership Form in
this edition of Trowel
Marks.

Trowel Marks
Winter 2012

9

Archaeology Magazine offers coincidence

Dig at Iklaina brings Guido
a full circle to archeologists
at University of Missouri
By Guy Folger
Editor's Note: In this final article in a series on archeology travel, OAS member and veteran adventurer Guy Folger,
McAlester, continues his story on an extended visit to Greece.
Before starting this, my Greek odyssey, I searched the
Internet for great places to see archeology in Greece. It was my
good fortune to find an ongoing dig at Iklaina, known as IKAP or the
Iklaina Archaeological Project.
It was under direction of the University of Missouri at St.
Louis by archeologist Michael Cosmopoulos. I immediately wrote
the good doctor and obtained permission to visit.
The project is located on the southwestern tip of Greece, in
the Messenia area, near the town of Pylos and the village of Iklaina.
The site dates to the Late Bronze Age (about 1600-1100 BC)
known as the Mycenaean period.
In a happy coincidence, the July/August 2012 issue of Archaeology Magazine offered a comprehensive article about Iklaina
by St. Louis archeologist/writer Amanda Summer.
She said after brief trial excavations in 1954, the site was
left unexplored. When Dr. Cosmopoulos first started work in 1998,
the site was nothing but olive trees in rough terrain. From then until
2006, IKAP performed thorough surface surveys. Excavations followed the next year.
The first thing I noticed about the site was that Greek
squares appeared to be twice the size we use at our Oklahoma
Anthropological Society digs. They use flotation water screening
to catch every fragment. Other than that, the dig seemed to be like
any other that I have seen or worked on.
Our visit was well received. Dr. Cosmopoulos and his
crews were knowledgeable, friendly and eager to answer our questions – sort of like visiting an OAS dig.
Over the years, excavation has
been generous with results. Gradually
revealed are giant terrace walls, an
advanced drainage system, murals, a
Mycenaean palace, and a clay tablet
containing an ancient form of Linear B
writing. A study has shown the tablet to
be the oldest known decipherable text in
Europe.
What are the chances that this
tablet would be baked in a trash heap
fire over 3,000 years ago? That’s exactly what happened, and how it survived.
In a March 2011 article in the
National Geographic, Dr. Cosmopoulos
said “Those tablets were not baked, only
dried in the sun and [were] therefore,
very brittle … Basically someone back

10

Trowel Marks
Winter 2012

Archeologist Michael Cosmopoulos visits with Guy
Folger at Iklaina Archaeological Project in Greece.

then threw the tablet in the pit and then burned the garbage. This fire hardened and preserved the tablet.”
In Amanda Summer’s article in Archaeology
Magazine, she states “The finds at Iklaina will keep Cosmopoulos and his team busy for years to come.
"He is working to purchase and excavate the
land adjacent to the site in future seasons – where there
is one Linear B tablet, there is always the hope of finding
more.”
Except for my failing knees, I would love to join
one of the annual excavations at Iklaina. The digs are
usually in June and include field trips to major sites and
museums of the area. The weather is pleasant, the skies
incredibly blue, and visitors welcome.
Early evenings are reserved for lectures on
Greek art, history, archeology, culture, and/or lab work. If
preferred, the whole experience can be done for college
credit.
More information, costs, dates, and registration is
available at Iklaina‘s website www.iklaina.org.

Researchers take a break at the Iklaina Archaeological Project where a
Late Bronze Age clay tablet turned up.

Oklahoma archeology
in the news
City church asks Survey
to verify time capsule

plans a documentary and a traveling
exhibit focusing on the Century Chest.
Dr. Hammerstedt frequently
leads Oklahoma Anthropological Society digs. Slaucitajs is OAS Dig Chairman.

An archeologist’s ground penetrating radar recently probed an Oklahoma
City church where a century-old time
capsule awaits revelation.
Research archeoloState law clear
gist Scott Hammerstedt
if human remains
verified a vault sealed
are discovered
almost 100 years ago
Finding human
remains under a concrete
remains
at a dig site,
slab in the basement of
whether
during constructhe First Lutheran Church
tion
or
in
archeology, is
in Oklahoma City.
never
a
good
thing.
According to ReIt
immediately
trigligion Editor Carla Hinton
gers
state
law
and
shuts
in a Nov. 17 story in The
down the excavation, acOklahoman, church senior
cording to environmental
pastor Jerry Peterson will
attorney Miles Tolbert.
lead excavation of the capA director at
sule. The contents will be
Scott
Hammerstedt
Oklahoma
City’s Crowe
prepared for display in an
and
Dunlevy
law firm,
April 22, 2013 ceremony, a
Tolbert
lays
out
the
century after the contents were sealed
state’s
three-step
procedure
in
an Oct.
and buried.
26
story
in
The
Oklahoman.
Among the vault's contents are
If human remains are discovsaid to be American Indian artifacts,
ered,
immediately
stop working, Tolbert
Oklahoma pottery, photographs, a
told
business
writer
Paula Burkes. Next,
phonograph and recorded speeches by
ensure
nobody
touches
the area where
historians and civic leaders, and copies
remains
are
found.
of a special Century Chest Edition of
“It is a felony to allow any
The Oklahoman.
person,
other than a law enforcement
Dr. Hammerstedt, of the Oklaofficer,
mortician,
medical examiner or
homa Archeological Survey in Norman,
archeologist,
to
disturb
human skeletal
typically operates his GPR in fields and
remains.
You
should
consider
placing
meadows.
barriers
or
tape
around
the
area
and
“This is new,” Dr. Hammerstedt
securing
the
discovery
spot
at
night,”
said in the article. “In fact, if you had
Tolbert said.
told me in the late ’80s when I started
Finally, you have 48 hours to
archeology that I would be doing a projreport
what
you find to law enforceect in a church basement, I would have
ment.
It’s
a
felony
if you don’t.
been skeptical.”
In
what
is
fortunate, your disAfter the GPR did its job,
covery
is
not
always
obvious, Tolbert
videographer Andy Slaucitajs peeked
said.
It’s
more
common
to discover
through several drilled holes to glimpse
bones
that
people
think
are human but
the vault’s interior. The view showed
actually
belong
to
a
horse,
cow or other
condensation and oxidation of the
large
animal.
copper-lined box holding the chest.
It’s up to the chief medical exThe information will help workers lift
aminer
to
determine if human remains
the box intact from its resting place.
are
involved
a crime. If none occurred,
Among those at the preview
the
state
archeologist
and state hiswere Kent Buehler of the Survey office
toric
preservation
officer
decide if the
and Chad Williams, Deputy Director of
remains
are
connected
to
an existing
the Oklahoma Historical Society’s Retribal
group.
search Division. The Historical Society

Angela Berg at an OAS Dig

Medical anthropologist
'last voice' of victims
Angela Berg is said to be following in the footsteps of noted Oklahoma forensic anthropologist Clyde Snow.
In an Aug. 12 profile in The
Oklahoman, Berg says “I’m the last
voice for these victims.”
She was hired by the Oklahoma
Medical Examiner’s office in 2010. A
veteran operating room nurse, she has
a master’s degree in anthropology. She
is pursuing a Ph.D. in biological anthropology at the University of Oklahoma.
She has joined several OAS
digs, including Fort Gibson.
Working as an Unidentified Case
Manager for the Medical Examiner,
Berg travels the state, probing fields, a
cave, the bottom of a sewer. Attending
to unidentified bodies in every imaginable condition is not work for the faint of
heart, said reporter Juliana Keeping.
“To piece together identities,
she prepares the remains for DNA
analysis. Preparation involves simmering bones at a low temperature in water
and laundry detergent or sending blood
samples to the lab.”
Each week about 10 new bodies reach the medical examiner’s office
lacking identity. In February 2011, when
skeletal remains were found encased in
concrete at the bottom of a Muskogee
sewer, Berg worked with other scientists and a team of archeologists to
identify the woman as Carol Grannon, a
missing Muskogee woman.

Trowel Marks
Winter 2012

11

Trowel Marks

Oklahoma Anthropological Society
11550 Bartons Butte Road
Mustang OK 73064

Mailing
Permit

Return Service Requested

OA S C hapters
ARKOMA CHAPTER, Ft. Smith, Ark.
Meetings 7 p.m. 3rd Thursdays
Echols Building, University of Arkansas, Ft. Smith
Contact Phil Hayden at plkr@windstream.net

KAY COUNTY CHAPTER, Ponca City
Meetings 6:30 p.m. 3rd Thursdays
Public Library 5th and Grand, Ponca City
Contact Gary Bracken arkriverguy78@sbcglobal.net

BYRDS MILL CHAPTER, Ada
Meetings 7:30 p.m. 2nd Tuesdays
Valley View Hospital Conference Room, Ada.
Contact Carl D. Gilley at (580) 332-3812

MCALESTER ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, Krebs
Meetings 7 p.m. 2nd Thursdays
Krebs City Hall, Krebs
Contact Guy Folger at guyfolger@aol.com
See Websites for McAlester and Tahlequah Chapters

CENTRAL CHAPTER, Oklahoma City
Meetings 7 p.m. first Thursdays
Will Rogers Garden Center, 3400 NW 36
Contact Curt Hendricks at mcokc@cox.net
CLEVELAND COUNTY CHAPTER, Norman
Meetings 7 p.m. first Mondays
Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History, Norman
Contact Simone Rowe at simone.rowe@ou.edu
GREATER SOUTHWEST CHAPTER, Lawton
Meetings 2 p.m. on 4th Saturdays
Museum of the Great Plains, 601 NW Ferris Avenue, Lawton
Contact Matt Griffin at mattthehat2000@msn.com
See WebSite Greater Southwest Chapter OAS

STILLWATER CHAPTER, Stillwater
Meetings 7 p.m. 3rd Thursdays
First Presbyterian Church, 524 S Duncan, Stillwater
Contact Alisa Hines at alisa_hines84@yahoo.com
TAHLEQUAH ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, Tahlequah
Meetings 7 p.m. 4th Thursdays
Tahlequah Public Library, Tahlequah
Contact Thomas Purdin at (918) 284-2410
TULSA ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, Tulsa
Meetings 7 p.m. 4th Mondays
Aaronson Auditorium, Central Library, 400 Civic Center, Tulsa
Before meetings at 5 p.m. at Baxters Interurban 727 S Houston
Contact Pam Proctor at pamela.proctor@cnent.com

