PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Forty, Number Six, September 2019

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Andy Burcham
Miranda Bible
Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
https://thebesttravelplaces.com/most-visited-graveyards/

Newsletter Editor
Erin C. Frigo

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
Volunteering for the TAS Annual Meeting

3

From Your Editor: Things to Think About

4

Upcoming Events

5

Memorial for Gerald E. Schultz

6

Some Summer Events (Science Day: Lamar Elementary-2019) 7-9

https://www.pinotspalette.com/redbank/event/365512

2

VOLUNTEERING FOR TAS ANNUAL MEETING

Some of these spots might have filled since I last asked about them, but as of my last
communication, these are the volunteer spots that still need to be filled:
(copied from an email from Scott)

-Organizing Name badges at the Embassy Suites on Thursday sometime around 5:00 or 6:00 pm.

We have not selected an exact time because we adjust according to volunteer schedules. Should last
about 2 hours

-Volunteers all day on Friday and Saturday for registration and general duties. These
volunteers simply need to be at the Embassy Suites and available (i.e., on call).

-Two volunteers, one Saturday Morning from 9:00 am to 11:30 am and another on Saturday

Afternoon from 1:30 to 4:45 pm to chair General Paper Sessions (i.e., help load presentations to
a laptop, introduce speakers, and keep papers on schedule).

Please contact Scott Brosowske (sbrosowske@gmail.com) for more information.

https://www.azurilland.com/forums/non-pokemon-forums/general-chat/546049-this-is-halloween-this-is-halloween-lets-talk

3

FROM YOUR EDITOR: THINGS TO THINK ABOUT
Marketing Suggestions
As your newsletter editor and social media manager (and marketer?), I have been thinking about some ways to
bring more attention to our beloved society. There wasn’t a lot of time to address these thoughts in our last meeting, and
since we will not be having another meeting until November, I decided to put these suggestions in this newsletter for you
all to think about and hopefully discuss in our next meeting.
1. I do not personally have a Twitter or an Instagram account, Facebook is about all I do in terms of social media.
However, we could potentially draw in a much younger audience with Twitter and Instagram, and if that sounds like a
good idea to you all, I can make Twitter and Instagram accounts for the society and figure out how to you use those platforms.
2. I know that we participate in Science Day for Lamar Elementary School and we recently did the Archaeology Fair, both
where we interacted with kids and tried to get them interested in archaeology. However, perhaps there is more that we
could do to get young children interested in archaeology. We could hold a few special events a year on weekends,
dedicated specifically to getting young children interested in archaeology with fun activities for them. Perhaps we could
even hold events at local elementary schools, middle schools, and high schools, especially near the end of the year after the
students have taken the STAAR exams (or whatever they’re called now), during a time of the year when teachers and students alike are exhausted and would welcome a break to learn about archaeology.
3. I can speak with people in charge of marketing and social media for the Panhandle-Plains Museum and the Texas Master
Naturalist society to see if they will promote our social media posts/events on their social media platforms, if that sounds
like a good idea. Also, if there are other societies or institutions that you know who might be interested in promoting us, let
me know. We might also have to return the favor by promoting these other institutions and societies on our social media
pages, but I personally don’t see an issue with that.
4. This one would of course be based on how comfortable each individual speaker is with this idea, but if the speaker is
comfortable with it, we could live stream our talks on Facebook and on other social media platforms of ours.
5. Lastly, we could dedicate some of our meetings or create separate events dedicated to helping anthropology and
archaeology graduate students get ideas for thesis and dissertation projects, or even to help them find more information and
contacts that might help them with parts of their current projects. However, that doesn’t have to mean that the event has to
be meant solely for graduate students, it can even be aimed for undergraduates considering a graduate degree in
anthropology/archaeology. The students can create networks and get contact information for people who might be good
sources of information concerning a project that they seek or are currently researching. I can speak with a few of my
professors from Texas Tech to see if they will spread information of these events to their students and I’m sure there are
others in our society who have students and contacts to whom they can spread this information as well. I personally think
that a great way to bring attention to our society is to make ourselves a resource to students of the field.
6. In addition to number 5, we could even try to contact organizations within the Anthropology Department at university
campuses. At Eastern New Mexico University, they have Mu Alpha Nu, which is their Anthropology Club. At Texas Tech,
they have the Anthropology Society and Lambda Alpha as their Anthropology clubs. Those are the two that I know of, and
if we need me to, I could try to figure out what other Anthropology clubs there are at other universities. Or if there are
some that you know of, let me know. We could try to contact these organizations and see if they would be interested in
having us talk with their members and/or if they could merely mention us and the opportunities that we offer at their
meetings.
These are just a few ideas that I and even a few of our other members have had. Maybe some of them are too far-fetched,
maybe some of them just aren’t doable, but this is what I have been thinking about in terms of bringing more attention to
our society. Perhaps we can expand on some of them at the next meeting, and maybe some of you have some great ideas of
your own that you could mention! All the same, I look forward to hearing your thoughts and ideas!
Erin Frigo

4

UPCOMING EVENTS

October 11-13

TAS Annual Meeting, Amarillo.

October 16-19

Plains Anthropological Society conference, Bloomington, Indiana
For more information, please visit https://plainsanthropologicalsociety.org/annualmeeting

There will be no October meeting.
November 20

7:00 p.m. Regular meeting, PAS. Amarillo Public Library, Downtown
Branch, Upstairs.
5:30 p.m. Please join us for our pre-meeting dinner, Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor.

https://casagrandeaz.gov/halloween-family-fright-night-trunk-or-treat/

5

Memorial for Dr. Gerald E. Schultz

One of our members, Dr. Gerald E. Schultz passed away this August. Below is
a memorial for him taken from the WTAMU Half-Flag Notice.

West Texas A&M University Professor
Dr. Gerald Edward Schultz
Gerald Edward Schultz, 82, of Amarillo passed away Friday, August 23, 2019.
Gerry, the only child of Clara Shellhouse and Lionel Schultz, was born in Red Wing, Minnesota on
September 2, 1936. Gerry attended Red Wing High School and graduated in 1954. He continued his
formal education for the next 10 years, earning a BS and MS in Geology from the University of Minnesota, and finally a Ph.D. in Geology and Vertebrate Paleontology from the University of Michigan.
In 1964 he moved with his wife Lorna to the Texas Panhandle to join the faculty of WTAMU. Dr.
Schultz loved teaching, and one of his great joys was reconnecting with the many former students he
would encounter around town. He taught a diverse selection of courses including Paleontology, Oceanography, Mineralogy, Earth Science, and Human Origins, served as advisor to graduate geology students, and always looked forward to his annual student field trip to Mount Capulin in New Mexico.
At his retirement in 2018, he was proud to hold the record for WTAMU’s longest tenure at 54 years.
Dr. Schultz was also passionate about research. He took advantage of the Panhandle’s extensive ranch
land to organize fossil digs and successfully discovered and pieced together skeletons of camels, threetoed horses, rhinos, saber-tooth cats, and mastodons. Many of these fossils can be seen on display at the
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum in Canyon. He authored many scientific papers, was co-author of
the book entitled “Ice Age Mammals of Northwestern Texas,” and was a member of the Society of
Vertebrate Paleontology and the Paleontological Society.
In 1997 Dr. Schultz married his second wife, Joyce. Together they were active with church and Sunday
school activities at Paramount Terrace Christian Church, where they first met, and later at First Baptist
Church. They enjoyed taking trips to see national parks, attend school reunions, and visit friends and
family members across the country.
Dr. Schultz was a lover of the performing arts, attending concerts of the Amarillo Symphony and Harrington String Quartet and productions by Amarillo Opera and Amarillo Little Theatre. He traded his
role as audience member for that of performer by singing with the Amarillo Civic and Amarillo Opera
Choruses and participating in various square dancing, clogging, and Norwegian folk dancing
groups. He was an avid fan of old records and movies and over the years compiled comprehensive collections of opera and jazz recordings, serials, Westerns, and detective films.
Gerald was preceded in death by his parents and wife, Joyce Merrick Shull Schultz. He is survived by
three daughters, Katherine Schultz Hoyer and husband Scott of Portland, OR, Sally Shull West and
husband Dale of Dallas, TX and Cindy Shull Smeltzer and husband Steven of Rancho Mission Viejo,
CA; cousins, Glenn and Natalie Shellhouse of Colorado Springs, CO; sister-in-law, Betty Leavelle of
Euless, TX; four grandchildren, Mark Smeltzer, Keren Smeltzer Broce and husband Jason, Daniel
Smeltzer and wife Jolene Tan and Bethany Smeltzer all of Orange County, CA and two greatgrandchildren, Cambria Joy Broce and Judson Tan Smeltzer.
In lieu of flowers the family suggests memorial contributions to The Amarillo Symphony Orchestra or
The Panhandle Plains Historical Museum.

6

LAMAR ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 2019
Some of our members participated in Science Day for Lamar Elementary School back in
May. We helped the kiddos learn about rock art interpretation and even had a fun little
project for them to tell a story with their very own “rock art”. Our very own Miranda
Bible was a real trooper, giving the same presentation several times as we met with a new
group of kids every 30 minutes.

7

LAMAR ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 2019

8

LAMAR ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 2019

9

