Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

September 5, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2012-50: A Cultural Resources Survey of the 1.4-Mile Old River
Ranch Lateral in Central Dimmit County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during an archaeological survey of the Old river
Ranch Lateral right-of-way on February 14, 2012 (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Old River Ranch Lateral on large topographic map.

Dimmit County
Prehistory and
History
Other than early work done
by A. T. Jackson in 1932,
perhaps the earliest
systematic archaeological
survey in Dimmit County
was conducted by Parker
Nunley and Thomas Hester
in 1964 and 1965. Their
work resulted in the
documentation of 24
archaeological sites in the
county, ranging in age from
the Early Archaic through
the Later Prehistoric Toyah
phase (Nunley and Hester
1966).
Indian artifacts found in
Dimmit County indicate
that the area has been
occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food
sources such as wild game,
fruits, seeds, and roots
made the land hospitable.
Early technology included
tools from wood and stone,
woven basketry, sewed Figure 2. Old River Ranch Lateral on Carrizo Springs East (1972)
rabbitskin robes, and a very topographic map.
effective weapon was the
atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness of their spears (Hester 1984; Leffler
1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery and to hunt with bows and
arrows. “During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians native to Dimmit
County were squeezed out by other Indian who were migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who
were moving up from the south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in
Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in to take their place” (Leffler 1996:646).
“No permanent Spanish settlement seems to have been established in the future Dimmit County.
Beginning in the late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio
Road, a camino real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. After the Mexican War of
Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its citizens to settle in Texas.
Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that included territory now in
Dimmit County. None of the recipients seems to have made use of the land, however. By 1836, when

Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated almost solely by Indians”
(Leffler 1996:646).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of Dimmit County lay in the
disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for desperate
characters until about 1865. Carrizo Springs was founded in 1865, with the new settlers who lived
in jacals or dugouts frequently being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part tobeing
pursued by the Texas Rangers, and being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave
Dimmit County by 1877, and in 1880 Carrizo Springs became the county seat for the newly formed
county. By 1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also an
important part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators
combined to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
Although the residents of Dimmit County learned to cope with the sparse annual rainfall, artesian
wells ushered in an era of large vegetable truck farms in the 1890s, and Dimmit County became
known as part of the Texas Winter Garden Region, one of the most prolific vegetable-growing areas
in the country.
As with rest of the nation, the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced to cut
back their once-lucrative vegetable production during the depression, and fell back on raising poultry,
hogs, and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county in the
1950s certainly bolstered Dimmit County’s economy, and although large ranches lay claim to most
of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively increasing part
of the county’s development (Leffler 1996).

Background Review
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Even though only a handful of scattered archaeological surveys have been conducted in Dimmit
County (e.g., Nunley and Hester 1966), these very few surveys have identified over 160
archaeological sites. Archaeological remains such as Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview artifacts indicate
that the area was likely occupied by Native Americans as early as 11,000 years ago.
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say what
bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of Dimmit County before then. Only
cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and apparent
lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods. Archaeologists have
documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites, including large open campsites that are
most commonly located along stream or river terraces with numerous campfires, where a wide variety
of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal remains are found. Where
gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are
sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric
quarries.
Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the lack

of cultural resource surveys near the PA that would have located sites, rather than the probable nonexistence of sites. In fact, the PA lies to the west of a large archaeological survey conducted in
anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al. 1981).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both Live
Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000 years
ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and gathering
natural food resources available in the area. In addition, archaeologists from the Center for
Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted archaeological
investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir. A number of different types of
structures were investigated, the purpose being to extract as much information as possible about
architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns during the last half of the 19th century within the
reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met
the challenges of living in a frontier area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming
of law and order, railroads, and modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archaeological sites indicates that no
professional documented archaeological surveys had been conducted one mile of the Project Area
(PA). However, four archaeological sites have been documented within one mile, all by Parker
Nunley and Thomas Hester in the 1960s (Nunley and Hester 1966). These are briefly described in
Table 1. Although the Atlas does not reveal any surveys, as shown in Figure 2, Tierras Antiguas
archaeologists conducted field surveys of the Allee Lateral in January 2011, and the Allee C 1H
Pipeline in October 2011 (Nickels 2011a, b). During the Allee Lateral survey, portions of sites
41DM30 and 41DM31 that were within the right-of-way were revisited, and it was determined that
these areas were heavily disturbed.
Table 1. Documented Archaeological Sites within One Mile.
Site #
41DM30

Site Description

Remarks

Prehistoric open campsite with burned rocks, snails,
mussel shells, and lithic debitage scattered over 3-4
acres; maybe 3-4 feet in depth; diagnostics include a
Perdiz point and a dart point

Site appears to be significant; on
north edge of Allee Lateral; site
likely extends into ROW

41DM31

Prehistoric open campsite with burned rocks, and
Site appears to be insignificant;
lithic debitage scattered over 4-5 acres; site is heavily on north edge of Allee Lateral;
eroded, with no depth; diagnostics include a Perdiz
site could extend into ROW
point and a Frio point

41DM32

Prehistoric open campsite with scattered burned
rocks, stone tools, lithic debitage, and mussel shells;
site is heavily eroded, with no depth; diagnostics
include Archaic dart points

Site appears to be insignificant;
located 500 meters north of
Allee Lateral

41DM33

Prehistoric open campsite with scattered burned
rocks, stone tools, lithic debitage, pottery sherds, and
arrow points suggesting a Toyah, Late Prehistoric
occupation; depth unknown

Site appears to be significant;
located 1,100 meters north of the
Allee Lateral

Old Maps, Aerial Photographs, Historic Research
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the Dimmit County
area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts
of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the huntergatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his experiences in
1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves to the easily
exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer, occasionally sending a hunting party
onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each other in the
semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents (Campbell and
Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are
documented accounts of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to
establish any sort of permanent structures (Chipman 1992).
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the pipeline passes through, little
or no attention was given to early aerial photography. In lieu of this, the oldest topographic maps
found of the area were those produced in 1939 by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for Carrizo
Springs and Big Wells (Map 2012a, b).
Although the maps are not exact by today’s
standards, it was possible that historic water
tanks, corrals, outbuildings other structures
related to early ranching activities could be
encountered along the Old River Ranch
Lateral. Three maps found in the Texas
General Land Office (Texas GLO 2012a-d)
indicated that Old River Ranch Lateral is to
run just east the Nueces River near the
Upper Presidio Road Crossing, near
present-day Presidio Park, and the
northernend of the lateral may abut the old
road (Figures 2-5). The Upper Presidio
Road was used from about 1800-1870 as a
well-traveled route from Mexico (McGraw
et al. 1998). Although there were no
documented historical archaeological sites
directly associated with the Upper Presidio
Road along the Old River Ranch Lateral,
the possibility of undiscovered sites did
exist.
In sum, preliminary research indicated that
there could be rare and isolated occurrences Figure 3. 1846 map with Old River Ranch Lateral
of early ranching activities along the Old overlay.

River Ranch Lateral, but the expectations of
encountering any archaeological site of
significance from the 1500s through the mid1900s along the line were minimal. Technically,
any structures older than 45 years are now
considered of interest by the Texas Historical
Commission, and this would be considered.

Figure 4. 1851 map with Old River Ranch Lateral
overlay.

Figure 5. 1867 map with Old River Ranch Lateral
overlay.

Soils

The Old River Ranch Lateral
crosses five soil types that offer
varying depths, sedimentation and
deposition rates, and broad, shallow
streams course through the area. As
such, the soils and their proximity to
these stream likewise imply the
potential for the preservation of
intact cultural resources to exist.
Figure 4 shows the soils that are to
be intersected by the Old River
Ranch Lateral (Web Soil Survey
2012). Table 1 then presents a brief
description of each type, and their
potential to contain buried and
intact cultural deposits.

Figure 4. Soils to be dissected by the Old River Ranch
Lateral.
Table 1. Soils to be Dissected by the Old River Ranch Lateral.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact Archaeological
Potential

Catarina clay (CGB)

Deep clayey soils on gently sloping
upland areas

Minimal to Moderate to about 26
inches below the surface

Cochina clay (Cm)

Moderately deep clay loam on ridges
and summits on convex interfluves

Minimal to about 24 inches below
the surface

Maverick clay loam (MKC)

Moderately deep clay loam on ridges
and summits on convex interfluves

Minimal to Moderate to about 17
inches below the surface

Montell clay (MnA)

Deep clayey soils on gently sloping
upland areas

Minimal to about 19 inches below
the surface

Winterhaven silty clay loam
(WnA)

Deep silty clay loam on bottom land,
rarely floods

Moderate to about 30 inches below
the surface

Field Survey Results
A thorough, 100-percent pedestrian survey of the surface was conducted along the right-of-way.
Although surface visibility ranged from 80 to 100-percent, no prehistoric or historic cultural
materials were observed. Our observations were that the upland soils in this area are shallow, deflated
and eroded, exposing clay hardpan in several areas, and the drainages in this area are very shallow,
broad, and essentially ephemeral, with no terrace building evident on either sides of the drainages.
Animal burrow backdirt piles were frequent, but a thorough examination of those again revealed no
evidence of cultural material. Machine-pushed brush piles were also common along the proposed
right-of-way. Although our attention was focused upon a possible connection with the Upper Presidio
Road, no observable trace of the road could be discerned. It appears that if the Old River Ranch did
impact the route of the old road, any trace of it has been obscured by the existence of modern two
track roads and an existing pipeline.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Based upon the negative findings during this survey which afforded excellent surface visibility on
heavily eroded, deflated, and mechanically disturbed surfaces, and the very ephemeral and broad
stream crossings along the right-of-way, we recommend that construction of the Old River Ranch
Lateral as currently aligned be allowed to proceed as planned, with no further archaeological
investigations. However, we further advise that if any previously undiscovered cultural resources are
encountered during development of the pipeline, such finds should be examined and evaluated by
Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
February 1, 2012].

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.
Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon
Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hester, T. R.
1984 Fragments, Flints, and Footprints: The Prehistory of Dimmit County. In Dimmit
County Mesquite Roots, Volume I, pp. 1-6, edited by L. K. Tidwell. Wind River
Press. Austin, TX.
Leffler, J.
1996

Dimmit County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 6, pp. 645-648.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

McGraw, A. J., J. W. Clark, Jr., and E. A. Robbins (editors)
1998 A Texas Legacy, The Old San Antonio Road and the Caminos Reales, A
Tricentennial History, 1691-1991. Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Map
2012a Big Wells. Perry Casteñeda Library Map Collection. Big Wells USACE
Topographic Map. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo [Accessed February 1,
20112.
2012b Carrizo Springs. Perry Casteñeda Library Map Collection. Carrizo Springs

USACE Topographic Map. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo [Accessed
February 1, 2012].
Nickels, D. L.
2011a A Cultural Resources Survey of the 7.8-Mile Allee Lateral Line in Dimmit
County, Texas. Archaeology report #31. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations, Martindale, Texas.
2011b Final Letter Report of a Cultural Resources Survey of the 0.95-Mile Allee C 1H
Pipeline in Dimmit County, Texas. Submitted to Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd., by Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations,
Martindale, Texas (October 31, 2011).
Nunley, P., and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. XVIII, No. 3, pp. 233-253.
Texas GLO
2012a Presidio Crossing Map.
<http://wwwdb.glo.state.tx.us/central/arcmap/ArcMapsXoomer.cfm>[Accessed
February 1, 2012].
2012b 1846 Map traced from General Arista’s Map captured by the American Army
under General taylor at Resaca de Palma, May 9, 1846 and presented to James K.
Polk, President of the United States. Lieutenant I. M. Scarritt, cartographer.
Library Reference RG 77 Fortifications Map Drawer 148, Sheet 21. National
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.
<http://wwwdb.glo.state.tx.us/central/arcmap/ArcMapsXoomer.cfm>[Accessed
February 1, 2012].
2012c 1851 J. De Cordova’s Map of the State of Texas. Robert Creuzbauer,
cartographer."Revised & Corrected by Charles W. Pressler" Publisher name is
illegible.<http://wwwdb.glo.state.tx.us/central/arcmap/ArcMapsXoomer.cfm>[Acc
essed February 1, 2012].
2012d 1867 Traveler’s Map of the State of Texas. Charles W. Pressler, cartographer.
American Photo-Lithographic Company, New York. Texas State Library &
Archives Commission, Austin, Texas.
<http://wwwdb.glo.state.tx.us/central/arcmap/ArcMapsXoomer.cfm>[Accessed
February 1, 2012].
Web Soil Survey
2012 Dimmit County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed February
1, 2012].

