ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED CAPITOL PARKS
LITTLE LEAGUE BALL FIELDS, SAN ANTONIO,
BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS
by
Eloise F. Gadus
and
Damon Burden
Principal Investigator: Ross C. Fields
LETTER REPORT NO. 926
submitted to
Adams Environmental, Inc.
San Antonio, Texas
and
Cude Engineers
San Antonio, Texas
by
Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Cultural Resources Services
Austin, Texas

PAI No. 218002
July 2018

FINAL REPORT
TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 8379

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT...............................................................................................................................

v

CURATION...............................................................................................................................

v

INTRODUCTION.....................................................................................................................

1

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................................

1

RESULTS OF FILE SEARCH..................................................................................................

3

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY...................................................................................................

5

RECOMMENDATIONS...........................................................................................................

10

REFERENCES CITED.............................................................................................................

11

iii

LIST OF FIGURES
1.

Project location map........................................................................................................

2

2.

Modern aerial photograph of the project area showing shovel test locations..............

6

3.

Photographs of the access road segment of the project area........................................

8

4.

Photographs of the main part of the project area.........................................................

9

5.

View to the southwest of the creek cut bank northeast of Shovel Test EG03..............

10

iv

ABSTRACT
On April 10 and June 6, 2018, personnel with Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted an
intensive archeological survey on 23.7 acres of undeveloped land to be utilized for the creation
new Little League baseball fields just east of the intersection of Wurzbach Parkway and Wetmore
Road in northeast San Antonio, Texas. This survey was conducted under the direction of Adams
Environmental, Inc., for Cude Engineers, partially under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8379.
The proposed development will be done as a private-public partnership. Most of the project
area (23.0 acres) is privately owned land (Capitol Aggregates, Inc.). The public component of
the project will involve use of City of San Antonio bond money to construct a road and bridge to
access the property on its southeast side. This will be done on 0.7 acres of publicly owned land,
and only this part of the project is governed by the terms of the antiquities permit.
No prehistoric or historic artifacts or archeological sites were identified during the survey.
The access bridge and road section has seen extensive disturbance from development along the
eastern creek bank, and the main western section of the proposed park has seen disturbance
associated with land clearing and the construction of embankments along Wurzbach Parkway.
Shovel testing and examination of cut banks in this western section found no evidence of
archeological sites. The proposed project will not impact any archeological resources that meet
eligibility criteria for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or designation as a State
Antiquities Landmark. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., recommends that the proposed project be
allowed to proceed without additional archeological investigations.

CURATION
The archeological survey did not find any artifacts, so the project does not require
artifact curation. Project records and photographs currently housed at the offices of Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., will be transferred to the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin
for permanent curation.

v

INTRODUCTION
On April 10 and June 6, 2018, personnel with Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
conducted an intensive archeological survey on 23.7 acres of undeveloped land to be
utilized for the creation new Little League baseball fields just east of the intersection
of Wurzbach Parkway and Wetmore Road in northeast San Antonio, Texas (Figure
1). This survey was conducted under the direction of Adams Environmental, Inc.,
for Cude Engineers, partially under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8379, to fulfill
the requirements of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966,
as amended, and associated regulations 36 CFR 800; the Antiquities Code of Texas
(Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977, Title 9, Chapter 191, VTCS 6145-9); and
the City of San Antonio’s Historic Preservation and Design Section of the Unified
Development Code (Article 6 35-360-634).
The proposed development will be done as a private-public partnership. Most
of the project area (23.0 acres) is privately owned land (Capitol Aggregates, Inc.),
and development there will be done by Future Fields, Inc. The public component of
the project will involve use of City of San Antonio bond money to construct a road
and bridge to access the property on its southeast side. This will be done on 0.7 acres
of publicly owned land, and only this part of the project is governed by the terms of
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8379. The project will entail construction of five ball
fields, a parking lot, access road and bridge, a concessions stand, batting cages,
a playground, and associated utilities. The horizontal area of potential effects is
23.7 acres (23.0 acres privately owned and 0.7 acres publicly owned). Most grounddisturbing activities will be restricted to the upper 1.5 ft, but some disturbance could
extend as deep as 5 ft. Hence, the vertical area of potential effects is 5 ft.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The project area is on gently sloping terrain immediately west of an unnamed
tributary of Salado Creek, about 1.2 km north-northwest of the confluence of those
streams. It is on the leading edge of the Balcones Escarpment in north-central
Bexar County and along the transitional boundary between the Blackland Prairie
to the southeast and the Edwards Plateau to the northwest (Arbingast et al. 1973:6;
Griffith et al. 2004; McMahan et al. 1984:Figure 1). This portion of the Blackland
Prairie is characterized by rolling to nearly level tall-grass plains underlain by soft
interbedded marls, chalks, limestones, and shales. The scarp along the edge of the
Edwards Plateau is a rugged dissected landscape of limestone hills and canyons
created by extensive stream downcutting and headward erosion. According to the
Geologic Atlas of Texas (Bureau of Economic Geology 1983), the area is on the outer
edge of a wide band of Pleistocene terrace alluvium deposited by Salado Creek and
its tributaries. This deposit is inset into Upper Cretaceous Pecan Gap chalk and
chalky marl. Along the escarpment, the mapped terrace deposits primarily consist
of calcareous gravels mixed with sands, silts, and clays. No Holocene alluvium is
mapped in the vicinity of the project area.
Undifferentiated, nearly level, frequently flooded Tinn and Frio soils are
mapped along and immediately adjacent to the tributary that borders the southeast

Figure 1

2

Sources: Esri, HERE, Garmin, USGS, Intermap, INCREMENT
P, NRCan, Esri Japan, METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), Esri
Korea, Esri (Thailand), NGCC, © OpenStreetMap contributors,
and the GIS User Community

City of San
Antonio

³

0

1,000 2,000

4,000

Meters

T E X AS

PAI/18/slh

Figure 1. Project location map.

side of the survey area. These very deep, moderately well-drained soils formed in
calcareous loamy and clayey alluvium derived from ancient geologic deposits. Nearly
level Lewisville silty clay is mapped across gently sloping terrain in the remainder
of the area west of the stream. Lewisville soils occur on nearly level, broad terraces

3

along area creeks and rivers. They are very deep, well-drained, calcareous upland
soils that formed in ancient loamy and clayey calcareous sediments (SoilWeb Earth
2018; Taylor et al. 1991:25). Tinn series soils are Vertisols; the other listed soils are
Mollisols (SoilWeb Earth 2018). The archeological potential for naturally buried
prehistoric sites in and adjacent to the project area varies according to geologic and
geomorphic setting. Based on these factors alone, terrain away from the existing
stream channel has limited potential. The narrow tributary floodplain consisting
of Tinn and Frio soils has the greatest potential for naturally buried archeological
sites, but any such deposits would have been subject to natural channel meander
and scouring and recent channel modification.
The Bexar County climate is classified as modified subtropical and is
predominantly marine in the summer and continental in the winter (Taylor et al.
1991:102). The climate of the Blackland Prairie physiographic unit is classified as
modified humid subtropical with Gulf-influenced hot summers and continentalinfluenced mild winters. The Edwards Plateau physiographic unit is classified
as subtropical steppe (Natural Fibers Information Center 1987:10–12). Seasonal
temperature extremes exceeding 100°F and dipping below 32°F occur in both regions
but are more frequent on the Edwards Plateau. The mean annual precipitation for
Bexar County is 29.1 inches (739 mm). Precipitation is distributed throughout the
year, with peaks in the late spring and early fall months (Natural Fibers Information
Center 1987:49; Taylor et al. 1991:102).
As with landscape and climate, the biota of Bexar County differ east to west
with geographical overlap of some species. Flora and fauna of the Edwards Plateau
and Blackland Prairie are defined as Balconian and Texan, respectively (Blair
1950). Although the dominant vegetative regime for the project area was previously
listed as mesquite-live oak-bluewood parklands (Frye et al. 1984), the area is now
characterized by extensive suburban development. The region once supported short
to tall grasses with widely scattered mesquite, elm, hackberry, and pecan trees on
stream terraces and denser stands of elm, hackberry, oak, pecan, and ash trees
along tributary channels.
RESULTS OF FILE SEARCH
Review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Archeological Sites Atlas
in February 2018 revealed one documented archeological site and nine previous
archeological investigations within 1 km of the project area. The project area is
completely encompassed by a large survey area that extends north along the east
side of Wetmore Road. This area was part of a larger 1976–1977 reconnaissance
archeological survey and assessment of more than 11 drainages and 3 sewage
treatment plant areas on the northern and southern peripheries of San Antonio
that was conducted for the city by the Center for Archaeological Research at the
University of Texas at San Antonio (Fox 1977:1). Another large survey area northeast
of the Wurzbach Parkway/Wetmore Road intersection overlaps most of the 1976–1977
survey; it may have been triggered by planned activities at a large quarry there.
Neither survey recorded any sites within 1 km of the project area.

4

Linear surveys were conducted along segments of Wetmore Road and
adjacent Broadway Street west-southwest of the survey area in 1986 and along
the Wurzbach Parkway corridor just north of it in 1991. The Atlas does not provide
any other information about these projects. In 2005, personnel with South Texas
Archeological Research Services, L.L.C., conducted a small survey at Salado
Creek and Wetmore Road for Medina Consulting Company, Inc., and the Federal
Communications Commission. No sites are depicted in this survey area. In the same
year, the Center for Archaeological Research conducted an intensive pedestrian
survey north of Wetmore Road on three tracts to be impacted by the planned
airport expansion for the City of San Antonio Department of Aviation. No new
archeological sites were documented in these tracts, but previously documented site
41BX959 was revisited. Site 41BX959, about 1.2 km northwest of the project area,
is a multicomponent Archaic and late-nineteenth/early-twentieth-century artifact
scatter on a knoll east of Mud Creek that was initially recorded archeological
steward C. K. Chandler in 1991. The prehistoric component consists of tested
cobbles, debitage, bifaces, dart points, a Guadalupe tool, unifacial tools, cores, and
occasional pieces of burned rock. The historic component is composed of glass,
historic ceramics, plastic, rubber, and metal artifacts derived from a preexisting
farmstead. Shovel testing conducted during the revisit expanded the site boundary
and indicated that the majority of the prehistoric archeological deposit is within
10 cm of the modern surface, with a handful of artifacts recovered between 10 and
40 cm (Figueroa and Thompson 2005).
In 2007, personnel with SWCA Environmental Consultants conducted an
intensive survey of the proposed Wurzbach Parkway extension corridor between
Blanco Road and Wetmore Road for HNTB Corporation and the Texas Department
of Transportation. No new archeological sites were identified (Galindo et al. 2010).
In 2008, the Center for Archaeological Research conducted an intensive
archeological survey of the segment of the proposed Salado Creek Greenway between
Loop 410 and Wetmore Road. This project identified three new prehistoric sites
(all well outside the 1-km review area) and revisited 41BX841 about 1.1 km southsoutheast of the current project area. This site was recorded as a surface artifact
scatter. It covers ca. 300x280 m in Ladybird Johnson Park on the north side of Salado
Creek. Three shovel tests were dug in the southwest portion; the one positive test
contained burned rocks to a depth of 50 cm and lithic debitage to 60 cm (Figueroa
2008). The portion within the project right of way was determined to be ineligible
for National Register inclusion in 2008.
Finally, in 2017, personnel with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.,
conducted a survey of existing and proposed wastewater alignments along the south
side of Wurzbach Parkway for the San Antonio Water System. This survey identified
Native American site 41BX2168 about 0.6 km west-northwest of the project area.
This site is an extensively disturbed, 105x20-m surface scatter of debitage and
cores sandwiched between an infilled gravel quarry and Wurzbach Parkway right
of way (Owens 2017). Site 41BX2168 was determined to be ineligible for National
Register inclusion in 2017.

5

In addition to review of the Archeological Sites Atlas, the potential for
historic archeological sites was assessed using a mid-eighteenth-century Spanish
map, several nineteenth- and twentieth-century maps obtained from the Texas
Department of Transportation’s Texas Historic Overlay, and a series of historic and
modern quadrangles and aerial photographs accessed through the NETR Online web
viewer. Late-nineteenth-century Bexar County maps depict a northeast-southwest
road in the vicinity of the project area (Klappenbach 1871) and a later alignment
that probably relates to the International and Great Northern Railroad (Rullman
1887). These likely correspond to modern-day Wetmore Road and the railroad tracks
along Wetmore Road just west of the project area. The railroad line that parallels
Wurzbach Parkway just north of the project area probably corresponds with an
International and Great Northern Railroad line depicted on the 1928 U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers Bracken quadrangle. The Longhorn Siding is depicted at the
northeast corner of where these two rail lines merge on the 1928 quadrangle and
on subsequent quadrangle maps (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1928, 1938; U.S.
Defense Mapping Agency 1978; U.S. Geological Survey 1953, 1967, 1992). The northsouth railroad is labeled as the Missouri Pacific Railroad, and the east-west line
is labeled as the Missouri, Kansas, & Texas Railroad on the 1953 and 1967 USGS
Longhorn quadrangle maps. No development is depicted within the project area on
the majority of maps reviewed. However, the 1973 USGS Longhorn and 1978 U.S.
Defense Mapping Agency Bracken quadrangles do indicate that an unimproved
haul road once passed north-south through the survey area, connecting a quarrying
operation north of present-day Wurzback Parkway with a material dump south of
the project area. The 1992 USGS Longhorn quadrangle also depicts an unimproved
roadway along or just outside of the southwest edge of the project area. Review of
available aerial imagery (NETR Online 2018) and Google Earth satellite imagery
supports the conclusion that the project area was little impacted by the urban
development that surrounded it in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. A 1955
aerial image indicates the survey area is in a large tract south of the railroad line
that was once used for row-crop cultivation, and late-twentieth-century images
suggest the east edge was impacted by disturbance associated with construction of
Wurzbach Parkway.
The Atlas review suggested there is some potential for surface and nearsurface prehistoric archeological deposits in the project area, particularly near the
tributary that passes along the southeast side. However, geologic and geomorphic
characteristics of the project area suggest that it has limited potential for deeply
buried prehistoric archeological sites. Review of available nineteenth- and earlytwentieth-century maps and aerials suggests there is some minor potential for
historic archeological sites associated with the construction and operation of nearby
railroads and the operation of area quarries.
RESULTS OF THE SURVEY
Field investigations consisted of pedestrian survey by a crew of two
archeologists who walked transects across the 23.7-acre area at intervals of ca. 30 m,
examined vegetation-free surface exposures and the creek cut bank, and excavated

6

21 shovel tests. The work meets or exceeds the requirements of the Texas Historical
Commission’s Archeological Survey Standards for Texas. The project area consists of
a 0.7-acre linear segment on the east-side of the creek that will be used to construct
a road and bridge to access the ball fields and a 23.0-acre triangular area on the west
side of the creek that will be the main part of the park (Figure 2). Investigations in
these areas did not discover any prehistoric or historic archeological sites.
The access road segment supports a vegetative cover of grasses and mature
huisache (sweet acacia) and hackberry trees. It is higher in elevation, ca. 740 ft
above mean sea level, than the remainder of the project area and as such may be
considered to have a greater potential for archeological sites. However, it is also
Figure 2

EG11 EG10

AN06

AN05
AN07

EG09

AN04

EG08
AN08 EG05

AN03

EG04
AN10

EG06

AN02

EG07 AN09

EG03
EG02
AN01
EG01

Shovel Test
Project Area, Private Property
Project Area, Public Property

³

0

50

100
Meters

PAI/18/slh

Figure 2. Modern aerial photograph of the project area showing shovel test locations.

200

7

substantially disturbed by utilities consisting of both sewer and overhead power
lines, a concrete-lined drainage ditch to the creek, surface runoff channels, and
bulldozer push piles (Figure 3). Most of these disturbances are likely associated
with the extensive development along the east side of the creek, which consists of
an industrial complex and residential neighborhoods. Surface exposures near the
creek were inspected in this area, but no shovel tests were excavated because of
the disturbance.
The 23.0-acre main part of the project area, located west of the creek at
an elevation of 730 ft, is lower then the east bank of the creek. It supports similar
vegetation of mature huisache and hackberry trees concentrated mainly along the
creek, with scattered trees, tall grasses, and dense stands of brush across the area
away from the creek. Ground surface visibility is generally low in this area, but it
can rise to 30 to 60 percent under some of the stands of brush (Figure 4a). The lack
of vegetation below these brushy sections may be a result of water perching on the
clayey soils after heavy rains, and ponded water is present along the southwest
project area boundary. Disturbances in the area consist of evidence of scooped-out
sections and bulldozer piles along the northeastern side between Shovel Tests
AN03 and AN04 as well as on the northwest side between Shovel Tests AN07 and
EG06 (Figure 4b). The northeastern boundary was affected by the construction of
embankments associated with Wurzbach Parkway just to the north. Shovel Test
EG08 in this area exposed disturbed sediment, and chert gravels, probably from
road construction, were noted on the surface at Shovel Tests EG10 and EG11. There
is also a grass-covered two-track road with deep ruts paralleling the creek at the
southeastern boundary. The fist-sized chert cobbles seen on the surface near Shovel
Tests EG01 and EG02 likely came from this road; none of them were chipped in any
way to suggest modifications by Native Americans.
Due to the limited surface visibility in the main part of the project area,
shovel testing was done here. Shovel tests were placed judgmentally or at 100-m
intervals along the transects. The shovel tests were approximately 30 cm in diameter
and were excavated in 20-cm levels when sediments allowed. Excavated sediment
was screened through 1/4-inch-mesh hardware cloth or carefully sorted through with
a trowel when too difficult to screen efficiently. A Shovel Test Record form was used
to record brief sediment descriptions and notes on recovery, natural inclusions, and
characteristics such as the vegetation surrounding the tests. The average shovel
test depth was 20 cm, with depths ranging from 10 to 40 cm.
Sediments within the shovel tests generally consisted of 10–40 cm of dark
brown to dark grayish brown silty clay loam over dark brown clay loam. In Shovel
Test EG08, light gray clay with yellow mottles was encountered at 10 cm below the
surface; this may represent bedrock disturbed by construction of nearby Wurzbach
Parkway. Chert cobbles were noted on the surface and in the silty clay loam, but
none of these displayed chipping consistent with Native American tool production.
No artifacts were recovered or noted in any of the tests or on the surface. Shovel
tests were terminated as the silty clay loam transitioned to dense clay loam. Cut
banks along the creek at the east edge of the project area indicate that the surface
sediments can be up to ca. 1 m thick atop bedrock (Figure 5), but shovel tests show

8

Figure 3

a

b
Figure 3. Photographs of the access road segment of the project area: (a) Archeologist Aaron Norment standing
on a bulldozer push pile at the northwest edge of the access road segment; (b) view to the northeast, with creek
channel on the left and concrete-lined drainage ditch on the right.

9
Figure 4

a

b
Figure 4. Photographs of the main part of the project area: (a) Shovel Test EG04 with open ground below a
brushy area; (b) view east across a grass-covered push pile from Shovel Test AN07.

10

that they are thinner away from the creek. The thickness of the sediments near the
creek indicates some potential for buried sites there, but none were found in the
extensive cut bank exposures examined.
Figure 5

Figure 5. View to the southwest of the creek cut bank northeast of Shovel Test EG03.

RECOMMENDATIONS
No prehistoric or historic artifacts or archeological sites were identified
within the proposed Capitol Parks Little League ball fields project area during
this survey. The access bridge and road section has seen extensive disturbance
from development along the eastern creek bank, and the main western section of
the proposed park has seen disturbance associated with land clearing and road
construction. Shovel testing and examination of cut banks in this western section
found no evidence of archeological sites. Hence, the proposed project will not impact
any archeological resources that meet eligibility criteria for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places or designation as a State Antiquities Landmark. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., recommends that the proposed project be allowed to proceed
without additional archeological investigations.

11

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast, Stanley A., Lorren G. Kennamer, Robert H. Ryan, Alice Lo, David L. Karney, Charles
P. Zlatkovich, Michael E. Bonine, and Roberta G. Steele
1973
Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93–115.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1983
The Geologic Atlas of Texas, San Antonio Sheet. Reprint. Originally published in 1974.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Figueroa, Antonia
2008
An Intensive Pedestrian Archaeological Survey of the Salado Creek Greenway, Wetmore
Avenue to Eisenhower Road, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. Phase II: N. E. Loop 410
to Wetmore Avenue. Archaeological Survey Report No. 395. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Figueroa, Antonia, and Jennifer Thompson
2005
Intensive Pedestrian Survey of Three Tracts to be Impacted by the Planned Expansion
of the San Antonio Airport, Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report No. 357.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Fox, Anne A.
1977
An Archaeological Assessment of the San Antonio 201 Wastewater Treatment Project.
Archaeological Survey Report No. 41. Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.
Frye, R. G., K. L. Brown, and C. A. McMahan
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas Map. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Galindo, Mary Jo, Kevin Miller, and Al McGraw
2010
Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Wurzbach Parkway Extension
Project from Blanco Road to Wetmore Road, Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Studies
Program, Report No. 125. Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs
Division, Archaeological Studies Program, Austin. SWCA Cultural Resources Report
No. 07-225. SWCA Environmental Consultants, Inc., Austin.
Griffith, G. E., S. A. Bryce, J. M. Omernik, J. A. Comstock, A. C. Rogers, B. Harrison, S. L. Hatch,
and D. Bezanson
2004
Ecoregions of Texas (color poster with map, descriptive text, and photographs): Reston,
Virginia, U.S. Geological Survey (map scale 1:2,500,000).
Klappenbach, Louis
1871
Bexar County. Texas General Land Office, Austin.
McMahan, Craig A., Roy G. Frye, and Kirby L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and accompanying illustrated
synopsis. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Wildlife Division, Austin.
Nationwide Environmental Title Research, L.L.C. (NETR Online)
2018
Historic Aerials. Electronic document, http://historicaerials.com, accessed February
2018.
Natural Fibers Information Center
1987
The Climates of Texas Counties. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at
Austin, in cooperation with the Office of the State Climatologist, Texas A&M University,
College Station.

12
Owens, Jeffrey D.
2017
Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed San Antonio Water System E-20
Wastewater Treatment Project, Segments 1 and 2, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc., Austin.
Rullmann, John D.
1887
Map of Bexar County. Published by the Strobridge Lithograph Company, Cincinnati,
New York, and London. Texas General Land Office, Austin.
SoilWeb Earth
2018
SoilWeb Network Link on Google Earth, Streaming-KMZ Interface to U.S. Department
of Agriculture, National Cooperative Soil Survey, Soils Survey Geographic Database
(SSURGO) and Natural Resources Conservation Service, State Soil Geographic Database
(STATSGO) digital soil survey products. California Soil Resource Laboratory, University
of California, Davis, in collaboration with U.S. Department of Agriculture, National
Cooperative Soil Survey. Electronic document, http://casoilresource.lawr.ucdavis.edu/
soilweb-apps, accessed February 2018.
Taylor, F. B., R. B. Hailey, and D. L. Richmond
1991
Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
1928
Bracken, Texas. 15-minute Quadrangle. U.S. Army Tactical Map, War Department, U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, Washington, D.C.
1938

Bracken, Texas. 15-minute Quadrangle. U.S. Army Tactical Map, War Department, U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, Washington, D.C.

U.S. Defense Mapping Agency
1978
Bracken, Texas. 15-minute Quadrangle. Hydrographic/Topographic Center, U.S. Defense
Mapping Agency, Washington, D.C.
U.S. Geological Survey
1953
Longhorn, Texas, 7.5-minute Quadrangle. Mapped by the U.S. Army Map Service.
Published by the U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.
1967

Longhorn, Texas, 7.5-minute Quadrangle. Mapped by the U.S. Army Map Service.
Published by the U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.

1973

Longhorn, Texas, 7.5-minute Quadrangle. U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.

1992

Longhorn, Texas, 7.5-minute Quadrangle. U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.

