ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF PARMER VILLAGE DUPLEXES (LOT 4),
AUSTIN, WILLIAMSON COUNTY, TEXAS

by

Damon Burden

Principal Investigator: Ross C. Fields

LETTER REPORT NO. 904

submitted to
D. R. Horton
Austin, Texas

by

Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Cultural Resources Services
Austin, Texas

PAI No. 214038

February 2015

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT
...............................................................................................................................
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING.......................................................................................................
RESULTS OF THE FILE SEARCH ................................................................................................
RESULTS OF BACKGROUND REVIEW AND FIELD INVESTIGATION .................................
RECOMMENDATIONS ..................................................................................................................
REFERENCES CITED ....................................................................................................................

ii

iii
1
1
3
4
4
6

ABSTRACT

On December 4, 2014, an archeologist with Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted
an archeological survey of a small property in northwest Austin in Williamson County,
Texas. The work was performed for the proposed residential development of a 9.3-acre
parcel of private property just west of Lake Creek at the intersection of Parmer Lane and
Sage Grouse Drive. The ﬁeld investigation was limited to the edges of the project area due
to ongoing earthmoving and residential construction, which had extensively disturbed and
reworked almost all of the parcel.
Surface survey identiﬁed a small amount of lithic debitage and burned rocks in the
northwest corner of the project area and one ground stone fragment along its east edge. These
artifacts are undoubtedly associated with previously recorded prehistoric archeological site
41WM585, which encompassed the current project area and adjoining lands to the west and
southwest. This site has been subjected to extensive disturbance over the past 15 years, and
the current investigations indicate that no intact archeological deposits are present in the
project area. Hence, the site is considered ineligible for listing in the National Register of
Historic Places. It is recommended that the proposed project be allowed to proceed without
additional archeological investigations.
CURATION

This survey was conducted under a no artifact collection policy. Identiﬁed artifacts
were noted, brieﬂy described, and returned to the point of recovery. Project records and
photographs are housed at Prewitt and Associates, Inc.

iii

INTRODUCTION

On December 4, 2014, an archeologist with Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted an
archeological survey of a 9.3-acre parcel just west of Lake Creek, northwest of the intersection
of Parmer Lane and Sage Grouse Drive in Austin in southwest Williamson County, Texas
(see ﬁgure). The survey was performed for the proposed residential development of Parmer
Village Duplexes Lot 4 to be conducted by Continental Homes of Texas, LP, on property
owned by D. R. Horton. This work was performed in compliance with Section 106 and 36
CFR part 800 of the National Historic Preservation Act. The survey was conducted to
check for unrecorded archeological resources and to evaluate the integrity of a portion of
a previously recorded prehistoric archeological site (41WM585) that overlaps the project
area. The 9.3-acre horizontal Area of Potential Effects (APE) has maximum dimensions of
670 ft on a side. Based on the characteristics of area soils, the estimated vertical APE is
about 3 ft or less.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

The project area is in the Balcones fault zone, which marks the physiographic
transition between the Blackland Prairie to the east and the rugged, dissected landscape of
limestone hills and canyons of the Edwards Plateau to the west. Topography in the project
area is dominated by level to gently rolling uplands incised by easterly ﬂowing tributaries
(Bureau of Economic Geology 1997; Grifﬁth et al. 2004; McMahan et al. 1984; Werchan and
Coker 1983).
The project is on gently sloping upland terrain about 150 m northwest of an
intermittent segment of Lake Creek that is inset into limestones and dolomites of the Lower
Cretaceous–age Fredericksburg Group (Bureau of Economic Geology 1981; Fenneman
1938; Sellards et al. 1966). Eckrant extremely stony clay with 0–3 percent slopes is mapped
across all but the southeast corner of the project area, which is depicted as Fairlie clay
with 0–1 percent slopes (USDA-NRCS 2014a). Well-drained Eckrant series soils are very
shallow and shallow to indurated limestone bedrock and interbedded quartz, chert, marl,
and chalk. These soils are found on nearly level to very steep ridge summits, shoulders, and
backslopes of dissected plateaus. Fairlie series soils are deep, moderately well drained soils
found on nearly level to gently sloping uplands; these soils are prone to cracking when dry.
Surface layers in Eckrant and Fairlie soils may vary from 10 to 50 cm thick (USDA-NRCS
2014b).
The climate of the eastern Edwards Plateau is classiﬁed as subtropical subhumid with
hot summers and dry winters, whereas the climate of the Blackland Prairie physiographic
unit is classiﬁed as modiﬁed humid subtropical with Gulf-inﬂuenced hot summers and
continental-inﬂuenced mild winters (Goetze 1995; Natural Fibers Information Center
1987:10–12). The Williamson County climate is characterized by hot summers and typically
cool winters punctuated by brief periods of cold arctic air. Seasonal temperature extremes
exceeding 100ºF and dipping below 32ºF occur across the county but are more frequent
on the Edwards Plateau (Werchan and Coker 1983:2–3). The mean annual precipitation

1

Project Area
Williamson County

³

0

50

100

200

Meters

³
T E X A S

Figure. Project location map and modern aerial photograph showing the Area of Potential Effects.

2

for Williamson County is 34.5 inches (876 mm), with peaks in the early summer and fall
months (Williamson County Weather 2014).
As with landscape and climate, the biota of Williamson County differs east to west
with geographical overlap of some species. Flora and fauna of the Edwards Plateau and
Blackland Prairie are deﬁned as Balconian and Texan, respectively (Blair 1950). The
project area is in the Balcones Canyonlands segment of the Edwards Plateau ecological
region (Grifﬁth et al. 2004), where mapped vegetative regimes include live oak-mesquite­
ashe juniper parklands and live oak-ashe juniper woodlands (Frye et al. 1984). The climax
plant community for the Eckrant soil series (and likely historically representative of the
project area) consists of tallgrass savannah with scattered mottes of live oak (USDA-NRCS
2014b).
RESULTS OF THE FILE SEARCH

Review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Archeological Sites Atlas revealed that
there are four recorded prehistoric archeological sites (41WM585, 41WM589, 41WM591,
and 41SM971) and two sites with both prehistoric and historic components (41WM494 and
41WM586) within 1 km of the project area. All of these sites have been extensively disturbed
by infrastructure and residential development in the past 30 years.
Site 41WM494 was recorded by Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc., in 1982 and
revisited twice two years later (Hubbard et al. 1984; site form submitted by John Clark of
the Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation). Covering approximately
200,000 m2, it consisted of 18 burned rock middens and surrounding scatters of predominantly
chipped stone artifacts along a limestone bench on the east side of Lake Creek, about 0.3 km
southeast of the project area. Observed diagnostic artifacts indicate repeated occupation
from the Early Archaic to Late Prehistoric periods; the historic component is tied to early­
twentieth-century stone quarrying. The site has been impacted by looting since the 1950s,
and it has been extensively disturbed by residential development.
Sites 41WM585, 41WM586, 41WM589, and 41WM591 were recorded during a
survey conducted for North Austin Municipal Utility District No. 1 (Hubbard et al. 1984).
The current project area overlaps the eastern part of 41WM585, which consisted of a large
(>200,000 m2) sparse to dense scatter of chipped stone artifacts that included Early to Late
Archaic period projectile points. Much of the site was extensively disturbed by the time
it was recorded, and most of the site has since been destroyed. Site 41WM586 was a late­
nineteenth/early-twentieth-century homestead composed of a series of low water-control
or agricultural features, a handful of late historic ceramics, and a possible historic grave
on a Lake Creek tributary about 0.8 km southwest of the project area. A very small scatter
of chipped stone artifacts is also included within the site boundary. Sites 41WM589 and
41WM591 were very sparse, variably-sized scatters of chipped stone artifacts recorded
approximately 0.9 km southeast of the project area; both sites may represent southern
extensions of 41WM494. Sites 41WM494 and 41WM586 are referenced during subsequent
surveys of the Anderson Mill Road corridor by Hubbard (1984) and the Texas Department
of Transportation (1996). The latter was conducted prior to proposed road and right-of-way
expansion.

3

Site 41WM971 is a small scatter of chipped stone artifacts identiﬁed on the west side
of Lake Creek, about 0.3 km southeast of the project area. The site was recorded during a
survey conducted by Archeological and Cultural Sciences Group prior to Lake Creek channel
improvements (Nash 2000).
RESULTS OF BACKGROUND REVIEW AND FIELD INVESTIGATION

A review of available modern and historic topographic quadrangles and aerial
photographs (NETR Online 2014) and Google Earth satellite imagery before field
investigation indicated that the southern portion of the project area was cleared of wooded
vegetation at least as early as 1960 and was within the ﬂoodpool level of nearby Ganzert
Lake. Development of the immediate area began shortly after 2000. Associated disturbance
within the project area included additional vegetation clearance and the construction of
a large retention pond in 2002. The ca. 2-acre feature extended from the south-central to
northeast corner of the project area with a spillway fronting the Parmer Lane right of way.
By late 2008, the reservoir was ﬁlled in and replaced by the present reservoir south of Sage
Grouse Drive. The period between its construction and inﬁll included additional mechanical
vegetation clearance and surface disturbance and the installation of subsurface utilities
(e.g., water, sewer, and telecommunication lines) along new roadways that formed the south
and west boundaries of the project area. Review of aerial imagery suggests that the stillwooded northwest corner of the APE is the least disturbed portion of the property.
Survey of the project area on December 4, 2014, revealed that construction was well
underway across the entirety of the parcel. Area surfaces had been scraped to bedrock and/or
graded with imported ﬁll, road cuts had been made in some areas, and crews were removing
extraneous ﬁll material or excavating trenches for subsurface utilities placement. Due to
the ongoing construction, which included heavy mechanical equipment trafﬁc and clear
indications of extensive surface disturbance, the ﬁeld investigation was limited to walking
the periphery of the parcel and photographing ongoing and recent mechanical construction
disturbance; no shovel testing was done because of the extensive disturbance. The small
wooded area in the northwest corner of the project area was bisected by several road and
driveway cuts that extended down into bedrock, leaving several small islands of trees and
intact sediments. A few pieces of lithic debitage and burned rocks were observed in displaced
or truncated soils in and along the edges of some of these cuts, and a quartzite ground
stone fragment was observed at the top of a wide ditch cut that forms the east edge of the
project area. No other archeological materials were identiﬁed on the investigated margins
of the project area. These isolated artifacts undoubtedly relate to previously recorded site
41WM585, which encompassed the current project area and adjoining lands to the west and
southwest. No intact portions of this site remain within the current project area.
RECOMMENDATIONS

A review of available topographic quadrangles, aerial photographs, and Google
Earth satellite imagery before the ﬁeld investigation indicated the southern part of the
project APE was disturbed by historic vegetation clearance and that most of the project area

4

was subjected to mechanical surface disturbance after 2000. About 20 percent of the APE
was extensively disturbed by the construction of a large retention pond in 2002. Modern
roadways and residential developments frame the parcel; subsurface utilities run along its
south and west edges; and a broad ditch cut extends along its east side. Recent and ongoing
construction have extensively disturbed the modern surface across the 9.3-acre parcel, often
truncating the landform and cutting well into bedrock.
The small amount of lithic debitage and burned rocks observed in the northwest
corner of the parcel and the ground stone fragment observed along its east edge are
undoubtedly associated with previously recorded prehistoric site 41WM585. Recent
residential, commercial, and infrastructure development have extensively disturbed this
site, and no intact archeological deposits remain. Hence, the site is considered ineligible
for listing in the National Register of Historic Places. It is recommended that the proposed
project be allowed to proceed without additional archeological investigations.

5

REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93–115.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1981
The Geologic Atlas of Texas, Austin Sheet. Reprint. Originally published in 1974.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
1997

Tectonic Map of Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Fenneman, N. M.
1938
Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Frye, Roy G., Kirby L. Brown, and Craig A. McMahan
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas Map. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Goetze, J. R.
1995
Distribution, Natural History and Biogeographic Relationships of Mammals on the
Edwards Plateau of Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Biological Sciences,
Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Grifﬁth, G. E., Bryce, S. A., Omernik, J. M., Comstock, J. A., Rogers, A. C., Harrison, B., Hatch,
S. L., and Bezanson, D.
2004
Ecoregions of Texas (color poster with map, descriptive text, and photographs). U.S.
Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia.
Hubbard, R. A.
1984
A Cultural Resource Re-Survey of a Linear Corridor along Anderson Mill Road,
Williamson County, Texas. Richard A. Hubbard, Archeological Consultant, Austin.
Hubbard, R. A., D. Brown, and J. Jackson
1984
A Cultural Resource Survey and Assessment of the North Austin Municipal Utility
District 1, Williamson and Travis Counties, Texas. Richard A. Hubbard, Archeological
Consultant, Austin.
McMahan, Craig A., Roy G. Frye, and Kirby L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis. Wildlife Division, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Nash, Sean R.
2000
Cultural Survey of the Lake Creek Channel Improvement Project, Williamson County,
Texas. Reports of Investigations, Archeological and Cultural Sciences Group, Austin.
Natural Fibers Information Center
1987
The Climates of Texas Counties. Bureau of Business Research, The University of
Texas at Austin, in cooperation with the Ofﬁce of the State Climatologist, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Nationwide Environmental Title Research, L.L.C. (NETR Online)
2014
Historic Aerials. Electronic document, http://historicaerials.com, accessed December
2014.
6

Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1966
The Geology of Texas. Reprint. Originally published 1932. Bulletin 3232. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Texas Department of Transportation
1996
Williamson County, Texas. Sterling Hays, Principal Investigator. Survey Report.
Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (USDA-NRCS)
2014a
Web Soil Survey. Electronic document, http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/
HomePage.htm, accessed December 2014.
2014b

Soil Series Classiﬁcation Database. Electronic document, http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
wps/portal/nrcs/detail/soils/survey/class, accessed December 2014.

Werchan, L. E., and J. L. Coker
1983
Soil Survey of Williamson County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station.
Williamson County Weather
2014
Williamson County Weather. Electronic document, http://www.usa.com/williamson­
county-tx-weather.htm, accessed December 2014.

7

