Cultural Resources Investigations along Drainage Improvements,
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas: 1986 Investigations

by

Grant D. Hall
Michael B. Collins
and
Elton R. Prewitt

with Contributions by

James W. Westgate
and
Margaret Ann Howard

Co-Principal Investigators:

Elton R. Prewitt and Michael B. Collins

REPORTS OF INVESTIGATIONS, NUMBER 59

Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Consulting Archeologists
Austin, Texas

October 1987

TABLE OF CONTENTS

. • viii

ABSTRACT • • • •

ix

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CHAPTER 1:

Introduction •

1

CHAPTER 2:

Environmental Background

5

Climate

5

Flora •

5

Fauna •

6

Geology and Physiography

6

Modern Land Use • • •

9

Environmental Zones •
Environmental Zone
Environmental Zone
Environmental Zone
Environmental Zone
Environmental Zone
Environmental Zone
Environmental Zone
Environmental Zone
Environmental Zone
CHAPTER 3:

10
I •
II
III •
IV
V • •
VI
VII •
VIII
IX • • • •

11
11
11

12
12
12
12
14
14

Archeological Background

15

Site Prediction and Topographic Occurrence

15

Cultural Chronology and Time-Diagnostic Artifacts

16

Subsistence Pursuits and Settlement Patterns

18

CHAPTER 4:

Ditch Survey •

21

Field Methods •

21

Survey Results

26

Geomorphology along the Survey Routes
Findings

36

CHAPTER 5:

38

Testing of the Sardinas Resaca Site, 41HG118 ••

41

Site Description

43

Technical Procedures

46

Results of the Investigations
Surface Collection • • •
Backhoe Trenching • • • •
Controlled Test Excavations

48
48
52

Geomorphology
Geologic Setting •

54

49

53

iii

i

Natural Stratigraphy of Site 41HG118
Conclusions

56

60

Discussion of Findings

61

Conclusions •

62

CHAPTER 6:

Assessments, Recommendations, and Conclusions

65

Assessments • • •

65

Recommendations

70

Conclusions

77

REFERENCES CITED •

APPENDIX 1:

81

Site Descriptions
Grant D. Hall

87

Introduction

89

Hidalgo County

89

Willacy County

104

References Cited

129

APPENDIX 2:

Artifact Descriptions and Debris Analysis
Grant D. Hall
••••

.....

131

Introduction

133

Chipped Stone •

133

Cores

133
133
135
135
135
135

Cobble Cores
Unifacial Cores • •
Bifacial Cores
Core Nuclei • • •
Core Fragments
Thick Bif aces

135

Thin Bifaces ••
Oval to Subtriangular •
Unstemmed Triangular
Stemmed • • • • • • •
Miscellaneous Fragments

146
146
147

Distally Beveled Bif aces and Unifaces

155

Modified and/or Trimmed Debitage •
Modified Debitage •
• ••••
Trimmed Debitage

161
161
161

Unmodified Debitage

164

Ground Stone • • • • • •

186

154

154

iv

168

Grinding Slab • •
Abrader Fragment

.................

Lithic Residues and Miscellaneous Materials

174
174

Fire-Fractured Rocks, Burned Clay Lumps, and Pebbles

175

Cobbles

178

Caliche Concretions •

178
178

Shells • • •
Marine Shells •

178

Freshwater Shells
Mussel Shells
Land Snail Shells

183
183
186

Bones

187

Carbon

187

Historic Debris

187

References Cited

190

APPENDIX 3:

APPENDIX 4:

Analysis of Feature 1 Burial at 41WY113
Margaret Ann Howard

191

A Preliminary Report on a Large Concentration of the Remains
of the Giant Gopher Tortoise, Gopherus hexagonatus, in the
Late Pleistocene Beaumont Formation of Willacy County, Texas
James W. Westgate
•••••

199

......................

Introduction • • •

201

Systematic Paleontology

201

Skeletal Material •

203

Geographic and Stratigraphic Location •

207

Associated Vertebrate Fauna •

212
212

Paleoecology • • • • • • •
Geographic Distribution •

212

Burrowing Evidence and Paleoclimatic Implications •

214

Fossil Nests

215

Human/Tortoise Relationships

216

Conclusions

216

Acknowledgments

217

References Cited

218

APPENDIX 5:

Identification of Vertebrate Faunal Remains
James W. Westgate • • • • • • • •
v

221

, I

LIST OF FIGURES

1.

General location map • • •

3

2.

Environmental photographs

8

3.

Environmental zones

13

4.

Western portion of survey area

22

5.

Eastern portion of survey area •

23

6.

Photographs of survey segments and site environments

24

7.

Photographs of survey segments and site environments • •

25

8.

41HG118, site area map • • •

• •••

42

9.

Photographs of site 41HG118

• ••••

44

• • • • • •
• • • • •

10.

41HG118, site map

45

11.

41HG118, schematic north-south geologic section

55

12.

41HG118, stratigraphic position of humate samples

58

13.

Cobble cores and core nuclei •

137

14.

Unifacial cores

139

15.

Bifacial cores

141

16.

Thick bifaces

145

17.

Oval to subtriangular thin bif aces •

149

18.

Unstemmed triangular thin bifaces

151

19.

Stemmed and unstemmed thin bifaces •

153

20.

Proximal fragments of unstemmed triangular thin bifaces

157

21.

Distally beveled bifaces and unifaces

159

22.

Trimmed debitage pieces with bevels

167

23.

Trimmed debitage •

171

24.

Ground stones

177

25.

Modified marine shells and mussel shell

185

26.

Feature 1 burial at 41WY113

194

27.

Skeletal elements present, 41WY113 •

195

28.

Fossil localities

202

29.

Photographs of Gopherus hexagonatus

205

30.

Drawing of male Gopherus hexagonatus

209

31.

Shell of female Gopherus hexagonatus •

211

32.

Stratigraphic profiles of turtles 1-7

213

vi

LIST OF TABLES

9

1.

Land use in Hidalgo and Willacy counties as of 1976 •

2.

Site records by survey segment

29

3.

Survey results in previously surveyed segments

32

4.

Sites per kilometer by environmental zone • • • • •

33

5.

Summary of key site assessment characteristics

34

6.

Provenience of tools from the surface collection units at 41HG118

50

7.

Provenience of other artifacts from the surface collection units at 41HG118 • • •

51

8.

National Register assessments by environmental zone • • •

67

9.

Summary of cumulative site assessments, National Register eligibility •

71

10.

Current recommendations and site status by environmental zone

72

11.

Summary of site status

76

12.

Provenience and metric data for cores

134

13.

Provenience and metric data for bifaces •

142

14.

Provenience and metric data for distally beveled bifaces and unifaces •

160

15.

Provenience and metric data for modified debitage

162

16.

Characteristics of modified debitage

163

17.

Provenience and metric data for trimmed debitage with beveling

164

18.

Characteristics of trimmed debitage with bevels • • •

165

19.

Provenience and metric data for other trimmed debitage

168

20.

Characteristics of other trimmed debitage •

169

21.

Debitage from 41HG118 •

172

22.

Debitage from the other sites

175

23.

Provenience, counts, and metric data for fire-fractured rocks,
burned clay lumps, and pebbles from 41HG118 • • • • • • • • • •

179

24.

Provenience, counts, and metric data for fire-fractured rocks,
burned clay lumps, and pebbles from the other sites •

181

25.

Provenience of cobbles recovered from all sites •

182

26.

Caliche concretions recovered from 41HG118

182

27.

Provenience of historic artifacts from 41HG118

188

28.

Measurements of Gopherus hexagonatus from Texas •

206

vii

ABSTRACT

Archeological, geomorphologic, and paleontological studies were carried out during the
summer of 1986 along certain portions of a major drainage ditch system located in Hidalgo
and Willacy counties, southern Texas. The investigations were sponsored by Hidalgo County
Drainage District No. 1 and Willacy County Drainage District No. 1 as part of a continuing
program intended to mitigate damages to cultural resources resulting from implementation of
drainage improvements.
An archeological study was conducted along discontinuous segments of existing and
proposed drainage ditches, having a combined length of 82.93 km (51.54 miles). Fifty-five
cultural resources were recorded, including 43 sites and 12 isolated finds. The majority
of the sites and isolated finds evidence prehistoric human activity. A small number of
historic sites or components were also defined. The remains of Pleistocene fauna were
discovered at 22 localities. Significant observations concerning the detectability of
sites before and after ditch excavation are permitted as a result of recent survey
findings.
The Sardinas Resaca Site (41HG118), a prehistoric resource located south of Mission,
was intensively investigated via a controlled surface collection, backhoe trenching, and
test pit excavations. Chipped stone artifacts recovered from the site suggest that it was
occupied during the late Archaic and, possibly, the Late Prehistoric periods. Deposits
containing cultural debris were found to have been severely disturbed and redistributed by
modern surface modifications. Geomorphologic observations and radiocarbon dates obtained
from assay of soil humate samples provide useful insights into the age and development of
landforms related to the site.
Investigation of paleontological sites was intended to explore the possibility that
humans were interacting with certain now-extinct Pleistocene animals. Remains of a large
Pleistocene land turtle -- Gopherus hexagonatus -- are relatively common along the ditches.
Seven specimens of this species were recovered, but no evidence of human activity was found
in association.
Recommendations for final mitigation of damages to cultural resources resulting from
construction of the Hidalgo-Willacy Drainage Ditch System are presented.

viii

-----\

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The completion of this report has come about as the result of the efforts and cooperation of a number of individuals. The authors wish especially to thank key representatives
of the sponsoring agencies, including Judge Santos Saldana, Charles Curtis, and Vona Walker
of Hidalgo County Drainage District No. 1, and Jim Riggan of Willacy County Drainage
District No. 1. Charles Curtis and Vona Walker rendered invaluable assistance in arranging
property access and providing equipment and personnel for site testing operations. Godfrey
Garza and Jack Nickel of the engineering firm of Melden and Hunt, Inc. were very responsive
and helpful when questions concerning ditch routes arose. They also promptly provided maps
as needed by the archeological survey team.
Project guidance at the Federal level has come from the office of Col. Gordon Clark,
Galveston District, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Archeologists Carolyn Good and Jan
Stokes have done an admirable job of managing Corps of Engineers' interests with respect to
the Hidalgo-Willacy Drainage Ditch Project. At the State level, the Texas State Historic
Preservation Officer, Laverne Herrington, and her assistant, Susan L. Andrews, are to be
commended for their exemplary cooperation in assuring that the project has been in compliance with state antiquities management requirements. Jan Stokes and Susan L. Andrews are
due special thanks for the timely and professional manner in which they responded to a
request for deliberation concerning clearance for site 41HG118. The contributions to the
project by Robert J. Mallouf, State Archeologist of Texas, and Lawrence E. Aten, Chief,
Interagency Resource Management, National Park Service, Washington, D.C., were also very
helpful.
Dr. Ernest Lundelius, Director of the Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory at The
University of Texas at Austin, is to be thanked for his interest in the paleontological
remains found during the survey. Dr. Lundelius passed study of fossils found along the
ditch into the capable hands of his student, James W. Westgate. Westgate's nephew, Glen
Armstrong of New York, New York, participated in recovery of fossil turtle remains during
one long, hot week in August. Without Glen's strong back, his uncle and Archeologist Hall
would still be trying to drag plaster-coated turtle shells out of the ditch.
Laboratory space and helpful analytical advice were provided to the senior author by
Dr. Thomas R. Hester, Director of the Center for Archaeological Research at The University
of Texas at San Antonio. His cooperation and assistance are gratefully acknowledged.
The competent and hard-working staff of Prewitt and Associates, Inc. is largely
responsible for the successful conduct of the fieldwork and report preparation involved in
this project. President Elton R. Prewitt designed the field research program and lent
freely of his extensive knowledge of Rio Grande Delta archeology. Linda Nance Foster did
an admirable and much appreciated job of administering the fieldwork. She has also done
most of the typing involved in progress reports and in preparation of the final report
manuscript, as well as editing the manuscript. Carolyn LeMaster assisted with administration and typing duties; LeMaster and Jeanine Seay catalogued the photographs generated by
the project.
Laboratory processing and cataloging of artifacts recovered during the
project were accomplished by Wayne Klement and Seay. They left the collection in a clean
and well-organized state, which greatly facilitated subsequent analysis. The pleasing and
informative maps in the report were designed and executed by Sandra Hannum. The excellent
artifact illustrations were drawn by Ellen Atha.
Margaret Howard deserves special

ix

recognition for her involvement in field surveys related to the project and for her highly
competent analysis of the human skeletal remains recovered at 41WY113.
The field crew was made up of Robert L. Stiba and Wayne Chesser. Their willingness to
put in long hours walking along treacherous ditch banks in oven-like heat led to completion
of the fieldwork in a timely fashion. Their congenial personalities made for an enjoyable
and stimulating expedition in general.
Lastly, the senior author wishes to thank his parents, Helen and Sandy Hall of
Edinburg, for the many ways they helped the crew during the fieldwork stage of the project.

x

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

In the months of June through August 1986, archeological and paleontological investigations were carried out along a system of drainage ditches trending from west to east
across the lower Rio Grande Valley in Hidalgo and Willacy counties in far southern Texas
(Fig. 1). The investigations were conducted by personnel from Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
under contract with Hidalgo County Drainage District No. 1 and Willacy County Drainage
District No. 1, the entities responsible for creation of the drainage system in each
county. As originally conceived, the project was to involve archeological survey of 96.2
km (59.75 miles) of existing and proposed drainage ditches.
Project objectives were eventually expanded to include the testing of prehistoric site 41HG118 and the investigation of
Pleistocene fossil localities potentially associated with the activities of Early Man in
the region.
The above agencies sponsored this project as part of an ongoing program of mitigating
damages to cultural resources resulting from implementation of improvements to the Valley's
drainage system. The cultural resources investigations were conducted under the provisions
oe the State of Texas Antiquities Code (Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977, Title 9,
Chapter 191; VTCS 6145-9) and the special conditions of U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Permit
No. 11374 issued by the Galveston District Office. Cultural resources are considered under
the provisions of 33 CFR 325, Appendix C; 36 CFR 800; and 36 CFR 36. Authorizing legislation includes the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, P.L. 89-665, P.L. 96-515 (as
amended), Executive Order 11593 (Protection and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment
1971), and the Archeological and Historical Preservation Act of 1974, P.L. 93-291 (as
amended).
This report is the fifth in a series documenting archeological surveys and site
testing operations along proposed elements of the Hidalgo-Willacy drainage ditch system.
The pilot survey was conducted in 1976 by personnel from the Texas Historical Commission
In 1980, additional surveys
(Mallouf et al. 1977). Forty-nine sites were recorded.
resulted in the location of 53 more sites (Day et al. 1981). These surveys were followed
by excavations aimed at assessment of two sites (Day 1981) • More survey work in 1982
yielded 10 sites and 14 isolated finds (Mercado-Allinger 1983). A prehistoric site,
41WY84, was also tested at that time (Mercado-Allinger 1983).
Archeological surveys related to the present investigation began in November 1985 when
Elton R. Prewitt of Prewitt and Associates, Inc. and Carolyn Good of the Galveston District
Office, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, spent three days inspecting ditch segments in the
vicinity of Lyford, Texas, in the east-central area of the system. These investigators
recorded the locations of 22 definite or possible cultural and/or paleontological resources
and wrote brief descriptions of what they found. The localities encountered by Prewitt and
Good were revisited during the survey effort reported here and were officially documented.
In April of 1986, Michael B. Collins and Margaret A. Howard of Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. surveyed certain ditch segments where the drainage districts wished to proceed more
immediately with construction. During a two-day period, Collins and Howard located and
recorded 10 sites as they surveyed five ditch segments totaling approximately 4.5 km in
length. The Collins-Howard findings are reported herein.

I
HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

The subsequent survey effort along the ditch system began on June 18 and continued to
July 10, 1986. The survey work was done by a Prewitt and Associates, Inc. crew consisting
of Grant D. Hall (Project Archeologist) and Robert L. Stiba and Wayne Chesser (Archeological Assistants). As previously mentioned, the survey was initially intended to cover
some 96.2 km (59.75 miles) of existing and proposed ditch segments. The length of existing
and proposed ditch alignments actually surveyed totals 82. 93 _kn\ _(51. 54 miles) • The reduction in survey effort is accounted for mainly by current indecision as to the final route
of the proposed Southwest Lateral ditch to be excavated north of Mission, at the west end
of the system. At the request of Hidalgo County Drainage District No. 1, additional
archeological survey will not be attempted along the Southwest Lateral until its route is
finalized. Further reductions in the survey effort came as a result of a decision by
Willacy County Drainage District No. 1 not to excavate certain proposed ditch segments that
were originally within the scope of this survey.
Survey of the 82.93 km of ditch segments consumed 476 person-hours of effort. Fortythree prehistoric and/or historic sites, 12 isolated finds, and 22 fossil localities were
found during the course of the survey. These totals include the Prewitt-Good findings and
the 10 sites recorded by the Collins-Howard team. The expenditure of person-hours given
above is for the primary survey only.
One of the prehistoric sites recorded by the Collins-Howard team -- the Sardinas
Resaca Site (41HG118) -- was judged to warrant further investigation. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. negotiated a separate contract delivery order with Hidalgo County Drainage
District No. 1 enabling these required additional investigations to occur. The timing on
the contractual negotiations was such that the Hall-Stiba-Chesser team went directly from
the general survey into testing at the Sardinas Resaca Site. The investigation l;>egan on
July 14 and continued until July 24, 1986. Activities at 41HG118 consumed 256 person-hours
of effort. The results of the investigation are reported here (see Chapter 5) along with
the survey findings.
A final outgrowth of the survey program was a week-long operation aimed at recovering
important fossil Pleistocene turtle remains found at a number of locations along ditch
segments in Willacy County. Fossil remains of mammoth, turtle, and other late Pleistocene
fauna have been found along the ditch system (Rawn-Schatzinger 198lb and this report). The
possibility that these fauna date from a culturally relevant time is an issue that needed
to be addressed. Many of the turtles are well preserved and were found in original geologic context. The turtles occur in the Beaumont Formation, deposits of which are known to
have been laid down in late Pleistocene times. Other mammalian faunal remains found along
the ditch system, such as mammoth and horse, are still not dated nor have they been found
in good geologic context. The fossil turtles thus offered the best opportunity for detection of an association between humans and Pleistocene fauna in this area of Texas. As a
means of exploring such a possibility, a crew consisting of vertebrate paleontologist Jim
Westgate, Grant Hall, and Glynn Armstrong spent the week of August 18 to August 22, 1986,
recovering the remains of seven fossil turtles. A total of 150 person-hours was consumed.
Although no evidence of human activity was found along with the fossils, a significant
collection of paleontological materials was recovered. Information concerning the recovered fossils is presented in Appendix 4 of this report.
In conjunction with the archeological and paleontological investigations, Michael B.
Collins conducted a study of geomorphology as it pertains to cultural resources occurring
along the ditch system in general and to the Sardinas Resaca Site in particular. Collins'
observations and interpretations are reported here as well.

2

HIDALGO-WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS- 1986 INVESTIGATIONS
BROOKS

I

HIDALGO

COUNTY

HIDALGO

a

WILLACY COUNTIES, TEXAS
GENERAL LOCATION MAP

I
:;i
I

L.

:::,

}

o·

«:-.

1

0

I

~

K E N E D y

---: ; L

~ ~NT
Y •,

Y

uN

~-.

T_Y_ _ • - -

--.

Port Mansfiel}

Gulf

,-1

l

-

of

d86

-,

-·--·-

CAMERON

CouNry

LEGEND
-

· -

County Line
Drainage Ditch Alignment

--"...J

MEXICO

5

I

E=""""3

10

,,

20

I

'°c....

kilometers

0
P8Al/86 / SLH

0

5

10
miles

20

ct>

CHAPTER 2
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

Climate

The Rio Grande Delta region is hot and very humid much of the year, these conditions
being somewhat alleviated by a brisk breeze that often blows from the southeast. Temperate
winter months are punctuated by "northers," or blasts of cold air rolling down the continent from the Arctic. Between these extremes, there is a mean annual temperature of 24° C
(74° F). Record high temperature for the summer is 42° C (107° Fl, and the record low for
the winter is -ll ° C ( 12° Fl (Carr 1969). Sustained periods of extreme heat and drought
have been experienced in historic times. Northers usually lower temperatures only briefly,
but killing frosts lasting up to a week occur every 20 years or so. Icy conditions and
snowfall are rarely experienced. An average of 61.65 cm of rain falls each year on the
delta. Much of the rain comes in the early fall and late spring (Carr 1969) • Thunderstorms course through the area an average of 24 days a year, most commonly in September and
October. In August and September, the region is prone to hurricane devastation characterized by high winds, tornados, and cataclysmic rains. Records show that over 40 hurricanes
hit deep south Texas in the period from 1818 to 1980 (U .s. Army Engineer District,
Galveston 1979).

Flora

A comprehensive treatment of native flora of the Rio Grande Delta is provided by
Johnston (1955). Blair (1950) saw the lower portion of the Rio Grande Valley as a distinct
subarea within his Tamaulipan biotic province. He referred to it as the Matamoran district
(Blair 1950: 102), saying that i t supported notably more luxuriant plant growth than did
surrounding lands of the Tamaulipan province. Surviving areas of native vegetation may be
characterized as dense stands of thorny brush savannah with tall grasses and scattered
motts of live oak or brush, and prairies of sacahuiste (Gulf cordgrass -- a coarse, tall
grass) and/or such things as saltwort, shoregrass, and sea blite.
The brush community has as prominent components mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa), Texas
ebony (Pithecellobium flexicaule), huisache (Acacia farnesiana), blue paloverde (Cercidium
floridum), prickly pear (Opuntia lindheimeri), retama (Parkinsonia aculeata), yucca (Yucca
sp.), spiny hackberry (Celtis pallida), tasajillo (Opuntia leptocaulia), whitebrush
(Aloysia texana), and cenizo (Leucophyllum texanum) (Rawn-Schatzinger 198la:l43-162).
According to Johnston (1955), salinity is the most critical factor with respect to the
native species that will grow in any given area of the delta. Moisture availability and
clay/sand content of the soils are secondary factors. With the notable exceptions of the
Sal del Rey and La Sal Vieja (two saline lakes) in northern Hidalgo County, high salinity
environments occur mainly in a band along the Laguna Madre. There, the salt-tolerant
species such as sacahuiste (Spartina spartinae), saltgrass (Distichlis spicata), moss rose
(Portulaca pilosa), and spikebrush (Eleocharis sp.) form a dense but low-lying ground
cover. However, brush species will grow in this same coastal zone where salinity and soil

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

conditions permit, as on many of the islets that dot the Laguna Madre and over extensive
areas of the El Sauz Ranch. Westward along the ditch, most of the land is now completely
denuded for agricultural purposes. Isolated patches of brush remaining here and there
contain some or all of the brush species listed above, often in nearly impenetrable
thickets.
The foremost authorities on the native vegetation of the Rio Grande Delta have
suggested that grasslands formed the climax vegetation over the area in prehistoric and
early historic times (Inglis 1964; Correll and Johnston 1970). Brush encroachment came in
later historic times with proliferation of cattle, horse, sheep, and goat herds, either
domestic or feral. These herds overgrazed the grass and facilitated the spread of brush by
broadcasting seeds in their manure. With respect to the activities of prehistoric people
on the delta, it is probably reasonable to assume that there was much more prairie (open
grassland) and savannah (grassland with scattered brush motts) than dense continuous brush
as now occurs on some ranches in northern Hidalgo and Willacy counties. The possibility of
historic brush spread coupled with widespread recent denudation of the land has made it
difficult to project the floral environment within which prehistoric peoples were
operating.

Fauna

Blair (1950:103-105) lists 61 species of mammals, 36 species of snakes, 10 kinds of
lizards, 2 land turtles, 3 urodeles, and 19 anurans for the Tamaulipan biotic province.
Large game encountered mainly on brush-covered ranches include deer, javelina, bobcat, and
coyote. Smaller game seen more widely include raccoon, skunk, badger, opossum, jackrabbit,
cottontail rabbit, and armadillo. The diamondback rattlesnake is often encountered in
brushy areas, as are black snakes and coachwhips. The Texas tortoise and western box
turtle occur, along with several species of water turtles. The delta area is along a major
flyway for migratory fowl moving between North and South America. Migratory species such
as Canada geese, mallards, pintails, and teal by the thousands spend the winter on the
delta. Mourning dove, white-winged dove, and bobwhites are very common. Over 300 other
bird species have been sighted on the delta at various times of the year (Bureau of Sport
Fisheries and Wildlife 1973). The waters of the Laguna Atascosa yield a variety of marine
fish and shellfish and also attract great numbers of migratory birds. Drum, trout, redfish, croakers, and flounder often feed or spawn in shallow bay waters where they can be
speared or netted quite easily. A variety of bivalves and gastropods inhabit the bay and
can also be easily gathered. The Rio Grande and its abandoned channels (sloughs or
resacas) yield fish, turtles, and mussels. Gar, catfish, and freshwater drum grow to
immense size in this river.

Geology and Physiography

The geology of the Rio Grande Delta is described in detail by Brown et al. (1980).
The area geology and physiography also are usefully summarized and discussed by Mallouf et
al. (1977:4-15). The land surfaces in Hidalgo, Willacy, and Cameron counties have resulted
primarily from processes of alluvial deposition and secondarily by eolian deflation and
deposition. These three counties cover a portion of the Texas coastal plain which, in this

6

CHAPTER 2: ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

region of the state, is composed of Pliocene to Modern deposits. Sedimentary deposits of
the Goliad (Pliocene), Lissie (Pleistocene), and Beaumont (Pleistocene) formations combine
to form a low-relief plain with a gentle coastward slope. There is an elevational difference of 325 ft from a high in western Hidalgo County to sea level in eastern Willacy
County, a distance of about 95 km (65 miles). Unconsolidated sand, mud, silt, clay, and
pea gravels comprise the surface and near-surface deposits from the vicinity of Mission
eastward to the coast. West of Mission, gravel deposits of the Pliocene Goliad Formation
crop out. This gravel is the closest source of raw materials which prehistoric peoples
occupying the delta would have had for the manufacture of stone tools.
Topographic relief on the Rio Grande Delta is subtle. The Rio Grande and the Arroyo
Colorado are the only drainage channels on the delta. Terraces, terrace remnants, levees,
and other features related to alluvial and erosional processes of the Rio Grande provide
relief adjacent to the active channel and modern floodplain.
Northward from the Rio
Grande, similar features on more-ancient surfaces of Pliocene and Pleistocene age are muted
or obscured altogether. These surfaces are blanketed in some areas by sand sheets and in
others by sand dunes that rise 6 m (20 ft) or more above the surrounding countryside. The
delta is pocked with natural depressions which are the result of eolian deflation (Fig.
2a). In northern Hidalgo County, the two saline lakes -- El Sal del Rey and La Sal Vieja
-- combine eolian deflation and deposition to form an unusual source of salt in depressions
ringed by dunes.
Brown et al. (1980:23-25) note that from 30,000 to 18,000 years ago the Rio Grande
eroded a broad, deep valley in response to lowered sea level, in turn linked to global
glaciation. The mouth of the river was the edge of the continental shelf, now far out at
sea. About 18,000 years ago, the glaciers began to melt. Sea level rose, reaching its
present height about 4,500 years ago. The river began to fill its valley as gradient
decreased and the channel became more sinuous. Sediments supplied by the Rio Grande were
reworked by winds and current to form South Padre Island between 3,400 and 1,900 years ago.
The Laguna Madre was created between the barrier island and the mainland. The process of
valley alluviation continued on through the Holocene and into Modern times, the meandering
river leaving many miles of resacas in the valley while covering substantial areas of
Pliocene and Pleistocene formations with later deposits.
Brown et al. (1980:24) indicate that the Rio Grande became a progressively less competent stream during the Holocene. It had filled in its valley following sea level stillstand at 4,500 years ago, then projected a delta an estimated 16 km (10 miles) out into the
Gulf of Mexico. Reduced flow and diminished sediment load resulted in this projecting
delta being eaten away by current and winds.
This degradation has continued to the
present, exacerbated by construction of dams on the Rio Grande which further reduce stream
flow and trap sediments far upstream.
Locally, additional effects of the drying trend following the Pleistocene dramatically
altered the delta landscape. As Brown et al. (1980:24) state:
Climatic changes that accompanied the decline of worldwide glaciation slowly led to increasingly arid conditions in South Texas. Consequently, eolian processes became the dominant geologic process in the
• • • area. While Holocene sea level was rising, persistent southeast

7

Figure 2
Environmental Photographs

a.

A pond formed in a natural depression and surrounded by
cultivated fields east of Lyford. Vicinity of Survey
Segment 2.

b.

View looking north across prehistoric site 41HG127 located
north of McAllen. The site is in a citrus grove. Note
ornamental palms in the background. Survey Segment 30.

8

CHAPTER 2: ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

winds deflated poorly vegetated Pleistocene sand deposits on the mainland and created extensive dune fields in the northern part of the
• • • area. Repeated, perhaps cyclic, arid episodes of dune fields
were stabilized by vegetation. Both active and stabilized dune fields
presently occur on the delta.

Modern Land Use

Much of the area traversed by the drainage ditch system in Hidalgo and Willacy counties today appears as flat, relatively featureless, cultivated land. In southern Hidalgo
and Cameron counties and the southwestern area of Willacy County, citrus trees and tall
ornamental palms impart some individuality and character to an otherwise unremarkable
landscape (Fig. 2b) • Realization of the region's agricultural potential has dictated
widespread land modifications over the past 60 to 80 years. Table 1 provides a breakdown
of land use in the two counties as of 1976.

TABLE l*
LAND USE IN HIDALGO AND WILLACY COUNTIES AS OF 1976

Major Land Use

Urban or Built-up Land
Agricultural Land
Cropland
Rangeland
Unproductive Land
Water
TOTALS:

Hidalgo County
(acres)

Willacy County
(acres)

43,985

5,680

49,665

427,879
148,769
576,648

203,599
147,396
350,995

631,478
296,165
927 ,643

9,142

28, 728

37,870

18,077

26, 132

44,209

647,852

4ll,535

1,059,387

Total
Acreage

*Data are from Day et al. (1981:10) as adapted from U.S. Army Engineer District, Galveston
(1979).

From the standpoint of prehistoric and historic cultural resources, these land-use
figures are at first glance relatively innocuous. In reality, the steps in development of
productive crop and range lands on the Rio Grande Delta have had a devastating impact on
the physical evidence of past human activity.

9

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

The land making up Hidalgo and Willacy counties was once covered in some areas by
thorny brush and in others by native grasses (Inglis 1964). According to localized soil
conditions (especially salinity) and moisture availability, the native vegetation varied
from almost impenetrable stands of brush, to savannahs having open expanses of grass
spotted with motts of brush, to open grasslands (Johnston 1955). The first step toward
preparing brush-covered land for eventual cultivation is to eradicate the brush. Early in
the 1900s, much of this work was done by axe- and machete-wielding laborers. In later
years, heavy bulldozers and tractors were used creatively in conjunction with huge blades,
chains, and claws to knock the brush down and/or rip up its roots. Cleared brush was
commonly eliminated by stacking it into huge piles and then burning it.
Irrigation of croplands is a common practice in some parts of the delta, especially
adjacent to the Rio Grande in the southern portions of Hidalgo and Cameron counties. For
irrigation to be most efficient and effective, the fields must be relatively flat but
graded slightly in the direction of the desired water flow. These requirements have led to
extensive artificial leveling and terracing of field surfaces involving transport of as
much as a meter of soil from one area to another (Mallouf et al. 1977:24). Even in areas
where irrigation techniques are not practiced, farmers often will level their fields to
improve drainage. Following brush removal and leveling, the annual cycle of soil preparation for cultivation carried out by farmers is also a very destructive process, especially
the use of chisel plows and huge disks that break up and churn soil to depths of as much as
a meter.
The cumulative. effects of modern land modifications on a cultural resource study are
several. First, there are few places where native vegetation is preserved in appreciable
stands. The ranges of native faunal species have likewise been reduced or eliminated to
the extent that many are never seen in the southern portions of the delta counties.
Burning of brush piles generates tremendous numbers of burned clay lumps, items that are
considered important indicators of prehistoric cultural activity. Leveling, terracing, and
deep plowing have severely disrupted the physical remains and related associational contexts on hundreds of prehistoric sites and many early historic sites. These sites are
typically shallow. Debris is seldom buried more than 50 cm deep. Internally, vertical and
horizontal relationships of cultural remains and debris have been altered by root plowing
and deep plowing. On a broader scale, terracing and leveling have "smeared" sites well
beyond their original limits and have created false stratigraphy.

Environmental Zones

In the pilot survey for the Hidalgo-Willacy drainage ditch system, involved areas of
the two counties were divided into seven subareas based on such criteria as topography,
elevation, land use, nature of surface deposits, and depositional environment (Mallouf et
al. 1977:102-109). These subareas are referred to as "environmental zones" (Mallouf et al.
1977:102). Subsequent survey efforts encompassing areas beyond the limits of the pilot
study necessitated definition of two additional environmental zones (Day et al. 1981:1826). In each report cited above, the cultural resources located were related and compared
according to their respective environmental zones. As a means of insuring some measure of
consistency with past research, these same zones are utilized in the present report. The

10

CHAPTER 2: ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

following zonal characteristics are abstracted from previous writings of Mallouf et al.
(1977:102-109), who defined Environmental Zones I-VII, and Day et al. (1981:18-26), who
created Environmental Zones VIII and IX. Additional, primary references are cited where
appropriate. A map of the nine environmental zones is provided in Figure 3.

Environmental Zone I

Environmental Zone I consists of the Faysville-Edinburg stabilized dune field in
Hidalgo County (Price 1958: 49). The land surface varies in relief from flat to gently
rolling to markedly hilly where the larger stabilized dunes occur. Elevations range from
14 m (45 ft) above msl in the eastern reaches to 38 m (125 ft) above msl on the tops of big
stabilized dunes in the western area. No substantial natural drainage channels occur.
Surface deposits are composed of Pleistocene and Holocene alluvial and eolian sands, silts,
and clays. Pea gravels are occasionally observed, but otherwise there are no natural
lithic resources in this zone. Most of the land in Zone I is under cultivation. The
balance is covered by urban sprawl. Natural surface water is available only when run-off
ponds in eolian depressions. Before dams were built upstream on the Rio Grande, Zone I
lands were subject to severe flooding.

Environmental Zone II

Environmental Zone II is in the central and western parts of Willacy County, continuing westward into central and southwestern Hidalgo County. Elevations vary from 9 m (30
ft) above msl in the east to 33-38 m (ll0-125 ft) above msl in the west. The land is
basically flat in the east, becoming rolling to the west correspondent with the Hargilt
Conical Dune Field (Price 1958:52). On the western margin of this dune system, the land
again flattens. There is no natural drainage to speak of, and there are no remarkable
lithic resources. Most of the land is under cultivation, with lesser areas devoted to
rangeland or urban settlement. Mallouf et al. (1977:104) note that Zone II has the most
highly variable surface relief evidenced in Hidalgo County.

Environmental Zone III

Environmental Zone III trends through the northern portions of Willacy County, protruding slightly into eastern Hidalgo County. It encompasses parts of the Rudolph sand/
loess sheet to the west and the El Jardin deflation area on the east (Brown et al. 1980).
Elevations vary from about 5 m (15-20 ft) above msl in the east to about 14 m (45-50 ft)
above msl in the west. Sand dunes are common, and the largest examples reach elevations up
to 29 m (95 ft) above msl. The land surface is flat to gently rolling except where dunes
occur. The zone has no natural drainage courses. No natural lithic resources are available. Most of the land is used for livestock pasture. Limited acreage is cultivated.
Live oaks grow in this zone along with the more common thorny brush species.

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Environmental Zone IV

Environmental Zone IV extends over much of central and southern Willacy County and a
piece of eastern Hidalgo County. Its surface consists of part of a Pleistocene fluvial/
deltaic feature characterized by filled channels, levees, and point bars composed of sands,
silts, and muds. The Arroyo Colorado trends across the southeastern reaches of the zone
and provides natural drainage in that area. No lithic resources are available. The land
surface is flat to gently rolling and liberally pocked with eolian depressions and occasional low sandy hummocks. Cultivation and irrigation-related land modifications have had
an especially severe impact on over half the land in this zone in the western portion. To
the east, much land (36%) is devoted to livestock pasturage. It has become heavily covered
in brush. To the northeast, a small area of the zone (2%) supports oak-mesquite forest.

Environmental Zone V

Environmental Zone V is in the northeastern corner of Willacy County. Active and
stabilized Holocene dunes overlie a plain of Pleistocene age. The dunes are part of the
Norias eolian sand lobe (Brown et al. 1980). Elevations are generally low, ranging from
ca. 1.5 m (5-10 ft) above msl to ca. 21 m (70-75 ft) above msl. The active sand dunes
provide pronounced topographic relief. Composed of sand, these active dunes support little
or no vegetation. Blowouts occur in the dunes. The active dunes are surrounded by low,
marshy areas. Northwest of the active dunes, large tracts of stabilized dunes and grassy
flats are seen. Dense stands of live oak and brush forming motts grow in these dunes and
meadows. There are no natural drainages or lithic resources in the zone. The land is used
primarily for cattle grazing.

Environmental Zone VI

Environmental Zone VI is in eastern Willacy County. It borders the Laguna Madre and
is composed of marine plain, wind-tidal flats, and clay dunes. The features are Holocene
and Modern in age. The marine plain and tidal flats compose about 90% of the zone. They
are considered coastal wetlands, with 5% of the area permanently covered by salt water.
Clay dunes cover about 10% of the area. The plain supports a thick cover of sacahuiste.
The clay dunes are accretional features made of wind-tidal flat deposits blown up during
dry periods. Spanish dagger, prickly pear, lime prickly ash, spiny hackberry, and mesquite
grow on the dunes. The combination of their height and the brush cover renders clay dunes
as very prominent features in an otherwise quite barren landscape. Nearby tidal flats
attract seasonally huge flocks of migratory waterfowl. Cattle graze on the clay dunes, but
otherwise the land in this zone has little modern commercial use.

Environmental Zone VII

Environmental Zone VII is a small strip of Modern alluvium deposited along the northern side of the Arroyo Colorado as it crosses the southeastern corner of Willacy County.

12

HIDALGO-WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS- 1986 INVESTIGATIONS
ENVIRONMENTAL ZONES

LEGEND
County Line

____r--u

Droinoge Ditch Alignment
Environmental

~

C=:J

~
~
~
~
~
r.;->71

L!....!..3.J

~;i;W:{i:iJ

PBA//86/SLH

Zones

I
Il

m
N

0

5

IL

I

E"""-3

0

5

10

"Tl

I

'°.....c
20

ct>

0J

'ilIII
IX

20

kilometers

IlI
Ilil

10

miles

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

The surface is made up of sands and silts. It is gently rolling, supporting a light cover
of grass and shrubs. Elevations range from 1.5 m (5 ft) to 4.5 m (15 ft) above msl.

Environmental Zone VIII

Environmental Zone VIII is in south-central Hidalgo County. Exposures of the Pleistocene Beaumont Formation form the surface. The discontinuous dune fields of Environmental
Zone I are superimposed on the Beaumont Formation of Environmental Zone VIII. The zone is
characterized by extensive floodplain deposits and poor drainage. Elevations range from
27.5 m (90 ft) to 32.5 m (107 ft) above msl. There are fewer filled channel scars and
eolian depressions apparent in this zone. Heavy urban settlement and cultivation account
for most of the land use.

Environmental Zone IX

Environmental Zone IX is a narrow band of alluvium running through southern Hidalgo
County. The zone is composed of modern floodplain deposits along the north side of the Rio
Grande Valley. Uvalde gravels are found in this zone. Elevations vary from 23 m (55 ft)
to 38 m (125 ft) above msl. Much of the land is used for agricultural purposes. The zone
encompasses major landform features such as abandoned channels, levees, and terraces along
the Rio Grande.

14

CHAPTER 3
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

A comprehensive treatment of the background to Rio Grande Delta archeology and prehistory, current to 1977, has been published (Mallouf et al. 1977:57-88). This background
information is not repeated here. Rather, study briefly summarizes current understanding
with respect to the topographic occurrence of prehistoric sites, the cultural chronology,
and the subsistence and settlement habits of the region's prehistoric occupants.

Site Prediction and Topographic Occurrence

Between 1908 and 1940, the lower reaches of the delta on both sides of the Rio Grande
were scoured by A. E. Anderson, an artifact collector and avocational archeologist who
lived in Brownsville. The maps, notes, and artifact collections resulting from Anderson's
activities remain as one of the most important sources of regional data presently available
for study by archeologists. In a brief article, Anderson (1932:29-31) identified "clay
hills" (clay dunes) near the coast, "old overflow channels" (resacas), and "small fresh
water lakes" (natural depressions or playas) as the locations where prehistoric sites were
most often found.
Almost 40 years later, a survey in Cameron County verified Anderson's observations and
generated information permitting more-sophisticated definition of topographic settings in
which prehistoric sites occur (Prewitt 1974:55-65). Prewitt differentiated five types of
sites on the basis of their relationship to local topographic features. The features or
combinations of features where sites tend to occur include:
(1) clay dune-laguna; (2)
resaca-laguna; (3) clay dune-lake; (4) resaca; and (5) barrier island (Prewitt 1974:58).
Anderson's collecting activities and Prewitt's survey work were largely restricted to
the coastal zone in Cameron County. The pilot survey for the Hidalgo-Willacy drainage
project occurred in 1976 (Mallouf et al. 1977) • During this survey, relatively large
inland areas of the delta, as well as the coastal zone, were inspected for prehistoric
sites for the first time. Following analysis of the site distribution data which they
gathered, Mallouf et al. (1977:198) concluded that "prehistoric occupation throughout the
project universe appears to have focused largely on temporary water supplies provided by
eolian plain depressions and on areas of exceptional wildlife resource potentials." Active
sand sheets and dune fields in conjunction with saline lakes, oak forests, and marshy
depressions are suggested to have been rich hunting areas.
The inland association of prehistoric sites with natural depressions, natural levees
along relict distributary channels, and stabilized sand and clay dunes was tested through a
combination of field survey data and airphoto analysis (Holz and Prewitt 1981:165-183).
This study concluded that "while there is not necessarily an archeological site adjacent to
every depression or along every channel scar levee, there is certainly a high correlation
between those topographic features and the locations of sites identified during the field
work" (Holz and Prewitt 1981:181-182). Along the coast, sites were found to occur on clay
dunes but, contrary to predictions, were also found on the marine plain (Holz and Prewitt
1981:174).

·%

...................
~

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Knowledge of the topographic occurrence of prehistoric sites on the Rio Grande Delta
thus began with the observations of A. E. Anderson, who spoke from his intimate acquaintance with almost 400 delta sites on both sides of the Rio Grande. He called attention to
clay dunes, levees beside resacas, and natural depressions forming ponds as likely locations for sites. Later researchers have added shores of lagunas, barrier islands, dune
fields, sand sheets, and ancient channels and levees to Anderson's original list. The
ability to predict prehistoric site locations on the basis of topographic features has been
considerably refined over the past 10 years.

Cultural Chronology and Time-Diagnostic Artifacts

The limited controlled archeological excavations which have occurred thus far on the
Rio Grande Delta have yielded no radiocarbon ages for distinctive prehistoric artifact
types and associated cultural debris. The limited progress made to date has been the
result of cross comparisons of distinctive artifact types with those in adjacent, betterknown regions. Northeastern Mexico has provided the closest, and presumably most reliable,
information. The more distant regions of the Trans-Pecos and southwest and south-central
Texas have also yielded cultural-chronological data potentially relevant to the Rio Grande
Delta situation.
Early work by Sayles (1935) and MacNeish (1947) introduced concepts of essentially
Archaic and Late Prehistoric cultural components for the delta region. Sayles recognized
two distinct artifact assemblages, one he labeled the "Coahuiltecan Branch" and the other
the "Brownsville Phase." Investigations later conducted by MacNeish (1947) in northeastern
Mexico produced stratigraphic data permitting the ordering of distinctive artifact assemblages and site types into a relative sequence. He recognized three complexes -- Repelo,
Abasolo, and Brownsville -- ordered from earliest to latest. The Abasolo Complex, stratigraphically above the Repelo and below Brownsville, was represented by certain triangular
and straight-stemmed projectile points. The later Brownsville Complex was distinguished by
a remarkable array of marine shell artifacts, bone artifacts, Huastecan pottery, and stone
tools including small "humpback" scrapers, drills, and projectile points (MacNeish 1947:67) • MacNeish' s definition of the Brownsville Complex elaborated on that of Sayles, and
both relied heavily on the collections and knowledge of A. E. Anderson.
The basic Repelo-Abasolo-Brownsville sequence was first encountered in salvage excavations at the Ayala Site south of McAllen in Hidalgo County (Campbell and Frizzell 1949).
The Ayala Site yielded human burials attributed to the Brownsville Complex based on the
presence of grave inclusions such as marine shell ornaments and worked bone. Deposits into
which the Ayala grave pits were excavated contained midden debris attributed to activities
of earlier Repelo-Abasolo (Coahuiltecan Branch) peoples on the site. A chipped stone
"gouge" and a subtriangular projectile point were assigned to the earlier occupation.
Another Brownsville Complex cemetery was reported at the Floyd Morris Site located
north of Harlingen in Cameron County (Collins et al. 1969). Investigations at this site
generated additional details concerning Brownsville Complex mortuary behavior, as well as
providing a graphic example of site destruction caused by land leveling.
The poorly defined Archaic Repelo-Abasolo Complex and the better-known Brownsville
Complex on the Rio Grande Delta may be usefully contrasted to findings at the La Perdida

16

CHAPTER 3: ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Site in Starr County and at sites now covered by Falcon Lake on the Rio Grande in Zapata
and Starr counties. The La Perdida Site (Weir 1956) is situated along the Arroyo Los Olmos
north of Rio Grande City. Surface collections from this area demonstrate clear Paleoindian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric activity at a distance of only 56 km (35 miles) or so
northwest of the upper end of the delta. The number of stemmed dart points found in the
vicinity of La Perdida is especially remarkable against the background of unstemmed triangular and subtriangular dart points common to the region. A similar full sequence of
prehistoric cultures is evidenced at Falcon Lake, with triangular unstemmed projectile
points, scrapers, gouges, and other thin triangular bi faces predominating (Krieger and
Hughes 1950; Hartle and Stephenson 1951; Cason 1952; Suhm et al. 1954; Kotter 1980). The
La Perdida and Falcon assemblages differ from those representing the Rio Grande Delta in
that Paleoindian and earlier Archaic activities are strongly expressed. On the delta, they
are weakly evidenced, if at all.
The Ayala and Floyd Morris site investigations were salvage operations conducted under
less than ideal circumstances. The Ayala Site research supported the two-period cultural
sequence proposed earlier by MacNeish by demonstrating the stratigraphic superpositioning
of Brownsville Complex materials over a Repelo-Abasolo midden. No radiocarbon assays came
from either Ayala or Floyd Morris. MacNeish (1947:8) proposed that the Brownsville Complex
was late, probably beginning no earlier than A.D. 1000 and continuing to as late as the
early Historic Period. Prewitt (1974:62) concurred with MacNeish, suggesting that "the
Brownsville Complex is contemporaneous with late Huastecan (Panuco V and VI) assemblages,
and with the Rockport Focus," this conclusion based on cross comparison of diagnostic
artifact forms.
Recent archeological investigations involving the Hidalgo-Willacy Drainage Ditch
project have not appreciably altered understanding of the cultural-chronological sequence
in the Rio Grande Delta. In the pilot survey reported by Mallouf et al. (1977:197), it was
suggested that aboriginal occupations had occurred from 3000 to 5000 B.C. to as late as
A.D. 1500. However, the diagnostic artifacts indicative of the earlier activity were
confined mainly to the La Sal Vieja area and Norias eolian sand lobe, both well north of
the final Hidalgo-Willacy ditch routes (Robert J. Mallouf, personal communication 1986).
In their analysis of the Armando Vela Collection, most of which came from sites in eastcentral Hidalgo County, Mallouf et al. (1977:281) concluded "that the sites were occupied
repeatedly over a long period of time extending from the Middle or Late Archaic stages into
the Late Prehistoric stage." Subsequent to this pilot study, the first controlled archeological excavations to take place at promising sites along the ditch route yielded no absolute or relative ages for the cultural remains and demonstrated the paucity of recoverable
cultural debris in the subsurface (Day 1981; Mercado-Allinger 1983). Radiocarbon assay of
human skeletal materials recovered from 41WY50, a site located on a clay dune in the Laguna
Madre, yielded an uncorrected radiocarbon age of A.D. 1410 ± llO (Prewitt 1981:413).
Unfortunately, no diagnostic artifacts were found in association with the dated skeletal
remains.
As becomes apparent from the foregoing discussion, development of a cultural-chronological sequence for the Rio Grande Delta continues to be an important need. The Brownsville
Complex, of which marine shell artifacts are considered important diagnostics, is generally
affiliated with the Late Prehistoric period, that is, later than A.D. 1000. Evidence of
Brownsville Complex occupations is found widely scattered over the American side of the
delta but is most strongly expressed at sites near the coast and river in lower Cameron
County. Activity on the delta during the Archaic Stage is indicated primarily by unstemmed

17

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

triangular thin bifaces, gouges, and infrequent stemmed dart points. Estimates on the age
of these occupations range from middle to late Archaic, spanning as much as 6,000 years.
The Archaic sequence is thus the one most in need of refinement and elaboration. The stark
differences between the La Perdida Site assemblage from Starr County and presumed Archaic
remains on the delta permit the tentative suggestion that the delta was not heavily
exploited by human groups until the middle Archaic, or perhaps even later.

Subsistence Pursuits and Settlement Patterns

The prehistoric and early historic aboriginal peoples who inhabited the Rio Grande
Delta are believed to have subsisted as mobile hunter-gatherers. As Prewitt (1974:61) has
succinctly stated: "Food resources appear to have been diverse; certainly the Gulf, the
river, the resacas, and the lakes were heavily exploited for both fish and shell fish.
Deer and other small game were apparently hunted when possible. Undoubtedly various plant
foods were utilized even though such evidence is not preserved in the archeological
record." As noted in Mallouf et al. (1977:65), the infrequent occurrence of durable grinding implements has been commented upon for the region in general and supports ethnohistoric
observations of wooden mortars and pestles used by Coahuiltecan groups (Krieger and Hughes
1950:21). The Coahuiltecans are also reported to have crushed bones for consumption as a
gruel (Ruecking 1953; Suhm et al. 1954:139; Troike 1962; Salinas 1986). Large land snails
were reportedly eaten by Indians in northern Mexico during early historic times (Campbell
and Campbell 1981).
Limited subsistence remains recovered during recent surveys and
excavations along the Hidalgo-Willacy drainage ditch route are consistent with the above
general outline of subsistence habits. Snail shells, mussel shells, marine shells, and
animal bones (i.e., deer, rabbit, turtle, fish, etc.) have been recovered from the prehistoric sites (Rawn-Schatzinger 198lb; Winkler 1981).
In a recent consideration of the ethnohistoric literature dealing with the Rio Grande
Delta, Salinas (1986:212-220) has listed mentions of the following animals as having been
hunted by the aborigines: deer, peccary, rabbits, rats, mice, turkeys, birds, snakes,
horses, and Spanish livestock (Salinas 1986:213). Fish were procured with the bow and
arrow or in long, seine-like nets. Wild plant products gathered for food included prickly
pear fruits and pads, mesquite bean pods, maguey root crowns, onion bulbs, yucca flower
pods, palm parts, roots, fruits, and herbs (Salinas 1986:218).
Hypotheses concerning settlement patterns on the Rio Grande Delta have been advanced
by Hester (1969, 1973). In considering the significance of cemeteries such as Ayala and
Floyd Morris in comparison to scattered single burials, Hester (1969:163) suggested three
possibilities involving:
(1) the interplay of food resource availability, territorial
size, and mobility; (2) seasonal population aggregations permitted by food resources; and
(3) "differing religious, social or governmental modes among individual groups." Hester
(1973) later proposed two distinct adaptations for the Rio Grande Plain. These involved a
"maritime adaptation" and a "savannah adaptation" (Hester 1973:4-8). The maritime adaptation is represented by sites near the coast occurring either on clay dunes or around
natural depressions and which are distinguished primarily by the marine shell industry
characteristic of the Brownsville Complex. The savannah adaptation would apply to the
western portions of Willacy and Hidalgo counties, as well as additional extensive areas of
inland South Texas. Hester ( 1973: 7) indicates that typical sites occur on floodplain
terraces, high gravel terraces, and uplands. Base camps were located mostly on the

18

CHAPTER 3: ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

floodplains, while hunting camps and other short-term, special-activity sites were situated
on terraces and uplands.
In concluding their pilot study of the Hidalgo-Willacy drainage project, Mallouf et
al. (1977:198) stated:
Prehistoric occupation throughout the project universe appears to
have focused largely on temporary water supplies provided by eolian
plain depressions and on areas of exceptional wildlife resource potentials.
Freshwater sources across the arid region must have been
attractive both to aboriginal groups and to the food animals they
sought. Thus, eolian depressions are significant as determinants of
settlement/subsistence patterns.
Following up on these perceptions, Day et al. (1981:43) concurred but noted that they did
"not explain the cultural mechanisms and characteristics by which the aboriginal peoples
were able to successfully adapt to the harsh environment of the Rio Grande Del ta." These
researchers contend that an understanding of prehistoric settlement systems on the delta
will be dependent on distinguishing between semipermanent and temporary camps. Further,
such distinctions are difficult to recognize on the basis of data typically obtained
through survey investigations. More-intensive study of individual sites and development of
a sound cultural-chronological framework are suggested as prerequisites for further progress in the determination of local prehistoric settlement patterns. Particularly critical
in settlement analysis is establishing contemporaneity among the sites interpreted as being
part of a single settlement system.
In sum, the archeological record of the Rio Grande Delta is comprised of relatively
sparse material remains that are not easily dated and that do not lend themselves to
settlement and subsistence analysis. It is tempting to infer that these represent a substantial time-depth to cultural configurations like those of the ethnographic present in
which durable material culture was almost totally lacking. It has been inferred, on the
basis of sequences established elsewhere, that much of the present delta was not occupied
earlier than about 3,000 years ago.
The primary thrust of investigations subsequent to the pioneering work of Anderson
(1932) and Prewitt (1974) and the salvage efforts at the Ayala (Campbell and Frizzell 1949)
and Floyd Morris (Collins et al. 1969) sites has been directed at areas to be affected by
the Hidalgo-Willacy Drainage Ditch project. The focus of archeological research on the Rio
Grande Delta has thus been largely drawn away from the coastal margin and modern valley of
the Rio Grande where, due to the availability of a dependable water supply and/or food
resources, prehistoric sites evidencing more-intensive and long-term occupations are predicted to occur. It is in these same areas that aggradational features such as clay dunes
and alluvial terraces also occur. In conjunction with periodic prehistoric human activity
at sites located on such features, these locations are also expected to yield the stratified deposits of cultural debris so badly needed for clarification of the regional
cultural-chronological sequence. Although it is unreasonable to anticipate progress in the
full temporal span of local human prehistory, the geographic parameters of the HidalgeWillacy Drainage Ditch project nevertheless offer the potential for elucidation of an
important segment of human prehistory on the delta.

19

r
HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Models of prehistoric human settlement for the Rio Grande Delta, such as those proposed by Hester (1969, 1973), are heavily dependent both on ethnohistoric observations of
Coahuiltecan groups (Salinas 1986) and on ethnographic observations of the habits of
various modern hunter-gatherer groups elsewhere in the world. These models constitute a
necessary first step toward an understanding of prehistoric lifeways in the region. There
is a critical need for rigorous testing of such models against the local archeological and
ethnohistoric records, and ethnological findings in general, to determine their applicability with respect to prehistoric cultures on the delta. Such research is critical and has
yet to occur in a systematic way.

20

CHAPTER 4
DITCH SURVEY

The system of drainage ditches surveyed as part of the present study is composed of 22
elements, that is, main or lateral (tributary) channels, having a total length of approximately 354 km (220 miles) (Figs. 4 and 5). Almost all of the drainage improvements are in
the form of earthen canals designed to carry off floodwaters from a relatively flat region
having poor to nonexistent natural surface drainage. The system has feeder channels that
begin northwest and southwest of Mission. The system then trends eastward across Hidalgo
and Willacy counties to an outfall in the Laguna Madre 12 km (7.4 miles) south-southwest of
Port Mansfield.
As discussed in Chapter 3, the present actions are but the latest in a series of
surveys and excavations that have occurred since the pilot archeological study was conducted in 1976 (Mallouf et al. 1977). This survey differs substantially from the others in
that, for the most part, it follows rather than precedes ditch excavations. Segments of
existing ditches were selected for postconstruction survey on the basis of their relationship to nearby topographic features and/or known site locations. Some unexcavated ditch
alignments also were examined.

Field Methods

The field survey crew consisted of three persons. Survey activities were guided by a
set of USGS 7. 5' topographic maps upon which were marked the alignments of existing and
proposed drainage ditches as well as known archeological sites. Existing ditches were
examined by having crewmen walk along the slope of each bank, usually at a level roughly
midway between the original ground surface and -the water level or ditch floor. As two
members of the crew walked either bank of the ditch, the third crewman moved the vehicle,
spot-checked spoil piles paralleling the ditch, or surveyed a section of ditch bank. Spoil
piles were not systematically surveyed. Once a site was located on the basis of evidence
seen in the ditch wall, the adjacent area of spoil then was usually examined for additional
cultural materials. Typical survey segments and site environments are shown in Figures 6
and 7.

Evidence of prehistoric cultural activity in the area is in the form of chipped stone
tools and tool fragments, lithic debitage, ground stone (rare), ceramics (rare), bones of
fish and animals) freshwater mussel shells, marine shells, and burned clay lumps. Lithic
artifacts, debitage, and obviously modified shells are taken as clear evidence of prehistoric human activity. Bones, unmodified shells, and burned clay lumps must occur in some
combination of two or more of the classes of material listed (Prewitt 1974). As previously
discussed, burned clay lumps result from the firing of clay-rich soils. In the absence of
other associated debris obviously derived from prehistoric cultural activity, burned clay
lumps alone are not considered valid indicators of prehistoric sites. The occurrence of
three or more pieces of material diagnostic of prehistoric cultural activity within a
diameter (or length) of 100 m or less defined a prehistoric site. Chipped stone tools,
tool fragments; and debitage encountered singly (or, in the case of debitage, up to two
pieces) and not accompanied by any other type of debris, were recorded as isolated finds.

,,
c
HIDALGO-WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS-1986 INVESTIGATIONS '°...

(1)

WESTERN PORTION OF SURVEY AREA
North

~

Main

Drain

-$-

;-----~AMPLE AREA 2

1925

I

,'

79

I
I

Southwest

Main Drain
88

Lateral

LEGEND

B

Survey Segment

=:f-

Drainage Ditch Alignment

-$-

Match Point

Mission
0

I

I

H

2

0

kilometers
I
2

I

E=3
miles

P8A//86/SLH

4

I
4

I

HIDALGO-WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS- l986 INVESTIGATIONS
EASTERN PORTION OF SURVEY AREA
El Sauz Ranch

a

- -

WILL Acy

HIDALGO

Main
~NT_Y_, 34
COUNTY

I

73

H----~c-----------14981
r;;;:;:;m

Main

Win

1

l'l<'''';;:;,;;

65

-$-

·-

·.::::<'•

66

67

Drain

- -·--·WiLLAcy

CouNry

CAM£RON

CouNry

LEGEND

b:fiillJ
=::>--

-$-

Jd
~
~Jo

§,

0
I

Survey Segment
Drainage Ditch Alignment
Match Point

2.

0

I

I

H
kilometers
I
2.

E-3

.,,

4

I
4

I

'°c:

~

<I>

miles
(J1

P8Al/86/SLH

Figure 6
Photographs of Survey Segments and Site Environments

a.

Looking east-northeast to area of prehistoric site 41WY112
exposed along the left bank of the ditch. Survey Segment 62,
typical segment of ditch.

b.

Looking north at ditch containing prehistoric site 41WY111.
Note poor visibility along ditch due to grass cover. Survey
Segment 56.

24

Figure 7
Photographs of Survey Segments and Site Environments

a.

Looking north to area of prehistoric site 41HG124. Cultural
debris was exposed in the citrus grove to the right. The
Edinburg Main Canal runs along the left. Survey Segment 7.

b.

Looking west along ditch bank where evidence of prehistoric
site 41WY121 is exposed. Note grinding implement marked by
photo scale. Survey Segment 66.

25

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Historic sites are evidenced by glass, metal, earthenware sherds, and stoneware sherds.
extant historic structures were encountered during this survey.

No

Along channel alignments where ditches have not been excavated, the surveyors walked
rights-of-way following a diamond pattern that maximized examination of the ground surface.
Rights-of-way were a maximum of 53 m (175 ft) in width. To form the diamond pattern of
coverage, the crewmen walked two abreast following zigzag routes the length of each rightof-way segment. Cultural debris observed was marked with flagging tape and left in place
until the overall distribution of debris could be assessed.
Locations of sites, isolated finds, and fossil localities were recorded as accurately
as possible on the appropriate USGS 7. 5' topographic maps. Along segments of existing
ditch where topographic features were obscured or undetectable, a vehicle odometer was used
to measure the distance of site boundaries and isolated finds from nearby roads and other
manmade features shown on the USGS maps. Information concerning each site or isolated find
was recorded on State of Texas Archeological Site Data Forms. Black-and-white print and
color slide photographs were taken of representative sites, profiles, features, and unusual
finds. Chipped stone tools, tool fragments, debitage, animal bones, mussel shells, marine
shells, miscellaneous rocks, and burned clay lumps were selectively collected from sites.
All isolated finds were collected. Materials collected from each site or find spot were
placed in paper bags labeled with temporary site/find number, date of collection, and names
of collectors.
Emergency recovery of a fragmentary human skeleton eroding out of the ditch bank
occurred at site 41WYll3. The decision to remove these remains immediately was based on
the likelihood that they would not survive intact were they left for future mitigative
effort at the site. The remains were exposed in situ, photographed, and removed. The
bones and bone fragments were wrapped in tissue paper before placement in paper bags
labeled with provenience and collection information. The laboratory treatment and analysis
of these skeletal remains are reported in Appendix 3.
There were both advantages and disadvantages to the two survey settings involved in
this project -- existing ditch channels and ditch rights-of-way. Where ditches had not yet
been excavated, it was easier to define the horizontal extent of a site, but little or
nothing could be determined about subsurface deposits. Along existing ditches, the opposite was true. The ditch walls offer excellent views of the subsurface deposits. Determinations of horizontal extent, however, are limited to the linear distribution of cultural
debris along the ditch. Nothing can be said of deposits removed from the ditch or covered
by massive spoil piles. Horizontal definition of sites along the ditches is thus usually
limited to one dimension following the orientation of that particular ditch segment.
Surface visibility in the two settings ranged from excellent (75-100%) to poor (0-25%).
Good to excellent visibility was more often the case along existing ditch segments.
Unexcavated rights-of-way were often routed through cultivated fields or pastures where
crops and grass reduced surface visibility to varying degrees.

Survey Results

Survey of the designated segments of existing ditch and rights-of-way resulted in the
location of 43 archeological sites, 12 isolated finds, and 22 fossil localities. Two of

26

CHAPTER 4: DITCH SURVEY

the fossil localities are considered as additional noncultural components of prehistoric
sites 41WY110 and 41WY138. Detailed information for each site and isolated find is provided in Appendix 1. The fossil localities are discussed in Appendix 4. Table 2 lists
survey segments by ditch elements, shows segment lengths distinguished between existing and
unexcavated ditches, and tells how many sites or isolated finds were recorded. Sites along
the survey segments recorded prior to the current effort are indicated with asterisks (**).
Twenty-nine of the segments were examined during surveys conducted prior to ditch
construction. Table 3 identifies such segments and provides a summary of site recognition
statistics for each segment before and after ditch excavation. No fossil localities were
known prior to ditch excavation. Usually buried about 2 m below the modern ground surface,
there was no way to detect the occurrence of fossils prior to exposure of subsurface deposits. Seven segments (5.25 km in length) evidenced no sites either before or after ditch
excavation. Along four segments (6.15 km in length), some sites were recorded before ditch
excavation and some after. Eight segments (6.4 km in length) yielded sites before excavation, but no additional sites after excavation. Finally, there were 10 segments (8.55 km
in length) where sites were found only after ditch excavation. Thus, in 14 of 29 cases -almost one-half -- the site universe was increased by inspecting the segment again following ditch excavation. However, in a substantial number of cases, the field crew was unable
to detect previously recorded sites in the banks of the ditches. These results indicate
that survey of high probability segments before and after ditch excavation is a reliable
means of insuring the most complete and accurate site inventory possible.
Summarizing the data presented in Table 2, the total length of excavated ditch segments surveyed is 64.93 km. The total length of unexcavated ditch right-of-way surveyed is
18 km. Sixty-six sites have been recorded along the excavated ditch segments considered in
this survey, and 12 have been found along unexcavated segments. In both cases, the site
totals include those found during prior survey activities as well as the recently recorded
sites. Dividing the site total by the length of ditch surveyed (66 divided by 64.93 km), a
find rate of 1.02 sites per km is obtained for the excavated ditch segments surveyed. A
find rate of 0.67 sites per km (12 divided by 18 km) results for the unexcavated ditch
segments surveyed. These overall figures demonstrate that site recognition is almost
doubled by surveys conducted after the ditches have been excavated. This finding should be
tempered by the figures presented above concerning the number of sites that were visible
before, but not after, the ditches were dug.
In Table 4, the survey segments are grouped by environmental zones, and the number of
sites recorded in each are presented. Sites per km calculations are also made. A further
distinction is made between excavated and unexcavated ditch segments. Looking at these
data in all their possible combinations, Environmental Zones I and VIII have the lowest
site densities, while Environmental Zones IV and IX have the highest. Environmental Zone
II appears to have a low site density when the overall figures are examined. However, when
only the data for excavated ditch segments in Environmental Zone II are considered, the
site per km figure increases to become the highest among all zones for that category. The
pattern that emerges from these data is one suggesting that lands encompassed by Environmental Zones I and VIII were not as heavily utilized by prehistoric people as were the
other zones. Given the relatively short lengths surveyed in these two zones (5.95 km and
8.3 km), it is possible that an inaccurate picture has been formed. Conversely, lands
making up Environmental Zones IV and IX appear to have been heavily utilized by prehistoric
people. Settlement intensity in Environmental Zone II remains an ambiguous issue, but
prehistoric activity levels on a par with Environmental Zones IV and IX are suggested.

27

r
HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Table 5 presents a summary of the types of information considered to be the most
important in assessing the potential of sites for further investigation. All additional
data for these sites may be found in Appendix 1. Of the 43 sites and 12 isolated finds
recorded during the survey, all but 7 represent strictly prehistoric cultural activity.
Sites 41HG119 and 41WY141 have historic components only. Sites 41HG120, 41HG128, 41WY108,
41WY113, and 41WY122 have both historic and prehistoric components. Five sites (41WY109,
41WYllO, 41WYll3, 41WY132, and 41WY138) have yielded Pleistocene fossils in addition to
their prehistoric and/or historic components.
In terms of environmental zone associations, the sites and isolated finds recorded
during this survey occur as follows:
Environmental
Environmental
Environmental
Environmental

Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone

II:
IV:
VIII:
IX:

8
37
2
8

sites
sites
sites
sites

In the discussion above, where all sites discovered in past surveys were included, Environmental Zones IV and IX were shown to have the most prehistoric sites. Numerically, the
greatest number of sites have been found in Environmental Zone IV. On a site count per km
basis, however, Environmental Zones II and IX are yielding site densities comparable to the
densities determined for Environmental Zone IV.
Being the first time during the drainage project in which survey segments consisting
of excavated ditches substantially exceeded survey segment lengths along unexcavated
rights-of-way, this effort was afforded the opportunity to study the subsurface character
of a number of sites throughout the project universe. As detailed in Table 5, the depth of
the cultural debris in the subsurface of 17 sites was observable. In all but two cases -41WY111 and 41WY140 -- cultural debris was not found deeper than 60 cm below the surface,
and, in the majority of cases, cultural debris was noted at only 40 cm or less. Although
solid evidence is not available to substantiate the claim, it is likely that most of the
remaining sites are equally shallow. The common shallowness of these sites is important
for two reasons. First, it will be a very rare occurrence when components are found in
stratified contexts in these sites. This likelihood places a premium on the two sites
presently recognized as extending deeper than 60 cm below the surface. For the vast
interior reaches of the project area (i.e., away from the modern valley of the Rio Grande),
these sites offer the only known possibility for containing the stratified deposits so
badly needed as a means of clarifying and elaborating the cultural-chronological sequence
on the Rio Grande Delta. Secondly, the shallow nature of most of the sites, coupled with
the widespread modern ground disturbances that have occurred, almost certainly mean that
subsurface cultural remains have been heavily disturbed.
The extent of modern land surface modification is indicated in Table 5 by the "Modification/Disturbance" column in which the designations field, ditch/field, orchard, road,
etc. are used. The detrimental effects to cultural resources that result from brush
clearing, land leveling, cultivation, and range management have been discussed at length
elsewhere in this report. As made clear by the information in Table s, there are no sites
along the ditch system that remain in pristine condition. The extent to which these
destructive forces have lessened or eliminated the scientific potential of these sites is
an issue that must be given serious consideration.

28

CHAPTER 4: DITCH SURVEY

'I
!

TABLE 2
SITE RECORDS BY SURVEY SEGMENT

Ditch Element

Survey
Segments*

Length
in km

Existing
Ditch

Rightof-Way

Sites
Recorded

1
0
0

x
x
x

13

1.6
0.8
1.5

South Mission Lateral

94

1.4

x

4

Mission Lateral

6
7
8
14
15
19
30
95

1.6
1.5
0.8
1.6
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1

Rado Drain

96
97

0.43
1.3

x
x

1
2

Southwest Lateral

9
10
16
17
18

1.4
0.5
0.35
0.8
0.8

x
x
x
x
x

1
1
0
0
0

Perezville Drain

11

12

1
2
3
4
5

0.4
0.8
0.4
0.4
0.8

Edinburg Stub

22
23
93

1.0
0.5
0.8

North Main Drain

20
21
79
80
87

1.1
0.9
1.1
0.6
0.4

Pharr-McAllen Lateral

*Survey Segment numbers not assigned:
**Previously recorded sites

24, 4 7, 48, 49, 51

29

0
0
0
0
0

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

0
0
1
0
0
0
0
l**

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Table 2, continued
Ditch Element

Survey
Segments

Length
in km

South Main Channel
(Hidalgo County)

25
26
27
28
29
55
58
59
88
89

0.45
0.4
0.6
0.75
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.4
0.65
1.2

Mercedes Lateral

92

1. 75

South Main Channel
(Willacy County)

40
41
42
43
44
45
46
52
53
54
56
57
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
69
70

0.7
0.6
0.8
0.4
0.5
o. 75
0.8
1.2
1.0
1.6
1.45
0.65
0.45
1.2
1.1
0.5
0.8
0.95
0.9
1.65
1.0
0.8
0.7
1.65
1.1
1.6
1.3
0.6
0.9
0.65

71

81
82
83
84
85
86
91

30

Existing
Ditch

Rightof-Way

1
0
1
l**
1
0
1
1
0
0

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Sites
Recorded

0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
2 (**-1)
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
2
4
1
1
0
2
4
0
2
1
3 (**-2)
1

CHAPTER 4: DITCH SURVEY

Table 2, continued
Ditch Element

Willacy Main Channel

Survey
Segments

31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
50
68
72
73
74
75
76
77

78
90

Length
in km

0.7
0.3
0.8
0.8
0.6
1.5
0.75
0.6
0.4
1.8
0.6
2.25
1.6
0.95
0.45
0.95
1.4
1.1
0.3

Existing
Ditch

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Rightof-Way

Sites
Recorded

0
l**
1
3**
0
1
0
0
1
l**
2
3**
5 (**-4)
l**
l**
2**
2 (**l)
1
0

Presence or absence data for burned clay lump, concentrations and animal bones are
given in Table 5. In conjunction with site depth and degree of modern disturbance, these
two characteristics are taken here as important indicators of a site's potential for yielding useful archeological data. Burned clay lump concentrations were observed at 11 of the
recorded sites. Importance is attached to these features as they are assumed to represent
hearth areas around which prehistoric humans may have concentrated activities more so than
elsewhere within site limits. Recognition of such features in ditch wall profiles provides
a focus for limited intensive excavations where rates of cultural debris recovery would
presumably be higher and thus relatively more informative. The presence of animal bones
(and, in the case of 41WY113, human bones) is advantageous for three reasons. Animal bones
can be used for radiocarbon assays, to make inferences about game animals that were being
hunted by prehistoric peoples, and as an aid in reconstructing paleoenvironments. Thus, a
site exhibiting burned clay lump features and/or containing animal bones is accorded more
significance than is a site where such characteristics are not present.
From the 18 sites yielding vertebrate faunal remains, rabbit, deer, turtle, horse,
peccary, redfish, and sea trout have been identified (see Appendix 5). The presence of the
horse remains in the collection calls attention to the need for cautious interpretation of
vertebrate faunal remains when considering the subsistence pursuits of prehistoric peoples
in the region. The same modern processes that disturb prehistoric sites may also have
resulted in the introduction of modern faunal remains into the site deposits. Further, the
shallow depth of the cultural deposits in most of the sites renders them susceptible to
contamination, in this case with modern bones, through bioturbation. Nevertheless, the

31

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 3
SURVEY RESULTS IN PREVIOUSLY SURVEYED SEGMENTS
Previous
Sites

New
Sites

Fossil
Localities

Survey
Segments

Length

South Main Channel
(Hidalgo County)

25
26
27
28
29

0.45
0.4
0.6
0.75
0.5

0
0
0
1
0

1
0
1
0
1

0
0
0
0
0

North Main Drain

87

0.4

1

0

0

South Main Channel
(Willacy County)

62
63
64
65
66

1.1
0.5
0.8
0.95
0.9
0.7
1.65
1.6
1.3
0.6
0.9
0.65

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0

1
0
1
0
2
0
2
0
2
1
1
1

0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0

0.7
0.3
0.8
1.8
2.25
1.6
0.95
0.45
0.95
1.4
0.3

0
1
3

0
D

1
4
1
1
2
1
0

0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0

1
0
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
1
0

21

17

11

Ditch Element

71

81
83
84
85
86
91
Willacy Main Channel

31
32
34
50
72

73
74
75
76
77

90
Totals:

(km)

26.25

32

3

CHAPTER 4: DITCH SURVEY

TABLE 4
SITES PER KILOMETER BY ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE
Environmental Zone

Sites Recorded

Sites/km

TOTAL SEGMENT
LENGTHS SURVEYED
5.95
15.30
47.85
8.30
5.53

km
km
km
km
km

0.17
0.59
1.19
0.24
1.45

1
9

I

II
IV
VIII
IX

57
2
8

TOTAL LENGTH
EXCAVATED DITCH
5.95
2.70
47.85
4.30

km
km
km
km
4.13 km

I

1

II
IV
VIII
IX

4

0.17
1.48
1.19

57
0
4

o.oo

5

0.40

2
4

0.5
2.86

0.97

TOTAL LENGTH
UNEXCAVATED DITCH
0.00
12.60
0.00
4.00
1.40

I
II
IV
VIII
IX

km
km
km
km
km

SUMMATION:

Environmental Zone
I

II
IV
VIII
IX

Excavated (km)
0.17
1.48
1.19
0.00
0.97

33

Unexcavated (km)

0.40
0.50
2.86

Total
0.17
0.59
1.19
0.24
1.45

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 5
SUMMARY OF KEY SITE ASSESSMENT CHARACTERISTICS

Site

Environmental
Zone

41HG115
41HG116
41HG117
41HG118
41HG119
41HG120
41HG121
41HG122
41HG123
41HG124
41HG125
41HG126
41HG127
41HG128
41HG129
41HG130 (IF)**
41HG131 (IF)
41HG132 (IF)
41HG133
41HG134

VIII
IX
IX
IX
IX
IX
IX
IX
II
II
IX
II
VIII
II
II
II
II
II
IV
IV

41WY107
41WY108
41WY109
41WY110
41WY111
41WY112
41WY113
41WY114
41WY115
41WY116
41WY117
41WY118
41WY119
41WY120
41WY121
41WY122
41WY123 (IF)

IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV

Vertical
Extent

Burned Clay Lump
Concentrations

Animal
Bones

?
?
?
?

x*

10 cm
40-60 cm
30 cm

x

?
?
?
?

x
x*
x

?
?

40 cm

x*

?
?
?
?
?

40 cm

x

?
?

40-50 cm
40-50 cm
50-100 cm
40-50 cm
40 cm
40 cm

x

x

?
?

x
x*
x
x
x*
x
x*
x*

x

40 cm
50 cm

x

?

40-50 cm
40-50 cm
40-50 cm

x

?

*See Appendix 5
**IF = Isolated Find

34

x
x
x

Modification/
Disturbance

Field
Ditch/field
Field
Orchard
Ditch
Ditch
Road
Ditch
Ditch
Ditch
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Field
Ditch/field
Field
Field
Field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/pasture
Ditch/pasture
Ditch/pasture
Ditch/pasture
Ditch/pasture
Ditch/brush
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field

CHAPTER 4: DITCH SURVEY

Table 5, continued
Environmental
Zone

Site

41WY124
41WY125
41WY126
41WY127
41WY128
41WY129
41WY130
41WY131
41WY132
41WY133
41WY134
41WY135
41WY136
41WY137
41WY138
41WY139
41WY140
41WY141

(IF)
(IF)
(IF)
(IF)
(IF)
(IF)
(IF)
(IF)

IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV

Vertical
Extent

Burned Clay Lump
Concentrations

Animal
Bones

?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?

x

x*

x

x*
x*
x*
x*
x
x*
x*

x

100-150 cm
?

Modification/
Disturbance

Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/pasture
Ditch/pasture
Ditch/pasture
Ditch/pasture
Ditch/brush
Ditch/field
Field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field
Ditch/field

species list resulting from the analysis of the bones recovered during this survey,
combined with similar findings from earlier surveys (Rawn-Schatzinger 198la, 198lb; Winkler
1981:60-61), may be relied upon with appropriate reservations to suggest the kinds of game
animals which prehistoric peoples may have been hunting, catching, or trapping during the
periods when they occupied delta sites.
Other remains and artifacts possibly indicative of prehistoric human diet on the Rio
Grande Del ta include mussel shells, Rabdotus snail shells, marine mollusk shells, and a
grinding implement made of stone. Mussel shells were found infrequently during the present
survey (see Appendix 2). These shells occurred in both modified and unmodified forms and
are presumed to be residues of food consumed on the various sites. Rabdotus snail shells
pose a more complicated problem.
Ethnohistoric records show that such snails were
exploited as a source of food (Campbell and Campbell 1981). However, they also occur
naturally in abundance over some areas of the Rio Grande Delta. Along the surveyed ditch
segments, numerous massive concentrations of Rabdotus snail shells were observed. In some
cases, prehistoric cultural debris was found associated with the snail shell deposits. In
other cases, no cultural debris was seen amidst the shells. The situation indicates that
it would be imprudent to automatically infer use of snails as food simply because cultural
debris and snail shells co-occur in some areas. Confident recognition of snail exploitation must be demonstrated through careful exposure of archeological features and through
intensive analysis of representative snail shell populations from the sites.
Marine
mollusk shells, much as with mussel shells, were found both as artifacts and as presumed
food residues. The limited collection accumulated during this survey came primarily from
sites in Environmental Zone IV near the coast. A final piece of subsistence evidence came

35

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

in the form of a chert grinding implement found at prehistoric site 41WY121. This object
was probably used to process seeds or beans of some kind. Such are the limited lines of
evidence from which speculations concerning prehistoric diet may be drawn.
The survey effort resulted in the recovery of 37 chipped stone artifacts representing
the following formal categories: cores, thick bifaces, thin bi faces, distally beveled
tools, modified debitage, and trimmed debitage. In addition, some 65 pieces of unmodified
lithic debitage were found at various sites. Detailed descriptions and provenience information for all of these specimens are provided in Appendix 2. No meaningful distributional
patterns are recognized for the various types of artifacts represented in this collection.
Based on cross comparisons with dated artifact types from adjacent regions, activity during
the late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods is indicated generally throughout the study
area.

Geomorphology Along the Survey Routes

Previous archeological work in the Willacy and Hidalgo Drainage Project is to be
credited with recognizing an absolute need for understanding the geologic context of the
archeological record in this part of Texas (Mallouf et al. 1977; Day et al. 1981; Day 1981;
Mercado-Allinger 1983). It is not necessary to review these works in detail but only to
reiterate that strong correlations exist between site distributions and geomorphology,
between natural occurrences of stones and the frequency of stone artifacts, and between
geomorphology and site visibility.
As part of the present survey, C. Britt Bousman and Michael B. Collins conducted a
brief inspection of portions of the survey routes for the purpose of identifying research
needs and potential beyond those identified previously. The two principal thrusts in this
effort were: (1) to assess the potential for geochronometric studies toward improving the
basis for archeological dating in this region; and (2) to refine the geomorphological
models already developed by improving the chronological framework.
The theoretical and methodological stance taken in this study is drawn from diverse
sources but is best articulated by Butzer (1982). In his view, archeology has the potential to contribute significantly to the understanding of human ecology if approached from a
firm understanding of the complete natural environmental setting of a cultural system with
the objective of determining how environments affect humans and how humans affect physical
as well as biological aspects of their environments.
The two techniques of geochronology considered particularly prom1s1ng, and for which
(1) direct radiocarbon dating of
an evaluation of the field potential was sought, are:
organic-rich deposits and soil humates; and (2) thermoluminescent dating of eolian silts.
The abundant relict channels and intermittent ponds around and in which cultural remains
are often found contain deposits sufficiently rich in organic matter for radiocarbon
dating. Clay dunes as well as sand dunes contain silt which may be datable using thermoluminescence. Technically, the "dune" fields of this part of Texas are gozes. That is,
they are sand sheets with low, rounded eminences partly anchored by vegetation.
The approach to evaluating the geochronometric potential of the survey area was to
visit selected localities where cultural materials had been documented and to ascertain the

36

CHAPTER 4: DITCH SURVEY

geologic context of the cultural materials. Those localities with the clearest relative
chronology are considered the most useful in this effort because chronometric results can
be evaluated for agreement with stratigraphic position. It is important at this developmental stage to use the maximum possible sources of independent verification of any
geochronometric results.
Three days (9-11 July 1986) were spent retracing selected survey segments representative of three kinds of geomorphic site settings (Day et al. 1981:18-31, 73-78, Fig. 9, Fig.
15). These included sites in the following settings: clay dune/wind-tidal flat complex,
relict channel scar/depressions, and eolian depressions in sand dune trains. In addition,
gravel beds near La Joya were visited as an example of lithic sources in the western end of
the project area. In most cases, the areas visited were along existing ditch segments and
accessed by driving the roads next to the ditch. This provides a ready view of a cut, and
extensive geologic sections can be reviewed easily. In the western part of the project
area, a locality in a roadcut through a dune train was visited a short distance outside of
the actual right-of-way.
During this project, only field observations were made. No samples for chronometric
analysis were collected or processed except as part of data recovery at site 41HG118 (see
Chapter 5). Although mindful of the uncertainties that remain until actual tests are run,
the purpose was only to assess field evidence.
To be suitable for geochronometric dating, a deposit or soil must meet certain
requirements to which are added additional requirements when these techniques are to be
used in archeological inquiry. Radiocarbon dating of organic-rich deposits produces satisfactory results when the organic content is of the same age as the deposit being dated,
which is ordinarily the case with pond or lake deposits. Streams, particularly low-energy
ones, on the other hand, may dislodge and transport clayey, organic-rich deposits from an
earlier time and redeposit them without expunging the organics. If these are then dated,
the apparent age will be greater than the true age of the later deposit. Stream deposits
that contain organic matter suitable for accurate radiocarbon dating result from the
cleansing of elastic particles of older organic materials and the depositing of these with
coeval organic materials. Soil humates are also suitable for dating, but it must be
remembered that these date the products of pedogenesis which necessarily are more recent
than the earth materials in and on which the soil formed.
Thermoluminescent dating may be applied to silt-sized particles that have been wind
transported under dry, sunny conditions. Sunlight provides the energy necessary to release
the energy of thermoluminescence in dry particles of silt size. After deposition and
burial, the energy of thermoluminescence begins to rebuild and can be measured for the
purpose of calculating the time since last deposition.
The environment of the lower Rio Grande Valley is replete with organic-rich fill in
relict stream channels and other depressions and with dunes rich in silt. Theoretically,
these afford ample opportunity for establishing the chronology of geologic events necessary
for comprehensive environmental reconstruction. To articulate this with cultural history,
dating of those geologic processes which can be related to archeological remains should be
emphasized. Earlier archeological reconnaissance and testing (Mallouf et al. 1977; Day et
al. 1981; Day 1981; Mercado-Allinger 1983) have demonstrated that cultural materials occur
in organic-rich deposits filling depressions of various kinds (e.g., sites 41WY73 and
41WY72) as well as in dune deposits (e.g., sites 41HG39 and 41HG40). The present effort

37

i

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

concentrated on assessing situations like these and searching for situations where cultural
events could be related to ancient soils.

Findings

The principal findings of this effort relate to three specific localities: (1) site
41WY60 and vicinity near the outfall of the main drainage ditch; (2) site 41HG128 in
eastern Hidalgo County north of La Villa; and (3) an undesignated site near Alton in southwestern Hidalgo County. The first of these is a clay dune and wind-tidal flat complex on
the mainland side of Laguna Madre. The second is a relict meander scar and depression
complex. The third is a conical dune and eolian depression complex.

LOCALITY 1
At the first locality, archeological remains (site 41WY60) are eroding out of the
seaward face of a clay dune rising 5 m above a wind-tidal flat. The dune forms an island
in the wind-tidal flat whenever the flat is inundated. Wave and possibly wind action are
cutting the seaward edge of the dune, and wind-borne materials are being dropped on its lee
side. In this manner, the dune is migrating landward (westward) and building up younger,
foreset beds that dip downwind on the lee slope. A stratigraphic sequence is thus established in which at any point a vertical section is composed of beds in superposition but
also in which any given horizontal plane through the dune cuts a sequence from older beds
seaward to younger beds landward. It is not known i f the conditions under which this
process operates meet the requirements to completely release the energy of thermoluminescence in clay-sized particles, but, assuming that they do, these deposits should be
readily dated using direct thermoluminescent dating.
In addition, erosional cuts elsewhere along the margin of the island on which 41WY60
is situated expose buried soils which are potentially datable using radiocarbon analysis of
soil humates. The combined presence of discernible eolian silt-rich strata, superimposed
soils, and cultural materials makes this locality (and others like it which undoubtedly
exist in analogous settings) quite promising for establishing a cultural-ecological
sequence using geochronometric techniques.

LOCALITY 2
The second locality is informative not only from a geomorphic point of view but also
from the insight which a history of its investigation affords about the conduct of archeological investigation in this region of Texas. The locality consists of an archeological
site (41HG128) in the sloping edge of a depression adjacent to a dune field. This complex
is 5 km northeast of Edcouch in eastern Hidalgo County, and the locality has figured in
earlier studies of the drainage project. The pilot study (Mallouf et al. 1977) identified
a number of sample areas, one of which (Number 4) is 3 km west of this locality (Mallouf et
al. 1977:123-126, Figs. 18 and 29). Although Sample Area 4 did not encompass this locality, it did result in the discovery of one site (41HG42) on an analogous slope between a
dune and adjacent depression.

38

CHAPTER 4: DITCH SURVEY

The intent of the study conducted by Mallouf et al. (1977) was to ascertain the nature
of the archeological record in the drainage corridor as an aide to planning. The next
phase of work was a survey of the proposed rights-of-way for the drainage ditches. An
attempt was made to use the predictive assessment of Mallouf et al. to identify areas with
a high probability for the presence of archeological sites. This led to a prefield prediction that a site would likely occur in association with the depression at this locality
(Holz and Prewitt 1980). No site was found at the locality during the actual survey, which
was conducted prior to excavation of the ditches (Day et al. 1981). During the 1986
survey, segments of existing ditches were first visited by Prewitt and Goode and then
formally resurveyed to determine the comparability between the site inventory before and
after cutting of the ditch. Site 41HG128 was noted by Prewitt and Goode (their Locality
21) and formally documented by the 1986 survey. In the case of this site, the visibility
afforded by weathering of the sloping sides of the ditch led to its discovery.
The geologic context of 41HG128 meets the criteria sought in this study; that is,
cultural materials occur in stratified geologic deposits that appear suitable for geochronometric dating. Prior to the 1980 survey, aerial photo analysis identified the depression
at this locality as part of a channel scar (Holz and Prewitt 1980), and a strip of sand
dunes lying west of the channel scar is documented on the geologic map of the area (Barnes
1976). Exposed in the sides of the drainage ditch are the subsurface aspects of these
features. The deposits are in stratigraphic positions that comprise a sequence of changing
geologic conditions. The basal deposit exposed here is mapped as Lissie clay (Barnes
1976), which is lithologically similar to Beaumont clay as exposed in more-easterly portions of the drainage system. The surface of the Lissie clay is eroded, and a strong
calcium carbonate horizon occurs in the upper 1.5 m.
A channel dissects the Lissie near
the center of the locality. The channel is filled with very sandy clay, reddish in color.
Overlying the channel fill is a broad, shallow basin filled with dark, clay-rich pond
deposits. Burned clay lumps, bones, shells, chipped stones, and other cultural debris are
eroding from portions of this sequence of pond deposits. At the western edge of the basin,
a section through the dune is exposed. (Unfortunately, the best exposures of the dune are
on the south side of the ditch, while the cultural materials and the best expression of the
channel and pond deposits are on the north side). There seems to be interbedding of the
pond margin and the dune deposits, with some dune material clearly overlying some pond
sediment. In the dune is evidence of two soils, one earlier soil associated with a zone of
calcium carbonate being buried approximately 2 m below the surface of the dune. Another
soil, badly disturbed by ditch construction, occurs near the present dune surface.
These deposits are interpretable as representing the following sequence of events.
Exposed, weathered Lissie clay was the surface upon which a deltaic channel system formed,
probably in the relatively early Holocene. This is evidenced by the sinuous dark meander
scars visible on the aerial photographs and by the filled channel seen in profile. The
channels became closed basins after stream abandonment and began to hold water as lakes or
intermittent ponds, represented by the dark pond deposits seen in profile as well as by the
patterns on the aerial photographs. Cultural activity transpired around the margins of
these bodies of water, and artifacts became buried in the pond deposits. At this same
time, and probably earlier, a dune field was active west and southwest of the basin. The
prehistoric arrow point and the historic glass recovered from site 41HG128 indicate that at
least some of the pond deposits are relatively recent, but the chronology of the events
represented by these deposits is otherwise unknown. Cultural materials at the site are
potentially datable applying radiocarbon analysis to charcoal or bone and thermoluminescent
dating to burned clay lumps.
The pond deposits and the soils are candidates for

39

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

geochronometric dating using radiocarbon procedures, as are the dune silts using thermoluminescence. A comprehensive sequence of such dates covering the stratigraphic sequence
here should result in a firm chronology of all events since abandonment of the stream.
This would constitute valuable cultural-ecological information, but such results from a
single locality are not sufficient to determine whether the events are locality-specific or
parts of consistent regional patterns. Dates from several localities are needed to address
such issues. For example, it might be hypothesized that a regional pattern of changing
climate and/or water table elevation brought about a more-or-less synchronous change from
permanence to impermanence in the ponds formed in old stream meanders on the delta. Dune
growth should increase as ponds become less permanent. Such a widespread phenomenon would
probably have to be on the order of the worldwide climatic optimum dating eight to five
millenia ago. Alternatively, each meander scar may have formed a pond that independently
underwent the sequence of youthful permanence to mature impermanence brought about by its
gradual filling with pond sediments. In this hypothesis, dates would not be consistent
between pond/dune complexes.

LOCALITY 3
The third locality on the survey routes visited for geologic assessment is in southwestern Hidalgo County 1.7 km north-northwest of Alton. At this point, a northward-flowing
segment of drainage ditch will pass through a prominent depression in the stabilized dune
sheet. A high conical dune is on the west side of this depression, and an unrecorded
archeological site occurs at the crest of the dune. This site is about 300 m outside of
the right-of-way but is an informative example of site occurrences in this kind of setting.
The site consists of chert cobbles and flakes, burned caliche rocks, and abundant glass and
metal exposed along the edge of the two roadways that intersect near the center of the
site. The stone artifacts are considered to be prehistoric, and the glass and metal are
relatively modern. Some of the burned rocks are in place in the deposit, whereas the rest
of the site materials are resting on the present surface. The site is badly disturbed by
roads, house sites, agricultural activities, and erosion.
The deposits are massive, silty fine sand with a truncated soil at the top. Were this
site in a less disturbed condition, it would be suitable for archeological and geochronological investigations. The dating of eolian silts by thermoluminescence would seem to be
particularly promising at this site. Once drainage ditches are dug in this part of the
stabilized dune area, other similar sites are likely to be found and will have the potential of providing significant information about the local cultural-ecological history.
Generally, archeological sites in the entire project area have formed in dynamic
geologic settings. Interpreting and dating events in the geological history of the area in
culturally relevant times provides an important part of the environmental information to be
used in cultural-ecological reconstruction. Historically, archeological dating in this
part of Texas has not been particularly successful, but applying the techniques of geochronometry to dating the deposits and soils associated with archeological remains provides
an indirect means of establishing a firm cultural chronology for the area.

40

CHAPTER 5
TESTING OF THE SARDINAS RESACA SITE, 41HG118

Prehistoric site 41HG118 is located approximately 3.3 km (2 miles) southeast of the
City of Mission in southern Hidalgo County (Fig. 8). The site was recorded by Margaret
Howard and Michael B. Collins in April of 1986 as they surveyed a proposed drainage ditch
alignment known as the South Mission Lateral. When functional, this ditch will drain land
containing a new hospital located on the south side of Mission, and Hidalgo County Drainage
District No. 1 wished to expedite the required archeological investigations along the South
Mission Lateral because construction of this ditch would provide drainage for the hospital
in the event of heavy rainfall. The Collins-Howard team surveyed this and several other
ditch segments prior to the main survey effort carried out in July and August of 1986.
Confining their efforts strictly to the right-of-way of the proposed drainage ditch,
Collins and Howard defined a prehistoric site measuring 460 m north-south and a minimum of
80 m east-west. The site was evidenced by a comparatively dense surface scatter of cultural materials, including finished bifaces, cores, scrapers, debitage, burned rocks, and
bones (Howard and Collins 1986). The quantity of prehistoric cultural debris apparent on
the surface of 41HG118 and the possibility that undisturbed subsurface deposits might be
present led Collins and Howard to recommend further evaluation of the site through backhoe
trenching, controlled test excavations, and controlled collection of surface artifacts.
These recommendations were conveyed to the sponsoring agency, Hidalgo County Drainage
District No. 1, by Prewitt and Associates, Inc. The District responded by requesting from
Prewitt and Associates, Inc. a proposal detailing a program of research resulting in an
adequate evaluation of the site's potential. The consequent proposal followed the CollinsHoward recommendations closely. However, the sequencing of investigations was structured
in two stages. During the first stage, artifacts would be gathered from the surfaces of
collection units totaling 10% of the site area within the ditch right-of-way and a series
of backhoe trenches would be excavated. Assessment of information yielded by the trenching
operation with respect to subsurface contents and condition would then occur. If the
trench data indicated nothing of cultural significance in the subsurface and/or the deposits had obviously been extensively disturbed, no further effort would be expended. Conversely, the second stage of investigation -- involving excavation of test pits -- would
get under way if the trench data showed significant cultural remains to be preserved in the
subsurface at 41HG118.
The proposed first-stage activities were accomplished at 41HG118 between July 14 and
17, 1986. On July 17, an on-site meeting occurred to evaluate the trench findings.
Present were Elton R. Prewitt and Michael B. Collins of Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Susan
Andrews representing the Texas State Historic Preservation Officer, and Janelle Stokes of
the Galveston District Office, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. It was decided that controlled test excavations were justified on the basis of intact subsurface cultural deposits.
It was decided further that the test excavations, in conjunction with the first-stage
efforts, would constitute adequate mitigation of damages to 41HG118 resulting from construction of the South Mission Lateral. Presented in this chapter are the results of the
investigations conducted at 41HG118.

Figure 8

HIDALGO-WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS
1986 INVESTIGATIONS
41HGll8

SITE AREA MAP

LEGEND

k/)/j

l_-_ -:_

1

0

Approximate Site Location

1/4

1/2

E=3

I

Reported Site Location

kilometer

0

1/4

1/2
mile

P8A//86/SLH

Contour Interval= 5'

CHAPTER 5: TESTING OF THE SARDINAS RESACA SITE, 41HG18

Site Description

Site 41HGll8 is situated along the edge of a terrace-like elevation overlooking
Sardinas Resaca, an abandoned channel of the Rio Grande (see Fig. 8; Fig. 9). The Rio
Grande presently flows through a channel located as close as 3.4 km (2.1 miles) southwest
of 41HG118. The channel of Sardinas Resaca is about 200 m south of the southeastern end of
the site. The resaca channel floor and banks range in elevation from 95 to 100 ft (29 to
30. 5 ml above mean sea level (msl) • Site 41HGll8 occurs in an area where the modern
surface elevations range from 110 to 115 ft (33.5 to 35 ml above msl. The vertical difference between the site and the floodplain channels (both the resaca and the active Rio
Grande) is thus on the order of 15 to 20 ft (4.6 to 6.1 m). Until recent land terracing
and leveling obliterated them, the Sardinas Resaca Site was flanked to the east-southeast
and northwest by slight rises. These rises show on USGS 7.5' topographic maps of the area
made before modifications occurred (see Fig. 8). Northward from 41HG118, the terrain is
lower and relatively flat for a distance of about 1.6 km (1 mile). There, the land rises
from 115 to 135 ft (35 to 41 ml above msl over a north-south distance of 350 m. Much of
Mission is situated on the slope and upper edge of this terrace-like rise.
The right-of-way for the proposed South Mission Lateral straddles the boundary between
a cultivated field to the east and a citrus orchard to the west (Fig. 10). When 41HG118
was recorded by Howard and Collins, the cultivated field was covered with a melon crop.
Ground visibility over that area of the right-of-way was poor. Most of the artifacts they
observed were in the citrus orchard where the ground surface was free of low vegetation.
Restricting their activities to the right-of-way and unable to see much surface artifactual
debris in the melon field, Howard and Collins were nevertheless able to set north-south
site limits and speculated that the site continued for some distance to the east and west
of the right-of-way along the terrace edge. Based on the distribution of cultural debris
in the orchard, the site was recorded as extending from the terrace edge northward for a
distance of 460 m.
When the testing program began at 41HG118 in mid-July of 1986, the melon crop along
the east side of the right-of-way had been harvested and the field cultivated. The vegetation was thus turned under and visibility somewhat improved. However, the soil was reduced
to a loose, clodded state. As a result, conditions were still not optimal for spotting
surface artifacts out in the field. A good rain would have improved circumstances considerably, but none came during the period of investigation on the site. Assemblages of
cultural debris gathered from collection units in this field are appreciably smaller than
collections from adjacent units in the citrus orchard. Rather than reflecting variations
in the intensity of prehistoric cultural activity from one area of the site to another, the
smaller debris collection from the cultivated field is probably explained as a function of
reduced visibility due to the loose soil.
The cultivated field along the east side of the right-of-way is quite flat. Most
elevation readings were within 5 or 10 cm of one another. A few readings were as much as
20 cm lower. The citrus orchard to the west of the right-of-way is terraced into three
distinct levels (see Fig. 10). The surface of each terrace is very flat, but there is an
overall vertical difference of 1.5 m between the northernmost terrace (comprising most of
the orchard) and the terrace in the southwest corner of the grove. The field road running
north-south for the length of the grove is raised at its south end as much as 60 cm above
the grove terrace on its west side and cultivated field on its east side. The present

43

Figure 9
Photographs of Site 41HG118

a.

b.

Looking north along ditch right-of-way from southern area of
site 41HG118. Survey Segment 94.

Looking north from the Sardinas Resaca channel to rise
containing site 41HG118. Survey Segment 94.

44

HIDALGO-WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS- 1986 INVESTIGATIONS
41HGll8
SITE MAP
......

··::::I

I

....

::TERRACE D::::CITRus:· .. G R ov

c

WEEDY
PASTURE

:u

FIELD ROAD

0

'2

)>

0

Datum
CULTIVATED

I
I

FIE L D

I

I

LEGEND
0

c:=:::J Collection Unit
Backhoe Trench

a

20

,,,

,/IC_-----,..-

0

100

40
meters
200

Test Pit

t:ZJ Noncontrolled

Sur face Col lee lion

feet

.,
400

'°...,c
<l>

6
Contour Interval= 0.5m

P8Al/86/ SLH

80

,i;

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

condition of the land surface in the site area bespeaks an appreciable amount of modern
artificial topographic modification.
The results of the surface-collecting activities and the backhoe testing, each discussed in greater detail below, suggest that past leveling and terracing of the land containing 41HG118 have spread prehistoric cultural debris far to the north of the original site
limits. A north-south site dimension on the order of 160 m appears more realistic than the
460 m or more over which surface debris occurs. Although visibility was not the best in
the cultivated field, the presumed east end of 41HG118 was defined at distances of from 25
to 40 m east of the field road. In an inspection of the terrace edge westward from the
ditch right-of-way, the archeological crew found that prehistoric cultural debris is
evident on the surface for a distance of 1.2 km (0.7 mile). The west end of 41HG118 was
not reached. Based on additional data from the site area and survey beyond the ditch
right-of-way, revised dimensions of at least 1,250 m east-west and 100 m north-south are
offered for 41HG118. The investigation reported here thus occurred at the east end of an
extensive site.

Technical Procedures

The archeological investigation of 41HG118 involved a controlled collection of surface
artifacts, excavation of 12 backhoe trenches, hand excavation of 5 lxl-m test pits, and
preparation of a plan map.
A controlled collection of artifacts from 10% of the site surface area within the
drainage ditch right-of-way was proposed for 41HGll8. Using an east-west right-of-way
width of 54 m and north-south site width of 500 m, the site area within the ditch right-ofway was calculated to be 27,000 m2 • The minimum surface area to be collected by controlled
means was thus 2, 700 m2 • The western half of the right-of-way is partially covered by
east-west rows of citrus trees. The eastern half is in a cultivated field. The citrus
orchard has 50 rows of trees, and there are 49 spaces between tree rows. The distance from
the center of the field road along the east side of the orchard to the western side of the
right-of-way is about 25 m. From the road to the eastern side of the right-of-way is about
29 m. The spaces between the rows of citrus trees are about 4 m wide. Given these parameters, a collection unit size of 4x20 m was selected. Units with these dimensions would
fit conveniently between the rows of trees in the orchard. Beginning at the south end of
the orchard, spaces between rows of trees were assigned numbers. The first was numbered
"l" and so forth to "SO" at the north end of the orchard (see Fig. 10). Artifacts were
collected from the surfaces of 36 arbitrarily selected 4x20-m collection units along the
west side of the right-of-way. The collection units in the orchard were not staked out or
otherwise demarcated. Rather, the rows of trees were relied upon to define the collection
areas. Without benefit of the orchard rows to delimit collection units over the eastern
half of the right-of-way, a portable string frame measuring 4x20 m was constructed. The
string frame was staked out first at the south end of the site in the cultivated field(see
Fig. 10). Designated Collection Unit 54, this and each succeeding unit on the east side
was oriented along an east-west axis using a hand compass. Collection units on the east
side were spaced about 15 m apart. Seventeen units were collected in the field, bringing
the total of units collected to 53, or an area of 4,240 m2 • The total area collected by
controlled means thus substantially exceeded the 10% sample originally proposed for the
site. Each collection unit was picked clean of all visible surface artifacts. The only

46

CHAPTER 5: TESTING OF THE SARDINAS RESACA SITE, 41HG18

materials not collected were pieces of foam rubber, black plastic, and metal strips, all
items used in freeze protection for citrus trees. Collections from each 4x20-m unit were
placed in individual paper bags labeled with the site number, collection unit number, date
of collection, and initials of collector(s}.
Fourteen backhoe trenches were excavated on or near 41HG118 using equipment operated
by an employee of Hidalgo County Drainage District No. 1. They were distributed arbitrarily in a pattern intended to provide uniform subsurface exposures where prehistoric cultural debris was visible on the surface. Most of the trenching was done at the south end
of the site area because surface artifact densities were greater there and initial trenches
revealed promising subsurface indications (see Fig. 10). These trenches were intended to:
(1) provide exposures of strata permitting a geomorphological assessment of the site area;
(2) give an idea of the vertical and horizontal extent of any cultural debris in subsurface
deposits; and (3) fortuitously reveal the location(s) of habitational features and/or areas
of the site where controlled excavations could be most profitably conducted. Excavation of
each trench was monitored by a member of the archeological crew. Shortly after each trench
was completed, a narrow vertical strip of one wall was smoothed and a profile drawing made
while the deposits still retained natural moisture and color. Since no cultural features
were encountered, subsequent, more-detailed profile drawings were made in trenches relevant
to understanding the geology of the site. For these drawings, level lines were strung
across each profile to serve as vertical controls. Elevations were later calculated for
the level lines. Following completion of all necessary archeological procedures, the
trenches were backfilled.
Based on observations made in the backhoe trenches, two locations were selected for
controlled hand excavations. Three lxl-m units, designated Test Pits 1-3, were staked out
at the east end of Trench 13; two lxl-m units, designated Test Pits 4 and 5, were placed on
the south side of Trench 7 (see Fig. 10). Unit perimeters were established using measuring
tape triangulation. The test pits in each area were contiguous. In each excavation area,
a plow zone was recognized by examining the profile of the adjoining trench. The plow zone
in Test Pits 1-3 was 40 cm thick. In Test Pits 4 and 5, i t was 75 cm thick. Plow-zone
deposits were designated Level 1 in each unit and shoveled out. No effort was made to
collect artifacts by screening plow-zone matrix as it was felt that this effort was not
warranted given the adequate and comparable sample collected from the surface. Subsequent
levels in each test pit were excavated in arbitrary 10-cm-thick levels using shovels and
trowels. Vertical control was maintained with the aid of level lines attached to datum
stakes set beside each set of test pits. Level lines were related to the site datum
(100.000 m) using an alidade and leveling rod. Matrix excavated from each 10-cm-thick
level in a lxl-m unit was passed through a screen made of 1/4-inch-mesh hardware cloth.
All materials other than fragmentary land snail shells were collected. Materials were
placed in paper bags labeled with all appropriate provenience information, names of
excavators, and date of collection.
The plan map of 41HG118 was drawn with the aid of an alidade, plane table, and leveling rod. A datum stake was driven into the ground in the middle of the field road at the
south end of the citrus orchard (see Fig. 10). An elevation of 100.000 m was arbitrarily
assigned to the top of this stake. The contour elevations shown on the plan map, level
line elevations in trenches, and the excavation level elevations in test pits are all
relative to this 100.000 m arbitrary datum.

47

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Field documentation during the investigation of 41HGll8 involved a daily journal,
level report forms, feature and profile drawings, and a photographic log. Recorded in the
daily journal were a general accounting of progress made each day at the site and a discussion of findings made. A standard level report form was filled out for each 10-cm-thick
level excavated from each lxl-m test pit. Measured plan and profile sketches were drawn
for relevant trench wall profiles and one feature found as Test Pit 4 was excavated.
Photographs, both color slide and black-and-white print, were taken of the general site
area, the excavation units, trench profiles, and the feature. Information concerning the
content of each photograph was recorded in a photographic log.
Special samples collected during the investigation at 41HG118 include matrix samples
and carbon samples. Most of the matrix samples were collected by Collins during the course
of his geomorphological studies at the site. One additional sample was collected by the
archeological crew from the north wall of Test Pit 1. Matrix samples were collected with
the aid of a trowel and/or hand pick. Matrix was placed into 1-gallon ziplock bags labeled
with the appropriate provenience data and other relevant information. These samples ranged
in weight from 5 to 10 kg. Selected matrix samples were submitted for radiocarbon assay of
their humate content. A substantial quantity of carbon was collected from Feature 1 in
Test Pit 4. The carbon was placed in aluminum foil pouches labeled with provenience information. As this was later determined to be a noncultural feature, the carbon from Feature
1 was not submitted for radiocarbon assay.
The notes, drawings, photographs, artifacts, and other materials generated during the
investigation of 41HGll8 are permanently curated in the archives and collections at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory of The University of Texas at Austin. Costs of
curation are borne by the agencies sponsoring the 41HG118 investigation.

Results of the Investigations

Surface Collection

The 53 4x20-m surface units from which artifacts and other debris were collected are
shown in Figure 10. In the citrus grove along the west side of the ditch right-of-way,
each of the first 20 spaces between rows of trees was searched for surface artifacts. This
was done because there were appreciably greater amounts of cultural debris visible on the
surface of this area of the right-of-way than elsewhere. These 20 collection units
involved a north-south distance of approximately 145 m. Beyond Collection Unit 22, only
every other space between tree rows was searched. Over the eastern half of the right-ofway, involving Collection Units 54 to 86, visibility was not as good as a short distance to
the west in the grove. The field containing this half of the right-of-way had been cultivated shortly before the collection effort began. The surface was loose and powdery,
resulting in artifacts being obscured or covered. Consequently, not as much effort was
devoted to collecting areas in this portion of the site.
The results of the provenienced surface collecting activities at 41HG118, in conjunction with other find in gs discussed below, provide information concerning the original
extent of the site, the periods of prehistoric cultural occupation, and the range of
chipped stone tools produced by the prehistoric inhabitants.

48

;,I
CHAPTER 5: TESTING OF THE SARDINAS RESACA SITE, 41HG18

The particulars concerning artifacts and related debris collected from the surface of
41HGll8 are provided in Appendix 2. Table 6 summarizes recovery by collection unit for
formal artifact categories. It reveals that 54 (72%) out of 75 formal artifacts recovered
in the controlled surface collections came from Collection Units 1 to 24. The remaining 21
specimens (28%) were widely distributed among the other 30 collection units, with no appreciable concentrations apparent. Most of the 33 formal artifact specimens found as a result
of the noncontrolled collecting efforts came from an area totaling about 10,000 m2 in the
citrus grove west of Collection Units 1 to 20 (see Fig. 10).
Table 7 presents recovery totals in increments of five collection units for debitage,
fire-fractured rocks, and burned clay lumps, presented in order from south to north along
the right-of-way. The distribution of these materials again accentuates the area of the
site covered by Collection Units 1 to 20 in that, for the most part, the greatest amounts
of debris in each category were recovered there. There is, however, an exception in the
case of Collection Units 40 to 48 where the debitage count (118 specimens) is on a par with
totals in Collection Units 1 to 20.
The distribution of artifacts and debris recovered during the controlled surface
collection effort on the Sardinas Resaca Site indicates a definite concentration of prehistoric cultural activity over an approximately 160-m-wide strip of land paralleling the
upper edge of the rise upon which the site occurs (corresponding to Collection Units 1 to
22).

Backhoe Trenching

Fourteen backhoe trenches were excavated in or near the Sardinas Resaca Site (see Fig.
10). These trenches were excavated for three reasons. First, it was hoped that detection
of prehistoric cultural debris in subsurface deposits would aid in more-accurate definition
of the horizontal and vertical site dimensions. Secondly, observation of trench wall
profiles would permit characterization of subsurface deposits, potentially yielding data
useful in defining cultural stratigraphy and the geomorphic/depositional history of the
site. Finally, information gathered from subsurface exposures in the trenches was expected
to aid in selection of locations suitable for controlled test excavations.
The locations for Trenches 1 to 8 were arbitrarily selected to provide subsurface
exposures of 41HG118 as it was originally defined in the ditch right-of-way. The segment
of right-of-way corresponding to Collection Units 1 to 22 was given preference because
surface-collecting activities had revealed greater densities of prehistoric cultural debris
in that area of the site. Trenches 9 to 12 were intended to sample the slope and floodplain surface downhill from the site as originally defined. Trenches 13 and 14 were
excavated to reveal additional details about an exceptionally promising area of the site
recognized during earlier trenching activities.
Detailed descriptions of the character and structure of the natural deposits as
observed in the trenches at 41HGll8 are provided in a following section entitled Geomorphology. Four zones were defined in the subsurface deposits. Zone I is the Pleistocene
Beaumont Formation and is the deepest unit defined. Zone II rests on Zone I. It is a
Holocene loam containing in-situ cultural debris. Zone III is a late Holocene basin fill
that laps up onto Zone II at the north end of the study area. Zone IV is a sitewide plow

49

II

................

~~~~~~---------------------

9'5;

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 6
PROVENIENCE OF TOOLS FROM THE SURFACE COLLECTION UNITS AT 41HGll8

Collection
Unit

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ll
12
13

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
54
56
58
60
62
64

Cores

Thick
Bi faces

Thin
Bifaces

1

2

Distally
Beveled
Tools

2

1
1

1
1

2

Modified
Debitage

3
2
1
1

Trimmed
Debitage

2
3
1

1

1
1
2

2

1
2

1

1

2

1

1

1
1

1

1
2

1

1
1
1

2

1

1

1
1

1

2
1

1

1

1
1

1
1

1

1
1
1
1

50

CHAPTER 5: TESTING OF THE SARDINAS RESACA SITE, 41HG18

Table 6, continued
Collection
Unit

Cores

66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
General
Surface
63*
65*
Totals:

Thick
Bifaces

Distally
Beveled
Tools

Thin
Bifaces

Modified
Debitage

Trimmed
Debitage

1

1

1

4

4

13

5

12
1
1
35

2

4

7

7

22

27

*Other artifacts and debris not collected from these units.

TABLE 7
PROVENIENCE OF OTHER ARTIFACTS FROM THE SURFACE COLLECTION UNITS AT 41HG118
Collection
Units (5 each)*

1-5
6-10
ll-15
16-20
21-28
30-38
40-48
54-62
64-72
74-82
Totals:

Debitage

Fire-Fractured Rocks
Count
Weight (g)

21
70
34
15
8
16
24
27
19
9
243

170
104
llO
57
53
69
118
40
19
23
763

219
606
403
208
123
176
223
408
155
81
2,602

Burned Clay Lumps
Count Weight (g)

4
14
1
1
1
1
8
9
7
2
48

75
200
ll
10
7
8
19
42
29
9
410

*Collection Units so, 84, and 86 are excluded to leave only groupings consisting of five
collection units, insuring that equal surface areas are represented for comparative
purposes.

51

I
HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

zone containing displaced cultural materials. With respect to in-situ prehistoric cultural
debris, positive indications were seen only in Trenches 6, 7, and 8. These findings led to
the excavation of Trenches 13 and 14. Additional in-situ cultural debris was seen in the
wall of Trench 13 only. Cultural debris observed in the walls of these four trenches
consisted of debitage, fire-fractured rocks, and a burned clay lump. Trenches 6, 7, and 13
each had three pieces of debris visible in their wall profiles. No recognizable prehistoric cultural features were detected in any of the trenches. Cultural debris observed in
the wall of Trench 1 occurred within a 75-cm-thick plow zone (Zone IV), the debris
obviously having been transported from elsewhere on the site (see discussion below).

Controlled Test Excavations

Five lxl-m test units were excavated at the Sardinas Resaca Site. Test Pits 1-3 were
contiguous, forming an L-shaped excavation area connected to the east end of Trench 13.
Test Pits 3 and 4 joined to form a lx2-m extension along the south side of Trench 7 at its
west end. All units were situated in areas where the trench findings suggested that the
most substantial in-place deposits of cultural debris would be found in the subsurface.
The two groups of units were placed immediately alongside the trenches so that the trench
wall profiles could be used to guide removal of plow zone deposits and as an aid in the
definition of other zones in the tests.
Test Pits 1-3 were situated off the north end, northeast corner, and east side of
Trench 13, respectively. As the north end of the trench sloped, the north-south dimension
of Test Pit 1 gradually increased from 1.0 to 1.5 m as the unit was excavated downward.
Following removal of a 40-cm-thick plow zone, designated Level 1, an additional nine 10-cmthick levels of deposit were excavated from Test Pit 1. The depth of Test Pit 1 at completion was 1.3 m (99.40-98.10 m relative to the 100-m vertical datum established on the
site). Test Pits 2 and 3 also had 40-cm-thick plow zones. After the plow zone was
shoveled out, five additional 10-cm-thick levels were excavated from each unit. Test Pits
2 and 3 reached depths at completion of 90 cm (99.40-98.50 m).
The Zone II deposit excavated and screened in Test Pits 1-3 is characterized as a
moderate brown to moderate yellowish brown loam to clay loam (see below). Excavations in
these three units yielded no formal artifact specimens, and no features were recognized. A
miscellaneous thin biface fragment (Specimen 17) was recovered from Level 4 of Test Pit 2.
Four pieces of modified debitage were recovered, two from Level 4 and one from Level 6 of
Test Pit 1 and one from Level 5 of Test Pit 2. Rates of recovery for debitage, firefractured rocks, burned clay lumps, and Rabdotus snail shells (tabulated in Appendix 2)
suggest no clearly defined living surfaces within the deposit. Greater amounts of debitage
were recovered from Levels 5 to 8 in Test Pit 1 and from Level 5 in Test Pit 2. Firefractured rocks were recovered in greatest numbers (and weights) from Levels 3 and/or 4 of
all three units. Burned clay lumps likewise tended to be more concentrated in the upper
levels of the three units. No great variations in river pebble numbers are apparent,
except in the deeper levels of Test Pit 1 which cut down into the Zone 1 Beaumont Formation
deposits. Rabdotus snail shell counts were greater in Levels 4 to 6 or 7 of all three
units. In Levels 9 and 10 of Test Pit 1, Rabdotus shell counts dropped off substantially,
but the size of certain of the shells was noted to increase remarkably. Small fragments of
mussel shells were recovered in Levels 2 and 4 of Test Pit 1 and Level 5 of Test Pit 2.

52

CHAPTER 5: TESTING OF THE SARDINAS RESACA SITE, 41HG18

Test Pits 4 and 5 in Trench 7 were in an area of the site where the plow zone was
about 75 cm thick (99.50 to 98.75 ml. The plow zone (Zone IV) was designated Level 1 and
was shoveled out of each test pit without screening the matrix. Eight additional 10-cmthick levels (98.75-97.95 ml were excavated from Test Pit 4, the easternmost of the two
units. In Test Pit 5, four complete 10-cm-thick levels were excavated down through Level 5
(98.75 to 98.35 ml. Beginning with Level 6, the unit was halved along a north-south line
to permit cross sectioning of a feature. From Level 6 through Level 9 (98.35 to 97.95 ml,
only the eastern half of the unit was excavated.
The Zone II deposits encountered in Test Pits 4 and 5 were like those described above
for Test Pits 1-3. Again, no formal artifacts were found as these two units were excavated. Two pieces of modified debitage were recovered from Level 4 of Test Pit 4. In Test
Pit 4, rates of debitage recovery were low throughout the deposit. In Test Pit 5, Levels 2
and 5 yielded unusually large numbers of debitage pieces. Levels 7 to 9 of Test Pit 4
contained notably more pieces of fire-fractured rocks and burned clay lumps than did the
levels above. With only half of the unit excavated, a similar trend was nonetheless
apparent in Test Pit 5 as well. Rates of Rabdotus shell recovery were relatively consistent down through the deposits. The recovery of a small piece of clear glass in Level 2 of
Test Pit 5 indicates that the plow zone deposits may not have been completely cleared from
the units before excavation of Level 2 commenced.
A roughly circular area of mottled burned clay, carbon, and carbon flecks was initially detected in Level 5 (98.45 to 98.35 ml of Test Pit 5. Clearly apparent on the floor of
Level 5, this stained area measured about 45 cm in diameter. Extending out to the north
and northwest of the main feature area, and truncated by Trench 7, were three long, narrow
stains having the appearance of filled rodent runs or root molds. Within the main feature
area were two circular patches of pure carbon having diameters of 3 to 4 cm. There was
also a circular area about 8 cm in diameter marked by dense carbon flecking. In the westcentral portion of the main feature was an oblong area measuring about 18 cm north-south
and 8 cm east-west. It was evidenced by a concentration of burned clay flecks. The
feature was cross sectioned along a north-south line. Beginning in Level 6, only .the
eastern half of Test Pit 5 was excavated. Subsequent excavation of the eastern half of the
unit down through Level 9 left a 40-cm-high profile cut through the feature. In cross
section, the feature was 35 cm deep and 40 cm wide, having a U-shaped pit configuration.
The vertical extent of the carbon concentrations revealed in the profile was suggestive of
a burned stump. Matrix and carbon samples were collected from the "pit" fill. After
reaching the conclusion that this was a noncultural feature, no additional effort was made
to analyze the matrix and carbon samples collected from it.

Geomorphology

Cultural materials at site 41HG118 reside in deposits comprising a long,
tory along the crest of the north valley wall of Sardinas Resaca (Fig. 11).
cally, the promontory resembles a levee (and is referred to as such locally);
discussed below, the development of this ridge in Holocene times probably
result of eolian than of fluvial processes.

low promonTopographihowever, as
is more the

Geologic aspects of the site were examined 16-18 July, 1986. Field procedures followed those suggested by Soil Survey Staff (1973) and Olson (1976) and were applied to

53

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

exposures in 14 backhoe trenches (see Fig. 10). Trenching in the promontory and in the low
area north of it revealed four geologic zones (see Fig. 11). These provide substantial
information useful to understanding the site. Trenching in the floodplain of Sardinas
Resaca, south of the site (see Fig. 10), revealed considerable recent disturbance and
little in the way of data useful to interpreting the archeology of the site. Accordingly,
effort was concentrated on the exposures in the site and northward.
The objectives in examining the geology of this site were to elucidate aspects of the
physical environmental context of the cultural materials. This included describing the
relevant deposits, inferring the depositional processes by which they formed, identifying
the alterations they have undergone since deposition, and, i f possible, dating these
processes. Each of these objectives was achieved to some degree.

Geologic Setting

Site 41HG118 was defined, on the basis of surface distributions of artifacts (Collins
and Howard 1986), as extending the width of the drainage ditch right-of-way from the edge
of the Sardinas Resaca valley margin northward almost to the unpaved county road (see Fig.
10). Understanding the geology of this site requires a perspective extending beyond the
site a half kilometer or less to its immediate surroundings (referred to here as the
"41HG118 Locality") and to the lower Rio Grande Valley in general (the "region").
The geology of the region has been reviewed above as well as by various authors
(Barnes 1976; Mallouf et al. 1977; Brown et al. 1980; Day et al. 1981). As regards
41HG118, the critical aspects of this geologically dynamic region are the late Pleistocene
topography, the Holocene Rio Grande Valley, and Holocene deposits outside of the immediate
Rio Grande Valley.
The 41HG118 locality is near the upstream end of an extensive late Pleistocene fluviodeltaic plain of the Rio Grande represented today by the Beaumont Formation (Barnes 1976).
Two terrace-like topographic features are the prominent relief in the area from MissionMcAllen south toward the river. The upper of these two terraces is the more prominent and
more extensive. It is most clearly expressed from La Joya on the west to San Juan on the
east. The scarp defining the terrace face averages 11 m in height above Sardinas Resaca.
The towns of San Juan, McAllen, Mission, and La Joya are built wholly or partly on this
upper terrace surface.
A lower terrace lobe extends from near Perezville to south of McAllen and is defined
along its southern edge by the valley of Sardinas Resaca. This terrace averages about 4 m
in height above Sardinas Resaca.
Sardinas Resaca is the upstream-most section of a relict channel system of the Rio
Grande. This system consists of Sardinas and La Cruz resacas that flow north of, and
roughly parallel to, the Rio Grande from the vicinity of Mission to a confluent area south
of Weslaco where the system becomes known as Arroyo Colorado. Arroyo Colorado continues on
an easterly course to a point near Harlingen where it veers northeastward to debouch into
Laguna Madre some 45 km north of the mouth of the Rio Grande.

54

HIDALGO-WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS-1986 INVESTIGATIONS
41HGll8
SCHEMATIC NORTH-SOUTH GEOLOGIC SECTION

s

N

.l
0

()

0

----------~=f~(f5;:;§f;\~~o_o'°o\::~ ; <Jo: ~O :~·:o: \oo~ o
floodplain

Sardinas
Resaca

L E G E ND
~
~

Zone I, Beaumont Formation

bff/d

Zone TI

t==::=J

Zone ill,

U

X XX

P8Al/86/SLH

Depression Fill

Zone Til, Plow Zone
Truncated Cultural Deposit

Not Drawn to Scale

.,.,
'°c.....

ct>

~~------------------------·­
~

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Sardinas Resaca normally carries local natural run-off from the terraces in the
Mission-McAllen area as well as flow from artificial drainage systems. During high water
stages on the Rio Grande, overflow from the river enters the relict channel system at
several points and is carried to the Gulf by Arroyo Colorado and artificial floodways.
The width of the Sardinas Resaca valley south of site 41HG118 is roughly 2.5 km, and
that of the Rio Grande Valley per se is approximately 5 km. This width and the height of
the terrace at the site place the site above the reach of all but the very highest floods.
A low area on the surf ace of the lower terrace extends from just south of Mission to
the southeast. It lies just north of site 41HG118 and acts as an inefficient tributary to
Sardinas Resaca.
Prevailing winds in this area are from the southeast and east-southeast. This wind
direction transports fine materials off of the Rio Grande and Sardinas Resaca floodplains
and deposits them in a goz (low conical dune) (Bagnold 1954) field extending northwestward
from Mission and McAllen. This is the westernmost of several northwest-trending goz fields
lying west of Harlingen (Arbingast et al. 1973; Barnes 1976; Mallouf et al. 1977; Brown et
al. 1980) • The position of site 41HG118 is favorable for the development of localized
gozes as part of this overall eolian landscape.
The specific locality of the site is on an irregular, linear promontory bounded on the
north by a low-lying, poorly drained basin and on the south by the abrupt margin of the
Sardinas Resaca valley. The valley of Sardinas Resaca at this point has cut into deposits
of the Beaumont Formation (Barnes 1976), and it is this formation which stands as the
northern wall of the valley. The promontory along the crest of this valley wall consists
of an alignment of elongated rises made up of fine-grained, post-Beaumont deposits. Excavation revealed that, at least in the area of site 41HGll8, the upper contact of the
Beaumont also crests along approximately the same axis as that of the overlying deposits.
The valley of Sardinas Resaca in the vicinity of the site carries substantial amounts
of floodwater and maintains an active floodplain of Holocene fluvial deposits (Barnes
1976). No terracing is observable in the floodplain in the vicinity of the site, but
vegetation cover and recent disturbances may prevent detection of minor terraces.

Natural Stratigraphy of Site 41HG118

The four zones (see Fig. ll) comprising the physical stratigraphy of the 41HG118
locality are Quaternary in age and consist of a basal deposit of the Pleistocene Beaumont
Formation (Zone I), an overlying Holocene loam containing the in-place cultural materials
of the site (Zone II), late Holocene fill in the basin north of the site (Zone III), and a
pervasive plow zone containing displaced cultural materials (Zone IV). Each of these zones
is internally variable, and the relationships between them vary across the locality. Each
zone is described individually below with the overall interpretation following.
Zone I is exposed in erosional rills along the steep slope of the Sardinas Resaca
valley wall and was observed in all backhoe trenches. It consists of clay to sandy clay
with small pebbles and ranges in color from moderate brown to grayish orange. Calcium
carbonate nodules occur in the upper meter or so of this zone. Large Rabdotus tests occur

56

CHAPTER 5: TESTING OF THE SARDINAS RESACA SITE, 41HG18

in this zone in some but not all exposures. The upper contact of Zone I is sharp and
irregular in all observed exposures. Zone I is overlain by Zone II. The entire upper
contact of Zone I is unconformable and reflects erosion of an elevation. In Backhoe Trench
14, a gully had eroded 1.3 m into the surface of Zone I and was later filled by sediments
of Zone II. In every regard, Zone I conforms to the definition of the Beaumont Formation
(Sellards et al. 1932; Price 1958; Barnes 1976; Brown et al. 1980) which is considered to
be Sangamon- or Peorian-age fluvio-deltaic deposition during marine highstand(s). The
Beaumont surface then stood high and exposed to weathering throughout most of the last
glacial and early postglacial. No direct evidence for the age of Zone I was obtained, but
it is interpreted to be a part of the Beaumont and, therefore, greater than 50,000 years in
age (Brown et al. 1980).
Zone II rests unconformably on Zone I and consists of loam to clay loam. Zone II is
moderate brown to moderate yellowish brown in color and contains in-place cultural materials in a limited area in the south-central part of the surface distribution of artifacts.
Calcium carbonate is present in Zone II as small filaments to very small nodules.
The
Zone I-Zone II contact is wavy to irregular and, as exposed in Backhoe Trench 14, includes
a gully cut into the surface of Zone I and filled by Zone II. This contact configuration
and the degree to which Zone I is weathered indicates a considerable hiatus in which Zone I
was exposed. A sample of soil from the base of the Zone II fill of this gully was collected and submitted for radiocarbon dating of the included humates. The resultant date of
5182 B.P. (corrected using tree ring calibration tables [Damon et al. 1974], uncorrected
date: 4500 ± 130 B.P. [Beta-17434]) is considered indicative of the approximate time when
the shift from erosion to deposition occurred on the Beaumont promontory at this locality.
Small rounded pebbles like those in Zone I occur in Zone II (see Table 23 in Appendix
2), primarily in the lower part. These are stream polished and almost certainly derive
from the Rio Grande. Their presence in Zone II is best explained as intrusive from the
underlying Zone I as the result of bioturbation and various cultural activities.
Stratigraphically higher in Zone II is a weakly expressed, buried A horizon. Cultural
materials occur in this soil, but the relationship between the human activities and the
pedogenesis is unclear. Two alternative interpretations are proposed here.
In the first interpretation, it is assumed that 41HG118 is a single-component, late
Archaic site. The artifact distributions lack any vertical concentrations indicative of a
living surface, and no features were discovered. Two radiocarbon dates were obtained on
humate samples from the buried soil. When corrected to tree-ring calibration (Damon et al.
1974), these dates are 3698 B.P. (uncorrected date: 3350 ± 90 B.P. [Beta-17435]) and 3256
B.P. (uncorrected date: 3010 ± 160 B.P. [Beta-17437]). As discussed elsewhere in this
report, these dates appear to be as much as a millennium older than dates obtained for
comparable cultural materials at other localities in southern Texas. If these cross-dates
apply to the entire assemblage from 41HGll8, this would indicate that human activities
transpired on a relatively stable surface and resulted in cultural materials becoming part
of a soil horizon that formed prior to, during, and probably after the cultural episode(s).
The radiocarbon dates are the estimates of the average age of the humates comprising the
samples. The vertical position of these two humate samples in relationship to the cultural
materials is such that, in all probability, considerable humate from soil formation prior
to the human presence is included (Fig. 12). Given the vertisolic tendency of Zone II,
some downward movement of cultural materials is also expectable. Thus, an age of slightly
greater than 3, 000 years for a soil which hosts cultural materials of an age closer to
2,000 years is not incompatible.

57

Figure 12

HIDALGO-WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS
1986 INVESTIGATIONS
41HGll8
STRATIGRAPHIC POSITION OF HUMATE SAMPLES

BHT 6
SOUTH WALL
" <
"

<

r-'1--...- 9 9.40 m
< ,...

'I"'

~

V

TEST PIT I

NORTH WALL
? I- "1

L

I-

v

"

.., 'i (

I'"

7

L

I- ..,

L I' (
/' 7
L

L

Greatest Concentration
of Cultural Material

Beta-17437

•••. }

Greatest Concentration
of Cultural Material

c

oooo•~ o
0

Beta-17435

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

°

co

Q

0

0

QC

0

c

Cl

0

0

0

0

0

0

oo

o G
o o

0

o

~

a

o
0°-C

0

0

Cl

0

0

"'

0

LEGEND

"'

Zone I

0. 0

=

0

0

0

0

Q

0

°

0

0

=

0

0

0

"'

Q

0
0

0

Zone II

•

~0
= 0

c

Zone ISZ:
Ab Soil

c::.

Humate

Sample

20

40

0

0

I

10

H
centimeters

PBAl/86/SLH

I

CHAPTER 5: TESTING OF THE SARDINAS RESACA SITE, 41HG18

Alternatively, the assemblage of late Archaic diagnostic artifacts acquired from
disturbed contexts (i.e., surface of plow zone) may represent the younger of two components. In this interpretation, the earlier component occurs in Zone II at the level of the
Ab soil as encountered in the southern part of the site. As no diagnostic artifacts were
recovered from this horizon, no evidence for cultural cross-dating is at hand. Therefore,
two possible relationships exist between the Ab soil and the cultural remains. The cultural component could have accrued during the formation of the soil and, therefore, be
roughly contemporaneous, that is, about 3,000-3,500 years old; or, the soil may overprint
an earlier geologic deposit that accrued as cultural materials were being deposited. In
that event, the soil would be younger than the deposit as well as the cultural materials it
hosts. A time interval for this process would fall between the stratigraphically lower
date of 5182 B.P. and the soil dates of 3000-3500 B.P.
In the absence of time-diagnostic artifacts or other means of dating, these alternative interpretations for the age of the cultural deposits must remain unresolved. However,
Zone II is rather securely dated as beginning to form around 5200 B.P., to have achieved a
rather stable surface on which a soil formed around 3000-3500 B.P., and to have continued
to thicken for an undetermined length of time afterward.
The position and configuration of Zone II could be construed as a levee resulting from
high floods along Sardinas Resaca, but this interpretation seems extremely unlikely for the
reasons given above. This leaves eolian transport of floodplain deposits as the most probable process by which Zone II accrued. In this interpretation, Zone II is a dune (or more
precisely a goz) forming down the prevailing wind direction from the nearby floodplain of
Sardinas Resaca and the more extensive and more distant floodplain of the Rio Grande
itself.
The massive loam to clay loam comprising Zone II is characteristic of silt- to clayrich dunes in the Gulf Coastal Plain (Price 1958). Two factors favoring goz formation can
be identified at the 41HG118 locality. First is its position just above and back from the
edge of the valley wall. Eolian load is dropped where silt- and clay-bearing winds crossing the floodplain and rising against the valley wall sweep over the abrupt juncture of
this slope with more level ground beyond. Second is vegetation, the primary factor in goz
formation. Vegetation on this rise since 5,200 years ago cannot be directly observed, but
its presence is indicated by the abundant tests of Rabdotus, a genus which prefers open
scrub habitats (Raymond Neck, personal communication 1986), and by the Ab soil horizon of
3000 to 3500 B.P.
Zone III consists of a grayish brown clay to sandy clay loam accumulated in a lowlying area north of the elevated site area. This laps onto a low, sloping surface of Zone
II. The contact between Zones I and II is diffuse and bioturbated. Zone III appears to be
the result of intermittent ponding and is rich in organic content. A single radiocarbon
date of 723 B.P. (uncorrected date: 710 ± 70 B.P. [Beta-17436]) was obtained on a sample
collected approximately mid-depth in Zone III. This indicates that the topography of this
locality during the occupation of the site included a substantial depression in this area.
Deeper in Zone II may be pond deposits contemporary with human utilization of the nearby
site, but this is not demonstrated. An age of 700 years ago for a zone lapping onto Zone
II is consistent with the overall chronology developed for this locality.
Zone IV is a plow zone of loam extending over the entire locality north of the edge of
the Sardinas Resaca valley. Agricultural working of the soil, leveling, and terracing have

59

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

removed deposits from the elevated part of the locality (including the area where subsurface cultural evidence remains) and redistributed them in lower parts. The resultant plow
zone is relatively thin (25-37 cm) in those areas where leveling involved cutting and
relatively thick (50-95 cm) where filling occurred. Lateral transport of volumes of earth
over several tens of meters is indicated by these characteristics of the plow zone, and
cultural materials are found in varying amounts in and on this zone. It is apparent that
surface and plow zone horizontal patterning in cultural material distributions has been
totally destroyed at this site, and it is likely that the north-to-south dimension of the
"site" has been artificially increased, perhaps severalfold as a consequence of filling the
low to the north with earth removed from the high to the south.

Conclusions

The 41HG118 locality has been surficially disturbed by agricultural activities, but
significant subsurface data were found in place. Geologically, a dissected and weathered
Beaumont promontory began about 5,200 years ago to be draped with silt and clay dropped by
winds sweeping up from the Sardinas Resaca and Rio Grande floodplains to the southeast.
These eolian deposits filled gullies and other depressions and thickened over the entire
promontory. The topographic break at the valley margin and vegetation wind barriers
fostered the growth of a series of gazes, or low conical dunes, along the crest of the
valley wall. Humans utilized the crest of the dune at this site, probably beginning around
3,500 years ago, as the dune surface stabilized and a soil began to form. The dune continued to grow slowly, and intermittent human activity recurred. A low area north of the
site held water at times and began to fill with sediment. The lack of artifacts from the
post-Archaic indicates that human use of the site tapered off during the late Archaic. An
unknown height was reached by the goz at 41HG118 before modern leveling, terracing, and
plowing stripped the crest from the promontory and filled in the low-lying areas. This
scattered cultural materials over an area probably several times larger than the original
site size.
Archeological data recovery at this site encountered an all-too-common site character
in the southern part of Texas. Conditions necessary for traditional methods of dating
prehistoric sites are rarely met in this region, and 41HGll8 is no exception. Organic
cultural materials, including charcoal, are generally lacking in quantities or in contexts
suitable for radiocarbon dating. Requirements for other chronometric methods (particularly
archeomagnetism and thermoluminescent dating) are generally not satisfied. Relative dating
by seriation and cross dating of material culture are used but are not especially refined
in the lower Rio Grande Valley.
In an effort to explore alternative approaches to archeological dating in these
circumstances, four soil humate samples from this site were assayed. As discussed above,
these provided internally consistent dates for Zones II and III. These dates also are
reasonable in light of independent evidence. These results are very encouraging and
suggest that, in the future, judicious use and thoughtful interpretation of soil humate
dating in the lower Rio Grande Valley may prove to be quite valuable in archeological as
well as geological inquiry.

60

CHAPTER 5: TESTING OF THE SARDINAS RESACA SITE, 41HG18

Discussion of Findings

Surface collection activities at 41HG118 produced a comparatively large assemblage of
chipped stone artifacts and manufacturing residues. The presence of cores, core fragments,
thick bifaces, a wide range of biface manufacturing failures, and a variety of finished
thin bifacial and unifacial tools, in addition to over a thousand pieces of debitage,
demonstrates that the full sequence of lithic reduction was being performed by the site's
prehistoric inhabitants.
The formal stone tool collection from 41HG118 is dominated by medium to small unstemmed thin bifaces and unifaces having triangular or subtriangular outlines. Previously
defined artifact types repesented in this collection include Tortugas, Abasolo, Matamoros,
and Catan.
These specimens are typically categorized as dart and/or arrow points.
Distally beveled bifaces, often referred to as gouges, from 41HG118 represent the Olmos and
Clear Fork types. In the absence of local data permitting confident assignment of relative
ages to the temporal occurrence of these types, a cross-comparative approach is used to
suggest that they represent late Archaic and/or Late Prehistoric habitations of the site
(Shafer and Hester 1971:10; Hall et al. 1982:346; Turner and Hester 1985). The formal tool
types are augmented by an array of modified and trimmed debitage pieces. Debitage tools
with beveled working edges are most common in the collection. Pieces with notched or
"scooped" working edges are also present but are not nearly as numerous.
Following chipped stones, fire-fractured rocks, burned clay lumps, pebbles, and
cobbles were the next most common materials recovered from the surface of 41HG118. Unlike
chipped stone tools and debitage, these types of debris cannot be so confidently linked to
the prehistoric activities on the site. Some pebbles and cobbles have obviously been
introduced to the site in modern times as road metal and construction components (they have
cement or concrete adhering to them). Modern brush burning has very likely occurred in the
vicinity and produced a certain number of burned clay lumps. Brush piled and burned over
modern deposits of pebbles and cobbles would produce fire-fractured rocks. Much of the
debris representing these categories probably is the result of prehistoric cultural activities, but the possibility for modern introduction of the same materials must be kept in
mind. Nevertheless, the distribution of fire-fractured rocks and burned clay lumps again
accentuates the area of the right-of-way covered by Collection Units 1 to 22 as an area of
the site where prehistoric activity was most intensive.
The distribution of surface debris indicates a north-south width of about 160 m for
the Sardinas Resaca Site. This estimate is only partially supported by observations made
in the backhoe trenches. As previously discussed, in-situ cultural debris was found only
in Trenches 6, 7, 8, and 13. Were the site width determination to be based solely on the
trench data, a width on the order of only 52 m would be indicated. The site width based on
surface indications is thus more than three times that indicated by subsurface probes.
Both the surface collection data and trench observations show an increased density of
prehistoric cultural debris in the area of the right-of-way corresponding to Collection
Units 40 to 48. Interpretation of the geomorphic data indicates that a depressed area once
existed in this part of the study area. Modern land-leveling efforts resulted in about a
meter of relocated soil being deposited in the depression, bringing it up to level with the
rest of the field and grove. It is assumed that much of this redeposited soil was derived
from the higher elevation in the main site area to the south. It therefore contained

61

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

amounts of cultural debris comparable to those in the main site area. In the final analysis, it appears that modern land disturbances have spread evidence of prehistoric activity
from 230 m (based on surface indications) to 320 m (based on subsurface information) northward from the original site area. In its pristine state, the site occupied a long, narrow
band -- estimated to have been somewhere between 50 and 160 m in north-south width -paralleling the upper edge of the rise overlooking Sardinas Resaca. The processes that
resulted in the recent movement of between 40 and 95 cm of deposit from the site area
northward effectively preclude study of debris patterning on the site surface.
Test pit excavations produced no time-diagnostic prehistoric artifacts. They revealed
that from 50 to 70 cm of intact Zone II deposit was preserved in the site. Debris recovery
rates by 10-cm-thick excavation levels hinted at a distinct component or horizon within the
Zone II deposit, but it could not be confidently demonstrated or dated.
Very little can be said about the subsistence habits of the site's prehistoric occupants. Two small pieces of mussel shell were found in two test pits. Numerous Rabdotus
snail shells were recovered from all of the test pits. The mussel shells are taken as
reasonably good evidence of the use of mussels as food. The land snail shells are considered ambiguous evidence because they may have been concentrated in the site area through
either natural or cultural processes. A few fragments of burned snail shells collected
during the test pit excavations do not clarify the issue much as they, too, may simply have
been natural inclusions altered incidental to prehistoric fire-building activities on the
site. Vertebrate faunal remains were recovered only from the surface of 41HG118. Out of
11 bones fragments, only 3 were identifiable. They represent cow or bison and coyote or
dog. In both cases, modern animals likely are represented. From the projectile points and
scraping/cutting tools found, hunting of animals and subsequent processing of meat and
hides can be indirectly inferred. No grinding implements were found at 41HG118 to suggest
that people processed seeds or beans on the site.

Conclusions

The combined findings resulting from archeological and geomorphological studies at the
Sarindas Resaca Site reveal a prehistoric locality heavily damaged by modern land-surface
modifications. The site was originally situated along the crest of the rise overlooking
Sardinas Resaca to the south and a natural depression or low area to the north. The investigation of the portion of the site occurring in the ditch right-of-way took place within
40 m of the eastern extent of the surface scatter of prehistoric cultural debris. Evidence
of prehistoric human activity was found westward for a distance of 1.2 km and continued
beyond for an unknown distance. Thus, the overall east-west length of the site was never
established. The north-south width of the site in the ditch right-of-way may be as much as
160 m or as little as 50 m, depending upon which data set -- surface or subsurface -- is
used for definition.
Time-diagnostic chipped stone artifacts suggest that 41HG118 was occupied during the
late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods of the cultural sequence. This estimate is not
based on any hard data obtained from the site or more generally throughout the Rio Grande
Delta. Rather, it is derived through cross comparison of recovered diagnostic artifacts
with similar forms dated by relative and/or absolute means in adjacent regions of Texas and
Mexico. It is speculated that the human activities represented by the diagnostic artifacts

62

CHAPTER 5: TESTING OF THE SARDINAS RESACA SITE, 41HG18

known from 41HG118 occurred sometime between 400 B.C. and A.D. 1000. Radiocarbon assays of
humate samples collected from matrix containing in-situ prehistoric cultural debris have
yielded dates for accumulation of the deposits which are consistently older, by a reasonable and expectable margin, than the hypothesized period of cultural activity. Radiocarbon
assays on the humate content of soil samples collected at 41HG118 indicate that dune deposits began to accumulate in the area about 5,200 years ago. No earlier than 3,500 years ago
(ca. 1550 B.C.), human activity first occurred on the site and cultural debris was incorporated into the deposits. Eolian deposits and prehistoric cultural debris continued to
accumulate. However, due to the severity of modern ground disturbance, the rates and
periodicity of natural and cultural depositions could not be determined during the archeological investigation of the site.
The investigation at 41HG118 produced virtually no data from which specific components
of prehistoric human diet may be identified. Mussels and possibly large land snails are
suggested as sources of meat foods. Nothing else can be said. The severity of recent
surface and near-surface disturbances caused by land leveling and cultivation prohibit
consideration of intrasite patterning of prehistoric cultural activity.
Further, no
habitational features were defined in the subsurface.
Findings made at the Sardinas Resaca Site are useful in three respects. First, dating
and reconstruction of the landform containing the site will prove to be useful information
in the conduct of future research in the Rio Grande Delta. Recognition of the fact that
the rise along the north side of the resaca is primarily an eolian feature rather than a
levee is knowledge that will alter current perceptions of the local environment within
which prehistoric people were operating. Secondly, the artifact assemblage gathered from
the site is the most extensive controlled collection now available from one site in the Rio
Grande Delta. It provides examples of a broad range of chipped stone tools, preforms, and
by-products which will be useful to future researchers for comparative purposes. Finally,
the careful surface and subsurface studies done at this site demonstrate very clearly how
detrimental the effects of leveling, terracing, and cultivation have been on the shallowly
buried cultural resources typical of the Rio Grande Delta. These effects should be taken
into careful consideration when future research designs are formulated preparatory to
further field investigation of sites in the region.

63

CHAPTER 6

ASSESSMENTS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS

This chapter is divided into three sections, all of which relate to the identified
cultural resources that have been documented during the current effort and the previous
efforts over the past seven years. The first section, Assessments, addresses first the
regulatory management considerations for those sites and localities identified during the
current season of work, then reviews all previous site assessments in order to consolidate
the entire project findings into a cohesive unit. The second section, Recommendations,
addresses specific actions required to accomplish the management goals set forth in the
assessments. A plan of work is outlined that provides a mechanism for the continued
compliance with regulations through consideration of cultural resources.
The final
section, Conclusions, presents a brief statement regarding the findings made during the
current season of work.

Assessments

Regulatory management considerations require that sites be assessed in terms of their
eligibility for listing on the National Register of Historic Places. Since all the sites
recorded during this phase of work are archeological in nature, they are evaluated under
the provisions of Criterion D of the Secretary of the Interior's guidelines which include
sites ".
• that have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history." As has been repeatedly emphasized during all phases of work on the
Hidalgo-Willacy Drainage Project, the nature of most sites in the Rio Grande Delta renders
them very difficult to evaluate in terms of their scientific data potential, and this is
compounded by a lack of controlled excavations at substantial numbers of sites which could
be expected to provide a regional comparative data base. Consequently, five categories of
sites are defined on the basis of their known suitability for listing on the National
Register.
These categories are:
(1) eligible; (2) probably eligible; (3) possibly
eligible; (4) not eligible; and (5) indeterminate.
The eligible site (N = 1) is similar in characteristics to the probably eligible group
described below. It was determined eligible through an in-field concurrence between the
State Historic Preservation Officer and the Corps of Engineers.
Probably eligible sites (N = 4) are those distinguished by various combinations of
characteristics, including the presence of features such as burned clay lump concentrations
indicating probable hearth locations, vertebrate faunal remains, human burials, unusual
numbers and kinds of formal chipped stone tools or other artifacts, obvious culturally
relevant geomorphic data, and unusually great subsurface depth of cultural materials. As a
group, these sites appear to contain promising research potential in that they contain the
greatest quantity and diversity of cultural materials.
However, the lessons learned
through previous limited testing at 41WY71, 41WY72, 41WY84, and 41HG96 and the current
testing of 41HGll8 provoke a cautious approach to the assessment of research potential.
Thus, even though the sites in this group appear to be most promising, they are assessed as
probably eligible for listing on the National Register rather than definitely eligible.

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

The third category of sites (N = 13) consists of those assessed to be possibly
eligible for listing on the National Register. Each of these sites possesses one or more
of the characteristics listed in the first category, but their potential to yield significant information is not as readily apparent. Again, a cautious approach to assessment
suggests that until clearly demonstrable significance is established, they should be viewed
as only possibly eligible for National Register listing.
A fairly large group of sites (N = 28) is included in the fourth category which
consists of those sites assessed to be not eligible for listing on the National Register.
As a group, these sites yielded very few artifacts, lack vertebrate faunal remains, and
contain no identifiable features (such as hearths or burials). Any one of these sites
could, of course, later be found to indeed contain some significant information, but they
must be assessed on the basis of current data and in comparison to the other sites in the
sampling universe (e.g., the Hidalgo-Willacy Drainage Ditch and its constituent components). It could be argued further that these represent different kinds of sites than
those in the first two categories (e.g., temporary camps as opposed to semipermanent camps;
see Day et al. 1981), and therefore attain significance through the fact that they lack the
very attributes of those sites herein assessed to be of greater significance. The counterargument to this view is twofold. First, the material culture remains in this group of
sites (as presently known) are so sparse that additional investigations (e.g., testing or
excavations) are logistically and economically not feasible. Second, the currently existing data collected from these s:i,.tes (e.g., location, geomorphic setting, and kinds and
nature of the remains) may have in fact exhausted their practical information yield potential. Therefore, the sites in this group are assessed to be not eligible for National
Register listing.
For the most part, the sites contained in the categories described above are exposed
in the banks of existing segments of the ditches. Such exposure permitted the observations
necessary to assess the sites. In contrast, those sites located on unexcavated portions of
the ditch alignment frequently yielded too little evidence to permit conscientious evaluation of their potential. These sites (N = 9) are included in the fifth category of
indeterminate assessment. However, some sites on unexcavated segments were assessed to be
not eligible because of obvious severe modern disturbances, such as land leveling, which
greatly reduce information yield potential.
In summary, of the 55 sites recorded during the current season of work, 1 site is
assessed to be eligible for listing on the National Register, 4 are probably eligible, 13
are possibly eligible, 28 are not eligible, and 9 are indeterminate. These are listed by
environmental zones in Table 8.
Previous seasons of work on this project yielded information on 103 sites (N = 74) and
isolated finds (N = 29; these would now be treated as sites under current guidelines). Of
these, 74 were assessed as probably or possibly eligible for listing on the National
Register (N = 29) or indeterminate (N = 43). The original assessments and the current
assessments of these sites are summarized also in Table 8. The remaining 29 were assessed
to be not eligible for the National Register. Testing was conducted at three of the sites
assessed as potentially eligible for listing; 41WY71 and 41WY84 were found to be not
eligible (Day 1981), and 41WY72 was found to be eligible (Mercado-Allinger 1983). On the
basis of the 41WY84 findings, four other sites (41WY86, 41WY89, 41WY90, and 41WY91) were
judged to be not eligible for listing. Reinspection of these sites during the current
project produced concurring observations with one exception. Substantial concentrations of

66

CHAPTER 6: ASSESSMENTS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS

TABLE 8
NATIONAL REGISTER ASSESSMENTS* BY ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE

Site No.

Original
Assessment

Current
Assessment

Site No.

Original
Assessment

Current
Assessment

Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Not eligible
Indeterminate

41HG93
41HG94
41HG95
IFHW2 (HG)
IFHW3(HG)
IFHW4(HG)
IFHWS(HG)
IFHW7(HG)
IFHW8(HG)

Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Indeterminate

Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Indeterminate

Indeterminate
Not eligible
Prob. elig.
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.
Indeterminate

41HG98
41WY75
41WY76
41WY77
41WY85
41WY94(IF)
41WY95 (IF)
IFHWl(HG)
IFHW6(HG)

Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Indeterminate
Indeterminate

Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Indeterminate
Indeterminate

Indeterminate
Not eligible
Not eligible
Prob. elig.

41HG129
41HG130(IF)
41HG131 (IF)
41HG132 (IF)

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE I
1980-1983 Seasons
41HG38
41HG39
41HG40
41HG41
41HG86
41HG87
41HG88
41HG89
41HG92

Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Not eligible
Indeterminate

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE II
1980-1983 Seasons
41HG42
41HG81
41HG82
41HG83
41HG84
41HG85
41HG90
41HG91
41HG96
41HG97

Indeterminate
Not eligible
Prob. elig.
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.
Indeterminate

1986 Season
41HG123
41HG124
41HG126
41HG128
*Assessment Categories:

Not eligible
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Not eligible

Eligible = eligible for listing on National Register
Prob. elig. = probably eligible for listing on National Register
Poss. elig. = possibly eligible for listing on National Register
Not eligible = not eligible for listing on National Register
Indeterminate = eligibility assessment should be based on data
gathered during monitoring

67

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Table 8, continued
Site No.

Original
Assessment

Current
Assessment

Site No.

Original
Assessment

Current
Assessment

Not eligible
Not eligible
Poss. elig.
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Prob. elig.
Prob. elig.
Prob. elig.
Prob. elig.
Prob. elig.
Prob. elig.
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Prob. elig.
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Not eligible
Eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.

41WY80
41WY81
41WY82
41WY83
41WY84
41WY86
41WY87
41WY88
41WY89
41WY90
41WY91
41WY92(IF)
41WY93 (IF)
41WY96(IF)
41WY97 (IF)
41WY98 (IF)
41WY99(IF)
41WY100 (IF)
41WY10l(IF)
41WY102 (IF)
41WY103 (IF)
41WY104 (IF)
41WY105(IF)
IFHWll(WY)
IFHW12 (WY)
IFHW13 (WY)
IFHW14(WY)

Not eligible
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Not eligible
Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.
Not eligible
Not eligible
Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Indeterminate

Not eligible
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Prob. elig.
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Not eligible
Indeterminate

Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.
Prob. elig.
Prob. elig.
Not eligible

41WY124 (IF)
41WY125(IF)
41WY126 (IF)
41WY127(IF)
41WY128(IF)
41WY129 (IF)
41WY130(IF)
41WY131 (IF)
41WY132
41WY133

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE IV
1980-1983 Seasons
41WYS
41WY6
41WY7
41WY8
41WY34
41WY46
41WY49
41WY54
41WY55
41WY56
41WY58
41WY61
41WY62
41WY63
41WY64
41WY65
41WY66
41WY67
41WY68
41WY69
41WY70
41WY71
41WY72
41WY73
41WY74
41WY78
41WY79

Not eligible
Not eligible
Poss. elig.
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Prob. elig.
Prob. elig.
Prob. elig.
Prob. elig.
Prob. elig.
Prob. elig.
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Prob. elig.
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.
Prob. elig.
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.

1986 Season
41HG133
41HG134
41WY107
41WY108
41WY109
41WY110
41WY111
41WY112
41WY113
41WY114

68

Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Poss. elig.
Not eligible

CHAPTER 6: ASSESSMENTS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS

Table 8, continued
Site No.

Original
Assessment

Current
Assessment

Site No.

Original
Assessment

Current
Assessment

1986 Season, continued
41WY115
41WY116
41WY117
41WY118
41WY119
41WY120
41WY121
41WY122
41WY123 (IF)

Not eligible
Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Poss. elig.
Not eligible
Not eligible

41WY134
41WY135
41WY136
41WY13 7
41WY138
41WY139
41WY140
41WY141

Indeterminate
Not eligible
Prob. elig.
Indeterminate
Indeterminate

41WY53
41WY57
41WY59
41WY60
IFHWlS(WY)

Indeterminate

41HG127

Not eligible

IFHWlO(HG)

Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Eligible
Indeterminate

41HG120
41HG121
41HG122
41HG125

Poss. elig.
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Prob. elig.
Not eligible

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE VI
1980-1983 Seasons
41WY47
41WY48
41WY50
41WY51
41WY52

Indeterminate
Not eligible
Prob. elig.
Indeterminate
Indeterminate

Poss. elig.
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Prob. elig.
Not eligible

Poss. elig.
Indeterminate
Poss. elig.
Prob. elig.
Not eligible

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE VIII
1986 Season
41HG115

Not eligible

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE IX
1980-1983 Seasons
IFHW9(HG)

Not eligible

Indeterminate

Indeterminate

1986 Season
41HG116
41HG117
41HG118
41HG119

69

Poss. elig.
Poss. elig.
Not eligible
Not eligible

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

burned clay lumps and faunal remains were observed in the ditch walls at 41WY90, indicating
that it does potentially contain significant information. The original assessment of
probably eligible for listing is reinstated for this site.
Four other sites (41HG84, 41HG86, 41WY73, and 41WY74) assessed to be of indeterminate
eligibility were examined during the current season. All are now assessed to be not
eligible for listing on the National Register. For all other sites, whether still within
the ditch alignment or off the right-of-way, the original assessments remain unchanged.
The current assessments of the previously recorded sites are summarized as follows: 1 site
(41WY72) eligible for listing on the National Register; 4 sites probably eligible; 11 sites
possibly eligible; 48 sites not eligible; and 39 sites indeterminate.
To summarize all assessments to date for the 158 sites and isolated finds, 2 sites
(41WY72 and 41HGll8) are eligible for listing on the National Register, 15 are probably
eligible, 25 are possibly eligible, 68 are not eligible, and 48 are of indeterminate
eligibility (Table 9).

Recommendations

The various categories of site assessments each require different treatment in terms
of recommended actions to accomplish management objectives. This section is organized in
reverse order to the previous section; that is, recommendations are first presented for the
cumulative inventory of sites, then these are grouped according to the status of the work
required and/or already accomplished, and finally, a unified plan of work to carry out the
recommendations is presented.
The 158 sites and isolated finds recorded to date are listed by environmental zone and
by season of work (1980 through 1983, and 1986 or current season) in Table 10. The current
recommendations and status are given for each site. Recommendations are stated as one of
four alternatives: (1) avoidance; (2) testing to determine eligibility for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP Test); (3) monitor; or (4) none. Avoidance is
suggested in the case of historic cemeteries and at sites where it appears that the ditch
is over 0.5 km distant. The second alternative, NRHP Test, means that sufficient test
excavations should be conducted to demonstrate whether or not the site does indeed possess
research potential that qualifies it for listing on the National Register. This recommendation is given for the 40 sites assessed to be probably or possibly eligible for listing.
The third alternative, monitor, means that the site should be reinspected after the ditch
has been constructed and the ditch walls have weathered for at least three months, except
in the case of sites in Environmental Zone 6. There, monitoring means that the sites
should be inspected periodically for evidence of erosion/deposition in the outfall area.
Monitoring is recommended for the 48 sites assessed as indeterminate for National Register
listing. A final assessment should be made on the basis of these findings. The fourth
alternative, none, means that further work is not expected to be scientifically productive
at this time. This recommendation is given for the 68 sites assessed to be not eligible
for listing on the basis of the investigations to date. It should be clearly understood
that any of these sites later could be found to contain significant information (e.g.,
burials or other features) that would result in a reassessment of their research potential.

70

CHAPTER 6: ASSESSMENTS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS

TABLE 9
SUMMARY OF CUMULATIVE SITE ASSESSMENTS, NATIONAL REGISTER ELIGIBILITY
Assessment

Site Numbers

Eligible (N = 2):

41HG118

Probably Eligible (N = 15):

41HG82

41WY50

41WY58

41WY112

41HG128

41WY54

41WY60

41WY113

41WY46

41WY55

41WY63

41WY140

41WY49

41WY56

41WY90

41HG88

41WY53

41WY79

41HG91

41WY59

41WY108

41WY121

41HG96

41WY67

41WY109

41WY132

Possibly Eligible (N = 25):

41WY72

41WY117

41HG120

41WY70

41WY110

41WY134

41HG121

41WY77

41WY111

41WY137

41WY7

41WY78

41WY116

41WY139

41HG38

41HG97

41WY57

41WY136

41HG39

41HG98

41WY61

41WY138

41HG41

41HG115

41WY62

IFHWl

41WY34
Indeterminate (N = 48):

Not Eligible (N = 68) :

Ii

41HG42

41HG116

41WY64

IFHW2

41HG83

41HG117

41WY65

IFHW4

41HG85

41HG119

41WY66

IFHW5

41HG87

41HG123

41WY68

IFHW6

41HG90

41HG130

41WY69

IFHW8

41HG92

41WY8

41WY75

IFHWlO

41HG93

41WY47

41WY76

IFHWll

41HG94

41WY51

41WY81

IFHW12

41HG95

41WY52

41WY135

IFHW14

41HG40

41WY48

41WY95

41WY122

41HG81

41WY71

41WY96

41WY123

41HG84

41WY73

41WY97

41WY124

41HG86

41WY74

41WY98

41WY125

41HG89

41WY80

41WY99

41WY126

41HG122

41WY82

41WY100

41WY127

41HG124

41WY83

41WY101

41WY128

41HG125

41WY84

41WY102

41WY129

41HG126

41WY85

41WY103

41WY130

41HG127

41WY86

41WY104

41WY131

41HG129

41WY87

41WY105

41WY133

41HG131

41WY88

41WY107

41WY141

41HG132

41WY89

41WY114

IFHW3

41HG133

41WY91

41WY115

IFHW7

41HG134

41WY92

41WY118

IFHW9

41WY5

41WY93

41WY119

IFHW13

41WY6

41WY94

41WY120

IFHW15

!!?

I

??

II

~I

71

/11td. ilZeae.a!U'.A.
L~;

I

..1.................................................................j

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 10
CURRENT RECOMMENDATIONS AND SITE STATUS BY ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE

Site No.

Recommendation*

Status**

Site No.

Recommendation

Status

To be done
To be done
Off ditch
To be done
Completed/none
Avoided/off ditch
Avoided/off ditch/
to be done
Off ditch
To be done

41HG93
41HG94
41HG95
IFHW2(HG)
IFHW3(HG)
IFHW4 (HG)
IFHWS(HG)
IFHW7(HG)
IFHW8(HG)

Monitor
Monitor
Monitor
Monitor
None
Monitor
Monitor
None
Monitor

To be done
To be done
To be done
Avoided/off ditch
Off ditch
Avoided/off ditch
To be done
Near ditch
To be done

Completed/off
ditch
Off ditch
Avoided/off ditch
Avoided/off ditch
Completed/none
Avoided/off ditch
To be done (SWL)
To be done (SWL)
To be done (SWL)
To be done (SWL)

41HG98
41WY75
41WY76
41WY77

Monitor
Monitor
Monitor
NRHP Test

To be done (SWL)
Avoided/off ditch
Avoided/off ditch
Avoided/off ditch/
to be done

41WY85
41WY94(IF)
41WY95(IF)
IFHWl(HG)
IFHW6 (HG)

None
None
None
Monitor
Monitor

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE I
1980-1983 Seasons
41HG38
41HG39
41HG40
41HG41
41HG86
41HG87
41HG88

Monitor
Monitor
None
Monitor
Monitor
Monitor
NRHP Test

41HG89
41HG92

None
Monitor

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE II
1980-1983 Seasons
41HG42

Monitor

41HG81
41HG82
41HG83
41HG84
41HG85
41HG90
41HG91
41HG96
41HG97

None
Avoid
Monitor
Monitor
Monitor
Monitor
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
Monitor

*Recommendation Categories are:

NRHP Test

Avoided/off ditch
To be done

= testing

required to determine if eligible
for listing on National Register
Monitor = reexamine for additional NRHP data following
ditch construction
None = further work is not expected to be scientifically
productive at this time
Avoid = historic cemeteries or previously recorded sites
probably eligible for listing on the National
Register; located near ditch alignment but not
in right-of-way

**Abbreviations in parentheses indicate those sites in the outfall area (OF), along the
El Sauz segment of the South Main Channel (SMC), and on the Southwest Lateral (SWL).
72

CHAPTER 6: ASSESSMENTS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS

Table 10, continued
Site No.

Recommendation

Status

Site No.

Recommendation

41HG129
41HG130(IF)
41HG13l(IF)
41HG132 (IF)

None
Monitor
None
None

41WY79
41WY80
41WY81
41WY82
41WY83
41WY84
41WY86
41WY87
41WY88
41WY89
41WY90
41WY91
41WY92 (IF)
41WY93 (IF)
41WY96 (IF)
41WY97(IF)
41WY98(IF)
41WY99(IF)
41WY100 (IF)
41WY10l(IF)
41WY102 (IF)
41WY103 (IF)
41WY104(IF)
41WY105 (IF)
IFHWll(WY)
IFHW12(WY)
IFHW13 (WY)
IFHW14(WY)

Avoid
None
Monitor
None
None
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
None
None
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Monitor
Monitor
None
Monitor

Status

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE II, continued
1986 Season
41HG123
41HG124
41HG126
41HG128

Monitor
None
None
NRHP Test

To be done

To be done

To be done

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE IV
1980-1983 Seasons
41WYS
41WY6
41WY7

None
None
NRHP Test

41WY8
41WY34

Monitor
Avoid/
monitor
Avoid
Avoid
Avoid
Avoid
Avoid
Avoid
Monitor
Monitor
NRHP Test
Monitor
Monitor
Monitor
NRHP Test
Monitor
Monitor
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
Monitor
Monitor
NRHP Test

41WY46
41WY49
41WY54
41WY55
41WY56
41WY58
41WY61
41WY62
41WY63
41WY64
41WY65
41WY66
41WY67
41WY68
41WY69
41WY70
41WY71
41WY72
41WY73
41WY74
41WY78

Off ditch
Off ditch
Avoided/off ditch/
to be done
Avoided/off ditch
Avoided/off ditch
Avoided/off ditch
Avoided/off ditch
Avoided/off ditch
Avoided/off ditch
Avoided/off ditch
Avoided/off ditch
To be done
To be done (SMC)
To be done (SMC)
To be done (SMC)
To be done (SMC)
To be done (SMC)
To be done (SMC)
To be done (SMC)
To be done (SMC)
To be done (SMC)
Completed/none
Completed/avoided
Completed/none
Completed/none
Avoided/off ditch/
to be done

73

Avoided/ off ditch
Off ditch
To be done

Completed/none
Canceled/none

Canceled/none
To be done
Canceled/none

To be done
To be done (SMC)
Avoided/off ditch

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Table 10, continued
Site No.

Recommendation

Status

Site No.

Recomrnendation

Status

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE IV, continued
1986 Season
41HG133
41HG134
41WY107
41WY108
41WY109
41WY110
41WY111
41WY112
41WY113
41WY114
41WY115
41WY116
41WY117
41WY118
41WY119
41WY120
41WY121
41WY122
41WY123(IF)

None
None
None
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
None
None
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
None
None
None
NRHP Test
None
None

41WY124 (IF)
41WY125 (IF)
41WY126(IF)
41WY127(IF)
41WY128(IF)
41WY129 (IF)
41WY130(IF)
41WY131 (IF)
41WY132
41WY133
41WY134
41WY135
41WY136
41WY137
41WY138
41WY139
41WY140
41WY141

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
NRHP Test
None
NRHP Test
Monitor
Monitor
NRHP Test
Monitor
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
None

To be done (OF)
To be done (OF)
To be done (OF)

41WY53
41WY57
41WY59
41WH60
IFHWlS(WY)

NRHP Test
Monitor
NRHP Test
NRHP Test
None

To be done

41HG127

None

To
To
To
To
To
To

be
be
be
be
be
be

done
done
done
done
done
done

To be done
To be done

To be done

To be done
To
To
To
To
To
To
To

be
be
be
be
be
be
be

done
done
done
done
done
done
done

To
To
To
To

be
be
be
be

done
done
done
done

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE VI
1980-1983 Seasons
41WY47
41WY48
41WY50
41WY51
41WY52

Monitor
None
NRHP Test
Monitor
Monitor

To be done (OF)

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE VIII
1986 Season
41HG115

Monitor

74

(OF)
(OF)
(OF)
(OF)

CHAPTER 6: ASSESSMENTS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS

Table 10, continued
Site No.

Recommendation

Status

Site No.

Recommendation

Status

IFHWlO(HG)

Monitor

To be done

41HG120
41HG121
41HG122
41HG125

NRHP Test
NRHP Test
None
None

To be done
To be done

ENVIRONMENTAL ZONE IX
1980-1983 Seasons
IFHW9(HG)

None

1986 Season
41HG116
41HG117
41HG118
41HG119

Monitor
Monitor
NRHP Test
Monitor

To be done
To be done
Completed
To be done

The status of each site is stated in terms of whether the recommendation has been
carried out or is yet to be done, whether the site is still within the ditch right-of-way,
the specific action already taken, or combinations of these situations. National Register
testing has been completed at four sites (41WY71, 41WY72, 41WY84, and 41HG118); two of
these (41WY72 and 41HG118) were found to be eligible for listing, while the.other two
(41WY71 and 41WY84) were found to be not eligible. Site 41WY72 was avoided by realigning
the ditch right-of-way, while site 41HG118 could not be avoided and data recovery was
undertaken to mitigate the loss of important information. National Register testing at
four sites (41WY86, 41WY89, 41WY90, and 41WY91) was canceled on the basis of findings at
41WY84. Monitoring has provided supporting evidence for this decision except in the case
of 41WY90, where it was found that the site does indeed appear to warrant testing for an
eligibility determination. Monitoring recommended at five other sites (41WY42, 41WY73,
41WY74, 41HG84, and 41HG86) has been completed; none of them yielded positive results, and
further monitoring is felt to be unnecessary.
Twenty-three sites recommended for either avoidance, NRHP testing, or monitoring are
now out of the right-of-way; these are noted as "off ditch" or "near ditch." While no
further action is required at these sites in connection with the current project, the
recommendations should be carried out in the event future land modification projects
endanger the sites. A large group consisting of 64 sites remains where the recommendations
for NRHP testing or monitoring have not yet been conducted. These should form the sampling
matrix from which the next phase of treatment should be developed. A summary of the
current status of the recommendations is given in Table 11.
Some of these sites, particulary 41HG91 and 41HG96, may not be within the final ditch
alignment. It is suggested that work at these and other sites along the Southwest Lateral
ditch segment be delayed until such time as the construction route is better defined. At
that time 1 the selected route, or relevant portions thereof, should be surveyed and
National Register testing conducted at the appropriate sites if any are found to be within
the construction corridor.

75

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 11
SUMMARY OF SITE STATUS
Site Numbers

Status

Recommendations Completed (N
Tested for NRHP (n

= 35)

= 4):

NRHP Testing Canceled (n

= 3):

41HG118

41WY71

41WY72

41WY86

41WY89

41WY91

41WY84

Monitored, No Work (n

= 5):

41HG42
41HG84

41HG86

41WY73

41WY74

Avoided, Off Ditch (n

= 23):

41HG82
41HG83
41HG85
41HG87
41HG88
41WY7

41WY8
41WY34
41WY46
41WY49
41WY54
41WY55

41WY56
41WY58
41WY75
41WY76
41WY77
41WY78

41WY79
IFHWl
IFHW2
IFHW4
IFHW14

41HG91
41HG96
41HG120
41HG121
41HG128
41WY50
41WY53

41WY59
41WY60
41WY63
41WY67
41WY70
41WY90
41WY108

41WY109
41WY110
41WY111
41WY112
41WY113
41WY116
41WY117

41WY121
41WY132
41WY134
41WY137
41WY139
41WY140

41HG38
41HG39
41HG41
41HG90
41HG92
41HG93
41HG94
41HG95
41HG97
41HG98

41HG115
41HG116
41HG117
41HG119
41HG123
41HG130
41WY47
41WY51
41WY52

41WY57
41WY61
41WY62
41WY64
41WY65
41WY66
41WY68
41WY69
41WY81

41WY135
41WY136
41WY138
IFHW5
IFHW6
IFHWB
IFHWlO
IFHWll
IFHW12

Recommendations Not Completed (N
Test for NRHP (n

Monitor (n

= 37):

= 27):

= 64)

76

CHAPTER 6: ASSESSMENTS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS

Nine of the 27 sites recommended for National Register testing were identified during
work sponsored by the Corps of Engineers; these sites are: 41HG91, 41HG96, 41WYSO, 41WYS3,
41WYS9, 41WY60, 41WY63, 41WY67, and 41WY70. As noted above, the first two of these eventually may be found to be "off ditch" and not directly affected by the project. At the
remaining seven sites, the Corps should decided whether to proceed with their originally
proposed NRHP testing program. At the 18 sites recorded during work conducted by the local
sponsor, it is recommended that a sample of 7 sites be selected for initial National
Register testing. Selection of the specific seven sites to be tested should be made
through consultation among the Corps of Engineers, the State Historic Preservation Officer,
Hidalgo County Drainage District No. 1, Willacy County Drainage District No. 1, and the
archeological contractor for this project.
It is recommended that testing consist of four specific procedures: (1) geomorphic/
stratigraphic study and interpretation of the sites as they are exposed in the ditch walls;
(2) collection and radiocarbon assay of humate or other appropriate samples to obtain
chronometric dates from culturally relevant strata; (3) hand excavation of an average of 4
m square in each site and utilizing maximum advantage of features exposed in existing ditch
walls; and (4) opportunistic collection of additional materials that may be exposed in the
profiles created by the ditch. It is further recommended that monitoring of the 37 sites
identified in Table 11 be conducted as may be practical in view of the status of construction of various segments of the ditch. It can be expected that some sites now recommended
for monitoring will require National Register testing subsequent to ditch construction,
although it may be found that none will qualify for that level of investigation.
These two activities, National Register testing and monitoring, constitute Phase II as
described in the current contract for this work. Included with the basic assessment
activities are continued geomorphological, paleontological, and chronometric analyses, and
ethnohistorical analysis. The results and findings made during Phase II will determine
whether Phase III, data recovery, is appropriate or necessary.

Conclusions

The fact that much of the drainage ditch system already has been constructed also
means that most of the sites now under consideration for additional investigations are
manifested by cultural debris exposed in the sides of ditch walls. This situation graphically demonstrates the impact that excavation of the ditches has had on the sites through
which they pass. However, the vertical profiles through subsurface site deposits provide
an unusual archeological situation. The structure and stratification of deposits containing the sites are visible in the ditch walls. In some of the sites, exposed concentrations
of burned clay lumps are believed to be evidence of prehistoric habitational features.
These profile cuts and visible buried features can be used to good advantage, even though
the sites obviously already have been damaged by construction of the ditch.
Study of the ditch walls in and near prehistoric sites is expected to yield information concerning the geomorphic setting at the time of occupation. Further, careful
examination of the relationship between cultural debris and depositional strata may provide
badly needed cultural-chronological data. As observed in preceding discussions, dating of
prehistoric human activity on Rio Grande Delta sites has not yet been satisfactorily accomplished. Hope for progress in this area of research is based on the successful application

77

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

of radiocarbon assay techniques to soil humate samples collected at 41HG118, as discussed
in Chapter 5. The results achieved at this one site indicate that projectwide collection
of humate samples from appropriate archeologic and geomorphic contexts will yield radiocarbon assays providing ages for landform development and cultural activity at sites along
the ditch system. A primary value of the existing ditches lies in their potential to
reveal locations and contexts most suitable for humate sampling with these objectives in
mind.
Burned clay lump concentrations, noted occasionally on site surfaces but more often in
subsurface exposures, are virtually the only prehistoric habitational features now defined
at prehistoric sites along the ditch. Assuming that these features represent loci around
which prehistoric peoples concentrated their activities, they constitute focal points for
limited, controlled excavations. Two conditions common to Rio Grande Delta prehistoric
sites lend importance to the visibility of burned clay lump features. The destructive
effects of modern land alteration have been amply illustrated (Collins et al. 1969; Chapter
5, this report). At sites as demonstrably shallow as are most dealt with in this study, it
is reasonable to assume that some degree of postdepositional disturbance of cultural debris
has occurred at all of these sites. In this case, the presence of burned clay lump
features in subsurface deposits at a site provides an indication that modern disturbance
has not been so severe as to disintegrate or otherwise render unrecognizable these relatively fragile items.
A second circumstance revealed by test excavations conducted at three prehistoric
sites along the ditch system is that cultural debris recovery rates per cubic meter of
excavated deposit are extremely low. No durable artifacts having potential as time diagnostics have been recovered from dated subsurface contexts. No recognized habitational
features have been encountered, and only one radiocarbon age had been obtained (from assay
of human bone) prior to the dates reported here from the Sardinas Resaca Site (Day 1981;
Prewitt 1981; Mercado-Allinger 1983). No appreciable progress has been made in dating site
occupations and related durable artifacts because so little carbon, bones, or other datable
materials have been found. The test excavations reported by Day (1981), Mercado-Allinger
(1983), and at Sardinas Resaca (Chapter 5, this volume) took place on sites where only
surface indications and/or observations permitted by limited backhoe trenching were available to influence the placement of test units at locations where the most productive
results might be expected. This approach has not provided the hoped for results. In large
part, the failure may be attributed to the generally sparse nature of subsurface cultural
debris. Where surface indications are relied upon to dictate test pit locations, it is
likely that the effects of modern land disturbance are biasing the archeologist's perception of where the most intensive prehistoric human activity actually occurred. Such bias
resulting from land leveling and cultivation has now been documented widely across the
delta at sites such as Floyd Morris (north of Harlingen) and Sardinas Resaca (south of
Mission). At both of these locations, modern disturbance was so severe that attempts at
studying prehistoric human behavior based on surface debris distributions would have been
useless, if not totally misleading. In short, surface indications and backhoe trenching
have proven unreliable as methods of generating the kinds of information necessary to
extract useful data from sites on the Rio Grande Delta.
Given the circumstances discussed above, attention is again called to known burned
clay lump concentrations observed eroding from the banks at a number of prehistoric sites
intersected by the ditches. The problem of isolating domestic features within sites is
immediately solved. The visible subsurface feature provides a focal point around which

78

CHAPTER 6: ASSESSMENTS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS

controlled excavations could most profitably occur. In promoting careful study of exposed
burned clay lump concentrations, the premise is that there is more human habitational
debris immediately around these features than there is in adjacent areas where debris is
sparsely distributed and no habitational features are apparent. It appears that excavations conducted to date have sampled only those areas of sparse debris scatter in the
sites. A further immediate advantage of working with features visible in the ditch banks
is that they can be confidently related to stratigraphic or geomorphic features revealed in
the same cuts. Assuming continued success with radiocarbon assay of humate samples, it is
expected that the ages of such features can be reliably narrowed through their contextual
relationships with dated deposits. Verification of humate dates through thermoluminescent
dating of constituent burned clay lumps in the features also should be seriously considered. It is further possible that excavations in and around burned clay lump features will
yield carbon, bones, and/or shells suitable for radiocarbon assays. If found, it is hoped
that such materials will be accompanied by durable artifacts with time-diagnostic potential. Animal bones, carbon, and shells hold additional potential to reveal prehistoric
environmental conditions and human subsistence pursuits.
The trend of the Hidalgo-Willacy Drainage Ditch system across the Rio Grande Delta
landscape is such that data representing the full sequence of prehistoric human activity
probably will not be encountered. Crossing several diverse environmental zones, the ditch
system nevertheless falls roughly midway between areas of the delta where similar intensive
prehistoric activities have been demonstrated, such as near the coast (Prewitt 1974) and in
the sand sheets to the north (Mallouf et al. 1977). However, the system approaches the
modern Rio Grande Valley only marginally. This valley proper is an area which has received
negligible archeological scrutiny. It is speculated that the oldest evidence of local
prehistoric activity is buried in deep alluvial deposits near the river. Cultural debris
in sites thus far recorded along the ditches is rarely buried more than 40 cm below the
modern ground surface. One interpretation of the shallow depth is that zones traversed by
the ditch were not occupied until relatively late in the prehistoric cultural sequence.
Certain durable artifact types, al though certainly not yet recognized as reliable time
diagnostics, suggest that human activity on these sites occurred only in late Archaic and
Late Prehistoric times, and the single radiocarbon assay presently available from one of
these shallow sites yielded a date in the fifteenth century A.D. (Prewitt 1981). An alternative explanation for the shallowness of these delta sites is that depositional rates away
from the valley proper were extremely slow. If this is the case, human activity may have
occurred on the sites much earlier than is now thought, and the residues of this activity
simply were not buried at rates that might be expected in other situations. While the
sites along the ditch may not be truly representative of all that occur on the delta (e.g.,
sites earlier than late Archaic seem to be lacking), it should be possible to substantially
improve the cultural-chronological sequence.
With respect to prehistoric settlement
patterns, determination of when and for how long sites along the ditch were occupied will
represent a major advance. Beyond projected improvements in the cultural-chronological
sequence, recovery of potentially time-diagnostic artifacts and subsistence remains would
also make a valuable contribution to current knowledge of prehistoric lifeways on the
delta. The geomorphic data which can be gathered along the ditches should contribute
significantly to modern conceptions of the character and development of the landscapes over
which prehistoric peoples ranged. These are the kinds of data that intensive investigations of sites along the ditch are expected to yield. It is believed that the existing
research design and the specific procedures proposed here represent an efficient, costeffective, and productive approach to mitigating cultural resource loss brought on by the
drainage improvements that are being made in Hidalgo and Willacy counties.

79

H\DALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

While the survey data generated during the current project cannot be expected to
answer the seasonality and other questions posed in the research design, they do support
previous findings regarding site locations. It is expected that the greater details
gathered from specific sites during Phase II (and Phase III if it is required) will begin
to provide some of the basic pieces needed to solve the many riddles now surrounding the
archeology of the Rio Grande Delta region.

80

REFERENCES CITED

Anderson, A. E.
Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region.
1932
and Paleontological Society 4:29-31.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological

Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, A. Lo, D. L. Karney, C. P. Zlatkovitch, and
M. E. Bonine
Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.
1973
Bagnold, R. A.
1954
The Physics of Blown Sand and Desert Dunes.

Methven, London.

Barnes, V. E.
Geologic Atlas of Texas, McAllen-Brownsville Sheet.
1976
The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.

Bureau of Economic Geology,

Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.

Brown, L. F., Jr., J. L. Brewton, T. J. Evans, J. H. McGowen, W. A. White, C. G. Groat, and
W. L. Fisher
1980
Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal Zone -- Brownsville-Harlingen
Area. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife
1973
Birds of Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
Butzer, K. W.
1982
Archaeology as Human Ecology.

Department of the Interior,

Cambridge University Press, New York.

Campbell, T. N., and T. J. Campbell
1981
Historic Indian Groups of the Choke Canyon Reservoir and Surrounding Area,
Southern Texas. Choke Canyon Series 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Campbell, T. N., and Jack Q. Frizzell
1949
Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas.
Archeological and Paleontological Society 20:63-72.
Carr, John T., Jr.
1969
The Climate and Physiography of Texas.
Board, Austin.

Report 53.

Bulletin of the Texas

Texas Water Development

Cason, J. F.
1952
Report on Archeological Salvage in Falcon Reservoir, Season of 1952.
the Texas Archeological Society 23:218-259.

Bulletin of

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Collins, M. B., T. R. Hester, and F. A. Weir
Part I: The Floyd Morris Site (41CF2), a Prehistoric Cemetery in Cameron County,
1969
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-146.
Correll, D. s., and M. C. Johnston
1970
Manual of the Vascular Plants of Texas.
Texas.

Texas Research Foundation, Renner,

Damon, P. E., C. W. Ferguson, A. Long, and E. I. Wallick
1974
Dendrochronological Calibration of the Radiocarbon
Antiquity 39(2):350-366.

Time

Scale.

American

Day, D. William
1981
An Assessment of Archeological Sites 41WY71 and 41WY72, Willacy County, Texas.
Reports of Investigations 17. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Day, D. William, Jane Laurens-Day, and Elton R. Prewitt
1981
Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy
Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 15. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Hall, Grant D., Stephen L. Black, and Carol Graves
1982
Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase
.!. Findings. Choke Canyon Series 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hartle, D. D., and R. L. Stephenson
1951
Archaeological Investigations at the Falcon Reservoir, Starr County, Texas.
Mimeographed report on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Hester, Thomas R.
1969
Part III: The Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites: A Discussion of Burial Practices in
the Rio Grande Valley and the Lower Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 40:157-166.
1973

Hunters and Gatherers of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower Coast of Texas.
Paper presented at the 74th (1971) annual meeting of the Texas Academy of
Science, Nacogdoches, Texas.

Holz, Robert K., and Elton R. Prewitt
1980
Map notes. On file, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
1981

Airphoto Analysis. Appendix III in Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in
Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas, by D. William Day, Jane LaurensDay, and Elton R. Prewitt, pp. 163-183. Reports of Investigations 15. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Howard, Margaret, and M. B. Collins
1986
Field notes and site record forms. On file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

82

REFERENCES CITED

Inglis, Jack M.
1964
~ History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain.
Wildlife Department, Austin.

Bulletin 45.

Texas Parks and

Johnston, Marshall C.
1955
Vegetation of the Eolian Plain and Associated Coastal Features of Southern Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Botany, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Kotter, Steven M.
1980
Archeological Assessments at Site 41ZP73, Falcon State Recreation Area, Zapata
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 9. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Krieger, Alex D., and Jack T. Hughes
1950
Archeological Salvage in the Falcon Reservoir Area: Progress Report ~- Mimeograph. On file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1947
A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas.

American Anthropologist 13(1):1-15.

Mallouf, Robert J., Barbara J. Baskin, and Kay L. Killen
1977
A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,
Texas. Survey Report 23. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
Mercado-Allinger, Patricia A.
1983
Survey, Testing, and Assessment of Cultural Resources in Portions of Willacy
County Drainage District No. ~, Willacy County, Texas. Reports of Investigations
20. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Olson, G. w.
1976
Criteria for Making and Interpreting ~ Soil Profile Description.
State Geological Survey of Kansas, University of Kansas, Lawrence.

Bulletin 212.

Prewitt, Elton R.
Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Rio Grande Delta Area of Texas.
1974
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45:55-65.
1981

Radiocarbon Dating. Appendix VIII in Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments
in Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas, by D. William Day, Jane
Laurens-Day, and Elton R. Prewitt, pp. 411-416. Reports of Investigations 15.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Price, W. A.
1958
Sedimentology and Quaternary Geomorphology of South Texas.
tion of Geological Societies, Transactions 8:41-75.

83

Gulf Coast Associa-

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Rawn-Schatzinger, Viola
198la
Environmental Background. Appendix II in Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas, by D. William Day, Jane
Laurens-Day, and Elton R. Prewitt, pp. 141-162. Reports of Investigations 15.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
198lb

Faunal Analysis. Appendix VII in Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in
Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas, by D. William Day, Jane LaurensDay, and Elton R. Prewitt, pp. 391-409. Reports of Investigations 15. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Ruecking, Frederick, Jr.
1953
The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of
Northeastern Mexico. Texas Journal of Science 5:480-497.

Southern

Texas

and

Salinas, Martin
1986
Historic Indian Populations of the Rio Grande Delta and Vicinity: An Approach to
Definition of Basic Ethnic Units. Unpublished master's thesis, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Sayles, E. B.
1935
An Archaeological Survey of Texas.
Arizona.

Medallion Papers 17.

Sellards, E. H., W. s. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932
The Geology of Texas, Volume ~: Stratigraphy.
Texas at Austin.

Gila Pueblo, Globe,

Bulletin 3232.

The University of

Shafer, H. J., and T. R. Hester
1971
?:_ Study of the Function and Technology of Certain Bifacial Tools from Southern
Texas.
Archeological Report 20.
Texas Historical Survey Committee, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

----

Soil Survey Staff
Soil Taxonomy: ?:_ Basic System of Soil Classification for Making and Interpreting
1973
Soil Surveys. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Archeological Society 25 (entire volume).
Troike, Rudolph C.
1962
Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography.
32(for 1961):57-63.

of

the

Texas

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1985
?:_ Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Austin.

84

Bulletin

Texas Monthly Press, Inc.,

REFERENCES CITED

U.S. Army Engineer District, Galveston
1979
Draft Environmental Impact Statement. By Hidalgo County Drainage District No. 1
for flood control and major drainage improvements in Willacy and Hidalgo
counties, Texas.
Weir, Frank A.
1956
Surface Artifacts from La Perdida, Starr County, Texas.
Archeological Society 27:59-78.

Bulletin of the Texas

Winkler, Dale
1981
Faunal Analysis. Appendix II in An Assessment of Archeological Sites 41WY71 and
41WY72, Willacy County, Texas, by D. William Day, pp. 60-61.
Reports of
Investigations 17. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

85

APPENDIX 1:

Site Descriptions

Grant D. Hall

INTRODUCTION

The following infomation concerning the 55 prehistoric and historic sites recorded
during the survey is extracted from the State of Texas Archeological Site Data Foms filled
out for each site and submitted to the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory of The
University of Texas at Austin. Infomation taken from field notes by E. R. Prewitt (1985)
and site records produced by Margaret Howard and M. B. Collins (Howard and Collins 1986) is
denoted by these citations following appropriate site numbers. Much of the descriptive
information presented for these sites is taken almost verbatim from the notes and other
records of these researchers.

HIDALGO COUNTY

41HG115 (Howard and Collins 1986)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

40.8 m (134 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

VIII

USGS Mission, Texas 7.5' (1963, photorevised 1983)

Location: This site is located in a citrus orchard north of Mission and 0.8 km northnortheast of the intersection of State Highway 107 and FM 495.
Description: This site is a diffuse scatter of lithics within an orchard on the back
of the second terrace of the Rio Grande. Most of the cultural materials were found in one
concentration at the north end of the site. The area containing the site has been extensively disturbed by agricultural activities.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

70 m northwest-southeast, 10 m northeast-southwest.
Unknown

Materials Observed: Split pebble, thin biface (possible Catan dart point), flakes,
burned rocks, and burned clay lump.
Collections: Flakes and thin biface.
Archaic period occupation.

The possible Catan dart point suggests an

Discussion: There is insufficient information on this site to permit an evaluation of
its potential to contain important infomation.
Assessment: National Register of Historic Places eligibility cannot be determined on
the basis of survey data.
Recommendations:
drainage ditch.

The site area should be monitored subsequent to construction of the

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

41HG116 (Howard and Collins 1986)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

±33.5 m (±110 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IX

USGS Mission 7.5' (1963, photorevised 1983)

Location: This site is southeast of Mission. It was observed along the west side of
a drainage ditch on the south side of U.S. Highway 83, heading south-southwest from a point
2 km east of the intersection of FM 1016 and U.S. Highway 83.
Description: The site lies north of and within a series of northwest-southeasttrending depressions which may represent an ancient Rio Grande channel. Prehistoric
cultural debris was found in the spoil from the drainage ditch. No cultural debris was
observed in the banks of the ditch.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

380 m north-south and at least 10 m east-west.
Unknown, but probably very shallow.

Materials Observed: Burned rock, uniface fragment, mussel shell, flakes.
tics indicating period of occupation were observed.
Collections:
Discussion:

No diagnos-

One retouched flake.
The site has been considerably disturbed by ditch excavation.

Assessment: Insufficient evidence on site content and condition preclude the assessment of its potential to contain important information. National Register of Historic
Places eligibility cannot be determined on the basis of survey data.
Recommendations:
drainage ditch.

The site should be monitored subsequent to construction of the

41HG117 (Howard and Collins 1986)
Elevation:

33.5 m (110 ft) above msl

Component:

Prehistoric

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IX

USGS Mission 7.5' (1963, photorevised 1983)

Location: This site is located southeast of Mission in a plowed field 2 km eastsoutheast of the intersection of FM 1016 and U.S. Highway 83. It is between sites 41HG116
and 41HG118.

90

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Description: This site is manifested by a surface scatter of burned rocks, burned
clay, and flakes in an area of level terrain surrounded by low rises at the back of a low
terrace of Sardinas Resaca. The resaca appears to be an abandoned channel of the Rio
Grande.
Horizontal Extent:

100 m north-south, 40 m east-west

Vertical Extent:

Unknown

Materials Observed: Three burned rocks, one burned clay lump, one large flake.
diagnostics indicating period of occupation were observed.
Collections:

No

None

Discussion: Cultural materials were distributed in a very diffuse scatter over a
fairly broad area. This site may be the result of brief or limited use of the area.
Assessment: National Register of Historic Places eligibility of the site cannot be
assessed because there is insufficient information on site content and integrity.
Recommendations: The site should be monitored subsequent to ditch construction so
that its character can be evaluated.

41HG118 (Howard and Collins 1986)
See Chapter 5 for additional data recovered in National Register of Historic Places
testing of this site.
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

33.5 m (110 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IX

USGS Mission 7.5' (1963, photorevised 1983)

Location: This site is located southeast of Mission in a citrus orchard 2.2 km eastsoutheast of the.intersection of FM 1016 and U.S. Highway 83.
Description: The site is on the edge of a rise which runs parallel to Sardinas Resaca
on its north side. Sardinas Resaca appears to be an abandoned channel of the Rio Grande;
the rise is probably an ancient terrace associated with that channel. The site is evidenced on the surface by a relatively dense scatter of burned rocks, burned clay lumps,
bifaces, unifaces, and flakes. Most of the debris is visible in a citrus orchard on the
west side of the ditch right-of-way. Cultural materials also are present in a cultivated
field to the east.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

460 n north-south, at least 80 m east-west
Unknown

91

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Materials Observed: Flakes, cores, scraper, biface, two Tortugas dart points, burned
rocks, burned clay lumps, bones, and mussel shells. The dart points indicate occupation of
the site during the Archaic period.
Collections:

Two dart points, scraper, biface, flakes, cores, burned rocks.

Discussion: The site probably extends farther to the east and west into areas outside
the ditch right-of-way. The depth is unknown, but the orchard has disturbed the site
considerably.
Assessment:
Places.

The site appears to be eligible for the National Register of Historic

Recommendations: Controlled testing is needed to determine whether intact subsurface
deposits and/or features are present. A controlled surface artifact collection should also
be made. The surface remains observed have the potential to yield significant information
concerning lithic technology, site function, and temporal identification.

41HG119 (Howard and Collins 1986)
Elevation:

30.5 m (100 ft) above msl

Component:

Historic

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IX

USGS Mission 7.5' (1963, photorevised 1983)

Location: This site is located southeast of Mission on both sides of the old Sardinas
Resaca about 2.4 km southeast of the intersection of FM 1016 and U.S. Highway 83.
Description: This site consists of a scatter of historic artifacts.
structures was observed.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

No evidence of

60 m northeast-southwest, 40 m northwest-southeast
10 cm

Materials Observed: Burned clay lumps (from brush burning?), large mussel shells
(possibly from resaca and of natural origin), brick fragments, manganese-bleached glass,
clear glass, and one whole bottle of clear glass. Artifacts suggest a late nineteenth- or
early twentieth-century occupation.
Collections:

One whole bottle (clear glass).

Discussion: Hummocks of burned clay and mussel shells are probably spoil dredged from
the ditch beside the site.
Assessment: The age of some of the historic materials observed appears to be greater
than 50 years; however, insufficient evidence on the history, content, and integrity of the

92

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

site precludes an assessment of its eligibility for the National Register of Historic
Places.
Recommendations: The site should be monitored subsequent to ditch construction, and
sufficient archival research should be conducted to determine the probable age of the site.

41HG120 (Howard and Collins 1986)
Component:

Prehistoric, Historic

Elevation:

31.7 m (104 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IX

USGS Mission 7.5' (1963, photorevised 1983)

Location: This site is located on the west side of McAllen. It is exposed along the
west side of a drainage ditch 0.7 km southwest of the intersection of U.S. Highway 83 and
FM 2220.
Description: This site is situated at the foot of the valley wall of the Rio Grande/
Sardinas Resaca valley. A low area southwest of the site may have carried water at one
time. The site is evidenced by a surface scatter of lithic debris as well as other
cultural debris exposed in a roadcut on the west side of the site.
Horizontal Extent:

130 m northwest-southeast, 10 m northeast-southwest

Vertical Extent: 40-60 cm below the surface as indicated by cultural debris and a
dark stratum visible in the roadcut.
Materials Observed: One triangular arrow point, flakes, oyster shells, deer astragalus, burned clay lumps, historic blue transferware.
Diagnostic artifacts indicate
occupations during the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods.
Collections:

One arrow point.

Discussion: This site contains a variety of materials, including bones, and may
contain a midden deposit and intact features. The site probably extends farther to the
southwest and may extend deeper than the 40-60 cm exposed in the roadcut.
Assessment: This site is fairly deep and contains preserved bones. Its potential to
yield significant information is not certain, however, and it is assessed as possibly
eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations: The site should be tested to determine its depth, extent, integrity
and the span of occupations represented; this will enable an assessment of its research
potential and eligibility for the National Register of Historic Places.

93

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

41HG121 (Howard and Collins 1986)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

31 m (102 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IX

USGS Mission 7.5' (1963, photorevised 1983)

Location: This site is located west of McAllen on the west side of a drainage ditch
0.8 km south-southwest of the intersection of U.S. Highway 83 and FM 2220.
Description: This site is situated at the foot of the valley wall of the Rio Grande/
Sardinas Resaca valley. A low area southwest of the site may have carried water at one
time. A road runs along the east side of the site. The site is manifested on the surface
as a scatter of flakes, fossil bones, burned rocks, burned clay lumps, and gravels.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

40 m north-south, 10 m east-west
At least 30 cm as indicated in adjacent roadcut

Materials Observed: Flakes, fossil bones, burned rocks, burned clay lumps, gravels.
No diagnostic artifacts indicating the period of occupation were observed.
Collections:

None

Discussion: This site appears to be limited in extent but contains a variety of
cultural materials. It is likely to extend to the southwest and may also be deeper than it
appears at present. Some materials from the site may have been displaced to the south by
road and ditch construction.
Assessment: This site may contain significant intact cultural remains in the subsurface, but its potential to yield significant information is uncertain; it is assessed as
being possibly eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations: The site should be tested to determine its depth, extent, integrity
and the span of occupations represented; this will enable an assessment of its research
potential and eligibility for the National Register of Historic Places.

41HG122 (Howard and Collins 1986)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

30.5 m (100 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IX

USGS Mission 7.5' (1963, photorevised 1983)

94

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Location: This site is southwest of McAllen on both banks of a drainage ditch 1.3 km
south-southwest of the intersection of U.S. Highway 83 and FM 2220.
Description:
Sardinas Resaca.

This lithic scatter is on the streamward edge of the first terrace above

Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

20 m north-south, 20 m east-west
Unknown

Materials Observed: One burned rock, one flake, one pebble core or biface.
nostics indicating the period of occupation were observed.
Collections:

No diag-

One core fragment.

Discussion: The cultural materials are diffuse and in a highly disturbed context.
The landform has a high probability of containing cultural materials, but these may have
been damaged by ditch and building construction.
Assessment: This site is very diffuse and highly disturbed.
eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

It is assessed to be not

No further work is recommended.

41HG123
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

36.6 m (120 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

II

USGS Alton 7.5' (1963)

Location: This site is on the east bank of the Edinburg Main Canal north of McAllen.
It is situated 1.4 km north of the intersection of FM 1924 with the Edinburg Main Canal.
Description: This site is situated on what was (before the canal was constructed)
relatively flat ground between two shallow natural depressions or playas, one to the southsouthwest and the other to the north-northeast. The playa to the south-southwest is more
pronounced. The site is manifested by a lithic scatter in a cultivated field covered with
johnsongrass. The western portion of the site probably was destroyed by construction of
the Edinburg Main Canal.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

200 m north-south, 30 m east-west
Unknown

Materials Observed: Bifacial chert piece (scraper or broken biface?), unifacial
scraper, flakes, one bone fragment, one mussel shell fragment. No artifacts diagnostic of
the period of occupation were observed.

95

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Collections: Lithic tools and flakes, fire-fractured rocks, burned clay lumps, and
mussel shell fragments.
Discussion: The site runs parallel to
soil was scraped up to form the east side of
located in the field, but it appears to be
density is extremely sparse, i.e., less than

the canal and is visible mainly where borrow
the canal. A large quantity of burned clay is
the result of recent brush burning. Artifact
one artifact per 10 m2 •

Assessment: National Register of Historic Places eligibility cannot be determined at
this time because there is insufficient information on site content and integrity.
Recommendations:

The site should be monitored subsequent to ditch construction.

41HG124
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

36.6-38.1 m (120-125 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

II

USGS Alton 7.5' (1963)

Location: This site is north of McAllen on the east side of the Edinburg Main Canal
1.65 km north of the intersection of FM 1924 with the canal.
Description: This site is a very sparse lithic scatter in a citrus grove north of a
shallow natural depression or playa. The original ground surface (before the canal was
built) was probably quite flat.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

150 m north-south, 30 m east-west
Unknown

Materials Observed: Lithic debitage and tool fragments, burned.
might indicate the period of occupation were observed.

No diagnostics which

Collections: Nine piece of lithic debitage, one distal biface fragment, and one
mussel shell fragment.
Discussion: The site has been heavily impacted by excavation of the Edinburg Main
Canal and by maintenance of the citrus grove.
Assessment: The site is very diffuse and highly disturbed.
eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

It is assessed to be not

No further work is recommended.

96

111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111~1{~

________________________________. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

41HG125
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

33.5-35 m (110-115 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IX

USGS La Joya 7.5' (1963)

Location: This site is southeast of Perezville on an unnamed natural drainage channel
2.8 km southeast of the intersection of U.S. Highway 83 and FM 1427. It is 2.6 km eastnortheast of Abram and 2.3 km southwest of the intersection of U.S. Highway 83 and FM 2062.
Description: This site is in a cultivated field on the west side of a low rise on an
old terrace north of the Rio Grande. The site is an extensive and relatively dense surface
scatter of lithic materials.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

300 m north-south, 150 m east-west
Unknown

Materials Observed: Lithic debitage, cores, thin bifaces. A Tortugas dart point and
a side-notched arrow point indicate Archaic and Late Prehistoric period occupations.
Collections: Lithic debitage, cores, one Tortugas dart point, one side-notched arrow
point proximal fragment, one pebble, and one bone fragment.
Discussion: Artifact density is greatest in the north-central area of the site. The
site had been very deeply plowed shortly before it was recorded. No cultural debris was
observed in the banks of a recently constructed ditch running along the west and southwest
boundaries of the site.
Assessment: Extensive disturbance related to cultivation and absence of perceptible
subsurface deposits in the nearby ditch banks indicate that this site has little potential
for further investigations, and it is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41HG126
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

19.8 m (65 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

II

USGS Edcouch 7.5' (1957, photorevised 1970)

97

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Location: This site is north of Elsa on the south bank of the Donna Drain. It is 0.4
km west of FM 88 and 2.0 km north-northeast of the intersection of FM 88 and FM 1925.
Description: This site is a concentration of burned clay lumps which probably represent a hearth area. The lumps were found eroding out of the south bank of the drainage
ditch at a depth of approximately 40 cm.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

20 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
occupation were found.
Collections:

Burned clay lumps; no diagnostics indicating the period of

One .44-caliber shell casing.

Discussion: The site has been heavily damaged by cultivation and ditch excavation.
It is a short distance north of 41HG85.
Assessment: Due to the paucity of artifacts observed, this site appears to hold
little potential for further information yield. It is assessed to be not eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41HG127
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

38.1 m (125 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

VIII

USGS Mission 7.5' (1963, photorevised 1983)

Location: This site is northeast of McAllen.
section of FM 494 and FM 495.

It is 0.9 km northeast of the inter-

Description: The site is on a low-relief deltaic plain with no obvious topographic
features presently visible. It is partly in a citrus orchard and partly in a cultivated
field. An orchard caretaker stated that a slight rise once existed in the site area but
was removed when the area was leveled. The site is evidenced by a concentration of burned
caliche nodules, land snail shells, debitage, and chipped stone tools covering a subcircular area about 20 m in diameter.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

60 m north-south, 125 m east-west
Unknown

98

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Materials Observed: Land snail shells, burned caliche (fist-sized), debitage, biface
No diagnostics indicating the period of occupation were
fragments, bone fragments.
recovered.
Collections: One oval thin biface, small bifacial scraper or gouge, end scraper, core
fragment, one flake.
Discussion: Leveling of the rise wh~re the site occurs appears to have resulted in
the site materials being displaced far to the north of their original location.
Assessment: Displacement of cultural debris by leveling and cultivation have severely
reduced the information yield potential of this site to an unknown extent. It is assessed
to be not eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41HG128
Components:

Prehistoric, Historic

Elevation:

15.2 m (50 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

II

USGS Edcouch 7.5' (1957, photorevised 1970)

Location: This site is north of La Villa on the north side of the South Main Channel
(shown on USGS map as the Donna Drain). The site is 1.95 km north-northwest of the intersection of FM 1925 and FM 491.
Description: Site 41HR128 occurs on the north shore of a natural depression or playa.
The site has both prehistoric and historic components as lithics, mussel shells, burned
clay lumps, glass, and historic ceramics were observed eroding from the north bank of the
drainage ditch.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

350 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
±40 cm as evidenced by debris eroding from ditch face

Materials Observed: Burned clay lumps, lithics, mussel shell, glass, and historic
ceramics. Diagnostics present indicate occupation of the site during the Archaic and
Historic periods.
Collections: One plain aboriginal sherd, one distal gouge fragment, one biface fragment, one grooved sandstone, one core fragment, lithic flakes (one modified and four
unmodified), two mussel shell fragments (one shaped?), one piece of thick clear bottle
glass, burned clay lumps, six bones.
Discussion: Historic and prehistoric debris are intermixed, indicating that the site
deposits are somewhat disturbed. Burned clay lumps are common but may be the result of

99

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

either prehistoric or historic activities.
site.

See Chapter 4 for further discussion of this

Assessment: The quantity and diversity of the cultural debris on this site indicate
that it may contain significant information; it is assessed to be probably eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations: The site should be tested to determine the extent and integrity of
the site deposits; this will enable an assessment of its research potential and eligibility
for the National Register of Historic Places.

41HG129
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 27.4 m (90 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

II

USGS Edinburg 7.5' (1963, photorevised 1983)

Location: This site is located southeast of Edinburg. It is 2.3 km southwest of the
intersection of State Highway 107 and FM 907 and 2.1 km southeast of the intersection of
State Highway 107 and FM 1426.
Description: Site 41HG129 is situated along the southwest side of a natural depression or playa in a cultivated field. It is evidenced by a very sparse surface scatter of
burned clay lumps and lithics.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

10 m in diameter
Unknown

Materials Observed: One flake, one piece of burned caliche, one burned clay lump.
diagnostics indicating the period of occupation were observed.
Collections:

No

None

Discussion: A subdivision has been built in the area of the depression northeast of
41HG129; related disturbance may have affected the site.
Assessment: This site probably has been disturbed extensively by land cultivation.
It is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41HG130 (Isolated Find)
Component:

Prehistoric

100

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Elevation:

ca. 33.5 m (110 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

II

USGS Edinburg 7.5' (1963, photorevised 1983)

Location: This isolated find was made southwest of Edinburg.
1.5 km northwest of the intersection of FM 1926 and FM 676.

The find location was

Description: This isolated find of two prehistoric chipped stone artifacts was made
in a cultivated field at the north end of an extensive natural depression or playa.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

Unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Collections:

One bifacial end scraper, one core fragment.

One biface, one core fragment.

Discussion: The cultivation of the field containing the artifacts has probably caused
their displacement.
Assessment:
The topographic occurrence of these remains makes it reasonable to
presume that they represent a site; however, insufficient evidence on the extent and
content of this site precludes an evaluation of its research potential. National Register
of Historic Places eligibility cannot be assessed on the basis of survey data.
Recommendations:

The site area should be monitored subsequent to ditch construction.

41HG131 (Isolated Find)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 32 m (105 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:
Location:

II

USGS Edinburg 7.5' (1963, photorevised 1983)

This isolated find was made west of Edinburg.

The find location was 2.25

km southeast of the intersection of State Highway 107 and FM 2220.

Description: A biface fragment was found on the surface of a cultivated field 150 m
south of a natural depression.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

Unknown
Unknown

101

~-

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Materials Observed:
activity.
Collections:

Medial biface fragment not diagnostic of any particular period of

Medial biface fragment.

Discussion:

This artifact probably has been displaced as a result of cultivation.

Assessment: The material culture remains at this site are so sparse that additional
investigations are not feasible; the site is assessed to be not eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41HG132 (Isolated Find)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 19.8 m (65 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

II

USGS Edcouch 7.5' (1957, photorevised 1970)

Location: This isolated find was made south of Monte Alto along the South Main
Channel (Donna Main). It was 2.2 km north of the intersection of FM 3071 and FM 1925.
Description: One unifacial scraper was found in a cultivated field on the south side
of the drainage ditch. A natural depression is situated 270 m to the southwest of the find
spot.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

Unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Collections:

One piece of trimmed debitage.

One piece of trimmed debitage.

Discussion: This find was made a short distance north of prehistoric site 41HG42 and
possibly may relate to this site, which might be more extensive than was originally
realized. However, no evidence of subsurface cultural debris was visible in the ditch wall
near the isolated find location.
Assessment: The material culture remains at this location are so sparse that additional investigations are not feasible; the site is assessed to be not eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

102

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

41HG133 (Prewitt 1985)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

12.2-13.7 m (40-45 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Raymondville 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: Site 41HG133 is located northwest of Sebastian along the east bank of the
South Main Channel. The site is 4.0 km west-southwest of the intersection of FM 2845 and
FM 491.
Description: This site is surrounded by cultivated fields; no notable topographic
features are discernible in the immediate vicinity. The site is evidenced by a sparse
artifact scatter and concentrations of Rabdotus snail shells eroding out of the ditch bank.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

100 m north-south, east-west extent unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed: Burned clay lump, bone, snail shells, lithic. Several relatively
dense concentrations of Rabdotus shells were observed. No diagnostic artifacts indicating
the period of occupation were observed.
Collections:

One cobble core.

Discussion:
The Rabdotus snail shell accumulations, which are not necessarily
cultural, are a notable feature on this site; however, the artifact density is very low.
Assessment: The material culture remains at this site are so sparse that additional
investigations are not feasible; the site is assessed to be not eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41HG134 (Prewitt 1985)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

13.7-15.2 m (45-50 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Santa Rosa 7.5' (1952, photorevised 1982)

Location: Site 41HG134 is located west-southwest of Sebastian, 4.4 km southwest of
the intersection of FM 2845 and FM 2629. It is 0.95 km northwest of El Azadon Cemetery.

103

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Description: This site was found eroding out of the south bank of the South Main
Channel. It is surrounded by cultivated fields, and there are no notable topographic
features in the immediate vicinity. Site 41HG134 is evidenced by burned clay lumps, animal
bones, and Rabdotus snail shells.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

75 m north-south, east-west dimension unknown
±40 cm

Materials Observed: Burned clay lumps, animal bones, and snail shells.
artifacts indicating the period of occupation were observed.
Collections:

No diagnostic

Bone fragments.

Discussion: One concentrated area of burned clay lumps may represents a prehistoric
hearth; however, the artifact density is very low.
Assessment: The material remains at this site are so sparse that additional investigations are not feasible; the site is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

WILLACY COUNTY

41WY107 (Howard and Collins 1986)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

8.2 m (27 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS San Perlita South 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1970)

Location: This site is northeast of Lyford about 3.5 km northwest of the intersection
of FM 498 and FM 2099.
Description: Site 41WY107 is evidenced as a sparse scatter of materials observed in
the banks and spoil of a drainage ditch. The site is surrounded by cultivated fields; it
is north of and topographically lower than several rises which are associated with a resaca
to the south.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

67 m north-south, 30 m east-west
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Burned clay lumps, mussel shell fragments, gravel, burned
caliche, and one bone fragment. There are numerous Rabdotus snail shells in the site area.
No artifacts diagnostic of the period of occupation were recovered.

104

l

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Collections:
Discussion:

One burned clay lump.
The site has been heavily disturbed by cultivation and ditch excavation.

Assessment: The material culture remains at this site are so sparse that additional
investigations are not feasible; the site is assessed to be not eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY108 (Howard and Collins 1986)
Components:
Elevation:

Prehistoric, Historic
7.6-9.1 m (25-30 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS San Perlita South 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1970)

Location: This site is east-northeast of Lyford.
intersection of FM 498 and FM 2099.

It is 3.25 km northwest of the

Description: Site 41WY108 is on the north side of a large natural depression which is
bisected by a drainage ditch. The natural depression lies in an abandoned distributary
channel. The site is on the north side of this depression and on a slight rise to the
north, which may be a levee deposit or a dune. Prehistoric and historic artifacts were
observed in a dirt road and on spoil piles by the ditch.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

400 m north-south, 240 m east-west
Unknown

Materials Observed: Prehistoric artifacts include a harnrnerstone or tested cobble, a
bifacially retouched flake, a burned clay lump, and bone fragments.
Historic debris
includes glass, glazed ceramics, a 1935D penny, and cement slab fragments. No artifacts
diagnostic of the period of prehistoric activity were found. The historic artifacts indicate activity between 1880 and 1940.
Collections:
penny.

Cobble, bifacially retouched flake, bone,

glass, historic ceramics,

Discussion: Information on the prehistoric component is minimal, due to the small
sample of artifacts. The historic artifacts are associated with structures once present to
the east (see 1956 USGS map) which recently were bulldozed into the depression. It is
possible that this historic debris represents the Las Jarras Ranch complex founded in the
1880s.
Assessment: Both the prehistoric and historic components are disturbed to an unknown
extent, but contain a considerable quantity and diversity of cultural materials. The

105

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

site's potential to yield important information is not certain, however, and it is assessed
as possibly eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations: Archeological testing should be conducted to determine the extent
and integrity of site deposits, and archival research should be conducted to determine
whether the Las Jarras Ranch headquarters is represented at this site.

41WY109
Components:
Elevation:

Prehistoric, Pleistocene fossil locality
ca. 12.1 m (40 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Raymondville 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is southwest of Lyford on the north side of the South Main
Channel, 1.2 km south-southwest of the intersection of FM 2845 and FM 491.
Description: Site 41WY109 is surrounded by cultivated fields, and there are no
notable topographic features in the immediate area. Prehistoric debris consists of burned
clay lumps and flakes. Fossil Pleistocene turtle bones also were found.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

ca. 60 m east-west, north-south extent undetermined
40-50 cm

Materials Observed: Burned clay lumps, one flake, two discrete clusters of fossil
turtle bones. No prehistoric artifacts indicating the period of occupation were noted.
Collections: One unifacial core, one burned clay lump, one shell fragment, and four
bones (one rabbit and three unidentified fragments).
Discussion:

One burned clay lump concentration may represent a hearth feature.

Assessment: The presence of a possible cultural feature indicates that test excavations focusing on the feature area might yield significant data. The site is possibly
eligible for the National Register of Historic Places, but its potential to yield important
information has not been ascertained.
Recommendations: Archeological testing should be conducted to determine site extent,
integrity, and the span of time represented.

41WY110 (Prewitt 1985)
Components:
Elevation:

Prehistoric, Pleistocene fossil locality
ca. 12.1 m (40 ft) above msl

106

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Raymondville 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is southwest of Lyford, 1.5 km southwest of the intersection of
FM 2845 and FM 491.
Description: Site 41WY110 occurs on a low-relief plain with no notable topographic
features; it is surrounded by cultivated fields. Scattered burned clay lumps, bone fragments, a flake, and numerous Rabdotus snail shells were found eroding from both banks of
the South Main Channel.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

200 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
40-50 cm

Materials Observed: Burned clay lumps, bone fragments, one flake, numerous land snail
shells. No diagnostic artifacts of the period of occupation were seen.
Collections:

None

Discussion: Three distinct concentrations of burned clay lumps are believed to be
aboriginal hearths. A fossil turtle shell is eroding from the ditch wall at the west end
of the site.
Assessment: The presence of three possible hearths at 41WY110 indicates that significant intact deposits remain; however, the age and extent of these deposits are at present
unknown. The site is possibly eligible for the National Register of Historic Places, but
its potential to yield important information has not been ascertained.
Recommendations: Archeological testing should be conducted to determine site extent,
integrity, and the span of time represented.

41WY111
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

12.1-13.7 m (40-45 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Santa Rosa 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is west-northwest of Sebastian, 1.1 km northwest of the intersection of FM 2845 and FM 2629.
Description: A scatter of artifacts is exposed in the west bank of a minor drainage
ditch. The ditch and site are on the north bank of a natural depression or playa, now
modified to serve as a stock tank. Willow trees grow around the depression, but otherwise
the site is surrounded by cultivated fields.

107

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

5 m north-south, east-west extent unknown
50 cm to 1 m

Materials Observed: One unifacial gouge, one flake, one mussel shell fragment.
gouge suggests activity during the Archaic period.
Collections:

The

One unifacial gouge.

Discussion: The site may be larger but is exposed only in the ditch. After collecting the artifacts listed above, it was not possible to detect this site so the density of
artifacts may be low.
Assessment: The apparent depth of cultural debris and the Archaic diagnostic suggest
that this site is older than many others located during this survey. Given their depth,
these remains have probably not been disturbed by cultivation. Little is known about the
extent of the site, however, or the quantity and diversity of cultural material. The site
is assessed to be possibly eligible for the National Register of Historic Places, but its
potential to yield important information has not been ascertained.
Recommendations: Archeological testing should be conducted to determine site extent,
integrity, and the span of time represented.

41WY112
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

9.1-10.7 m (30-35 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:
Location:
and FM 2099.

IV

USGS San Perlita South 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1970)

This site is east of Lyford, 2.8 km southwest of the intersection of FM 498

Description: A scatter of artifacts is exposed along the north bank of the South Main
Channel at the southwest end of an extensive natural depression or playa. The site area is
surrounded by cultivated fields.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

250 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
40-50 cm

Materials Observed: Substantial numbers of burned clay lumps, lesser amounts of bone,
small amount of lithic debitage, one piece of conch shell. No artifacts diagnostic of the
period of occupation were noted.
Collections:
three flakes.

One piece of shaped conch shell (subrectangular), two fragmentary bones,

108

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Discussion: A great quantity and variety of cultural debris is present at this site,
and it is relatively deep.
Assessment: This site appears to contain significant prehistoric cultural deposits,
and it is assessed to be probably eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations: Archeological testing should be conducted to determine site extent,
depth, and the span of time represented.

41WY113
Components:
Elevation:

Prehistoric, Historic, Pleistocene fossil locality
7.6-9.l m (25-30 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS San Perlita South 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1970)

Location: This site is east-southeast of Lyford, 1.0 km southeast of the intersection
of FM 2099 and FM 498.
Description: A scatter of artifacts and one feature are exposed along the north bank
of the South Main Channel. The ditch and site are on the east bank of a natural depression
or playa. The depression is surrounded by cultivated fields.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

160 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
±40 cm

Materials Observed: Human burial, animal bones, possible fossil tooth enamel, plate
glass fragment, mussel shells. No artifacts diagnostic of the period of occupation were
seen.
Collections: Human skeletal remains, 1 piece of clear thick bottle glass, 1 large
piece of deer antler, 11 bone fragments, 4 mussel shell fragments, 1 turtle carapace
fragment, 4 teeth fragments from a horse.
Discussion: The partial skeleton of a young adolescent was found eroding from the
ditch wall near the west end of the site. Following exposure of the skeleton, it appeared
that the bones represented either a secondary burial or an extensively displaced primary
burial. No grave inclusions were found; a pit outline could not be discerned. The bones
were fragmentary and lacked epiphyses; the pelvis, hands, feet, and most of the skull were
absent. This burial may have been damaged by ditch excavation and/or by previous land
cultivation.
Assessment: The presence of a partially intact human burial and well-preserved animal
bones indicate considerable potential for significant data yields from 41WY113; the site is
assessed to be probably eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.

109

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Recommendations: Archeological testing should be conducted to ascertain site extent,
depth, and the span of time represented.

41WY114
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 7.6 m (25 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS San Perlita South 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1970)

Location: This site is located east of Lyford and 3.22
section of FM 2099 and FM 498.

km

northeast of the inter-

Description: A scatter of artifacts is exposed on both banks of the Willacy Main
drainage ditch. It is on the western edge of a very slight rise overlooking an extensive
natural depression or playa trending north-south and is surrounded by cultivated fields.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

75-100 m north-south, east-west extent unknown
ca. 40 cm

Materials Observed: The artifact scatter consists of scattered burned clay lumps and
one piece of debitage. No artifacts diagnostic of the period of prehistoric occupation
were observed.
Collections:
Assessment:
intact features.
Places.

None
This site yielded very few artifacts and no vertebrate faunal remains or
It is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register of Historic

Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY115
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

4.6-6.1 m (15-20 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is west of Willamar and 1.96
FM 490 and FM 1420.

110

km

southeast of the intersection of

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Description: Several artifacts are exposed on the east side of the North Ditch. A
natural depression or playa 100 m east of the site is the only notable topographic feature
nearby.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

ca. 200 m north-south, east-west extent unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Collections:

Three lithic flakes.

Three flakes.

Discussion: This site yielded very few artifacts and lacked vertebrate fauna! remains
and intact features.
Assessment: The material culture remains in this site are so sparse that additional
investigations are not feasible; it is assessed to be not eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY116
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 4.8 m (15 ft) above msl
IV

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is on the El Sauz Ranch southeast of Willamar and 2.2 km southeast of the intersection of FM 490 and FM 1420.
Description:

A scatter of artifacts is exposed on the west bank of the North Ditch.

It is on the west side of a natural depression or playa and is surrounded by cleared

pasture.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

25-50 m north-south, east-west extent unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed: Triangular thin biface (Tortugas), a marine shell, and animal
bones. The Tortugas point indicates occupation during the Archaic period.
Collections:

Biface.

Discussion: These remains occur a short distance northwest of the limits of previously recorded site 41WY73. It is possible that a single site is represented.

111

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Assessment: The variety of cultural materials present on this site indicates that it
may contain important information; it is assessed to be possibly eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places because its significance is not clearly demonstrated.
Recommendations:

Archeological testing should be conducted to ascertain site extent,

depth, and the span of time represented.

41WY117
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

4.6-6.l m (15-20 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is on the El Sauz Ranch east-southeast of Willamar.
east of the intersection of FM 490 and FM 1420.

It is 3.8 km

Description: A scatter of artifacts is exposed on the north bank of the North Ditch.
A natural depression 300 m to the north is the only notable topographic feature nearby.
The site is surrounded by cleared pastures.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

10 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
±40 cm

Materials Observed: Burned clay lumps, one thin biface (Catan-like), and two marine
shells. The Catan point suggests an occupation during the Archaic period.
Collections:

Biface, marine shell.

Assessment: The variety of cultural debris observed at the site indicates that it may
contain important information; it is assessed to be possibly eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

Archeological testing should be conducted to determine the site's

extent, depth, and span of occupation.

41WY118
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

4.6-6.l m (15-20 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

112

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Location: This site is on the El Sauz Ranch east of Willamar.
the intersection of FM 490 and FM 1420.

It is 4.68 km east of

Description: A scatter of artifacts is exposed in the north bank of the North Ditch.
The site is in a flat area surrounded by cleared pastures. The nearest natural depression
is 0.9 km to the northwest.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

50-75 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
ca. 50 cm

Materials Observed: Two flakes, small number of burned clay lumps, one marine shell.
No artifacts diagnostic of the period of occupation were found.
Collections:

Flake, core.

Assessment: The limited number of artifacts observed suggests that the site does not
contain important information; it is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY119
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

4.6-6.1 m (15-20 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is on the El Sauz Ranch. It is on the south bank of the North
Ditch and 0.24 km west of the main north-south road through the El Sauz.
Description: Several artifacts were exposed on the bank of the ditch, which is
surrounded by cleared pastures. A slight natural depression lies just east of the site.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

5 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed: One flake, one core (possibly road metal or construction debris).
No artifacts diagnostic of the period of occupation were observed.
Collections:

Two flakes, one core.

Assessment: This site yielded very few artifacts and lacks vertebrate faunal remains
or features. It is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register of Historic
Places because the material culture remains are so sparse that additional investigations
are not feasible.

113

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY120
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

4.6 m (15 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is on the north bank of the North Ditch on the El Sauz Ranch.
is 3.6 km east of the main north-south road through the El Sauz.

It

Description: A scatter of artifacts is exposed on the bank of the ditch, which is
surrounded by uncleared pastures in which mesquite and prickly pear are the dominant
species. There is no obvious natural depression or similar topographic feature in the
immediate area.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

5 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
40-50 cm

Materials Observed: Burned clay lumps, oyster shells, and bone fragments.
facts diagnostic of the period of occupation were found.
Collections:

No arti-

None.

Assessment: This site yielded very few artifacts; additional investigations are not
economically feasible. The site is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further works is recommended.

41WY121
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 7.6 m (25 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS San Perlita South 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1970)

Location: This site is 1.4 km north-northeast of Los Coyotes Gin and 0.87 km southeast of the intersection of FM 498 and FM 507.

114

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Description: A scatter of artifacts is exposed on the south bank of the South Main
Channel. It is surrounded by cultivated fields, and there are no notable topographic
features in the site area.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

150 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
40-50 cm

Materials Observed: One yellow siliceous sandstone metate with one grinding facet on
each face, one animal bone fragment, two flakes, small number of burned clay lumps. No
artifacts diagnostic of the period of occupation were observed.
Collections:

Metate.

Assessment: The diversity of artifacts observed at this site indicates that further
investigations might yield significant information. The site is assessed to be possibly
eligible for the National Register, pending the results of testing.
Recommendations: Archeological testing should be conducted to determine the site's
extent, depth, and the span of occupation.

41WY122
Components:
Elevation:

Prehistoric, Historic
ca. 12.2 m (40 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Raymondville 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is located northwest of Lyford, 0.5 km northeast of the intersection of FM 2845 and FM 1921.
Description: A scatter of artifacts is exposed along the east bank of a lateral
drainage ditch, just west of a very slight rise. It is surrounded by cultivated fields.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

300 m north-south, east-west extent unknown
40-50 cm

Materials Observed: Rusty nails, numerous burned clay lumps, animal bones, three
flakes. No artifacts diagnostic of the period of occupation were found.
Collections:

None.

Discussion: Much of the burned clay on this site probably has been generated by
modern brush-burning activities. The mixing of historic and prehistoric debris suggests
that the site area has been subjected to severe disturbance.

4/ee4~--­
ll5

#t!~

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Assessment: Due to the evidence of disturbance and the ambiguous age of the cultural
debris, particularly the burned clay, this site is assessed to be not eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY123 (Isolated Find)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 10.7 m (35 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Raymondville 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This prehistoric artifact was found south-southeast of Lyford, 0.97 km
southeast of the intersection of FM 491 and FM 448.
Description: The isolated find was made on the south bank of the South Main Channel.
The find spot is surrounded by cultivated fields.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

Unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Collections:

One biface, not diagnostic of a particular cultural period.

Oval thick biface.

Assessment: The topographic
sites, suggesting that it has been
the National Register of Historic
tional investigations would not be
Recommendations:

setting for this isolated find is not typical of most
displaced. The site is assessed to be not eligible for
Places; materials at the site are so sparse that addifeasible.

No further work is recommended.

41WY124 (Isolated Find)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 9.1 m (30 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS San Perlita South 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1970)

Location: The isolated find was made southeast of Lyford.
of the intersection of FM 498 and FM 2099.

116

It was 2.43 km southwest

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Description: This prehistoric artifact was found along the east bank of a minor
north-south lateral drainage ditch, on the northern edge of an extensive natural depression. The find spot is surrounded by cultivated fields.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

Unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Collections:

One lithic artifact, not diagnostic of a particular time period.

One unifacial end scraper.

Assessment: This setting is appropriate for the presence of a site, but the cultural
materials are very limited. The site is assessed to be not eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places; materials at the site are so sparse that additional investigations would not be feasible.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY125 (Isolated Find)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 25 ft above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS San Perlita South 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1970)

Location: This isolated find was made east-southeast of Lyford, 1.58 km southeast of
the intersection of FM 498 and FM 507.
Description: The specimen was found on the north bank of the South Main Channel, at
the northeast end of an extensive but slight rise. The find spot is surrounded by cultivated fields. The closest apparent natural depression is 300 m to the north.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

Unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Collections:

One lithic artifact, not diagnostic of a particular time period.

None.

Assessment: Materials at this site are so sparse that additional investigations would
not be feasible; the site is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register of
Historic Places.
Recomendations:

No further work is recommended.

117

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

41WY126 (Isolated Find)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

6.1-7.6 m (20-25 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS San Perlita South 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1970)

Location: This isolated find was made south-southeast of Willamar, 3.8 km southwest
of the intersection of FM 490 and FM 1420.
Description: This specimen was found on the south bank of the Willacy Main Ditch.
The find spot is surrounded by cultivated fields. The closest natural depression is about
200 m to the west-northwest.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

Unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Collections:

One lithic artifact not diagnostic of a particular time period.

One trimmed debitage with beveling.

Assessment: The materials at this site are so sparse that additional investigations
would not be feasible. The site is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY127 (Isolated Find)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

4.6-6.1 m (15-20 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This isolated find was made southeast of Willamar, 2.1 km southeast of the
intersection of FM 490 and FM 1420.
Description: This specimen was found on the west side of the North Ditch. The find
spot is surrounded by cleared pastures. A natural depression occurs 0.25 km to the southeast.
Horizontal Extent:

Unknown

118

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Vertical Extent:

Unknown

Materials Observed:
Collections:
bevels.

One lithic artifact, not diagnostic of a particular time period.

One unifacial scraping/perforating tool,

one trimmed debitage with

Assessment: The materials at this site are so sparse that additional investigations
would not be feasible. The site is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY128 (Isolated Find)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

4.6-6.1 m (15-20 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This isolated find was made southeast of Willamar, 2.1 km southeast of the
intersection of FM 490 and FM 1420.
Description: One artifact was found along the east bank of the North Ditch.
spot is surrounded by cleared pastures. A natural depression occurs about 0.17
southeast.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

Unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Collections:

The find
to the

km

One lithic artifact, not diagnostic of a particular time period.

One flake.

Assessment: The materials at this site are so sparse that additional investigations
would not be feasible. The site is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY129 (Isolated Find)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 4.6 m (15 ft) above msl

119

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This find was made southeast of Willamar, 2.1 km southeast of the intersection of FM 490 and FM 1420.
Description: This specimen was found on the south bank of the North Ditch. The find
spot is surrounded by cleared pastures and is along the northeast margin of an extensive
natural depression.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

Unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Collections:

One lithic artifact, not diagnostic of a particular time period.

One core.

Assessment: The materials at this site are so sparse that additional investigations
would not be feasible. The site is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY130 (Isolated Find)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 4.6 m (15 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This isolated find was made south-southeast of Willamar, 1.8 km southeast
of the intersection of FM 490 and FM 1420.
Description: This specimen was found along the south bank of the North Ditch. The
find spot is surrounded by cleared pastures and is on the northern edge of an extensive
natural depression.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

Unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Collections:

One lithic artifact, not diagnostic of a particular time period.

One lithic chunk.

120

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

I I
Assessment: The materials at this site are so sparse that additional investigations
would not be feasible. The site is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY131 (Isolated Find)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 3 m (10 ft) above msl
IV

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:
Location:

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

This isolated find was made on the El Sauz Ranch east of Willamar, 600 m

northeast of Madama Well.
Description: The specimen was found on the south bank of the North Ditch. The find
spot is surrounded by brush, primarily mesquite and prickly pear. A natural depression is
located about 200 m to the north.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

Unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Collections:

One lithic artifact, not diagnostic of a particular time period.

One flake.

Assessment: The materials at this site are so sparse that additional investigations
would not be feasible. The site is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY132 (Prewitt 1985)
Components:
Elevation:

Prehistoric, Pleistocene fossil locality
ca. 6.1 m (20 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is located south of Willamar, 1.7 km west-northwest of the intersection of FM 1420 and FM 498.

121

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Description: Several artifacts are exposed along the west bank of the South Main
Channel in an area surrounded by cultivated fields. The site is on a very slight rise.
Natural depressions are located at distances from 1.0 to 1.3 km to the southwest, northwest, and northeast.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

250 m north-south, east-west extent unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed: Three concentrations of burned clay lumps, one flake, one marine
shell fragment, fossil turtle shell fragments. No artifacts diagnostic of the period of
occupation were found.
Collections:

Two flakes, one bone fragment, one marine shell fragment, one pebble.

Assessment: The variety of materials at the site and the presence of features suggest
that further investigations might yield significant information. The site is assessed to
be possibly eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations: Archeological testing should be conducted to ascertain site extent,
depth, integrity, and the span of time represented.

41WY133 (Prewitt 1985)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 6.1 m (20 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is located south of Willamar, 1. 7 km southwest of the intersection of FM 498 and FM 1420.
Description: A scatter of shells is exposed in a flat cultivated field. There are no
notable topographic features in the immediate area. A natural depression is located 1.1 km
to the south-southeast of the site.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

100 m north-south, east-west extent unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed: One marine shell, numerous Rabdotus snail shells.
diagnostic of the period of occupation were seen.
Collections:

No artifacts

One marine shell.

Assessment: The materials at this site are so sparse that additional investigations
would not be feasible. The site is assessed to be not eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places.

122

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

41WY134 (Prewitt 1985)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 6.1 m (20 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5'

(1956, photorevised 1982) and USGS San Perlita

South 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1970)
Location:

This site is located south of Willamar, 2. 73

km

southwest of the inter-

section of FM 1420 and FM 498.
Description: Site 41WY134 is situated on the north bank of the South Main Channel.
Artifacts are exposed along the south shore of a natural depression or playa; the scatter
extends north into the depression, which is now a cultivated field.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

250 m north-south, east-west extent unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed: Numerous burned clay lumps, one double-fist-sized; bone fragments; core; and flakes. No time-diagnostic artifacts were noted.
Collections:

Bone fragments, core, flakes, marine shell fragment, fish otolith, and

burned clay lumps.
Assessment: The density and variety of artifacts observed on this site indicate that
further work might produce significant data. The site is assessed to be possibly eligible
for the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations: Archeological testing should be conducted to determine site extent,
depth, integrity, and the span of time represented.

41WY135 (Prewitt 1985)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 6.1 m (20 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:
Location:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

This site is south of Willamar, 2.44

1420 and FM 498.

123

km

southwest of the intersection of FM

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Description: A scatter of artifacts is exposed along the south bank of the South Main
Channel. The site is surrounded by cultivated fields. It is 340 m southeast of an extensive natural depression.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

ca. 50 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed: Rabdotus snail shells are concentrated in the site area; bone
fragments and flakes also are present. No artifacts diagnostic of the period of occupation
were found.
Six bone fragments, one flake, one marine shell fragment.

Collections:

Assessment: A limited range and low quantity of cultural debris was found at the
site. There is insufficient information on site content and integrity to assess its
National Register of Historic Places eligibility.
Recommendations:

The site should be monitored subsequent to ditch construction.

41WY136 (Prewitt 1985)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 6.1 m (20 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Willamar 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is located south of Willamar, 2.66 km southwest of the intersection of FM 498 and FM 1420.
Description: A scatter of artifacts is exposed along the south bank of the South Main
Channel. It is surrounded by cultivated fields. A natural depression occurs about 200 m
northwest of the site.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

ca. 75 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed: Scattered burned clay lumps, bone fragments, flakes, and Rabdotus
snail shells are concentrated in the area. No artifacts diagnostic of the period of
occupation were observed.
Collections:

Six bone fragments, one flake, three burned clay lumps.

Assessment: The sparseness and limited variety of the cultural debris insufficient to
assess the site's National Register of Historic Places eligibility.

124

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Recommendations:

The site should be monitored subsequent to ditch construction.

41WY137 (Prewitt 1985)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

ca. 6.1 m (20 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS San Perlita South 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1970)

Location: This site is located south-southwest of Willamar, 4.76 km east-southeast of
the intersection of FM 507 and FM 498.
Description: An artifact scatter is exposed along the south bank of the South Main
Channel. It is surrounded by cultivated fields. The closest relief consists of a natural
depression 120 m to the north.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

250 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Bone fragments, marine shells, lithics, and Rabdotus snail
shells. No artifacts diagnostic of the period of occupation were found.
Collections:

Five bone fragments, three marine shell fragments, one lithic flake.

Discussion: The site area is marked by a dense concentration of Rabdotus snail
shells, which may not be of cultural significance.
Assessment: The quantity and variety of materials at the site, particularly marine
shells, suggest that additional work at this site might yield significant information. The
site is assessed to be possibly eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations: Archeological testing should be conducted to ascertain site extent,
depth, integrity, and the span of time represented.

41WY138 (Prewitt 1985)
Components:
Elevation:

Prehistoric, Pleistocene fossil locality
ca. 7.6 m (25 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS San Perlita South 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1970)

125

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Location: This site is located east-northeast of Lyford, 2.28
intersection of FM 490 and FM 2099.

km

southeast of the

Description: A scatter of artifacts is exposed in the bank of a minor lateral drainage ditch. The site is surrounded by cultivated fields. The closest notable topographic
feature is a natural depression about 400 m to the south.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

ca. 100 m east-west, north-south extent unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed: Lithics, burned clay lumps, bones, and fossil bones. No artifacts diagnostic of the period of occupation were found. Two clusters of fossil turtle
bones are eroding from the ditch bank.
Collections:
Discussion:

One chert flake.
The site appears to be somewhat disturbed.

Assessment: The quantity and variety of the cultural debris observed on this site are
limited. There is insufficient information on site content and integrity to assess its
National Register of Historic Places eligibility.
Recommendations:

The site should be monitored subsequent to ditch construction.

41WY139 (Prewitt 1985)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

9.1-10.7 m (30-35 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Raymondville 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is located north of Lyford, 1.34
of FM 448 and FM 490.
Description:

km

southwest of the intersection

A scatter of artifacts is exposed along a minor lateral drainage ditch.
A natural depression is located 200 m to the

It is surrounded by cultivated fields.

northeast.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

150 m in diameter
Unknown

Materials Observed: Lithics, bones, a marine shell, burned clay lumps. Two burned
clay lump clusters which may represent hearths were observed in the site area. No artifacts diagnostic of the period of occupation were seen.

126

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Collections: Two marine shell fragments, bone fragments, one biface fragment, one
piece of trimmed debitage, burned clay lumps.
Discussion:

The site appears to be fairly intact.

Assessment:
The variety of prehistoric cultural debris and the presence of two
apparent features suggest that this site may contain significant information. The site is
assessed to be possibly eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations:

Archeological testing should be conducted to determine site depth,

integrity, and the span of time represented.

41WY140 (Prewitt 1985)
Component:

Prehistoric

Elevation:

9.1-10.7 m (30-35 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:
Location:

IV

USGS Raymondville 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

This site is located south-southwest of Lyford, 1.2 km southwest of the

intersection of FM 491 and FM 448.
Description: A scatter of artifacts is exposed along the west bank of the South Main
Channel, at the northeast end of a very slight rise. It is surrounded by cultivated
fields. Natural depressions are located about 1.0 km north and south of the site.
Horizontal Extent:

150 m north-south, east-west extent unknown

Vertical Extent: Most of the cultural debris was seen between 1.0 and 1.5 m below the
surface; some cultural materials occur as deep as 2.0 to 3.0 m.
Materials Observed: Mussel shells, bone fragments, lithics, burned clay lumps.
artifacts diagnostic of the periods of occupation were observed.
Collections:

No

Numerous mussel shell fragments, bone fragments, burned clay lumps,

three flakes.
Assessment: The site is deeper than any others recorded during this survey, and the
deeper materials could be considerably older. The vertical distribution of the subsurface
cultural debris indicates that this site may be stratified. This site is assessed to be
probably eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
Recommendations: Archeological testing should be conducted to determine site extent,
integrity, and the span of time represented.

127

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

41WY141 (Prewitt 1985)
Component:

Historic

Elevation:

10.7-12.2 m (35-40 ft) above msl

Environmental Zone:
Map Reference:

IV

USGS Raymondville 7.5' (1956, photorevised 1982)

Location: This site is located west of Lyford, 1.2 km south-southeast of the intersection of FM 1921 and FM 2845.
Description: A scatter of historic artifacts is exposed along a minor lateral drainage ditch. It is surrounded by cultivated fields.
Horizontal Extent:
Vertical Extent:

Unknown
Unknown

Materials Observed:
Glass, corroded metal.
twentieth-century activity is indicated.
Collections:

None.

Discussion: No structural remains were seen.
homestead or a dump.
Assessment:
ascertain.

Historic late nineteenth- or early

The site could represent either a

The site area is extensively disturbed; site function is difficult to

Recommendations:

No further work is recommended.

128

APPENDIX 1: SITE DESCRIPTIONS

REFERENCES CITED

Howard, Margaret, and M. B. Collins
1986
Field notes and site record forms.
On file,
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1985
Field notes.

Texas Archeological Research

On file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of

Texas at Austin.

129

APPENDIX 2:

Artifact Descriptions and Debris Analysis

Grant D. Hall

APPENDIX 2: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND DEBRIS ANALYSIS

INTRODUCTION

The material remains recovered during survey of the drainage ditch system and excavations at 41HG118 are described, quantified, and/or analyzed in this section. For these
purposes, the remains are divided into the following seven general classes: chipped stone,
ground stone, lithic residues and miscellaneous materials, shells, bones, carbon, and historic debris. All measurements are given in centimeters. Weights are given in grams. An
asterisk (*) by a measurement or weight figure denotes a fragmentary specimen. Abbreviations used include "TP" for Test Pit, "L" for Level, and "CU" for Collection Unit. Bevel
angles were measured using a contact goniometer.

CHIPPED STONE

I

)
Included in this class of material are the products and by-products resulting from
chipped stone tool manufacturing activities of people who occupied the aboriginal sites
dealt with in this investigation. The class is further subdivided into six categories as
follows: cores and core fragments, thick bifaces, thin bifaces, distally beveled bifaces
and unifaces, modified and/or trimmed debitage, and unmodified debitage.
Raw materials out of which the chipped stone specimens are made may be generally
characterized as cryptocrystalline rocks having conchoidal fracture properties. Finegrained cherts are by far the most common rock types represented. Colors range from brown
to tan to gray, with much intergrading between. Chalcedony, quartzite, rhyolite, ryholite
porphyry, jasper, and agate also were used. All of these kinds of rocks are available from
gravel deposits along the Rio Grande (Sellards et al. 1932:758-759, 785-786; Mallouf et al.
1977:190-191; Day et al. 1981:290). In the assemblage considered here, the nonchert rocks
are represented mainly by debitage. They do not occur in any great numbers in the formal
tool categories, including specimens in the modified/trimmed debitage groups.

Cores (50 specimens)

Cores are stone cobbles or cobble fragments from which flakes have been removed by
percussion. The goal of the person flaking the core might have been to shape the core
itself into a finished tool. Conversely, a core might have been intended simply as a
source of flakes that could themselves be used as tools or further shaped into formal tool
types. The core collection is subdivided into cobble cores, unifacial cores, bifacial
cores, core nuclei, and core fragments.

Cobble Cores (6 specimens)

In this group are cobbles from which only a small number of flakes have been struck
(Table 12). Modification through flaking has been so slight that the original overall
configuration of the cobble is still apparent. Flakes were struck off bidirectionally from

133

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 12
PROVENIENCE AND METRIC DATA FOR CORES
\

Specimen

Site

Provenience

41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG125
41HG133
41WY119

Surface
cu 48
cu 58
Surface
Surface
Surface

Length (cm)

Width (cm)

Thickness (cm)

8.6
6.5
5.0
7.2
5.5
11.0

6.0
4.6
5.3
5.3
4.9
6.8

3.2
1.8
2.4
4.3
1.8
5.9

'

COBBLE CORES
1
2
3
4
5
6

~

41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41WY109

Surf ace
Surface
cu 7

41HG118
41HG125
41HG127

cu

4
Su:rface
Surface

41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG130
41WY89
41WY118
41WY129
41WY134

cu
cu
cu
cu

cu

72

Surface

7.9
10.2
6.6
8.9
6.8

4.0
6.0
4.6
7.5
3.7

2.2
2.1
2.4
3.7
2.5

10.5
8.1
7.7

5.7
5.8
4.5

3.0
3.1
2.0

BIFACIAL CORES
1

2
3

CORE NUCLEI
1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

r

'

UNIFACIAL CORES
1
2
3
4
5

I

'

2
13
13
24
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface

134

APPENDIX 2: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND DEBRIS ANALYSIS

cortex platforms. Much of the cortex is still present on these specimens. Specimens 2
(Fig. 13a) and 5 (Fig. 13b) are each modified at one end in such a way as to suggest use as
chopping or scraping tools.

Unifacial Cores (5 specimens)

Unifacial cores (Table 12; Fig. 14) are cobbles which have been flaked extensively on
one face and little, if at all, on the opposite face. The unflaked face is covered with
cortex. Flakes were knocked off multidirectionally from both cortex and single-facet
platforms. The outline configurations of all except Specimen 4 suggest that eventual
reduction to bifaces was intended.

Bifacial Cores (3 specimens)

These cores are flaked bifacially (Table 12; Fig. 15). They differ from the thick
bifaces discussed below in that they are thicker and the flake scars are larger. Flakes
were removed multidirectionally from both cortex and prepared platforms. Specimens retain
from 5 to 25% of the cortex.

Core Nuclei (9 specimens)

Core nuclei (Table 12; Fig. 13c and d) or exhausted cores have been flaked down to
such a small size that further flake removals would have been impractical or impossible.
These specimens are all much smaller than cores in the other groups. They vary in outline
shape from circular to oval to subrectangular. Most retain no cortex, but some have
patches covering 10 to 50% of one face. Flakes were removed multidirectionally from both
cortex and prepared platforms. Lengths range from 3.0 to 5.5 cm.

Core Fragments (27 specimens)

Core fragments are unclassifiable pieces of cores that were probably generated as
platforms were prepared and general shaping was done. They range in length from 2.5 to 6.0
cm. The provenience of these 27 specimens is as follows: 41HG96, 2 specimens; 41HG118, 20
specimens; 41HG122, 1 specimen; 41HG125, 2 specimens; 41HG128 1 specimen; and 41WY91, 1
specimen.

Thick Bifaces (7 specimens)

These bifaces are 1.3 cm or more in thickness (Table 13). They differ from core
bifaces in that they are more extensively flaked, retain no cortex, and have less-sinuous
edges. They range in outline shape from subtriangular to oval. All are believed to be

135

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 13.

Cobble Cores and Core Nuclei

Cobble Cores
a.

Specimen 2, Collection Unit 48, 41HGll8.

b.

Specimen 5, Surface, 41HG133.

Core Nuclei
c.

Specimen 1, Collection Unit 2, 41HGll8.

d.

Specimen 2, Collection Unit 13, 41HGll8.

All cores are illustrated actual size.

136

Figure i3

a

b

c

d

---------------------------------------------------------------ls..
~
~

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 14.

Unifacial Cores

a.

Specimen 2, Surface, 41HG118.

b.

Specimen 3, Collection Unit 7, 41HG118.

Both cores are illustrated actual size.

138

Figure 14

·.//
_,

-

<
'

I•

~·

.· . ,1·.·.
l

I

.

-.·. ,'.·_:·..

..
•

•,

~
!
t.·.·.=.·

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 15.

Bifacial Cores

a.

Specimen 1, Collection Unit 4, 41HG118.

b.

Specimen 2, Surface, 41HG125.

Both cores are illustrated actual size.

140

1'

Figure 15

0

b

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 13
PROVENIENCE AND METRIC DATA FOR BIFACES
Specimen

Site

Provenience

Length (cm)

Width (cm)

Thickness (cm)

Weight (g)

THICK BIFACES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG127

Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
cu 1
Trench 6
Surface

6.7
7.5
2.9*
7.8
7.5
7.5*
4.4*

3.6
5.6
5.3
5.1
4.8
4.3
3.4

1.5
1.5
1.6
2.0
2.1
1.3
1.3

31.8
63.5
24.9*
77.5
72.8
50.8*
17.4*

Surface

Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface

3.3
3.2
3.5
4.2
3.4
5.0
3.3
6.3
5.3

3.2
2.3
2.2
2.5
2.4
3.4
2.4
2.9
3.1

1.2
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.0
0.9
1.2
1.1
1.4

11.0
10.4
9.1
4.2
7.7
17.5
12.1
21.5
20.6

Surface
Surface
cu 44
Surface
Surface
Surface
cu 1
Surface
Surface
Surface
cu 54
Surface
Surf ace
Surface
Surf ace
Surf ace
cu 4

3.6
3.9
4.2*
3. 7*
4.9
2.6
2.4
3.3
2.8
3.3*
5.1
4.4
4.4
2.8*
2.5*
2.4*
2.7*

2.3
2.2
2.5*
2.9
3.2
1.9
2.0
2.2
1.9
2.5
2.5
2.6
1.6
1.4
2.2
2.0
2.1

0.7
0.7
0.7
1.0
0.7
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.6

6.7
7.0
8.8*
11.3*
11.0
4.3
3.3
4.6
3.9
7.8*
10.6
11.4
6.5
2.5*
5.5*
4.4*
5.3*

THIN BIFACES
Oval to Subtriangular
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG123
41HG127
41HG130
41WY100
41WY123

cu 9
cu 15
cu 17

Unstemmed Triangular
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

11
12
13
14
15
16
17

41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG125
41WY116
41HG115
41HG118
41HG96
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41WY117
41HG128
41HG120
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118

*Fragmentary specimen

142

Ii
I

'

APPENDIX 2: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND DEBRIS ANALYSIS

Table 13, continued
Specimen

Site

Provenience

Length (cm)

Width (cm)

Thickness (cm)

Weight (g)

~,1,

$

I

'\I
),

~

:1
ff
;f$i

f

J
VJ;

:ii

18
19
20
21
22
23

41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118

cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu

10
13
20
42
63
65

3.1*
1.4*
1.3*
1.6*
1. 7*
1.8*

2.3
2.2
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.7

0.7
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.8
0.7

6.3*
3.1*
2.7*
2.8*
4.1*
4.3*

41HG125
41WY72

Surf ace
Surface

2.1*
2.2*

1.8*
2.5

0.4
0.8

2.5*
5.3*

3.4*
3.0*
3.0*
2.2*
3.3*
2.1*
4.0*
2.7*
4.4*
2.5*
3.2*

3.5
5.2
3.3
3.2*
3.5
2.7
2.4
3.5
2.0
3.5
2.1

1.0
0.8
0.8
1.0
1.2
0.7
1.0
1.1
1.2
0.9
0.5

15.4*
14.2*
11.3*
8.7*
11.4*

2.6*
2.4*

2.0
1.8

0.6
0.5

3.5*

1.9

0.4

Stemmed
1
2

:I
<;:

Miscellaneous Fragments

"£'.'

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG125
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG131
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG128
41WY139

Surface
Surface
cu 18
Surf ace
Surface
cu 1
cu 78
cu 36
cu 38
Surface
Surface
Surface
cu 6
cu 10
cu 42
cu 60
TP2, L4
cu 6
Surf ace
Surface

10.3*
12.9*

4.2*

4.6*

manufacturing failures or preforms of one kind or another. Specimen 1 (Fig. 16a) , for
example, has a thick knot on one side that is marked by step fractures evidencing failure
of the knapper to further thin the piece. Specimen 2 (Fig. 16b) evidences no obvious
flaws. Specimen 4 (Fig. 16c) shows some edge modification which may have resulted from
use. Specimen 6 (Fig. 16d) is incomplete, displaying a transverse fracture adjacent to
edge crushing where platform preparation was attempted. Given the lithic resources available locally, the size of these thick bifaces suggests that cobble cores were being
bifacially reduced.
Thick biface Specimen 6 was recovered from a humate sample collected in Backhoe Trench
6 at 41HG118. Radiocarbon assay of this humate sample yielded an uncorrected date of 1060
B.C. (Beta-17437).

143

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 16.

Thick Bifaces

a.

Specimen 1, Surface, 41HG118.

b.

Specimen 2, Surface, 41HG118.

c.

Specimen 4, Surface, 41HG118.

d.

Specimen 6, Surface, 41HG118.

All artifacts are illustrated actual size.

144

Figure 16

a

b

c

d

I

'I

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Thin Bifaces (54 specimens)

Thin bifaces (Table 13) are less than 1.3 cm thick. They are generally worked into
more-formalized tool forms than are thick bifaces. Flaking is finer. Although percussion
flaking is still evidenced, there is much more of the fine shaping associated with pressure
flaking. The thin biface assemblage breaks down into two subcategories. The first contains pieces that are oval to subcircular to subrectangular in outline. They range in
thickness from 0.8 to 1.2 cm and thus appear abnormally thick relative to their length.
Their edges are somewhat sinuous, and there are signs of more percussion flaking than
pressure flaking. These thicker, cruder specimens are believed to be preforms and manufacturing failures representing an intermediate stage in the lithic reduction process
between thick bifaces and finished thin bifacial tools. The second subcategory of thin
bifaces contains what are assumed to be finished tools, as suggested by their thinness,
formal shape, and fine flaking. Complete finished tools, fragments of tools broken in the
final stages of shaping, and fragments of tools broken in use are represented. All of the
specimens described below as oval to subtriangular thin bifaces and certain of the miscellaneous thin biface fragments fall into the first group. The second group is composed of
unstemmed triangular thin bifaces, stemmed thin bifaces, and certain of the miscellaneous
thin biface fragments.

Oval to Subtriangular (9 specimens)

As discussed above, specimens in this group do not, for the most part, appear to be
finished artifacts. They are relatively thick, crudely flaked, and have fairly sinuous
edges. Preforms or manufacturing failures are indicated.
Specimen 1 (Fig. 17a): Made of brown chert, this piece has cortex covering about 20%
of one face. Step fractures on this same face indicate inability to further thin the
piece.
Specimen 2 (Fig. 17b): Material is brownish gray chert.
are step fractures on one face.

No cortex remains.

There

Specimen 3 (Fig. 17c): Made of tannish gray chert, this specimen retains a small
patch of cortex at one end. This cortex patch may have been the striking platform for the
original flake.
Specimen 4 (Fig. l 7d) : This specimen is made of mottled gray-cream-tan chert.
exhibits many step fractures.

It

Specimen 5 (Fig. 17e): Made of grayish white chert, this piece retains a cortex
striking platform at the distal end. The edges are somewhat sinuous, and there are step
fractures on both faces.
Specimen 6 (Fig. 17f): The best-made example in this group, Specimen 6 is made of
coarse-grained gray chert with tan speckles. The piece is well thinned, and the edges are
fairly smooth. There is no obvious reason for discarding this piece. It could have functioned as a cutting tool.

146

APPENDIX 2: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND DEBRIS ANALYSIS

Specimen 7 (Fig. 17g): This specimen is made of grayish white chert. It is pronouncedly thick in relation to its width. No cortex remains. The edges are quite sinuous.
Specimen 8 (Fig. l 7h) : Made of brown chert, this specimen may be a finished tool.
Edges at the distal end show some edge damage and retouch that may have resulted from use
and subsequent rejuvenation. Damage at the distal end looks like impact fracturing.
Specimen 9 (Fig. 17i): A reddish brown coarse-grained chert, the specimen has extensive step fracturing on one face. The edges are sinuous. A small patch of cortex remains
on one face.

Unstemmed Triangular (23 specimens)

The specimens in this group appear to be in finished form or, for the fragmentary
specimens, were broken either in the final stages of manufacture or during use. For
descriptive purposes, the specimens are grouped below according to similar morphological
characteristics, including overall size and outline configuration. Specimens conforming to
previously defined types are so indicated. These artifacts are presumed to have functioned
as projectile points and/or knives.
Specimens 1-5 (Fig. 18a-e): These specimens exhibit the general morphological characteristics of the Tortugas type (MacNeish 1958:64-65; Suhm and Jelks 1962:249). Blade edges
are straight to slightly convex. Basal corners are squared to slightly rounded. Bases are
straight to very slightly concave. The blade edges of these specimens show no signs of
alternate beveling. Specimen 4 is noticeably thicker at the distal end, and the distal tip
appears to have been sheared off, perhaps by an impact fracture. Specimen 5 shows evidence
of having been resharpened along the blade edges while hafted. Specimen 3 is missing the
distal tip and one basal corner and was burned. Materials represented: Specimens 1 and 2,
tannish gray chert; Specimens 3 and 4, brown chert; Specimen 5, grayish white chert with
tan speckles.
Specimens 6-7 (Fig. 19a-b): These two pieces fit the characteristics of the Matamoros
type (MacNeish 1958:68; Suhm and Jelks 1962:215). Specimen 6 is made of gray chert. It
has slightly convex blade edges which are alternately beveled. The base is convex. Specimen 7 is triangular in outline. It is made of light brown chert. Blade edges are slightly
convex and alternately beveled. The base is straight.
Specimens 8-9 (Fig. 19c-d): These two bifaces meet the specifications for the Catan
type (MacNeish 1958: 68-69; Suhm and Jelks 1962: 175). Specimen 8 is made of reddish tan
chert. It has concave blade edges, slightly rounded basal corners, and a more-or-less
straight base. Specimen 9 is grayish brown chert. It has a straight blade edge, rounded
basal corners, and a convex base. One blade edge is beveled.
Specimens 10-12 (Fig. 18f-h): These specimens are distinguished from the other thin
bifaces in that they are larger and have strongly convex bases. They have some characteristics of the Abasolo type (Suhm and Jelks 1962:165). Specimen 10 is a proximal fragment.
It is made of chert that has been burned to a reddish gray color. The blade edges are
convex, and the basal corners are rounded. The base is rounded. Specimen 11 is made of
gray chert.
It has convex blade edges which exhibit very slight alternate beveling.

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 17.

Oval to Subtriangular Thin Bifaces

a.

Specimen 1, Surface, 41HG118.

b.

Specimen 2, Collection Unit 9, 41HGll8.

c.

Specimen 3, Collection Unit 15, 41HGll8.

a.

Specimen 4, Collection Unit 17, 41HGll8.

e.

Specimen

f.

Specimen 6, Surface, 41HG127.

g.

Specimen 7, Surface, 41HG130.

h.

Specimen 8, Surface, 41WY100.

i.

Specimen 9, Surface, 41WY123.

s,

Surface, 41HG123.

All artifacts are illustrated actual size •
.·

148

Figure 17

~I
a

~I

c

b

I

I

<222/>

e

f

d

g

h

i

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 18.

Unstemmed Triangular Thin Bifaces

Tortugas
a.

Specimen 1, Surface, 41HG118.

b.

Specimen 2, Surface, 41HG118.

c.

Specimen 3, Collection Unit 44, 41HG118.

d.

Specimen 4, Surface, 41HG125.

e.

Specimen 5, Surface 41WY116.

Abasolo-like
f.

Specimen 10, Surface, 41HG118.

g.

Specimen 11, Collection Unit 54, 41HG118.

h.

Specimen 12, Surface, 41WY117.

All artifacts are illustrated actual size.

150

Figure 18

/i
b

a

I
'I

c

d

e

I

~

1

I
)'

.i
*1-

.1

v

I

:I.,

I
l

1
I

f

g

h

t

Ji
·~1

~·

;!!I:,

"1111111111011111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111

n
<~'

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 19.

Stemmed and Unstemmed Thin Bifaces

Matamoros
a.

Specimen 6, Surface, 41HG115.

b.

Specimen 7, Collection Unit 1, 41HG118.

Catan
c.

Specimen 8, Surface, 41HG96.

d.

Specimen 9, Surface, 41HG118.

Untyped Triangular
e.

Specimen 13, Surface, 41HG128.

f.

Specimen 14, Surface, 41HG120.

Stemmed Proximal Fragments
g.

Specimen 1, Surface, 41HG125.

h.

Specimen 2, Surface, 41WY72.

All artifacts are illustrated actual size.

152

I

Figure 19

c

b

a

I

I

<ZZ>

e
d

f

g

h

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Specimen 12 is of grayish white chert. It is consistent in general morphology to Specimens
10 and 11 but is distinguished by lateral and basal edge beveling on one face. The tips of
both Specimens 11 and 12 are broken off.
Specimen 13 (Fig. 19e): This specimen is unique in the present assemblage. It is
long and narrow in outline form. The point is very sharp. The blade edges are very
slightly convex and are lightly serrated. The basal corners are squared to slightly
rounded. The base is weakly convex. In cross section, this piece is biconvex and it is
unusually thick for its width and overall good workmanship. It is made of brown jasper.
Specimen 14 (Fig. 19f): This small slender piece is made from tannish gray chert.
The tip is missing. The blade edges are straight to slightly concave. The basal corners
flare out a little bit. The base is concave, having a notched appearance. The specimen is
planoconvex in cross section. Blade edges are lightly serrated.
Specimens 15-19 (Fig. 20a-e): These five specimens are proximal fragments of triangular thin bifaces. They have straight bases as a common feature. The surviving blade edges
of all are straight to slightly convex. All except Specimen 18 appear to have been
finished. Specimen 18 exhibits step fractures suggesting that it was broken during manufacture. Dark brown, tan, grayish red (burned), and gray cherts are represented.
Specimens 20-23 (Fig. 20f-i): These four pieces are proximal fragments of triangular
thin bifaces having concave bases. Blades are generally too incomplete to describe,
although Specimen 21 shows signs of blade sharpening while mounted in a haft. Gray, black,
and reddish tan (burned) chert are represented.

Stemmed (2 specimens)

Two proximal thin bifaces having stems were recovered. Specimen 1 (Fig. 19g): This
artifact is made of mottled red-tan-gray chert. Surviving blade edges are straight and
serrated. The stem is formed by side notches, each about 0.4 cm wide and deep. The basal
corners are sharply pointed. The base is broadly concave. The color and glossiness of
this piece suggest heat treatment of the chert.
Specimen 2 (Fig. 19h): Made of grayish white chert, this artifact is the stem of a
very weak-shouldered thin biface. The stem contracts slightly to a straight base.

Miscellaneous Fragments (20 specimens)

As discussed above, this subcategory of artifacts contains both large,
biface fragments believed to represent manufacturing failures and thin,
biface fragments that came from finished of near-finished tools. Specimens
the former group (manufacturing failures) and Specimens 11-20 the latter
fragments).

crudely flaked
finely flaked
1-10 represent
(finished tool

Specimens 1-4: These are proximal biface fragments. Specimens 1 and 2 have straight
ends. Specimens 1, 3, and 4 are of chert. Specimen 2 is of chalcedony. Specimen 4 has a
glossy appearance suggesting heat treatment.

154

APPENDIX 2: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND DEBRIS ANALYSIS

Specimens 5-7: Pointed bifaces are represented by these fragments.
made of chalcedony, while Specimens 6 and 7 are of chert.
Specimens 8-10: These are medial and lateral biface fragments.
gray-white cherts are represented.

Specimen 5 is

Gray-brown, tan, and

Specimens 11-17: Distal, or pointed, thin biface fragments of the finished kind are
represented by seven pieces. Specimens 11-16 are of chert. Specimen 17 is of chalcedony.
Specimen 12 appears to have been burned. Specimens ll, 13, 14, and 17 have a glossy
appearance suggesting heat treatment.
Specimens 18-20: Specimens 18 and 20 are basal corner fragments of chert.
19 is a basal fragment of chalcedony.

Specimen

Distally Beveled Bifaces and Unifaces (12 specimens)

In this category are formally shaped bifaces and unifaces sharing distal bevels as a
common attribute (Table 14) • Often referred to as "gouges," a less-function-specific
designation is opted for here following Hall et al. (1982:318). Two of the 12 specimens in
this group are unifacially worked, and one has a thickness of 1.3 cm. In these cases,
their formal shapes and the presence of distal beveling override traits that would have
otherwise thrown these tools into other descriptive categories such as modified/trimmed
debitage or thick bifaces. The concept of a formal or intentionally developed shape is
important in that it distinguishes specimens in this category from those in the modified/
trimmed debitage category, which also have beveled edges of one kind or another. It is
quite possible that the function of the bevels on tools in the two separate categories was
the same.
Specimens 1-3
angular in outline
Specimen 1 is made
facet. Specimen 2
less than half the

(Fig. 2la-c): These artifacts are all bifacially
form. They fit the description for Olmos bifaces
of black chert. One corner of the distal (beveled)
is made of tannish gray chert. Specimen 3 is made
length of Specimens 1 and 2.

worked and are tri(Hester 1969:29-30).
end exhibits a burin
of tan chert and is

Specimen 4 (Fig. 2ld):

This is the largest distally beveled tool in the assemblage.
(Ray 1941) • It is made of now-dehydrated
(hence very light and soft) chert. The color of the material is light reddish yellow. The
unifacial surface of this piece (the side opposite the bevel) is the cortex of the cobble
from which it was manufactured. This characteristic has been reported from the Falcon
Reservoir area in Zapata County (Chandler 1974; Kotter 1980).
It most closely resembles the Clear Fork type

Specimen 5 (Fig. 2le): This piece is made of grayish tan chert and is subtriangular
in outline shape. The proximal end is thick and exhibits step fractures. The bevel at the
distal end is very poorly worked. Lateral edges are slightly convex.
Specimens 6-7 (Fig. 2lf-g): These two specimens are distinguished by the fact that
the distal bevels were made on proximal thin biface fragments. Specimen 6 is made of gray
chert. The proximal end is wider than the distal (beveled) end, and the base is convex.
The dorsal (bevel) face has a thick ridge near the bevel. Step fractures indicate that

155

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 20.

Proximal Fragments of Unstemmed Triangular Thin Bifaces

Straight Bases
a.

Specimen 15, Surface, 41HGll8.

b.

Specimen 16, Surface, 41HGll8.

c.

Specimen 17, Collection Unit 4, 41HGll8.

d.

Specimen 18, Collection Unit 10, 41HGll8.

e.

Specimen 19, Collection Unit 13, 41HGll8.

Concave Bases
f.

Specimen 20, Collection Unit 20, 41HGll8.

g.

Specimen 21, Collection Unit 42, 41HGll8.

h.

Specimen 22, Collection Unit 63, 41HGll8.

i.

Specimen 23, Collection Unit 65, 41HGll8.

All artifacts are illustrated actual size.

156

Figure 20

I

I

c::zz2>

I

I

czz;:>
c

b

0

I

I

~

- -,:::__

f

e

d

'~(

I~
g

I

I

dZP
h

i

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 21.

Distally Beveled Bifaces and Unifaces

a.

Specimen 1, Collection Unit 1, 41HGll8.

b.

Specimen 2, Collection Unit 1, 41HGll8.

c.

Specimen 3, Surface, 41HG124.

d.

Specimen 4, Surface 41WY111.

e.

Specimen 5, Collection Unit 13, 41HG118.

f.

Specimen 6, Surface, 41HG118.

g.

Specimen 7, Surface, 41HG118.

h.

Specimen 8, Surface, 41HG124.

i.

Specimen 9, Collection Unit 6, 41HG118.

j.

Specimen 10, Surface, 41HG127.

k.

Specimen ll, Collection Unit 13, 41HG118.

1.

Specimen 12, Collection Unit

so,

41HG118.

All artifacts are illustrated actual size.

158

Figure 21

/;
/J

a

c

b

f

e

d

i

h

g

j

k

I

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 14
PROVENIENCE AND METRIC DATA FOR DISTALLY
BEVELED BIFACES AND UNIFACES

Specimen

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

Site

Provenience

41HG118
41HG118
41HG124
41WY111
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG124
41HG118
41HG127
41HG118
41HG118

cu
cu

1
1
Surface
Surface

cu

13

Surface
Surface
Surface
cu 6
Surface

cu
cu

13

50

Length
(cm)

Width
(cm)

Thickness
(cm)

3.1
3.6
2.0
4.3
3.7
3.3
2.0
1.5
1. 7
1.5
1.9
2.4

2.3
2.8
2.0
4.0
2.2
3.0
2.9
1.5
2.6
2.3
3.2
2.1

0.8
0.8
0.6
1.3
1.0
1.0
0.6
0.7
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.9

Weight
(g)

Bevel
Angle

7.0
8.9
2.8
13.6
9.7
10.8
4.7
2.0
4.0
3.0
4.8
4.2

65-70°
66°
70-76°
63-68°
88-90°
80-83°
59-62°
67-69°
47-48°
46-50°
54-58°
48-52°

this piece could not be further thinned by the knapper. Specimen 7 is made of good quality
light brown chert. The thin biface proximal fragment on which this bevel is worked may
have been a Tortugas point. The base is slightly concave.
Specimen 8 (Fig. 2lh): This tiny piece is made of brownish orange jasper. It is
unifacial and is strongly planoconvex. Such specimens have been referred to elsewhere as
"end scrapers" (Mallouf et al. 1977:275).
Specimen 9 (Fig. 2li): This piece is made of good-quality light brown chert. It is
bifacially worked. It is somewhat like Specimens 6 and 7 in that the proximal end is
broader than the distal (beveled) end. However, this piece is obviously not reworked from
another broken tool.
Specimen 10 (Fig. 2lj): This piece is similar in general configuration to Specimen 9.
The beveled end is narrower than the proximal end. It is bifacially worked. Material is
pink-tan-brown chert. Its glossiness suggests heat treatment.
Specimen 11 (Fig. 2lk): This specimen is subtriangular in outline shape with the
distal (beveled) end being pronouncedly wider than the proximal end. The bevel is not
pronounced. Light brown chert was used to make this piece. The proximal end appears to
retain a striking platform for the original flake on which the piece was made. It is
bifacially worked and exhibits a number of step fractures on both faces.
Specimen 12 (Fig. 211): This specimen is subrectangular in outline shape with the
distal (beveled) end being slightly wider than the proximal. It is bifacially worked and
made of gray chert.

160

APPENDIX 2: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND DEBRIS ANALYSIS

Modified and/or Trimmed Debitage (68 specimens)

In this category are whole flakes and flake fragments (chips) which show signs of
alteration assumed to have resulted from use of the pieces as tools. The most important
overall characteristic of specimens in this group is that the alterations observed have not
changed the overall configuration of the flake or chip on which they appear. As discussed
with respect to distally beveled bifaces and unifaces, some of the specimens in this
descriptive category have bevels that may have functioned in like fashion to the formal
tool types. The distinction made is that the beveled debitage piece is not otherwise
shaped by chipping. Specimens are subdivided into two groups representing trimmed debitage
and modified debitage. Modified pieces exhibit "nibbling" or edge damage in the form of
tiny flake scars believed to have been generated during direct use (e.g., cutting or
scraping?) on a relatively hard material. Trimmed debitage pieces have a working edge that
was intentionally worked on the piece by the maker, either before use or through resharpening for further effective use. A trimmed piece may also exhibit "nibbling" or edge damage
on the trimmed edge.

Modified Debitage (30 specimens)

Provenience and metric attributes for the modified debitage are presented in Table 15.
Modified debitage specimens are further characterized in the Table 16. Information presented includes whether the piece is a whole flake or flake fragment (chip) , amount of
cortex remaining (primary: cortex covers one face; secondary: some cortex remaining;
tertiary: no cortex remaining), and the orientation of the working edge relative to the
long axis of the piece. All modified debitage specimens are made of chert.

Trimmed Debitage (38 specimens)

The trimmed debitage collection is subdivided into three groups based on characteristics of the trimmed edge. The three edge types include bevels, scoops, and notches.

BEVELED PIECES (22 specimens)
These specimens (Table 17; Fig. 22)) exhibit one and sometimes two edges altered by
trimming to form beveled working surfaces. Additional characteristics of trimmed debitage
pieces with bevels are summarized in the Table 18. Column entries are as described for the
modified debitage. All of the beveled trimmed debitage pieces are made from chert.

NOTCHED PIECES (10 specimens)
Ten trimmed flakes are altered in such a way that notches were formed along the trimmed edge. Provenience and metric attributes for these specimens are presented in Table 19.
Additional characteristics of trimmed debitage pieces with notches are summarized in Table
20. Column entries are as described for the modified debitage. All specimens are made of
chert. Selected specimens are illustrated in Figure 23a-d.

I
I
• - ......................
.....

161

I

I

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 15
PROVENIENCE AND METRIC DATA FOR MODIFIED DEBITAGE
Specimen

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

Site

41HG116
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG123

Provenience

Surface
Surface
Surf ace
Surface
Surface
TPl, L4
TPl, L4
TPl, L6
TP2, LS
TP4, 14
TP4, L4
cu 1
cu 1
cu 1
cu 2
cu 2
cu 3
cu 4
cu 6

cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu

13
13

15
17
24
24
28
36
42
48
Surface

Length (cm)

4.6
3.4
2.4
4.2
3.0
2.7
3.9
2.5
3.2
2.8
4.0
2.3
3.4

s.s
1.9
2.7
4.5
2.7
2.3
2.1
2.7
3.1
2.2
3.3
1.8
3.9
3.9
2.9
3.3
2.8

Width (cm)

Thickness (cm)

3.9
1.7
2.0
4.0
1. 7
3.0
3.0
2.3
2.4
1.6
2.1
1.6
1.1
5.4
1.9
2.1
2.2
1.9
1.8
1.5
3.2
1.8
2.0
3.1
1.8
2.5
2.7
2.2
3.2
1.8

0.8
0.6
0.2
0.6
0.7
0.3
0.8
0.2
0.6
0.3
0.7
0.6
0.4
1.8
0.3
0.9
1.0
0.7
0.4
0.4
1.1
0.7

o.s
0.9
0.4
0.4
1.1
0.6
0.7
0.6

Weight (g)

15.5
4.3
2.3
14.4
4.7

s.s
8.1
2.3
5.8
2.3
6.0
3.8
2.4
37.8
2.0
6.4
10.0
4.7
3.5
2.5
9.7
4.0
3.4
9.9
2.1
6.9
10.9
4.9
7.6
3.8

SCOOPED PIECES (6 specimens)
These tools were made on debitage pieces having pronounced "scooped" or curved configurations (Table 19). The scooped edge was trimmed to form a very distinctive-looking
tool (Fig. 23e-f). Additional attributes are summarized in Table 20. Specimen 1 is made
of brown jasper. All other specimens are chert.

162

TABLE 16
CHARACTERISTICS OF MODIFIED DEBITAGE
Specimen

0)

w

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Flake

x
x

12
13

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

Primary

Secondary

x
x
x
x
x
x

Distal

Unilateral

x
x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x

x

x

x
x

x
x

x

x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x

Distal/Lateral

x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Bilateral

x
x

x

x
x
x
x
x

Tertiary

x
x
x

10
11

Chip

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 17
PROVENIENCE AND METRIC DATA FOR TRIMMED DEBITAGE WITH BEVELING

Specimen

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

Site

Provenience

41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG123
41WY127
41HG128
41HG132
41WY89
41WY115
41WY124
41WY126
41WY127
41WY139

Surf ace
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
cu 1
cu 3
cu 3
cu 10
cu 46
cu 84
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surf ace
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface

Length
(cm)

1.8
2.5
3.3
2.6
4.3
3.5
2.8
3.0
3.0
3.4
3.9
2.2
3.3
2.2
1. 7
3.3
3.8
3.7
2.4
4.5
3.7
2.2

Width
(cm)

Thickness
(cm)

Weight
(g)

Bevel
Angle

2.6
1.5
3.2
2.2
3.7
2.2
2.9
1.7
1.0
4.0
3.2
2.4
2.9
2.1
1.5
3.0
3.4
2.8
2.6
3.0
2.1
1.8

0.6
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.7
1.0
0.6
0.8
0.3
1.0
1.0
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.7
1.2
0.7
1.1
0.8
0.6
0.6

5.6
3.6
6.5
3.0
12.8
9.7
6.6
4.5
2.2
17.5
15.6
4.2
8.5
3.4
2.2
9.6
19.5
9.7
8.3
11.2
5.2
2.8

64-66°
69-72°
47-51°

58-65°

85-87°

65-68°
76-81°
65-70°

Unmodified Debitage (l,262 specimens)

The unmodified debitage collection consists of 1,262 flakes and chips. Site 41HG118
yielded 1,196 specimens. The balance of 66 pieces of debitage came from 22 other sites.
In Tables 21 and 22, the debitage is broken down into four groups representing primary
flakes, secondary flakes, tertiary flakes, and chips. Flakes exhibit a striking platform
and a bulb of percussion. Chips lack the striking platform and exhibit angular breaks
resulting from breakage, crushing, or shattering. A primary flake has cortex over its
entire dorsal or external face. A secondary flake has cortex over 1 to 99% of the dorsal
or external face. Tertiary flakes retain no cortex. The totals presented here include the
pieces dealt with in the section on modified and/or trimmed debitage above. The flake/chip
breakdown for 41HG118 is: 80 primary flakes, 340 secondary flakes, 461 tertiary flakes,
and 315 chips. For the remaining 22 sites, the totals are: 2 primary flakes, 22 secondary
flakes, 39 tertiary flakes, and 6 chips.

164

TABLE 18
CHARACTERISTICS OF TRIMMED DEBITAGE WITH BEVELS
Specimen

1
2
3

I-'

°'
U1

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

12
13

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

Flake

Chips

*
x
x

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

x

x
x
x

x
x

x

x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x

x

x
x
x

x

x

*Specimen 1 is manufactured from a small pebble.

x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x

Distal/Lateral

x

x

x
x

Bilateral

x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Unilateral

x
x
x
x
x

x

Distal

x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x

Cortex was removed only where the bevel was made.

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 22.

Trimmed Debitage Pieces with Bevels

a.

Specimen 1, Surface, 41HG118.

b.

Specimen 2, Surface, 41HG118.

c.

Specimen 6, Surface, 41HG118.

d.

Specimen 12, Collection Unit 84, 41HG118.

e.

Specimen 16, Surface, 41HG132.

f.

Specimen 19, Surface, 41WY124.

g.

Specimen 20, Surface, 41WY126.

h.

Specimen 21, Surface 41WY127.

All artifacts are illustrated actual size.

166

Figure 22

/

0

b

I

I

~

d

c

f

e

h

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 19
PROVENIENCE AND METRIC DATA FOR OTHER TRIMMED DEBITAGE
Specimen

Site

Provenience

Width (cm)

Thickness (cm)

2.0
2.7
3.2
2.7
3.9
3.9
2.0
3.2
3.7
2.3

2.6
1.8
2.8
1.8
2.9
4.0
1.5
2.2
2.3
1.5

0.6
0.5
0.9
0.5
1.0
0.8
0.3
0.7
1.8
0.4

4.2
3.1
6.1
3.4
10.3
10.7
1.8
5.5
9.0
2.3

2.7
1.6
3.5
2.4
2.5
3.5

2.9
2.0
2.2
1.5
2.9
2.3

0.6
0.5
0.8
0.3
0.7
1.1

5.0
3.1
6.3
2.2
5.6
7.0

Length (cm)

Weight (g)

NOTCHED PIECES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118

cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu

1
3
4
9
10
12
18
21
50
62

SCOOPED PIECES
1
2
3
4
5
6

41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41HG118
41WY134

Surf ace
cu 13
cu 13
cu 24
cu 38
Surf ace

GROUND STONE

Grinding Slab

One grinding slab was recovered from the surface (actually exposed in south bank of
drainage ditch) of 41WY121. This grinding slab (Fig. 24b) is made of a rectangular cobble
of reddish yellow siliceous siltstone. One end of the specimen is slightly rounded, being
essentially an unaltered portion of the cobble. This end does exhibit some striations or
scratch marks paralleling the long axis of the cobble. The striations are up to 1.1 cm
long. Most of the long striae are on one face of the specimen, but some short marks are
also visible on the opposing face along the same edge. The opposite end appears to have
been broken off with a single blow. The edges of the break were then flaked off to a
certain extent by additional blows on one side. At the end on the opposite side, there is
a 5.6-cm-long groove down the middle. It may be a plow mark. There are two oblong facets,
one on each broad, opposing face. The facets are 12 to 13 cm in length and 6 cm wide. The
facet surfaces were ground smooth and subsequently pecked. This specimen is 21 cm long,
12.3 cm wide, 5.2 cm thick, and weights 2.518 kg.

168

TABLE 20
CHARACTERISTICS OF OTHER TRIMMED DEBITAGE
Specimen

Flake

Chips

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

Distal

Unilateral

Bilateral

Distal/Lateral

NOTCHED PIECES
1
2

x

4
I-'

\.0

5
6
7
8
9

x
x

x
x
x

x
x

10

x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x

3

(J')

x

x

x
x
x

x
x

x
x

x
x

x

x

SCOOPED PIECES
1
2

x
x
x

3
4

5
6

x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 23.

Trimmed Debitage

Notched Pieces
a.

Specimen 5, Collection Unit 10, 41HGllB.

b.

Specimen 7, Collection Unit 62, 41HGllB.

c.

Specimen 9, Collection Unit 50, 41HGll8.

d.

Specimen 10, Collection Unit 62, 41HG118.

Scooped Pieces
e.

Specimen 5, Collection Unit 38, 41HGll8.

f.

Specimen 10, Surface, 41WY134.

All artifacts are illustrated actual size.

170

Figure 23

b

a

d

c

e

f

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 21
DEBITAGE FROM 41HG118
Primary Flakes
Provenience

Test Pit 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 6
Level 7
Level 8
Level 9
Level 10
Test Pit 2
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 6
Test Pit 3
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 6
Test Pit 4
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 6
Level 7
Level 8
Level 9
Test Pit 5
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4

Total

Modified/
Trimmed

Secondary Flakes
Total

Modified/
Trimmed

Chips

Tertiarx: Flakes
Total

Modified/
Trimmed

Total

2
7

1

4
4

2

5
7

5

16

3

7

1

6
6

11

4
3
3

1
3

11

3

1

1
3
2
3
1

2

2
2
3

1
6
6
4

1

9

1

1

3

4

1
3
1

8

5

1
2
1

2

1

3

2
3
5
8

1

2
2
2
2
4
1

14
1
1

172

1

1
1

5
3
1

Modified/
Trimmed

APPENDIX 2: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND DEBRIS ANALYSIS

Table 21, continued
Primary Flakes
Provenience

Level
Level
Level
Level
Level
Totals:

cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

12
13

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48

Total

Modified/
Trimmed

Secondary Flakes
Total

Modified/
Trimmed

4

5*
6*
7*
8*
9*

Tertiary Flakes
Total

Modified/
Trimmed

Chips
Total

Modified/
Trimmed

3

7
1

1
1
7

46

4
3
2
1
1
1

9
5
15

2
1
4
2
4
3

2
1
1

3
3

1
1
2
3
3
1
1

13

3
12
5
10
3
8
4
6
11

6
3
3
3
6
3
1
7
5
2
2
1
9
6
5
5

149
1
1
1
1

11

10
17
16
8
8

68
3
1
2
1
1

2

2
1
2
1
1
1

1
3

10
6
6
4
8
9
15
1
7
4
7
3
3
9
4
2
1
2

1
1
2
1

1

1
1
1

11

1

13
11

1

15
2
9
4
8
2
7

1

12
8
8
2
4
5
5
1
2
2
1
2
6
2
10
6
4

1
1

8
4
3
5

12
6
6

2

13

7

7

1

9
3
6

6
10
3

7

*Recovery from eastern half of unit only.

173

2

1

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Table 21, continued
Primary Flakes
Provenience

cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu

50
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
Totals:

GRAND
TOTALS:

Total

Modified/
Trimmed

Secondary Flakes
Total

1
1
1
1
1

5
3
3
1
4
2
3

2

1

2
1
1

1

Modified/
Trimmed

1

Tertiary Flakes
Total

5
5
3
4
3
2
3
4

1
1
1
9

2
1
4
10
3
42

1
1
2
1
1
1
4
3
45

16

88

194

Modified/
Trimmed

Chips
Total

Modified/
Trimmed

5
2
2
2
1
1
3

1

1

2
1
2
3
35

103

Abrader Fragment

This abrader fragment (Fig. 24a) was recovered from Collection Unit 2 (surface) of
41HG118. This small piece of sandstone seems to be a fragment of a small, flat pebble or
cobble. The specimen is biconvex in cross section, rounding off on either side at what
appear to be the natural margins of the pebble. Flat to slightly convex opposing faces are
very smooth. This specimen is 3.0 cm long, 2.2 cm wide, and 0.65 cm thick.

LITHIC RESIDUES AND MISCELLANEOUS MATERIALS

This class of material includes fire-fractured rocks, burned clay lumps, pebbles,
cobbles, and caliche concretions. Almost all of this debris was collected during the
course of excavations and surface collections at 41HG118.

174

APPENDIX 2: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND DEBRIS ANALYSIS

TABLE 22
DEBITAGE FROM THE OTHER SITES
Primary Flakes
Provenience

41HGll5
41HG123
41HG124
41HG127
41HG128

Total

1
1

Total

2
5
3

Modified/
Trimmed

1

1

41WY60
41WY72
41WY89
41WY108
41WYll2
41WYll5
41WYll8
41WYll9
41WY128
41WY130
41WY131
41WY132
41WY134
41WY135
41WY136
41WY137
41WY138
41WY140
Totals:

Modified/
Trimmed

Secondary Flakes

2

1

1
1
1

Tertiary Flakes
Total

3
7
3
1
3

Modified/
Trimmed

Chips
Total

1

1
3
1
1
3
2

1
3
1

1
1

1
1

Modified/
Trimmed

3
3

1
1
1

1

1
1
3
1

1

2

2

1
1
1

22

39

6

Fire-Fractured Rocks, Burned Clay Lumps, and Pebbles

Fire-fractured rocks combine all chert, caliche, quartzite, and sandstone that has
been burned as indicated by discoloration and characteristic angular fracturing. This
debris is assumed to have been brought to the site by prehistoric peoples and subsequently
fired either intentionally or unintentionally. Burned clay lumps are the result of the
firing of clay-rich local soils. As such, they could have formed beneath prehistoric
hearths and/or during historic brush-burning activities. Pebbles recovered in excavations
are natural constituents of alluvial deposits in the area. Pebbles collected from the
surface of 41HG118 are of more doubtful origins. Some pebbles were very likely brought to

175

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 24.

Ground Stones

a.

Abrader fragment, Collection Unit 2, 41HG118; illustrated
actual size.

b.

Grinding slab, Surface, 41WY121; illustrated at 68% of
actual size.

176

Figure 24

a

b

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

the site by prehistoric peoples. Other pebbles, probably the majority, were introduced in
historic times as a component of concrete used in irrigation systems and as road metal.
Indeed, a number of pebbles from the surface of 41HG118 have concrete and/or mortar clinging to them. As a consequence, pebbles not obviously modified as artifacts or recovered
from test excavations are suspect. Provenience, counts, and weights for the fire-fractured
rocks, burned clay lumps, and pebbles are provided in Tables 23 and 24.

Cobbles (19 specimens)

As discussed above with respect to pebbles, it also is difficult to establish the
prehistoric or historic origin of cobbles. One cobble from 41HGll8, for instance, has
concrete adhering to it. The significance of these specimens in relation to the prehistoric occupation at 41HG118 is thus questionable. Provenience, metric attributes, and raw
material types for these specimens are given in Table 25.

Caliche Concretions

Circular to subcircular and
diameter. They are lenticular in
indicate the concretional origin
excavated at 41HG118. Provenience

flat, these concretions range from 1.0 to 2.0 cm in
cross section. Laminae are visible along the edges and
of these objects. All were recovered from test pits
and counts are presented in Table 26.

SHELLS

Marine Shells (16 specimens)

Fragments of marine shells representing at least five species of bivalves and gastropods were recovered. Species identifications, proveniences, and comments are given below.

GIANT ATLANTIC COCKLE
Laevicardium (Dinocardium) robustum (Andrews 1977:219)
Fragments of this species' shell were found at the following sites:
41HGll8
41WY109
41WY135
41WY137
41WY139

1
1
1
1
1

small fragment
fragment
large fragment
fragment ("X" and linear incising on ventral face) (Fig. 25a)
small fragment

178

APPENDIX 2: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND DEBRIS ANALYSIS

TABLE 23
PROVENIENCE, COUNTS, AND METRIC DATA FOR FIRE-FRACTURED
ROCKS, BURNED CLAY LUMPS, AND PEBBLES FROM 41HG118

Provenience

Test Pit 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 6
Level 7
Level 8
Level 9
Level 10
Test Pit 2
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 6
Test Pit 3
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 6
Test Pit 4
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 6
Level 7
Level 8
Level 9
Test Pit 5
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4

Burned Clay Lumps
Weight (g)
Count

Fire-Fractured Rocks
Weight (g)
Count

Pebbles
Count Weight (g)

39
8
5
8

119.2
13.2
3.5
35.9

3
5
3
6
8
15
25
51
50

3.4
4.6
4.5
14.1
8.9
14.5
17.9
40.4
56.0

44
1
11

20.3
8.0
5.8
33.0

1
2
4
3
6

4.1
2.7
2.5
3.0
10.3

3.9
18.5
10.3
11.4
8.4

30
5
4

45.7
5.1
6.6

4
6

3.7
7.3

4
14

2.3
14.4

20.9

2

3.3

2
3
1
2
6

1.5
12.9
38.4
43.8
40.3

1
2
5
24
14
20

1.2
5.5
4.0
44.6
33.3
33.9

1
1
1
2
3
4
6

1.0
1.2
1.4
1.9
2.5
3.8
5.1

8

21.0

3

2.3

2
7
6
2

1.3
44.9
116.5
30.0

2

24.5

10
1
2

53.4
1.6
7.3

3
8
2
1
2

4

10

179

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Table 23, continued

Level
Level
Level
Level
Level

5*
6*
7*
8*
9*

Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection

Burned Clay Lumps
Count
Weight (g)

Fire-Fractured Rocks
Count
Weight (g)

Provenience

1

1.2
8
8

47.7
5.4
9.7

1
2

3.5
24.9

1
3

46.2
18.2

4
6
1

45.4
91.2
45.0

1

10.8

1

10.2

1

7.4

10

Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

2

4.9

2
6
4
9

45.3
98.6
14.5
61.0

28
2
18
8
14

11

11

12

14
5
4

224.8
60.7
94.9
llO.O
115.4
149.1
173.6
68.8
11.2

4
3
5
2
1
1
3

23.5
53.3
73.8
36.4
21.3
2.2
21.2

2
2
3
1
5
3
4
5
7
3
1
8
2
3
1

58.0
41.4
19.4
18.3
70.0
28.9
38.9
27.4
58.7
58.6
4.8
73.9
46.9
66.5
7.2

13

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
54
56

*Recovery from eastern half of unit only

180

1

8.4

3
1

5.1
4.2

4

9.9

Pebbles
Count Weight (g)

1

1.0

8
4

11.8
5.2

3
18
1
16

39.4
lll.2
4.6
59.2

20
1
10
1
10
1
3
8
12
3
5
6
10
2
2
4
7

86.4
15.5
37.0
3.6
47.9
10.0
33.2
71.1
89.4
40.2
79.3
131.0
66.5
19.3
14.7
36.7
104.3

2

7.4

1
7
1
3
1
3
2
5

7.6
28.6
9.9
84.2
11.4
66.9
21.0
29.5

8
1
2
1

68.9
2.8
27 .6
8.6

APPENDIX 2: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND DEBRIS ANALYSIS

Table 23, continued

Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection

Burned Clay Lumps
Count
Weight (g)

Fire-Fractured Rocks
Weight (g)
Count

Provenience

Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit

58
60
62
64
66
68
70

5
7
ll
6
4
6
3

61.8
63.8
208.8
27.1
55.8
38.5
33.3

4

25.8

3
2
5
2

44.8
9.9
22.7
26.0

72

74
76
78
80
82
84
86

9

42.2

2

6.4

2
2
1
1

9.4
7.1
5.6
6.3

1

3.1

Pebbles
Count Weight (g)

7
4
6
4
3
4
7
8
8
1
6
8
10

88.4
30.8
48.1
67 .8
49.6
46.0
73.9
46.0
51.8
1.6
63.3
42.8
55.2

TABLE 24
PROVENIENCE, COUNTS, AND METRIC DATA FOR FIRE-FRACTURED ROCKS,
BURNED CLAY LUMPS, AND PEBBLES FROM THE OTHER SITES

Provenience

41HG96
41HG123
41HG125
41HG128

Fire-Fractured Rocks
Count
Weight (g)

7
2

Burned Clay Lumps
Count
Weight (g)

51.2
44.5

41WY107
41WY109
41WY132
41WY134
41WY136
41WY139
41WY140

181

2

2.6

2

38.5

1
1

2.2
10.2

7
3
3
2

31.l
15.2
18.4
19.5

Pebbles
Count Weight (g)

1

10.8

1

5.1

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 25
PROVENIENCE OF COBBLES RECOVERED FROM ALL SITES
Length (cm)

Width (cm)

Thickness (cm)

8
17
30
42
44
44
82
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surf ace
Surface

6.2
5.9
8.8
7.5
10.1
5.2
7.9
5.2
5.5
6.6
6.0
7.7
6.4
5.9
7.6
6.7
7.2
5.7

6.7
4.3
6.9
5.9
3.1
3.5
4.9
4.3
4.6
4.6
4.3
7.8
3.8
4.6
4.6
4.9
6.6
3.3

5.1
2.7
5.5
2.7
4.2
3.2
4.2
2.6
4.0
2.6
2.0
3.9
3.1
1.9
3.7
4.0
4.0
1.8

quartzite
rhyolite(?)
quartzite(?)
quartzite
chert(?)
chert(?)
unidentified
chert
quartzite
chert
chert
chert
rhyolite
chert
quartzite
rhyolite
chert(?)
chert(?)

41WY108, Surface

9.2

4.5

2.4

chert

Provenience

41HG118,

cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu

Material

TABLE 26
CALICHE CONCRETIONS RECOVERED FROM 41HG118
Level

Test Pit 1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8

9

10

Test Pit 2

Test Pit 3

4

Test Pit 4

Test Pit 5

10

3
8

7

1

5

1

5
2
4
2

6

7
3

2

182

APPENDIX 2: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND DEBRIS ANALYSIS

COMMON RANGIA
Rangia (Rangia) cuneata (Andrews 1977:220)
41WY117 -- 1 small shell

CONCH (no species identification possible)
41WY112
This subrectangular piece of conch shell measures 3.8x4.0x0.9 cm. It
appears to be a body whorl fragment. Edges along three sides appear to be rounded as if by
intentional abrasion or though use as a scraping tool (Fig. 25b).

LETTERED OLIVE
Oliva (Ispidula) sayana (Andrews 1977:153)
41WY60 -- One lettered olive shell was recovered from this site. It shows clear
evidence of having been modified by the groove-and-snap technique (Fig. 25c).

SUNRAY VENUS
Callista (Macrocallista) nimbosa (Andrews 1977:242)
41WY133
41WY137

1 fragment
2 fragments (1 umbo)

MISCELLANEOUS UNIDENTIFIED SHELL FRAGMENT
41HG96 -- 1 small fragment

Freshwater Shells

Mussel Shells

Freshwater mussel shells were uncommon and poorly preserved. In most cases, only
small unidentifiable fragments were recovered. Site provenience and comments are provided
as follows:
Provenience

Count

Comments

41HGll8
Test Pit 1, Level 2
Test Pit 1, Level 4

1 fragment
1 fragment

2x2 cm, unidentifiable
lxl cm, unidentifiable

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 25.

Modified Marine Shells and Mussel Shell

a.

Laevicardium (Dinocardium) robustum, Surface, 41WY137.

b.

Conch, Surface, 41WY112.

c.

~

d.

Mussel shell, Surface, 41HG128.

(Ispidula) sayana, Surface, 41WY60.

All modified shells are illustrated actual size.

184

Figure 25

a

b

c

d

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Comments

Count

Provenience
Test Pit 2, Level 5
Collection Unit 6
Collection Unit 14
Collection Unit 17
Collection Unit 38
Collection Unit 62

1
1
1
1
1
1

2x2
lxl
lx2
2x3
2x2
lx3

fragment
fragment
fragment
fragment
fragment
fragment

cm,
cm,
cm,
cm,
cm,
cm,

unidentifiable
unidentifiable
unidentifiable
unidentifiable
unidentifiable
unidentifiable

41HG123, Surface

2 fragments

unidentifiable

41HG124, Surface

1 fragment

unidentifiable

41HG128, Surface

2 fragments

one cut into subrectangular
shape 2.5x3.5 cm (Fig. 25d),
unidentifiable

41WYll3, Surface

4 complete valves

modern, unidentifiable

41WY132, Surface

1 fragment

unidentifiable

41WY134, Surface

1 fragment

unidentifiable

41WY140, Surface

numerous fragments

unidentifiable

Land Snail Shells

Whole land snail shells were collected from test pit deposits at 41HGll8. Species
represented are Rabdotus sp., Helicina sp., and Polygyra sp. Counts for these shells are
provided below.

Rabdotus sp. -- 41HG118 (whole shell counts by level)
Test Pit 1
157
206
285
300
337
290
ll6
ll5
49

Level
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Test Pit 2
139
195
226
286
231

Test Pit 3
152
170
202
251
290

Test Pit 4
275
250
98
154
239
245
262
291

Test Pit 5
219
301
182
131
lll
148
153
180

Single burned Rabdotus shells were recovered from Levels 5 and 8 of Test Pit 5 at
41HGll8.

186

APPENDIX 2: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND DEBRIS ANALYSIS

41HG118

Helicina sp., Polygyra sp.

Test Pit 2

Test Pit 1

Level
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Test Pit 3

3
2
5
2
2

1
2
8
3

1
4
5
15

Test Pit 4

Test Pit 5

10
4
3
8
3
15
1
12

1
12
28
2
3
5
4
11

BONES

Human bones and faunal remains recovered during the survey are treated in Appendices
3, 4, and 5.

CARBON

A considerable amount of carbon was collected from Feature 1 in Test Pit 5 at 41HG118.
As this feature was later determined to be of probable natural origin, no attempt was made
to analyze the carbon further.

HISTORIC DEBRIS

Historic artifacts were recovered from six sites. The largest collection is from
41HG118, and all of it is obviously very recent material. Table 27 and the following notes
give descriptions and proveniences for the materials collected.
41HG119, Surface

Clear glass bottle, 14x4xl.5 cm

41HG126, Surface

Brass rim-fire shell casing (.44 caliber?)

41HG128, Surface

1 piece thick, clear bottle glass

41WY108, Surface

1
1
5
1

41WY113, Surface

1 piece thick, clear bottle glass

stoneware sherd, orange
piece green glass
earthenware sherds
Lincoln penny dated 1935

187

TABLE 27
PROVENIENCE OF HISTORIC ARTIFACTS FROM 41HG118

Provenience

.......

co
co

Test Pit S,
Level 2
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit
Collection Unit

Clear

Brown

Glass
Green
White

Amethyst

Amber

1

-

Brick
Fragments

Miscellaneous
Metal

Gunshell
Casings

Plastic/
Rubber

Stoneware

Concrete
Fragments

-

1

1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
24
26
28

1
4
13

1
4

5
1

2
1

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

2
1

-

4

1

-

1

-

-

1
1
1
1

2
2
8

-

-

1

1
1
1
1

-

-

-

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

4

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2

-

1
2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

2
1
2
1
1

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1
3
1

1

1

1

-

1
1

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

-

1

-

1

1

1

1

-

1

Table 27, continued

Provenience

......
co
\.0

Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection
Collection

Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit

30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86

Clear

Brown

1
9

-

-

1

Amber

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

-

-

-

Miscellaneous
Metal

Gunshell
Casings

Plastic/
Rubber

Stoneware

-

-

-

1

1

-

2

1

1
1

1

-

-

1
1

-

-

1

1

-

2

3

Amethyst

Brick
Fragments

1

-

-

Glass
Green
White

1

2

-

1
1

2

2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2

-

-

1

1

1

1
1
1
1

-

1
1
1

-

-

-

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1
1

-

-

-

1

-

-

1

1

2

1
1
1

1

2

-

-

-

1

1
1

Concrete
Fragments

ri
~

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

l

t
~

¥

REFERENCES CITED

t

Vi

f
Andrews, Jean
1977
Shells and Shores of Texas.

University of Texas Press, Austin.

Chandler, C. K.
1974
Use Wear Analysis of "Clear Fork" Tools from the Falcon Reservoir Area, Southern
Texas. La Tierra (Journal of the Southern Texas Archeological Association)
1(4):15-21.
Day, D. William, Jane Laurens-Day, and Elton R. Prewitt
1981
Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy
Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 15. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Hall, Grant D., Stephen L. Black, and Carol Graves
Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase
1982
I Findings. Choke Canyon Series 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hester, Thomas R.
1969
Archeological Investigations in Kenedy and Kleberg Counties, Texas, in August
1967. Archeological Program Report 15. Texas State Building Commission, Austin.
Kotter, S. M.
1980
Archeological Assessments at Site 41ZP43, Falcon State Recreation Area, Zapata
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 9. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1958
Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Sierra de Tarnaulipas.
of the American Philosophical Society 48:6.

Transactions

Mallouf, Robert J., Barbara J. Baskin, and Kay L. Killen
1977
A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,
Texas. Survey Report 23. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1941
Various Types of Clear Fork Gouges.
Paleontological Society 13:152-162.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and

Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932
The Geology of Texas, Volume l= Stratigraphy.
Texas at Austin.

Bulletin 3232.

The University of

Suhrn, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological Society
Special Publication 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4. Austin.

190

APPENDIX 3:

Analysis of Feature 1 Burial at 41WY113

Margaret Ann Howard

APPENDIX 3: ANALYSIS OF FEATURE 1 BURIAL AT 41WY113

A scatter of human bones was found eroding from the ditch wall at 41WY113. Excavation
revealed an in-situ human burial approximately 29 to 38 cm below the ground surface. The
bones were confined to a roughly triangular area 25 cm north-south by 25 cm east-west (Fig.
26a). They were in very poor condition, most being mid-shafts of long bones in fragmentary
condition and lacking epiphyses. No evidence of a burial pit was observed. No associated
grave goods were found, although two burned clay lumps were recovered from the matrix
around the burial. This suggests that the burial intersected the diffuse midden deposit at
site 41WY113 (see site description in Appendix 1).
The bones were oriented randomly (Fig. 26b) and did not appear to be in anatomical
position. Two conjoining fragments of the right humerus were displaced 15 cm apart, indicating the degree of disturbance to the burial. Two possible explanations for this displacement are proposed. The burial may have suffered extensive postdepositional disturbance due to plow damage; the clean transverse breaks across some of the long bones support
this explanation. Alternatively, the burial may have been a secondary inhumation of long
bones and cranium. The absence of more-fragile elements, including the epiphyseal ends of
immature long bones, and lack of anatomical positioning support this explanation.
Very little of the skeleton was found in the Feature 1 burial. Mid-shaft fragments of
nine long bones were recovered (Fig. 27): distal right and left humeri, distal radius
(unsided), proximal right femur, distal left femur, proximal right and left tibias, and two
fibula shaft fragments (unsided). A number of cranial fragments were found, one of which
was identifiable to the lateral right parietal. A fragment of the mandible body was reconstructed, but it lacks the alveolar surface and both ascending rami. Two mandibular molars
also were recovered.
The skeletal materials were brought to the offices of Prewitt and Associates, Inc. and
washed with water and soft brushes. The fragments were reconstructed by the author with
the assistance of Mary Standifer, using a 25% solution of polyvinyl acetate as an adhesive.
The human remains found in Feature 1 at 41WY113 represent a juvenile male around 12
years-of-age. No evidence of pathology nor definite evidence of aboriginal origin was
found in the limited remains present.
Age has been assessed on the basis of three traits: cranial suture closure, dental
development, and general morphology. One parietal fragment includes part of the unfused
parieto-mastoid suture, which commences to close at age 37 in white males (Krogman 1962:
81). A much younger age is suggested by the development of the two permanent mandibular
molars. These specimens lack roots and show no occlusal wear, indicating that they have
not erupted from the alveoli. In white populations, most permanent molars have erupted by
age 14 (Brothwell 1981:65), although the third molar may never erupt in some individuals.
The general size and gracility of the skeleton suggest that the younger age estimate is
correct and that this individual is less than 14 years old.
The most distinctive elements for sex determination -- the cranium and the innominates
are absent in whole or part. The morphology of the mandible body suggests a male
identification, as the mental eminence of the mandible is square (Krogman 1962:115). The
stature of this individual cannot be determined because the fragmentary long bones do not
preserve enough landmarks to calculate their maximum length (Steele and McKern 1969).

193

Figure 26
Feature 1 Burial at 41WY113

a.

Photograph of burial.
Distal Medial
Left Femur(?) Fragment

I

I

Distal Medial
Left Humerus(?) Fragment

..

Cranial

~

Media I Left Tibia Fragment

Distal Medial
Right Humerus Fragment

t?O..Med;o1

Proximal Medial Right Femur

b.

Plan view of burial.

194

R;gh1 Humerus Fragment

41WYll3

Figure 27

SKELETAL ELEMENTS PRESENT
Right Parietal Fragment

Two

Mandibular Molars

One Radius

Distal Shaft Fragment

Two Fibula Shaft Fragments

Named elements are

not shown on diagram because

siding is unknown.

II
fl

I

I

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Although no time-diagnostic artifacts were recovered with the Feature 1 burial or in
other areas of 41WY113, Hall suggests that this is a late Archaic site based on other
evidence from the region (see Chapter 6). The absence of marine shell ornaments in association with the burial suggest that it may not be attributed to the Brownsville complex,
although some Brownsville complex burials do not contain grave goods (MacNeish 1958:189).
It is not known whether this burial is isolated or is part of a cemetery site because
excavation at 41WY113 is very limited. Both types of sites are known in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley (Hester 1969; Hester and Rodgers 1971). Secondary burials have been reported
by A. E. Anderson (Hester 1969:160) and from the Floyd Morris Site (Collins et al. 1969).
Burials of subadult males have been found at the Floyd Morris Site, the Unland Site
(Mallouf and Zavaleta 1979), and 41WYSO (Howard 1981).

196

APPENDIX 3: ANALYSIS OF FEATURE 1 BURIAL AT 41WY113

REFERENCES CITED

Brothwell, D. R.
1981
Digging Up Bones: The Excavation, Treatment and Study of Human Skeletal Remains.
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York.
Collins, Michael B., Thomas Roy Hester, and Frank A. Weir
Part I: The Floyd Morris Site (41CF2), a Prehistoric Cemetery Site in Cameron
1969
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-146.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1969
Part III: The Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites: A Discussion of Burial Practices in
the Rio Grande Valley and the Lower Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:157-166.
Hester, Thomas Roy, and R. W. Rodgers
Additional Data on the Burial Practices of the Brownsville Complex, Southern
1971
Texas. Texas Journal of Science XXII(4):367-371.
Howard, Margaret Ann
1981
Analysis of Human Skeletal Material. Appendix VI in Cultural Resources Surveys
and Assessments in Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas, by D. William
Day, Jane Laurens-Day, and Elton R. Prewitt, pp. 373-390. Reports of Investigations 15. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Krogman, Wilton Marion
1962
The Human Skeleton in Forensic Medicine.
field, Illinois.

Charles C. Thomas, Publisher, Spring-

MacNeish, Richard S.
1958
Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas, Mexico.
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 48, Part 6.
Mallouf, Robert J., and Anthony N. Zavaleta
1979
The Unland Site: A Prehistoric Group Burial from Laguna Atascosa National
Wildlife Refuge. Special Report 25. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
Steele, D. Gentry, and Thomas W. McKern
1969
A Method for Assessment of Maximum Long Bone Length and Living Stature from
Fragmentary Long Bones. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 31(2) :215-227.

197

-------------------~~~~~

APPENDIX 4:

A Preliminary Report on a Large Concentration
of the Remains of the Giant Gopher Tortoise,
Gopherus hexagonatus, in the Late Pleistocene
Beaumont Formation of Willacy County, Texas

James W. Westgate

INTRODUCTION

Remains of numerous specimens of giant Pleistocene tortoises were discovered in 1985
and 1986 during archeological surveys of the recently excavated drainage ditches in the
Lyford, Texas, vicinity.
Some turtle specimens consisting solely of dislodged shell
fragments were collected at the time of discovery. More-complete specimens were left
undisturbed until arrangements for their excavation could be made. Due to the onset of
canal maintenance operations using heavy machinery, Grant Hall, Glenn Armstrong, and James
Westgate spent August 18-22, 1986, collecting the most complete specimens using the plaster
and burlap method. Seven tortoises and one apparent nest of tortoise eggs were salvaged,
preventing additional damage and possible site obscurement by ditch-maintenance machinery.
The discovery of large concentrations of a single species of fossil turtle is a rare
event. Many fossil turtle species are known from only one (often fragmentary) shell, and
skull and skeletal remains are rarely recovered (Brattstrom 1961:543; Auffenberg 1962:25).
Remains of 29 tortoises were observed or collected along sections of ditch surveyed near
Lyford (Fig. 28). This represents an estimated one-third to one-half of the ditch system
in the Lyford area (Grant Hall, personal communication 1986). It is predicted that prospecting by trained vertebrate paleontologists of remaining sections of the canals would
yield a minimum of 30 to 60 additional tortoises.
Preliminary analysis of shell material indicates that all the Lyford turtles belong to
one species, Gopherus hexagonatus. The geographic and stratigraphic proximity of these
individuals suggest that they belonged to a single interbreeding population. Therefore,
this mass occurrence provides the unique opportunity to observe sexual, ontogenetic, and
individual variation within that population of giant gopher tortoises. In addition, the
limb elements of one individual and its burial position provide direct evidence that giant
gopher tortoises had the ability to burrow.
Information on nesting behavior in Q.
hexagonata appears to be provided by one excavated nest and others observed in the field.
Specimens have been placed in the collections of the Texas Memorial Museum (TMM) Vertebrate
Paleontology Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Remains of additional turtles were noted in older strata to the west of Lyford in
Hidalgo County (Grant Hall, written communication 1986). As that occurrence is unrelated
to the concentration of tortoise remains near Lyford, it is not discussed further in this
report.

SYSTEMATIC PALEONTOLOGY

Class Reptilia Laurent, 1768
Order Testudinata Shaw, 1802
Suborder Cryptodira Cope (part), 1870
Family Testudinidae Gray, 1825
Genus Gopherus Raphinesque, 1832
Species Gopherus hexagonatus (Cope), 1893

201

,,

.o·
c...,

IT>

HIDALGO-WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS-1986 INVESTIGATIONS~
FOSSIL LOCALITIES

L

j --·-.

LEGEND
•

=:>--

Fossil Locality
Drainage Ditch Alignment

0

5

I

E-3

10

20
I

kilometers

0

5

10
miles

P8A//86/SLH

20

APPENDIX 4: CONCENTRATION OF GIANT GOPHER TORTOISE REMAINS

Testudo hexagonata Cope 1893:77
Gopherus hexagonata Williams 1950:30
Gopherus hexagonatus Auffenberg 1974:183
[Taxonomic note:
Auffenberg (1974:184) stated that Q. hexagonatus is probably a
synonym of Q. laticaudatus. Both were described from the Irvingtonian (lower Pleistocene)
Rock Creek local fauna of the Tule Formation of Briscoe County, Texas, by Cope (1893).
Bramble (1982:854) concurred with this synonomy indicating "Q. hexagonata (=? Testudo
laticaudata)" but offered no explanation for making the latter a junior synonym of Q.
hexagonatus, while Q. laticaudatus has page priority over Q. hexagonatus (Cope 1893:75 vs.
77). If it can be shown that the type specimen of Q. laticaudatus displays characteristics
distinctive at the species level, Q. hexagonatus must be considered the junior synonym.
Until that time, the gopher turtle remains discussed in this report are referred to as G.
hexagonatus.]

Skeletal Material

The following specimens represent the remains of relatively complete specimens of G.
hexagonatus collected from the Beaumont Formation of Willacy County and their fossil locality numbers (FL) (see Fig. 28): #1 (TMM 42927-1; FL 14) 2/3 shell, 80 cm long, female; #2
(TMM 42927-2; FL 15) 9/10 shell, 59 cm long, left otic region, mandible, 4 cervical vertebrae, limb elements, female (Fig. 29a; Table 28); #3 (TMM 42927-3; FL 15) 1/2 carapace; #4
(TMM 42927-4; FL 14), anterior 1/2 of shell, some limb bones present; #5 (TMM 42928-2; FL
ll) 4/5 shell, female; #6 (TMM 42929-1; FL 16) 3/4 shell, male? (Fig. 29b); #7 (TMM
42929-2; FL 17) 1/4 shell; (TMM 42928-1) nest with whole and fragmentary eggs. Fragmentary
specimens were observed or collected from ditch bank or spoil exposures at these fossil
localities indicated in Figure 28 (more than one specimen indicated in []): FL 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 9, 10, ll[4], 12, 13, 16, 17 18[4], 19, and 20 (Grant Hall, written communication
1986).
In his redescription of Gopherus hexagonatus, Auffenberg (1962) presented detailed
descriptions of the shells of two individuals and figured one of them (TMM 3096 7-1817)
(Fig. 30). Both of these turtles had badly weathered carapaces. Auffenberg estimated the
positions of scutes and bone sutures in the mid-carapace region of TMM 30967-1817. Turtle
#2 (TMM 42927-2) from Willacy County shows excellent preservation in this region and allows
a more accurate understanding of the morphology of the carapace of Q. hexagonatus (Fig. 31;
Table 28). Auffenberg's (1962:27) observation that the fourth vertebral scute is the
longest does not agree with the osteological evidence shown by TMM 42927-2. In that
specimen, the second and third vertebral scutes are both longer than the fourth scute. TMM
42927-2 also allows determination of its neural formula, which is 4-8-4-8-4 for the first
five neurals.
It should be noted that a high percentage of modern gopher tortoises display abnormalities in their shell structure (Auffenberg 1976). As many specimens of Q. hexagonatus
from Willacy County as is possible should be compared to establish the types and frequencies of intraspecies shell variation which existed in this population.

203

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 29.

Photographs of Gopherus hexagonatus

a.

In-situ position of female Gopherus hexagonatus (turtle #2,
TMM 42927-2) with plastron tilted 30° NE. Arrows indicate
clusters of anterior axial, and anterior and posterior
appendicular skeletal elements, extending in a line dipping
15° NE. The unusual orientation of the bones appears to be
the result of burial in a burrow tunnel.

b.

Appearance of male(?) Gopherus hexagonatus (turtle #6,
TMM 42929-1) undergoing slow destruction by canal bank
erosion prior to salvage operations. Shell is plastron-up,
with anterior to the left (large bars on scale= 5 cm).

204

Figure 29

0

b

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

TABLE 28
MEASUREMENTS (mm) OF GOPHERUS HEXAGONATUS FROM TEXAS
(see Auffenberg 1976 for measurement definitions)

Element

carapace 1.
plastron 1.
humeral scute 1.
pectoral scute 1.
abdominal scute 1.
femoral scute 1.
anal scute 1.
anterior lobe w.
posterior lobe 1.
bridge 1.
entoplastron 1.
entoplastron w.
hyoplastron 1.
hypoplastron 1.
xiphiplastron 1.
xiphiplastron w.
xiphiplastal notch 1.
nuchal scute 1.
nuchal scute w.
1st vertebral scute 1.
1st vertebral scute w.
2nd vertebral scute 1.
2nd vertebral scute w.
3rd vertebral scute 1.
3rd vertebral scute w.
4th vertebral scute 1.
4th vertebral scute w.
1st costal scute 1.
1st costal scute w.
2nd costal scute 1.
2nd costal scute w.
3rd costal scute 1.
3rd costal scute w.
4th costal scute 1.
4th costal scute w.
nuchal bone 1.
nuchal bone w.
1st neural 1.
1st neural w.

TMM

TMM

42927-2

30967-1817*

593
579+
102
64
167
52
41
184
168
262
89
122
160
122
105
134
41
27
36
112
145
106
169
126
177
105
161
124
154
119
160
122
162
149
128
99
107
69
54

639
730
105
75
208
82
62
380
186
334
147
140
189
132
120
153
62
30
35

*(from Auffenberg 1962)

206

155
275

180
246

164
164

PPHM
P40-l*

853
124
122
192
143
60
201
189
397
172
175
210
180
153
169
60

APPENDIX 4: CONCENTRATION OF GIANT GOPHER TORTOISE REMAINS

Table 28, continued
TMM
42927-2

Element

2nd neural 1.
2nd neural w.
3rd neural 1.
3rd neural w.
4th neural 1.
4th neural w.
5th neural 1.
5th neural w.
6th neural 1.
6th neural w.
7th neural 1.
7th neural w.
8th neural 1.
8th neural w.
1st suprapygal 1.
1st suprapygal w.
2nd suprapygal 1.
2nd suprapygal w.
pygal 1.
pygal w.
mandible 1.
mandible w. across articular facets
mandible symphyseal depth
mandible depth at coronoid process

TMM
30967-1817

PPHM
P40-l

60
93
57
78
60
94
42
73
50
89
46
88
58
72

104
109
67
22
80
68
67
82
12
24

135
156

Geographic and Stratigraphic Location

All specimens of Q. hexagonatus were found in a roughly rectangular area of about 200
km 2 with boundaries lying approximately 4 km west, 25 km east, 3 km north, and 4 km south
of Lyford, Willacy County, Texas. The distinctive east-west orientation is probably an
artifact of the drainage ditch layout. Exact field locations of TMM specimens may be
obtained from the TMM Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory.
All turtle remains were collected from sediments belonging to the younger Beaumont
Formation (late Pleistocene) which is locally exposed in Willacy County south of Raymondville. These deposits, known as the Raymondville fluvial system, are the result of fluvial
deposition upstream of the Wisconsin Rio Grande Del ta (Brown et al. 1980) • The Raymondville fluvial system appears to have been active during a short Wisconsin interstadial
(?Peorian) over 50,000 years B.P. (Brown et al. 1980:47). Contemporaneous deltaic deposits
to the east are now overlain by Recent sediments of Laguna Madre, Padre Island, and the
inner continental shelf, and mark the position of the Gulf of Mexico shoreline from about
50,000 to 60,000 years B.P. (Brown et al. 1980).

207

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 30.

Drawing of male Gopherus hexagonatus

TMM 30967-1817 from San Patricio County, Texas (from Auffenberg
1962), anterior to the right; see Table 28 for measurements.

a.

Dorsal view with reconstructed central carapace region.

b.

Ventral view.

208

Figure 30

a

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Figure 31.

Shell of female Gopherus hexagonatus

Turtle #2, TMM 42927-2; anterior to the right; see Table 28
for measurements.

a.

Dorsal view.

b.

Ventral view.

c.

Right lateral view.

210

Figure 31

a

b

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Detailed stratigraphic positions were recorded for the seven turtles collected during
the salvage operation (Fig. 32). All seven were located between 1.4 and 2.3 m below the
prechannelized surface, with more-easterly specimens tending to be found at the greater
depths. Additional turtles may be buried more deeply; however, the ditch channels expose
only about 3 m of the uppermost strata of the Raymondville fluvial system.
Turtles #1-6 were buried in tan sandy silt. Caliche nodules were also associated with
turtles #1, 4, s, and 6, while turtles #2 and 3 lay approximately 0.7 m and 1 m below the
caliche-bearing zone, respectively. Pulmonate gastropods were present in the sandy silt,
while remains of aquatic animals were not observed. The apparent depositional environment
for turtles #1-6 was a well-drained floodplain or levee periodically subjected to submersion below floodwaters laden with silt and fine sand. There is presently no indication
that mortality was synchronous; however, burial must have occurred in an extremely short
geological time frame. This implies that all individuals belonged to a single, possibly
time-transgressive, interbreeding population.
Turtle 7 was found in a grayish tan sand lacking caliche. The relatively coarsegrained nature of these sediments and preburial breakage of the turtle shell indicate that
deposition occurred in a higher energy environment than that of turtles 1-6. Probably this
turtle and its surrounding sands represent crevasse splay or intrachannel deposition.

Associated Vertebrate Fauna

No in-situ vertebrate remains other than turtles were collected locally from the
Beaumont Formation.
However, Rawn-Schatzinger ( 1981: 396) reported heavily mineralized
remains of late Pleistocene (Beaumont Formation?) or early Holocene Equus spp. from sites
in Willacy County. The archeological survey in the summer of 1986 also recovered fragments
of mammoth teeth (Mammuthus sp.) from Fossil Localities 3 and 8, and two fragmentary but
mineralized horse teeth (Equus sp.) in dredged spoils.

PALEOECOLOGY

Geographic Distribution

Gopherus hexagonatus has been reported from Irvingtonian (early Pleistocene) deposits
in the Texas Panhandle (Cope 1893; Auffenberg 1962, 1974), from Sangamon deposits of Kansas
(Hibbard 1960:22; Auffenberg 1974:183), and from the well known Ingleside fauna (early
Wisconsinan) of San Patricio County on the South Texas coast (Auffenberg 1962; Lundelius
1972). New records from Willacy County, Texas, described in this appendix constitute the
southernmost record of _Q. hexagonatus and extend the known range of this giant tortoise
over 150 km farther south along the Texas coastline.

212

"l
HIDALGO-WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS- 1986 INVESTIGATIONS
STRATIGRAPHIC PROFILES OF TURTLES I-7
TURTLES 2 S 3

TURTLE I

,,/

A HORIZON

a

oo

... :

.. ,<i:::J

..

0

0

0

-....

"''

......

• o LIGHT T'AN 0
0 Q•
• •. SANDY
SILT
•
•
0 •••

..,<:> ...o ..

BROWN SANDY SILT

REDDISH-BROWN
SANDY SILT
-:-'REDDISH-TAN··. - SANDY SILT

oo,:o ,.'"o·o·o~ :.~ :o.. o

0

""""'·o

•

o

()

0

C)

...

oo

_"o 0

0

0

0()

oo"'"'

.........,

TAN NISH-BROWN
SANDY SILT

"!~N0 S~Ni?Y ,5!,Ll'

• o o0

0

0

111° 0 0
.. 0

..

o

0

o<.>.
0

oo

o()oooo.,o.. : o

TAN SANDY SILT

BLOCKY STRUCTURE
MORE CLAY

TAN SANDY SILT

o

... "'co"oo
t::i

o

c::i

<>

°'Q<io

<> " :

o ooOo

O'"

·O

0.

o
0

00<:>

0

0

loo

oo

00

o

o

000'"'

•<::><>oc:i.o

~~oa0oo 0

,.(:)

o :c::i ·.o

0

;.

0

o.Q

...
0.,

o

• o

: ..o o :

o

~
PBAl/86/SLH

Caliche
Ferric Staining

0.

<:;)"'

.,.<::i"'Q

()Q

0

e

a

0

o

•

o

o o oo .°' o "oo c ~

O(;)ooo

0

o~

.'"'o

: :\-: .,:.•

-~ ~ >:o}:.0£ ot ~·~ ·'

;~:~~:o. ·~·

GRAYISH-TAN
SILTY SAND-FINE

GRAYISH-BROWN
SILTY SAND

25

50

F"3
centimeters

100

I

<l•Q"ol::.

.. o

..

0

<::ic

::.~:.:.: ~;·~·-:-:·,
<:>

.,"'

TAN °SAN°DY SILTo'

0
.,:•a: ~0 0•:0°. 0

0°: o: ~

:

• oo 0 •.•o a 0 9
0
0
'O o o
o o
o

...

'
71

0

...

9

•

0

g

..,o

• o: oo \. ~ G: .f~:-:: ~

0

I

0

o

: ·SANDY SILT• ';'o•.
0

oo~o .. 001:::>'=:0000

0

o ... o

o~o

..,.0 0 0

LEGEND
Turtle Location

o

;l'ANN)s~ .'.'BRO;·N:· .

ot)'~•"'"ooo,.

la · ~ "' :

..

-~

0

<:>o o

oo

c:i-~:
s AN0Y SI~~<:
.,"'Oo•o ... ..,oo
0

..

..

•

oO~oOooO•o•

o

10

~()~°! ..• ~~o<.>.

:·~ Oo_o:o: tlo .. •:

~ ~~
r-'~'1:1.

0

11 o~

o o o 0 oo .. o o _o .,· .. ..o ()

'--'

DEPOSIT

0

0

~

A HORIZON

TANNISH-BROWN
SANDY SILT

~-; ~.-°: .:·:::· ~: 0

7

\/

PLAYA

:.

~
~

TURTLE

PLOW ZONE

., •

e>

6

TURTLE

5

_./

~ ~:-=.: -~ --:::.-0 ::00

: T ~NNISH~sfiowr-r :
• SANDY SIL.Jo • • .
'00 0 00 • 0

TURTLE

4

LIGHT TAN
SANDY SILT

TANNISH-BROWN
SANDY SILT

oooooo"C>•

TURTLE

'---'
GRAYISH-TAN SAND

,.,
<D

c

......

ct>

VJ
N

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Burrowing Evidence and Paleoclimatic Implications

Interpretation of past behavior of long-extinct species is a speculative exercise
based on inference by analogy to living, closely related species; structural designs of
fossil skeletons; and the geologic context of buried fossil material. There are four
extant species of gopher tortoises, and all are endemic to subtropical areas of southern
North America. Gopherus polyphemus lives in the southeastern coastal states of the U.S.
g_. flavomarginatus inhabits a small area in north-central Mexico. Recently, Bramble (1982)
erected a new genus (Scaptochelys) in which he placed the two other living gopher turtles.
S. berlandieri inhabits South Texas and northeastern Mexico. S. agassizi lives in the
desert southwest of the U.S. and northwestern Mexico.
Modern species of Gopherus have spatulate terminal phalanges on the manus and short,
robust cervical vertebrae adapted for fossorial habits (Bramble 1982). Modern and extinct
species of Gopherus have tended to inhabit regions possessing friable soils which allow
construction of extensive burrows enabling the tortoises to escape climatic extremes of
heat and cold, and moisture fluctuation (Bramble 1982). In areas of equable climate,
burrowing behavior may not be displayed and gopher tortoise habitats may not be restricted
to soils permitting burrow construction (Brattstrom 1961:553; Auffenberg 1969:20).
Turtle #2 (TMM 42927-2) provides evidence that .Q_. hexagonatus had both a skeletal
structural design for burrowing and displayed that behavior in Willacy County during early
Wisconsin times. As in§_. polyphemus (Auffenberg 1976; Bramble 1982), terminal phalanges
of the manus of §_. hexagonatus are spatulate in comparison with those of the pes. The
width of the largest phalanx in the manus of TMM 42927-2 is 77% of its length (17 mm wide,
22 mm long). The width of the largest phalanx from the pes of TMM 42927-2 is only 43% of
its length (13 mm wide, 30 mm long). The cervical vertebrae of TMM 42927-2 are robust.
The shell of TMM 42927-2 was discovered lying upside down with the plastron dipping at
30° to the northeast with the posterior end down, in a soft sandy silt (see Fig. 29a). The
long axis of the plastron was oriented facing N55°E. Disarticulated limb, neck, and head
elements were positioned along a line whose axis lay pointing N45°E, beginning at the
posterior margin of the plastron and extending downward at a dip of 15°NE for approximately
1 m. All elements were restricted to a zone less than one-half the width of the shell.
Auffenberg (1969:17) noted that the burrows of Q. polyphemus are usually dug at an angle of
declination between 15-30°. The unusual positioning of the remains of TMM 42927-2 in the
same spatial orientation as a Q. polyphemus burrow is not likely coincidental. Considering
that this individual displays anatomical evidence of the ability to burrow, the simplest
interpretation of the unusual burial position is that burial occurred in the individual's
burrow. The loose skeletal elements appear to have been washed or moved by gravity and/or
scavengers deeper down the tunnel than the shell. A section of the posterior portion of
the plastron was removed prior to burial, and several of the ends of long bones display
preburial damage resembling that shown by Haynes (1980) as characteristic of gnawed bones.
Such scavenging or predation activity would account for the inverted position of the shell.
The presence of several turtle nests in the same sandy silt horizon indicates that this
zone was above the water table and suitable for burrow construction. Hibbard (1960:22)
noted that a large Gopherus (sp. undetermined) of Sangamon age was also found in its
burrow.

214

APPENDIX 4: CONCENTRATION OF GIANT GOPHER TORTOISE REMAINS

Numerous authors, including Hibbard (1960), Brattstrom (1961), Auffenberg and Milstead
( 1965) , and Lundelius ( 1972: 9) , among others, have considered the presence of large
tortoises such as Geochelone and Gopherus to be indicative of regions having mild and
equable climates, partly due to the apparent inability of these large turtles to burrow
like the small living gopher tortoises. Recently, Graham (1986:137) has cautioned that
because of behavioral mechanisms, the climatic limitations of extinct species of Geochelone
may not have been as narrowly defined as those of living species of Geochelone. Graham
(1986) did agree that it is unlikely that Pleistocene Geochelone could have survived
extended periods of frigid temperatures.
Geochelone cf. crassiscutata and Gopherus hexagonatus are both present in the early
Wisconsin Ingleside fauna of San Patricio County, Texas (Lundelius 1972) • However, no
specimens of Geochelone have been found in association with Gopherus hexagonatus in Willacy
County. The discovery_ of TMM 42927-2 in its burrow indicates that some local environmental
factor required Q. hexagonatus to construct burrows. Auffenberg (1962:32) states "it is
mechanically impossible for a turtle with a shell a yard long or so in length to dig a
respectable burrow." Individuals of Q. hexagonatus a yard or more in length may have
simply dug shallow pallets resembling those of ,§_. berlandieri described by Auffenberg
(1969) and Auffenberg and Weaver (1969). The fact that a large population of gopher
turtles inhabited the area probably indicates that climatic conditions in Willacy County
were similar to those of modern subtropical regions in North America. Although the presence of the nearby Gulf of Mexico must have moderated the climate of Willacy County during
the time of deposition of the Raymondville fluvial system, perhaps the winters were sufficiently cold to require tortoises to seek shelter in burrows, thus excluding Geochelone
from the region. Other ecologically limiting factors such as food availability, predation,
and interspecies competition could also have excluded Geochelone from the area, however.

Fossil Nests

Five concentrations of egg shells which appear to have been nest sites were found at
FL 11. One of these (TMM 42928-1) was collected and possesses at least six large spherical
eggs up to 48 mm in diameter. These eggs are of a shape and size which are consistent with
those of turtles the size of Q. hexagonatus. The range in clutch size of the much smaller
Q. polyphemus (2-7] (Behler and King 1979:473) exceeds the minimum number of eggs in the
fossil nest. TMM 42928-1 probably contained additional eggs prior to disturbance by ditch
excavation machinery and subsequent bank erosion. Although many factors regulate clutch
size, giant turtles such as Q. hexagonatus probably had the physiological ability to generate more than six eggs at a time. It is likely that an undisturbed sample of fossil nests,
if in fact they were laid by Q. hexagonatus, will display larger clutch sizes.
The other egg shell concentrations are made up only of fragments and may represent
remnants of nest predation or post-hatching shell concentrations. Auffenberg and Weaver
(1969) found numerous examples of predation on nests of Scaptochelys berlandieri and Q.
polyphemus by small carnivores and possibly large rodents. The small shell fragments in
the fossil nest sites are consistent with the criteria of Auffenberg and Weaver (1969:164)
for indicating predator damage.

215

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Human/Tortoise Relationships

There has been a long history of utilization of North American tortoises by humans.
The meat of Gopherus polyphemus is commonly known as "Georgia bacon" and "Florida chicken"
(Auffenberg 1969:32). North American Indians used tortoise shells as a form of barter and
as pots, baskets, and sun helmets (Auffenberg 1969:32).
Clausen et al. (1979) and Holman and Clausen (1984) have described an overturned shell
of the giant tortoise Geochelone crassiscutata pierced by a wooden stake at Little Salt
Spring, Florida. Radiocarbon dating of the stake indicates an age of approximately 12,000
B.P. The age of the stake and the presence of fire-hardened clay under the tortoise, along
with evidence of fire-damage to the bones, indicate that the animal was cooked by a PaleoIndian. It is likely that Paleo-Indians utilized tortoises in North Amerca wherever their
ranges overlapped.
Due to the archeological emphasis of the Hidalgo-Willacy County survey, special
efforts were made to determine i f the Willacy County giant tortoises display evidence of
human activities. No such evidence has been observed. It is assumed that the specimens of
G. hexagonatus predate the arrival of man in Willacy County.

CONCLUSIONS

The following conclusions are drawn from the preliminary analysis of the specimens of
Gopherus hexagonatus collected or observed in Willacy County, Texas.
1. The occurrence of large numbers of individuals of fossil turtles is a rare event.
The Willacy County specimens allow the unusual opportunity to study osteological variability in a single population of extinct giant tortoises.
2. New evidence on the position of scutes and bones in the carapace of G. hexagonatus
is provided by these remains.
3. Q. hexagonatus inhabited the area near Lyford, Texas, at least 50,000 years B.P.
during a warm phase of, the early Wisconsin glacial stage. The area probably had a subtropical climate at that time.
4. The Willacy County occurrences constitute the southernmost record of the geographic distribution of Q. hexagonatus.
5. Most of the tortoise remains appear to have been buried in floodplain or levee
deposits.
6. A 59-cm-long individual of Q. hexagonatus appears to have displayed burrowing
behavior in Willacy County during deposition of the Raymondville fluvial system.
7. G. hexagonatus may have laid clutches of at least six eggs with a diameter of 48
mm. Many fossil nests display predator damage, probably due to small carnivores and/or
large rodents.

216

APPENDIX 4: CONCENTRATION OF GIANT GOPHER TORTOISE REMAINS

8. There is no evidence at this time that Homo sapiens and G. hexagonatus were
sympatric inhabitants of Willacy County.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Elton R. Prewitt discovered the tortoise remains at FL 5, 6, and ll in 1985. All
other tortoises were found by Grant Hall and survey crews under his supervision in 1986.
Glenn J. Armstrong traveled from New York, New York, to volunteer his assistance during the
arduous task of salvaging the beasts in the South Texas August heat. Dr. Michael Collins
offered information on possible depositional contexts of the tortoise specimens. Drs. Wann
Langston and Ernest Lundelius, Jr. read the manuscript and made useful suggestions throughout the course of the study.

217

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

REFERENCES CITED

Auffenberg, W.
1962
A Redescription of Testudo hexagonata Cope.

Herpetologia 18:25-34.

1969

Tortoise Behavior and Survival.
McNally & Co.

Biological Sciences Curriculum Study.

1974

Checklist of Fossil Land Tortoises (Testudinidae).
Biological Sciences Bulletin 18(3):121-251.

1976

The Genus Gopherus (Testudinidae): Pt. 1. Osteology and Relationships of Extant
Species. Florida State Museum Biological Sciences Bulletin 20(2):47-110.

Florida

State

Rand

Museum

Auffenberg, W., and W. W. Milstead
1965
Reptiles in the Quaternary of North America. In The Quaternary of the United
States, edited by H. E. Wright and D. G. Frey, pp. 557-568. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Auffenberg, W., and W. G. Weaver
1969
Gopherus berlandieri in Southeastern Texas.
Sciences Bulletin 13(3):141-203.

Florida State Museum Biological

Behler, J. L., and F. W. King
1979
The Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Reptiles and Amphibians.
Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
Bramble, D. M.
1982
Scaptocheys:
General
1982(4):852-867.

Revision

and

Evolution

of

Gopher

Tortoises.

Brattstrom, B. H.
1961
Some New Fossil Tortoises from Western North America with Remarks on the Zoogeography and Paleoecology of Fossil Tortoises. Journal of Paleontology 35:543-560.
Brown, L. F., Jr., J. L. Brewton, T. J. Evans, J. H. McGowen, W. A. White, C. G. Groat,
and W. L. Fisher
1980
Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal Zone -- Brownsville-Harlingen
Area. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Clausen, C. G., et al.
1979
Little Salt Spring, Florida:
614.

A Unique Underwater Site.

Science 203(4381):609-

Cope, E. D.
1893
~ Preliminary Report on the Vertebrate Paleontology of the Llano Estacado.
Geological Survey Annual Report (1892), pt. 2.

218

Texas

APPENDIX 4: CONCENTRATION OF GIANT GOPHER TORTOISE REMAINS

Graham, R. W.
1986
Plant-Animal Interactions and Pleistocene Extinctions. In Dynamics of Extinction, edited by D. K. Eliot, pp. 131-154. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Haynes, G.
Evidence of Carnivore Gnawing
1980
Paleobiology 6(3):341-351.

on

Pleistocene

and

Recent

Mammalian

Bones.

Hibbard, C. W.
An Interpretation of Pliocene and Pleistocene Climates in North America.
1960
Michigan Academy of Science, Arts and Letters, 62nd Annual Report, pp. 5-30.
Holman, J. A., and C. J. Clausen
1984
Fossil Vertebrates Associated with Paleo-Indian Artifact at Little Salt Spring,
Florida. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 4(1):146-154.
Lundelius, E. L., Jr.
1972
Fossil Vertebrates from the Late Pleistocene Ingleside Fauna, San Patricio
County, Texas. Report of Investigations 77. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Rawn-Schatzinger, V.
1981
Faunal Analysis. Appendix II in Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in
Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas, by D. W. Day, J. Laurens-Day,
and E. R. Prewitt, pp. 391-409. Reports of Investigations 15. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.

219

APPENDIX 5:

Identification of Vertebrate Faunal Remains

James W. Westgate

Element

Taxon*

phalanx
unidentified fragment

medium mammal

3
1

right M2

Bos sp. or
Bison sp.

-0-4
-0-17
-0-42
-0-56

1
1

-0-62
-0-64

1

2

unidentified fragment
limb shaft fragment
1/2 humerus (left)
limb fragment
1/2 atlas neural arch
unidentified bone fragment
left upper canine

-0-72

2

right p4

41HG125-0

1

limb bone fragment

medium mammal

41HG128-0

1

right calcaneum
unidentified fragments

Sylvilagus sp.

bone fragments

unidentifiable

Number

Locality

1

41HG96-0

41HGll8-0-2

1

1
1

5
10

41HG134-0

l

medium mammal
small mammal
medium mammal
medium mammal
Canis latrans or
C. familiaris
Canis latrans or
C. familiars

coyote/dog
coyote/dog

rabbit

sea trout

1

otolith

Cynoscion sp.

41WY89-0

1

bone fragment

medium mammal

41WY108-0l

1

unidentified fragment

medium mammal

41WY109-0

1

Sylvilagus sp.

rabbit

3

left calcaneum
unidentified bone fragments

41WYll2-0

1
1

metacarpal shaft fragment
limb fragment

Odocoileus sp.
medium mammal

deer

41WYll3-0

1

shell fragment
humerus or femur shaft
proximal antler fragment
distal end left tibia
cheek tooth fragments
left tibia
limb shaft fragments
anterior 1/2 left mandible
without teeth

turtle
turtle
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus sp.
Equus sp.
medium mammal
medium mammal
Tayassu tejacu

bone fragment

unidentifiable

1
1
1
4
1
2
1

I
~

Ip

I

cow/bison

41WY60-0

I

I&

Common Name

41WY132-0

1

deer
deer
horse

peccary
(collared)

~

i

?
~

I

*Sizes:

Small

Less than or equal to a fox; Medium

coyote up to bison; Large = mammoth

~

i

Wt

......_________________
f

t

223

HIDALGO/WILLACY DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Locality
41WY134-0

Taxon

fragment (burned)
plastron fragment
phalanx
tooth fragment (hypsodont)
limb shaft fragment
fragments
tooth fragment
fragments
otolith

unidentifiable
small turtle
Odocoileus sp.
deer
medium herb. mammal
medium mammal
medium mammal
medium mammal
unidentifiable
Sciaenops ocellata red fish or
red drum

proximal 1/4 left radius
fragment

Lepus sp.
unidentifiable

5

limb fragment
fragments

medium mammal
unidentifiable

2
3
1

fragments
fragments
fragment

unidentifiable
medium mammal
unidentifiable

1
3

medial 1/3 left calcaneum
fragment
fragment

Odocoileus sp.
medium mammal
unidentifiable

fragment
fragments
fragments

unidentifiable
medium mammal
unidentifiable

shell fragments
fragments
fragment (burned)
tooth fragment
fragments

turtle
unidentifiable
unidentifiable
Equus sp.
unidentifiable

6
1

1
1
1

19
1

2
1

41WY135-0
(burned)

1
1

41WY135-0

41WY136-0
(burned)

41WY137-0

1

1

41WY139-0
(burned)

1

4
3

41WY140-0

Common Name

Element

Number

2

6
1
2

2

rabbit

deer

horse

DEFINITE PLEISTOCENE VERTEBRATES
Fossil
Locality 3

1

tooth fragment

Mammuthus sp.

mammoth

Fossil
Locality 8

1

tooth fragment

Mammuthus sp.

mammoth

Large fragmentary turtles = cf. Gopherus hexagonatus
Turtles #1-7 = G. hexagonatus (see Appendix 4)

224

giant gopher tortoise

