ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE CULEBRA CREEK NWWC
DRAINAGE PROJECT, SAN ANTONIO, BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS
WBS Element: 40-00065-04-02
Environmental Project Code: 06-578F4-757CIP
by
Damon Burden
Principal Investigator: Ross C. Fields
LETTER REPORT NO. 922
submitted to
Adams Environmental, Inc.
San Antonio, Texas
and
City of San Antonio
Transportation and Capital Improvements
by
Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Cultural Resources Services
Austin, Texas
PAI No. 216002

November 2017

FINAL REPORT
TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 8145

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT...............................................................................................................................

v

CURATION...............................................................................................................................

v

INTRODUCTION.....................................................................................................................

1

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................................

3

RESULTS OF FILE SEARCH AND POTENTIAL FOR ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES...........

4

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY...................................................................................................

7

RECOMMENDATIONS...........................................................................................................

11

REFERENCES CITED.............................................................................................................

13

iii

LIST OF FIGURES
1.

Project location map........................................................................................................

2

2.

Modern aerial photograph of the project area showing the APE
and shovel test locations.................................................................................................

9

iv

ABSTRACT
On August 31, 2017, personnel from Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted an
intensive archeological survey on Culebra Creek in west-central San Antonio, Texas, for Adams
Environmental, Inc., and the City of San Antonio under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8145. This
work was completed prior to proposed channel improvements below existing bridges at Culebra
Road and Timber Path. The horizontal Area of Potential Effects (APE) for the project is 10.6
acres of city-owned property composed of 1.7 acres at Culebra Road and 8.9 acres downstream
at Timber Path. The APE segment at Culebra Road encompasses a 380-ft-long by 165-ft-wide
bridge corridor, with a 45-ft-wide corridor for a proposed pilot channel stretching 95 ft east and
160 ft west. The APE segment at Timber Path encompasses a 510-ft-long by 130-ft-wide bridge
corridor, with a 175-ft-long by 45–80-ft-wide area for a proposed pilot channel west of the bridge
and a 7.4-acre area slated for various channel improvements east of the bridge corridor.
Review of topographic maps, aerial photographs, satellite imagery, and project schematics
before the field investigation revealed extensive disturbance in the project area derived from
previous channel modification and road and bridge construction. The field investigation
included pedestrian survey and the excavation of nine shovel tests in and adjacent to the APE.
The field investigation identified shallow surface soils, surface or near-surface gravel deposits,
and exposed limestone bedrock across the project area. No artifacts or archeological sites
were found. Furthermore, the APE does not include surface soils of sufficient depth to contain
buried archeological sites. Based on this observation, the APE has very little potential for intact
archeological deposits that meet eligibility criteria for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places or designation as a State Antiquities Landmark. Therefore, Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
recommends that the proposed project be allowed to proceed without additional archeological
investigations.

CURATION
The archeological survey did not find any artifacts, so the project does not require
artifact curation. Project records and photographs currently housed at the offices of Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., will be transferred to the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin
for permanent curation.

v

INTRODUCTION
On August 31, 2017, personnel with Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted
an intensive archeological survey prior to proposed channel improvements below
existing bridges on Culebra Road and Timber Path at Culebra Creek in west-central
San Antonio, Texas (Figure 1). This survey was conducted under the direction
of Adams Environmental, Inc., for the City of San Antonio (COSA) under Texas
Antiquities Permit No. 8145. All work complied with Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, and associated regulations 36 CFR
800 since proposed channel improvements require Clean Water Act Section 404
permits be issued by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Fort Worth District. Work was
also performed in accordance with the requirements of the Antiquities Code of Texas
(Texas Natural Resource Code of 1977, Title 9, Chapter 191, VTCS 6145-9) and
the City of San Antonio’s Historic Preservation and Design Section of the Unified
Development Code (Article 6 35-360-634).
According to the 70 percent design plans, the project Area of Potential Effects
(APE) encompasses a total of about 10.6 acres, which is primarily restricted to the
extensively modified channel of Culebra Creek. The APE at Culebra Road consists
of 1.7 acres largely within the existing bridge corridor, with small areas of channel
above and below it. The remainder of the APE (8.9 acres) encompasses the bridge
corridor at Timber Path, a small channel segment above the bridge, and a larger
channel segment below it. Pilot channels will be excavated below both bridges to
direct stream flow, and a 30-inch-thick bed of partially grouted riprap (PGR) will be
installed below each to stabilize the stream bed. PGR will be laid between existing
concrete abutments below the bridges and will extend ca. 20 ft upstream and
downstream of the 100-ft-wide bridge deck at Culebra Road and the 60-ft-wide deck
at Timber Path. This riprap will line intersecting pilot channel segments, and it will
be laid on the minimally modified bed of Culebra Creek and on existing concretestabilized surfaces north and south of the channels with minimal preparatory
modification. The top-to-top bank width of the stream channel varies from 450 to
500 ft at the Culebra Road bridge and from 512 to 532 ft at the Timber Path bridge.
Maximum channel depths at these locations are about 23 ft.
The pilot channel at the Culebra Road bridge will be about 416 ft long with
a top-to-top width of 25 ft, floor width of 15 ft, and a depth that varies from 6.5 to
5 ft just above and below the bridge. A section of PGR approximately 315 ft long by
142 ft wide will be installed below the Culebra Road bridge. The pilot channel at the
Timber Path bridge will be about 1,025 ft long with a top-to-top width that varies
from 35 to 60 ft, floor width that ranges from 25 to 50 ft, and a depth of 1–2 ft. An
approximately 470-ft-long by 105-ft-wide section of PGR will be installed below the
Timber Path bridge.
Channel modifications downstream of Timber Path include cutting and
grading the channel floor to drain toward the pilot channel or the centerline of the
larger streambed and cutting channel walls. On the stream bed, this effort will entail
vertical cuts with a maximum depth of 10 ft and horizontal cuts over a maximum
distance of 250 ft. Channel walls will be cut back as much as 10 ft in places. The lower

2

Figure 1

USGS The National Map: National Boundaries Dataset, National
Elevation Dataset, Geographic Names Information System,
National Hydrography Dataset, National Land Cover Database,
National Structures Dataset, and National Transportation
Dataset; U.S. Census Bureau - TIGER/Line; HERE Road Data

City
of San
Antonio

³

0

250

500

1,000

Meters

TEXAS

PAI/17/slh

Figure 1. Project location map. The Culebra Road survey area is to the west, and the Timber Path survey area
is to the east. Base image is a segment of the USGS 7.5-minute Culebra Hill quadrangle map (U.S. Geological
Survey 1993).

3

half of the south bank wall will be cut to a 3:1 grade for an approximate distance
of 830 ft below the bridge. The north channel wall will be extensively modified. The
lower half of the existing bank wall will be cut back and the vertical face stabilized
with a 600-ft-long, 7–16-ft-tall concrete retaining wall reinforced by concrete soldier
piles 18.5–22.5 ft long set in structural concrete shaft backfill extending 10–15 ft
below the wall. The piles will be 8 ft on center, and ground anchors inset in these
will extend 25 ft into the terrace deposits behind the retaining wall. The bank above
the retaining wall will be modified to a 3:1 grade and faced with concrete. A new
concrete flume will run along the base of the concrete apron behind the retaining
wall. Segments of existing asphalt and fill along the top bank edge will be removed to
a depth of 6 ft, replaced with backfill, and capped with a new asphalt sheet. Finally,
the bank wall below (east) of the retaining wall will be modified to a 3:1 grade for
an approximate total length of 400 ft. CPS Energy will relocate a subsurface gas
line and eight overhead utility poles in advance of this project.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The APE is restricted to the channel and adjacent terrace margins of a portion
of Culebra Creek on the leading edge of the Balcones Escarpment in west-central
Bexar County. This segment of the intermittent stream is along the transitional
boundary between the Blackland Prairie to the southeast and the Edwards Plateau
to the northwest (Arbingast et al. 1973:12; Griffith et al. 2004; McMahan et al.
1984:Figure 1). The Blackland Prairie is characterized by rolling tall grasslands
underlain by soft limestones, marls, and chalks, whereas the scarp along the edge of
the Edwards Plateau is a rugged, dissected landscape of limestone hills and canyons
created by extensive stream downcutting and headward erosion.
According to the Geologic Atlas of Texas (Bureau of Economic Geology 1983),
this segment of Culebra Creek incises a wide band of Pleistocene terrace alluvium
that is inset into Upper Cretaceous Austin Chalk. Mapped terrace deposits are
composed of gravels, sands, silts, and clays. No Holocene alluvium is mapped in
the vicinity of the project area. Undifferentiated, nearly level, frequently flooded
Tinn and Frio soils are mapped on the restricted floodplain of Culebra Creek. These
very deep, moderately well-drained soils formed in calcareous loamy and clayey
alluvium derived from ancient geologic deposits. Soils mapped on low Quaternary
terraces south of the creek include nearly level Lewisville silty clay at Culebra Road
and nearly level Sunev loam at Timber Path. These very deep, moderately well to
well-drained alluvial terrace soils formed in ancient calcareous loamy and clayey
sediments. Nearly level, rarely flooded Patrick soils mapped on terraces north of
the creek at both crossings are characterized as moderately deep to gravelly, welldrained terrace soils that formed in clayey and gravelly alluvium derived from
Cretaceous-age sedimentary rock. Tinn series soils are Vertisols; all other listed
soils are Mollisols (SoilWeb 2017).
The Bexar County climate is classified as modified subtropical and is
predominantly marine in the summer and continental in the winter (Taylor et al.
1991:102). The climate of the Blackland Prairie physiographic unit is classified as
modified humid subtropical with Gulf-influenced hot summers and continental-

4

influenced mild winters. The Edwards Plateau physiographic unit is classified
as subtropical steppe (Natural Fibers Information Center 1987:10–12). Seasonal
temperature extremes exceeding 100°F and dipping below 32°F occur in both regions
but are more frequent on the Edwards Plateau. The mean annual precipitation for
Bexar County is 29.1 inches (739 mm). Precipitation is distributed throughout the
year, with peaks in the late spring and early fall months (Natural Fibers Information
Center 1987:49; Taylor et al. 1991:102).
As with landscape and climate, the biota of Bexar County differ east to west
with geographical overlap of some species. Flora and fauna of the Edwards Plateau
and Blackland Prairie are defined as Balconian and Texan, respectively (Blair
1950). Although the dominant vegetative regime for the project area was previously
listed as mesquite-live oak-bluewood parklands (Frye et al. 1984), the area is now
characterized by extensive suburban development. The region once supported short
to tall grasses with widely scattered mesquite, elm, hackberry, and pecan trees on
stream terraces and denser stands of elm, hackberry, oak, pecan, and ash trees along
tributary channels (SoilWeb 2017).
RESULTS OF FILE SEARCH AND POTENTIAL FOR
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES
Review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Archeological Sites Atlas on
August 10, 2017, revealed 7 recorded prehistoric archeological sites (41BX776 and
41BX1592–41BX1597), 1 historic archeological site (41BX617), and 12 previous
archeological investigations within 1 km of the APE. All of the documented
prehistoric sites are closest to the east half of the APE (Timber Path bridge). Site
41BX776 was recorded on private property by an avocational archeologist in 1987.
About 0.6 km southwest of the APE, the site was described as an open camp with a
buried burned rock midden on a high bluff above an intermittent lateral drainage of
Culebra Creek. The site had been almost completely destroyed by looting when it was
recorded. Landowners noted the discovery of one indigenous burial at the site, and
dart points collected by them indicated the presence of a Late Archaic component.
The other six prehistoric sites were recorded 0.5–1.1 km east of the APE
during an intensive archeological survey conducted by Tierras Antiguas for the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department and COSA in 2002 (Nickels 2004). The
surveyed property would later become Cathedral Rock Nature Park. Five sites were
classified as open campsites with hearth remnants (41BX1592 and 41BX1593),
open campsites with fire-cracked rocks (41BX1594 and 41BX1596), and a sparse
lithic scatter with fire-cracked rocks (41BX1595). Sites 41BX1592, 41BX1593,
41BX1595, and 41BX1596 were on terraces north and south of the creek and had
deposits that extended from or immediately below the surface to 30–70 cm below
the surface. Site 41BX1594 was on a small sloped bench just east of the creek and
had archeological deposits that extended to 70 cm below the surface. A biface was
noted at 41BX1594, and informal tools were noted at 41BX1592 and 41BX1595,
but no diagnostic lithic artifacts were recovered. The sixth site documented during
the Tierras Antiguas survey (41BX1597) consisted of a fire-cracked rock and a
core on a narrow bench west of Culebra Creek, about 1 m below a mammoth

5

tusk embedded in an overlying gravelly cutbank. The artifacts and the tusk were
considered to be in secondary contexts and unrelated.
Site 41BX1593 was revisited during a 2008 Hicks and Company survey
sponsored by COSA (Campbell and Jones 2009). This investigation extended the
depth of known archeological deposits by 25 cm, but the investigators recommended
no further work at the site. A 2011 transmission line corridor survey conducted by
Atkins for CPS Energy of San Antonio passed through 41BX1593. Atkins personnel
expanded the site area considerably and described the portion of the site within the
right of way as a sparse surface and shallow subsurface scatter of lithic debitage.
No further investigation was recommended (Robinson and Nash 2011).
In 2014, Pape-Dawson conducted State Antiquities Landmark eligibility
testing at 41BX1592 at the request of COSA. This work was done in advance of
proposed hike-and-bike trail construction for the Culebra Creek Greenway. This
investigation recovered nearly 1,000 chipped stone artifacts (none of them temporally
diagnostic) and identified two burned rock features with wood charcoal that dated to
the Late Archaic period. Pape-Dawson found no significant prehistoric archeological
deposits within or adjacent to the portion of the proposed trail alignment and
recommended no further work in that portion of the site. They recommended that
the central portion of the site is potentially eligible for State Antiquities Landmark
designation due to the likely presence of additional burned rock features in that
area (Nichols 2017).
The one historic archeological site (41BX1617) consisted of a single limestone
structure that served as a stage coach stop on Culebra Road. The site was on a
terrace on the north side of Culebra Creek, about 0.5 km west of the Culebra Road
portion of the APE. Site 41BX1617 was recorded by COSA archeologist Kay Hindes
in 2005. Personnel with Geo-Marine, Inc., revisited the site locality during a 2007
survey conducted for the U.S. Corps of Engineers and noted that the site had been
destroyed by residential development.
Other archeological investigations conducted within 1 km of the APE include
a 1979 area survey with the Environmental Protection Agency listed as the lead
agency and a 2012 area survey conducted by Abasolo Archaeological Consultants
with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development listed as the lead
agency. Both survey areas are north of the Culebra Road bridge. No archeological
sites were documented during these investigations. A linear survey alignment
depicted along present-day Grissom Road and another that followed a preexisting
segment of the same road across Culebra Creek (and through the APE at Timber
Path) were conducted in 1985. The Federal Highway Administration is listed as the
lead agency for both surveys, and they may have been associated with the same
project. Finally, a utility alignment surveyed by Geo-Marine, Inc., personnel in
2002 for the Texas Water Development Board passed through or close to both sides
of the APE on the south side of the Culebra Creek channel. The survey alignment
probably corresponds with an existing water main depicted on COSA schematics.
No archeological sites are depicted in or within 1 km of the APE on these three
alignments.

6

In addition to review of the Archeological Sites Atlas, the potential for historic
archeological sites was assessed using several nineteenth- and twentieth-century
maps obtained from the Texas Department of Transportation’s Texas Historic
Overlay and a series of historic and modern quadrangles and aerial photographs
accessed through the NETR Online web viewer. The earliest examined map that
could be reasonably linked to the modern landscape is Rullman’s 1887 Map of
Bexar County, which shows Culebra Road on the north side of Culebra Creek. The
road curves southeast to cross the creek at about the east side of the APE, and it
is clear from this and later maps that the original stream crossing was eventually
improved and used until the mid twentieth century. No structures are depicted in
the vicinity of the project area on the 1887 map. The 1903 San Antonio quadrangle
(U.S. Geological Survey 1903) shows no development in the vicinity of the project
area aside from the main road noted above and several secondary roads branching
off of it. A structure is depicted on a tributary roughly 700 m northeast of Culebra
Creek, and a turn-out and structure depicted west-northwest of the project area likely
correspond with the documented stage stop (41BX1617). The 1918 Lytle quadrangle
(U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1918) depicts essentially the same network of roads
that is shown on the 1903 quadrangle and shows the previously noted farmstead
northeast of Culebra Creek, but the stage stop is not depicted. The 1918 map also
depicts a structure near the valley wall, west of the Timber Path segment of the
APE, with plowed fields south of the creek. The 1927 West San Antonio quadrangle
(U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1927) shows minor development in the form of
structures and windmills along and to the north and south of the old stage road,
but these agricultural units are widely dispersed on the landscape. The farmstead
west of the Timber Path APE segment is labeled H. Weimer on the 1927 quadrangle,
and property fence lines are depicted for the first time. The 1953 Culebra Hill
quadrangle (U.S. Geological Survey 1953) shows a minimally developed rural area
with single structures and farm/ranch compounds distributed along area roadways.
Compounds close to the project area include one at the old stage stop, another north
of present-day Grissom Road about equidistant between the east and west parts
of the APE, and at the previously labeled H. Weimer compound south of the creek.
These and other agricultural compounds are visible on a 1955 aerial photograph
(NETR Online 2017). More importantly, the historic photograph shows trees along
the broad Culebra Creek channel and on the valley walls, but the valley floor is
free of visible vegetation and clearly used for crop agriculture and pasturage. The
original Culebra Road crossing was modified between 1955 and 1963 and used up
into the 1980s. Timber Path follows this modified alignment across and north of the
creek. The present Culebra Creek bridge and the road segment south of the creek
were constructed in the early 1980s, which coincided with encroaching residential
development on the north side of the creek. Residential development supplanted
agricultural land south of the creek between ca. 1995 and 2010, when the Timber
Path bridge was constructed (NETR Online 2017).
While the geologic and geomorphic characteristics of the project area suggest
the Culebra Creek floodplain has some potential for naturally buried prehistoric
sites, the distribution of documented prehistoric sites in the vicinity of the project
area suggests the possibility of finding prehistoric sites on this landform is limited.

7

Four of the six sites recorded by Nickels (2004) were on terraces adjacent to the
channel, whereas only one not attributable to secondary deposition was on a bench
along the creek. This small sample of prehistoric sites and the position of the one
nearby historic site suggest the terraces along the wide channel are better suited
to human occupation and thus the landforms most likely to contain archeological
deposits. However, the APE encompasses only minor segments of terrace tread, most
of which has been impacted by previous channel modification and other development.
Given these factors and the morphology of the stream channel, the potential for
prehistoric sites in the APE is limited, and deeply buried sites are unlikely.
Aside from historic-age road segments that pass through the east half of the
APE and are clearly visible east of Timber Path on Google Earth satellite imagery,
the potential for historic archeological sites in the project area is very low. Review
of historic maps and aerial photographs showed little development in the area prior
to the last 40–50 years aside from agricultural modification of the landscape, and
structures depicted on twentieth-century maps were again situated on terraces
above Culebra Creek or set on higher terrain well away from the stream channel.
RESULTS OF THE SURVEY
Field investigations consisted of pedestrian survey with examination of
vegetation-free surface exposures and shovel testing where appropriate within the
10.6-acre APE. In general, the north and south edges of the APE are defined by the
top edges of the present channel and the limits of adjacent retail and residential
development. The 1.7-acre segment of APE at Culebra Road encompasses a 380-ftlong by 165-ft-wide bridge corridor, with a 45-ft-wide corridor for a proposed pilot
channel stretching 95 ft east and 160 ft west. The 8.9-acre segment of APE at Timber
Path encompasses a 510-ft-long by 130-ft-wide bridge corridor, with a 175-ft-long
by 45–80-ft-wide area for a proposed pilot channel west of the bridge and a 7.4-acre
area slated for various channel improvements east of (below) the bridge corridor.
Much of the APE below the bridge corridor extends from bank to bank and stretches
for an approximate maximum distance of 830 ft below it.
Channel walls and floors have been cut and graded repeatedly in the vicinity
of both bridges, and gravel bars and previous road construction materials have been
mechanically moved away from them to provide right of way clearance and facilitate
stream flow. Less-disturbed and unmodified segments of the broader Culebra Creek
channel floor southeast of Timber Path include surfaces marked by flood chutes,
wider depressed areas, and a series of braided channels. The largest channels in
these areas have cut through coarse- and fine-grained deposits to expose limestone
bedrock. In situ remnants of the earlier, abandoned roadways are visible in the east
half of the APE, and demolition debris from them is scattered across the project
area east and southeast of Timber Path. The north bank wall east of Timber Path
has been impacted by erosion, mechanical excavation, road and retail construction,
and modern dumping.
Subsurface and overhead utilities cross through the APE. A sewer main
crosses the south sides of both APE segments. The line runs along the modified

8

channel floor before transitioning to the top edge of the previously cut and
graded bank or terrace southeast of Timber Path. Manholes for this line are in or
immediately adjacent to the APE at both bridges. A water main crosses underneath
the Timber Path bridge and follows the sewer main along the bank edge southeast
of the bridge. A gas line parallels the east side of the abandoned roadbed that
stretches from Timber Path to the southeast end of the APE. An overhead utility
alignment runs between the gas line and existing Culebra Creek channel for about
the southern third of the Timber Path APE, turns north to cross the channel, and
continues northwest along the wall of the north bank. Three other utility poles sit
on the extreme northeast edge of the Timber Path APE segment.
Surface visibility in the APE typically varied from 0 to 30 percent, with
higher visibility on the channel floor, on cut banks and bench margins along existing
channel segments, on portions of the north bank wall, and along two-track roads and
abandoned roads. Nine shovel tests were excavated in and immediately adjacent to
the APE (Figure 2). Shovel Tests 1 and 2 were placed near the ends of the proposed
pilot channel below Culebra Road. Shovel Tests 3–9 were southeast of Timber Path
on the channel floor, at the foot of the channel wall, and on terrace margins north
of the creek. Shovel tests were not systematically spaced along survey transects.
Most of the tests were placed in locations that appeared to be relatively undisturbed
and/or appeared to have the greatest potential for archeological deposits according
to landform. Some of the tests were excavated to demonstrate the character of the
subsurface deposits in areas otherwise obscured by surface vegetation. If the APE
acreage is rounded up to 11 acres, then the resulting shovel test density of 1 test for
every 1.2 acres exceeds the Texas Historical Commission’s minimum archeological
survey standard of 1 test every 2 acres on tracts of this size. This level of effort is
considered sufficient given the geomorphic setting of the APE and the extent and
level of natural and artificial disturbance within it. Backhoe trenching is considered
unnecessary within the APE for the same reasons.
Shovel tests were approximately 30 cm in diameter and were excavated in
20-cm levels when sediments allowed. Excavated sediment was screened through
1/4-inch-mesh hardware cloth or carefully sorted through with a trowel when too
difficult to screen efficiently. A Shovel Test Record form was used to record brief
sediment descriptions and notes about the presence of natural inclusions (e.g. snail
shells), modern trash, and construction materials. The average shovel test depth
was 29 cm, with depths ranging from 13 to 60 cm.
Shovel Test 1 was on a bench between the north bank wall and the existing
stream channel near the west end of the proposed pilot channel. Natural benches in
this location stand about 1.5 m above the floor of the channel, and these consist of
40 to 50 cm of sediment atop a thick gravel base. No artifacts were observed in the
inspected cut banks, and none were recovered in Shovel Test 1. Sediment in the top
28 cm of the test consisted of moderately consolidated brown silt loam that graded to
silty clay with depth. This sediment contained occasional fine gravels and abundant
snail shells. Pieces of plastic and rubber were common in the top 15 cm. The next
layer of sediment, exposed to a depth of 35 cm, consisted of well-consolidated, light

9

Figure 2

1

Gr

2

Cu

leb

Cu

le

ra

br

a

Cr

ee

is

so

m

Ro

ad

k

6

Ro

T im b e r

ad

7

9
4
5

8

3

Path

Shovel Test
Project Area

³

0

50 100

200

Meters

Figure 2. Modern aerial photograph of the project area showing the APE and shovel test locations. The Culebra Road
survey area is on the west, and the Timber Path survey area is on the east.

10

brown, gravelly silty clay with some carbonate flecks. The sizes of the angular to
subangular limestone gravels were variable.
Shovel Test 2 was on a vegetated gravel bar along the north edge of the
proposed pilot channel east of the bridge. This 15-cm-deep test revealed 3–4 cm of
grayish brown clay loam and roots above well-consolidated yellowish brown silty
and sandy clay with abundant rounded gravels and carbonate flecks. The existing
channel cut roughly 5 m south of the test shows a heterogeneous deposit of fine to
coarse gravels (up to 45 cm across) with little intervening sediment that is at least
1 m thick.
Shovel Tests 3–6 were in relatively flat areas on the broad channel floor,
between abandoned road segments and the current channel cut. Surfaces at these
four tests were covered with a dense mat of grasses and forbs. Shovel Tests 3–5 were
within 20 to 30 m of each other on what appeared to be a wide bench flanked by
the bedrock-floored channel to the east and northeast. Shovel Test 3 revealed 7 cm
of loose sandy loam with a few gravels and some asphalt shingle fragments above
tightly packed gravels interspersed with loam and silty clay; it extended to a depth of
13 cm. Shovel Test 4 exposed 12 cm of dark brown clay loam and clay with fine lenses
of medium-grained sand over 18 cm of dark brown clay mottled with pale gray silt
with few gravels. Beneath this was 30 cm of dry, strongly granular, dark brown clay
with scattered fragments of indurated limestone that increased in frequency with
depth. The test ended at limestone bedrock at 60 cm. Partially buried segments of
rubber tubing were observed in an area of softer surface sediments about 5 m south
of this test. Shovel Test 5 was about 10 m east of an abandoned road segment and
excavated to a depth of only 20 cm because it revealed dry brown loam and sandy
loam mixed with high-density small gravels and some asphalt fragments. Shovel
Test 6 was on a flat area composed of fine-grained sediments and surface gravel
deposits south of a braided channel segment. The test revealed 6 cm of moderately
consolidated, granular, silty clay over 9 cm of dark brown, granular, silty clay and
clay with few gravels and Rabdotus shells. Sediment in the remainder of the test (to
a depth of 45 cm) was very dark brown clay with a few small gravels and scattered
carbonate flecks.
Shovel Tests 7–9 were north of the existing stream channel. Shovel Tests 7
and 8 were on top of the north bank on the leading terrace edge. Shovel Test 9 was
on a bench below a 25-m-long by 15-m-wide mechanical cut in the bank wall. These
tests ranged from 25 to 28 cm in depth. Shovel Test 7 revealed 25 cm of strongly
granular, reddish brown silt loam with abundant fine gravels and some snail shells
above tightly packed calcareous gravels interspersed with silty clay. Shovel Test 8
exposed strongly granular to blocky, dark brown silty clay with a few fine gravels
to a depth of 25 cm. Shovel Test 9 revealed 22 cm of strongly granular, dark brown
silty clay loam and silty clay with a few fine gravels above well-consolidated brown
clay with carbonate flecks.
Visible remains of the original Culebra Road stream crossing east of Timber
Path include a 400-ft-long northwest-southeast paved segment on the channel floor
and a cut in the north terrace wall. The paved segment is 18 ft wide and composed

11

of at least two layers of weathered asphalt and fine-grained aggregate that has the
appearance of a modern concrete sidewalk. The paved portion is covered in places
by water-laid gravels, and the exposed segment ends at gravel berms and large
pieces of limestone. The cut in the bank wall is also covered with gravel, larger
rocks, and concrete rubble. A 1959 topographic map suggests the low road segment
bridged the creek with a culvert, but no indication of this was observed during the
survey, which suggests it was buried by post-abandonment stream flow (NETR
Online 2017). A later crossing was constructed roughly 275 ft upstream from the
first one between 1955 and 1963. The wider roadway tied into an expanded Culebra
Road alignment south of the creek. This road segment was in use until Timber
Path was constructed in about 2010 (NETR Online 2017). Timber Path follows the
mid-twentieth-century alignment across and north of the creek, and a 935-ft-long
segment of the old roadway and wide roadbed extends southeast from the present
bridge to the south end of the APE. The old roadbed runs between the graded south
terrace wall and an existing channel cut. The top of the roadbed is about 90 ft wide,
and it stands 3–4 m above the floor of the adjacent channel at the southeast end
of the APE. The sloped surface above the stream channel is composed of artificial
fill, dumped asphalt, concrete fragments, and large pieces of limestone. The former
roadway now consists primarily of limestone gravels and calcareous road base
with scattered remnants of in situ asphalt. Although both of the abandoned road
segments are of historic age, neither feature was recorded as an archeological site
due to extensive post-abandonment disturbance and limited archeological potential
with respect to area history.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Review of aerial photographs indicates that the Culebra Creek channel
was cut and graded across the west segment of APE prior to construction of the
Culebra Creek bridge in the 1980s. The east APE segment was impacted by road
construction as early as the nineteenth century, and the existing bridge corridor
and parts of the APE below it were subject to road construction disturbance in the
mid twentieth century and again in about 2010 (NETR Online 2017). The south
channel or terrace wall in the APE below Timber Path has been cut and graded,
and the north channel wall has been impacted by mechanical excavation and
retail construction. Subsurface utilities cross the southern portion of the APE, and
overhead utility lines cross segments of the east side of the project area. Proposed
modifications to the existing bridge corridors will be within the limits of previous
construction disturbance, and the proposed pilot channels are in areas impacted by
natural and artificial channelization, channel meander and scouring, and previous
road construction. Proposed bank or terrace wall modifications east of Timber Path
will be relegated to previously cut and graded wall segments or eroded surfaces
that have been extensively disturbed by previous mechanical earthmoving activity
and nonresidential construction.
Survey identified gravel deposits at the surface across much of the APE,
and shovel tests revealed shallow surface soils or near-surface gravel deposits
in the tested areas. Modern trash protrudes from the surface in some areas and

12

was identified in the upper portions of some of the shovel tests. No artifacts or
archeological sites were identified within the APE during this survey. The extensively
disturbed early- and mid-twentieth-century road segments in the APE were not
recorded as archeological sites because they have no potential to impart archeological
information. Surface observations and the shovel test profiles indicate that the APE
does not include surface soils of sufficient depth to contain buried archeological sites.
According to this finding, the APE has very little potential for intact archeological
deposits that would meet eligibility criteria for listing in the National Register of
Historic Places or designation as a State Antiquities Landmark. Hence, Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., recommends that the proposed project be allowed to proceed
without additional archeological investigations.

13

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, J. R. Buchanan, W. L. Hezlep, L. T. Ellis, T. G. Jordan,
C. T. Granger, C. P. Zlatkovich
1973
Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93–115.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1983
The Geologic Atlas of Texas, San Antonio Sheet. Reprint. Originally published in 1974.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Campbell, John, and Bradford Jones
2009
Intensive Archeological Survey of the City of San Antonio’s Lower Creek Greenway
Between Bandera Road and Ingram Road in Bexar County, Texas. Archeological Series
No. 213. Hicks and Company, Austin.
Frye, R. G., K. L. Brown, and C. A. McMahan
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas Map. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
Griffith, G. E., S. A. Bryce, J. M. Omernik, J. A. Comstock, A. C. Rogers, B. Harrison, S. L. Hatch,
and D. Bezanson
2004
Ecoregions of Texas (color poster with map, descriptive text, and photographs, map
scale 1:2,500,000). U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia.
McMahan, Craig A., Roy G. Frye, and Kirby L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and accompanying illustrated
synopsis. Wildlife Division, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Nationwide Environmental Title Research, L.L.C. (NETR Online)
2017
Historic Aerials. Electronic document, http://historicaerials.com, accessed August 2017.
Natural Fibers Information Center
1987
The Climates of Texas Counties. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at
Austin, in cooperation with the Office of the State Climatologist, Texas A&M University,
College Station.
Nichols, Melanie
2017
State Antiquities Landmark (SAL) Eligibility Testing of Site 41BX1592, City of San
Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. Pape-Dawson, San Antonio.
Nickels, David L.
2004
An Archeological Survey of Cathedral Rock Nature Park, San Antonio, Bexar County,
Texas. Archeological Report No. 1. Tierras Antiguas Archeological Consulting,
Martindale, Texas.
Robinson, David, and Michael Nash
2011
An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Grissom-Helotes-Bandera Transmission
Line Rebuild Project, Bexar County, Texas. Document No. 110083. Atkins, Austin.
Rullman, John D.
1887
Map of Bexar County. Published by the Strobridge Lithograph Company, Cincinnati,
New York, & London. Texas General Land Office, Austin.

14
SoilWeb Earth
2017
SoilWeb Network Link on Google Earth, Streaming-KMZ Interface to U.S. Department
of Agriculture, National Cooperative Soil Survey, Soils Survey Geographic Database
(SSURGO) and Natural Resources Conservation Service, State Soil Geographic Database
(STATSGO) digital soil survey products. California Soil Resource Laboratory, University
of California, Davis, in collaboration with U.S. Department of Agriculture, National
Cooperative Soil Survey. Electronic document, http://casoilresource.lawr.ucdavis.edu/
soilweb-apps, accessed August 2017.
Taylor, F. B., R. B. Hailey, and D. L. Richmond
1991
Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
1918
Lytle, Texas, 30-minute Quadrangle. War Department, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Washington, D.C.
1927

West San Antonio, Texas, 15-minute Quadrangle. War Department, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Washington, D.C.

U.S. Geological Survey
1903
San Antonio, Texas, 15-minute Quadrangle. U.S. Geological Survey. Walter Geology
Library, University of Texas, Austin.
1953

Culebra Hill 7.5-minute Quadrangle. Mapped by the U.S. Army Map Service. Published
by the U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.

1993

Culebra Hill 7.5-minute Quadrangle. U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia.

