ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY AT CAMP
STANLEY STORAGE ACTIVITY,
BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS

by
Karl W. Kibler
Kevin E. Stork
and
L. Wayne Klement

REPORTS OF INVESTIGATIONS, NUMBER 108

ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY AT CAMP
STANLEY STORAGE ACTIVITY,
BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS

by

Karl W. Kibler,
Kevin E. Stork,
and
L. Wayne Klement

Co-Principal Investigators: Ross C. Fields and Karl W. Kibler

REPORTS OF INVESTIGATIONS, NUMBER 108

Submitledto

Science Applications International Corporation
Boise, Idaho

by

Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Consulting Archeolog.ists
A~stin, Texas

March 1998

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT

Vll

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

viii

CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION

I

Geology

I

Quaternary Geomorphology...................

I

Climate

4

Flora and Fauna

4

CHAPTER 2: ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

5

Prehistoric Research Context for Camp Stanley...................................................
Cultural Chrooology

5
5

Previous Archeological Investigations and Known Archeological

Resources in the Camp Stanley Area
Types of Prehistoric Sites
Site Settings: Geomorphic Environments and Archeological Potential
Cultural Adaptive Systems: Correlations between the Archeological
Record and Prehistoric Human Behavior
,.. ,
Paleoenvironments

9
9
11

12
,

13

Chronology

14

Subsistence Strategies

14

Settlement Systems
Technology and Material Culture
Population Dynamics
Intraregional and Extraregional Interaction

15
15
15
16

Historic Period

.

16

CHAPTER 3: METHODS OF lNVESTlGATIONS

19

Survey Field Methods and Documentation

19

Artifact Collection and Analysis

23

CHAPTER 4: RESULTS OF THE SURVEY

25

Site 41BX1156
Site 41BXl157

25
..

Site 41BXl158 ........
Site 41BXl159

..

25

....................................................................................................................... U
.

.

26

Site 41BXl160

26

Site 41BXl161

:

Sile 41BXl162

27

Site 41BXl163.....................................

.

27

Site 41BXl164
Site 41BXl165

27

28
.

.

III

29

Site 4IBXI166

29

Site 4IBXI167

29

Site4IBXI168

29

Site 41BXI169

30

Site4IBXI170

31

Site 41BXIl71

31

Site 4IBXIl72

32

Site 41BXI173

32

Site 41BXI174

33

Site 41BXI175

33

Site 41BXI176

34

Site 41BXI177

34

Site 41BXI178

35

Site4IBXI179

35

Site 41BXIl80

35

Site 41BXlI81

37

Site 41BXll82

:........

.. 38

Sile 4IBXll83

.. 38

Site 41BXll84

38

Site 41BXll85

39

Site 41BXI186

39

Site 41BXl187

..

40

Site 4IBXI188

..

42

Site 41BXI189

..

43

Summary of Prehistoric Resources

43

Summary of Historic Resources

46

CHAPTER 5: ASSESSMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

49

Prehistoric Components

49

Historic Components

50
53

REFERENCES CITED

IV

LIST OF FIGURES

I. Project location map

2

2. Prehistoric cultural sequences

6

3. Map of Camp Stanley showing areas surveyed

20

4. 1925 U.S. Military Reservation, Leon Springs, Texas, map depicting military structures
at Camp Stanley and outlying ranches/farmsteads

21

5. Map of Inner Cantonment of Camp Stanley depicting areas of great and little disturbance

22

6. Flaked glass artifact from 41BXI157

26

7. Metal U.S. Army button from 41BXI159

26

8. Site map. 41BXI163

28

9. Artifactsfrom4IBXI169

30

10. Pedernales dart point from 4IBXII72

32

II. Dart points from 41BXI173

33

12. Pedernales dart point from 41BXI174

33

13. Angostura dart point from 41BXI176

34

14. Granbury arrow point from 41 BX 1177

35

IS. Sitemap,4IBXI180 ............................................................................•......................................................... 36
16. Dart points from 41BXI180

37

17. Frio dart point from 41BXI183

38

18. Dartpointsfrom4IBXI185

39

19. Site map, 41BXI186

41

20. Photographs of site 41BXI188

42

21. Site map, 41BXI 189

44

22. The archeological remains of the early Camp Stanley sewer system

48

v

LIST OF TABLES
I.

Structures and features at site 41BXI186

2.

Summary of prehistoric resources

3.

Summary of historic resources

4.

40
,

46

Prehistoric components and recommended

National Register of Historic Places eligibility status
5.

45

50

Historic components and recommended

National Register of Historic Places eligibility status

Vl

50

•

ABSTRACT

From November 1995 into early January 1996, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted an archeological survey
of2,125 acres at Camp Stanley Storage Activity in Bexar County, Texas. The survey covered approximately 977 of
the 1,780 acres within the Inner Cantonment, avoiding those areas of extreme disturbance by the military. The
survey of the Outer Cantonment covered 1,148 acres within five designated survey parcels. A total of 34 archeological
sites, consisting af20 prehistoric and 18 prehistoric components, were documented. Many of the sites lack contextual
and structural integrity due to a number of factors (e.g., erosion, brush clearing, military activities, etc.). Seven
sites with eight components are recommended as potentially eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places. Site 41BXl180 is the only prehistoric component recommended as potentially eligible, due to the intact
nature of the site's central feature, a burned rock midden. It is recommended that additional investigations in the
form of test excavations be carried out for a fuller assessment of the site's eligibility for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places. The seven historic components consist of late-nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century
ranch complexes and house structures and World War I training devices. The remains of ranch complexes and
house structures are present at sites 41 BX1170, 41BXll72, 41BX1179, and 41 BX1189. Although these four
components have limited archeological and architectural potential due to disturbances and demolition of structures,
they have yet to be fully assessed. Therefore, it is recommended that these components be judged potentially
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places pending archival investigations. The World War I
training devices are present at sites 41BX1l63, 41BX1188, and 41BX1l89. Training trenches at sites 41BX1163
and 41BX1l89 are diagnostic to the U.S. Army's participation in World War I. Site 41BX1188 is an old target
range at Camp Stanley. Built in 1907, the target range was used extensively to train infantry during World War I and
up to World War II. Key elements of these three sites are still intact and should be protected from future impacts
from vandalism, construction, and range management.

V11

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Many people are responsible for the completion of this project. The field survey was carried out by Roman
Clem and Brent Scott, under the direction ofL. Wayne Klement(ProjectArcheologist) and Kevin E. Stork (Assistant
Project Archeologist). The crew was assisted by Brian K. Murphy (Environmental Officer) and Tom Tijerina
(Facilities Engineer) of Camp Stanley, who provided maps and infonnation on the base's resources. Dusty Bruns

(Resource Management) of Camp Bullis also provided maps and valuable information on the history of Camp
Stanley. Other individuals include Dr. James Rudolph of Science Applications International Corporation, Boise,
Idaho, who coordinated our efforts with personnel at Camp Stanley and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort
Worth District, and Stephen Austin of the Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.
Report writing was shared by Karl W. Kibler, Wayne Klement, and Kevin Stork. Karl wrote the environmental
and prehistoric background and prehistoric research context, and Chapter 4, Assessments and Recommendations.

Wayne wrote up the prehistoric siles and wrote the summary of prehistoric resources in Chapter 3. Kevin wrote up
the historic sites and wrote the historic background to Camp Stanley and summary of historic resources. Kevin and
Wayne wrote Chapter 2, Methods of Investigations.

The staff at Prewitt and Associates, Inc., provided many skills and advice during this project. Ross C. Fields
and Karl Kibler served as Co-Principal Investigators. Artifacts were washed and cataloged by Audra L. Pineda
under the supervision of Karen M. Gardner. Elton R. Prewitt typed the projectile points, while the ceramic, glass,
and military artifacts were identified by Kevin Stork. Artifacts were illustrated by Ellen Atha. Maps and figures
were skillfully drafted by Sandra L. Hannum and Brian Wootan. The draft was produced by Melissa Hennigan,
assisted by Audra L. Pineda. Linda Foster edited and produced the final report.

viii

INTRODUCTION

1
This report presents the results of archeological
survey of ca. 2,125 acres (860 hectares) conducted by
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., from November 27, 1995,
to January 9, 1996, at Camp Stanley Storage Activity.
The investigations were conducted under a subcontract
with Science Applications International Corporation of
Boise, Idaho. Camp Stanley is a U.S. Army installation
encompassing ca. 4,004 acres in northern Bexar County,
Texas (Figure I). Camp Stanley is divided into two
parts-an Inner Cantonment (ca. 1,780 acres) and an Outer
Cantonment (ca. 2,224 acres). Of the approximately 2,125
acres surveyed, ca. 977 acres were in the Inner Cantonment and ca. 1,148 acres were in the Outer Cantonment.
The survey recorded 34 archeological sites consisting of
20 prehistoric components and 18 historic components.
These investigations are authorized by and were
conducted in accordance with Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (P.L. 89665, as amended in 1980), the Archeological and
Historical Preservation Act of 1974 (Pol. 93-291, as
amended), the National Environmental Policy Act of
1969 (P.L. 90-190, Executive Order 11593 (Protection
and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment 1971),
and Army Regulation 420-40.
The results of these investigations are presented
in this report in the following manner. The remaining
port.ion of Chapter I provides environmental
background information on the geology, Quaternary
geomorphology, climate, flora, and fauna of the area.
Chapter 2 presents an in-depth Prehistoric Context for
Camp Stanley and cultural chronologies for the
Prehistoric and Historic periods. Chapter 3 presents the
objectives and methods of the investigations. The results
of the archeological survey are presented in Chapler 4
with individual site descriptions and summaries and
interpretations of the collective prehistoric and historic
resources. Assessments and recommendations for the
cultural resources are given in ~hapter 5.
GEOLOGY
Camp Stanley is located in south-central Texas

along the Baleones fault zone which marks the southern and eastern margins of the Edwards Plateau. separating it from the Blackland Prairie and Gulf Coastal
Plain to the southeast (Arbingast el aI. 1973:6; Brown
el aJ. 1974). The Balcones fault zone is a band of northeast-southwest-trending faults that were active during
the Miocene. The fault blocks throughout this zone are
generally down thrown to the southeast, a result of the
uplift of the Edwards Plateau with respect to the Blackland Prairie and the Gulf Coastal Plain. Camp Stanley
is underlain by the Lower Cretaceous Glen Rose Formation (Brown et aJ. 1974), which consists of alternating beds of limestones, dolomites, and marls that are
indicative of shallow sub-tidal and tidal-flat environments. These alternating resistant and recessive beds
give the Glen Rose Formation its characteristic
stairstepped or benched topography. The Glen Rose is
divided into upper and lower units. The lower Glen Rose
is exposed across Camp Stanley in the Salado Creek
valley, its tributaries, and smaller drainages (E. Collins
1994). It is 200-270 ft thick and consists of massive
limestones and,dolomitic limestones containing some
rudistid reefs and mounds. The top of the lower Glen
Rose unit is capped hy a series of 1-3-ft-thick Corbula
beds consisting of abundant steinkerns of the bivalve
Corbula harveyi (E. Collins 1994). The upper Glen Rose
is present on the hilltops, ridges, slopes. and intervening saddles across Camp Stanley and consists of thinner, more-dolomitic, and less- fossiliferous heds (E.
Collins 1994). It has an overall thickness of 400 ft.
QUATERNARY GEOMORPHOLOGY

The rugged and highly dissected landscape of
Camp Stanley is the result of millions of years of erosion. The uplift of the Edwards Plateau during the late
Tertiary created knickpoints, which streams draining the
plateau have been wearing down since the Miocene.
Much of Camp Stanley is drained by Salado Creek, an
intermittment upland tributary of the San Antonio River.
The extreme southwestern corner of the installation is
drained by an unnamed ephemeral tributary of Leon

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Sorage Activity

'"

,
/

'"

/ /
Canyon Lake

BANDERA
COUNTY

.-

A
/i,
MEDINA

I,
I
I,
I,
I,

BEXAR
COUNTY

Camp
Stanley

COUNTY.

0

•

3

6

12

~

f

kilometers

0

3

6
miles

P/<,11971SLH

Figure 1. Project location map.

2

12

Chapter 1: Introduction
Creek, while the northeastern corner is drained by
ephemeral tributaries of Cibolo Creek. Faulting has to
some extent controlled or strongly influenced the development of these drainages (particularly Salado
Creek) by directing groundwater to seeps and springs,
exposing formations of varying resistances, and controlling gradients.
The low-order upland drainages are usually deep,
narrow, and often scoured to bedrock and devoid of thick
alluvial deposits. Relatively thick alluvial deposits were
observed only in the Salado Creek valley in the form of
a relatively broad floodplain. These alluvial deposits
are up to 1-1.5 m thick and consist of thick gravelly
basal units capped by thin mantles of loamy and clayey
alluvium. Salado Creek is a slightly meandering, intermittent, mixed-load stream. The headwaters of Salado
Creek are within and just outside Camp Stanley; therefore, Salado Creek has a steep gradient (9.5 m1km).
Much of the Salado Creek valley has been modified
and channelized, disturbing and destroying the stratigraphy of the alluvial deposits. Downstream, in Camp
Bullis, a large earthern dam was constructed by the Soil
Conservation Service on Salado Creek to inhibit rapid
run-off and facilitate the infiltration of water into the
Edwards aquifer. Undoubtedly, the presence of the dam
has affected sedimentation upstream in Camp Stanley.
In the past, the steep gradient of upper Salado Creek
(9.5 m1km), coupled with heavy rainfalls and impervious ground cover throughout the watershed, resulted in
intensive flash floods and scouring of the channel bed
and margins. It is probable that most of the upper Salado
Creek valley was scoured out periodically, making the
presence of any alluvial deposits temporary features
within the valley. How often this may have occurred is
not known, but since flashy discharges are now controlled to some extent, much of the sediment upstream
from the dam may have been deposited since its construction in the 1970s.
An earlier archeological survey along Salado
Creek in Camp Bullis also noted the presence of basal
gravels (high-energy environments) and suggested that
most of the valley had little potential for yielding intact
archeological sites (Quigg 1988:26). This notion was
further supported by the absence of prehistoric cultural
resources in primary context throughout the Salado
Creek valley, even though the area was subjected to an
intensive shovel-testing program during the survey..
Uplands, ridges, slopes, and intervening saddles
characterize much of the Camp Stanley landscape and
therefore represent an important part of the evolution
of this landscape and potential archeological record.
Kibler (Kibler and Gardner 1997) presents a simple
model oflandscape evolution for the Camp Stanley area,

based on investigations at neighboring Camp Bullis, that
primarily focuses on the development of upland slopes
and processes of sediment transport from upland
environments to the fluvial systems in the valley
bottoms. The model views sediments and clasts being
delivered to the valley bottoms from the uplands and
slopes by sheetwash, rillwash, fluvial, and mass-wasting
processes through a system of discontinuous and
segmented bedrock-entrenched gullies. Other colluvial
processes and depositional environments commonly
associated with the development of slopes, such as
debris flows and the formation of fans, are extremely
rare.
Upland or upslope sediments are delivered by
sheetwash and rill wash to the gullies, where the flow
becomes channelized and restricted. The gullies tend
to be widely spaced, creating broad, smooth slopes characteristic of a low drainage density system (Young
1972:74). The alternating resistant and pervious beds
of the Glen Rose Formation as well as the gradient of
the main slope playa major role in the development of
these gullies, influencing and controlling drainage, channel (gully) morphology, gradient, and incision. Farther
downslope, the walls and bottom of the channel will
merge at a location known as the intersection point
(Waters 1992: 145). Intersection points usually occur
where the drainage intersects an exposed bed of highy
resistant bedrock, hindering entrenchment, and where
the gradient of the main slope decreases. Sediments
accumulate at intersection points to form small gullymouth fans, sheetwash and rillwash become the dominant modes of sediment transport, and the overall gully
channel becomes wider and shallower, until the channel once again becomes entrenched due to a bedrock or
gradient change downslope. Channel gradient changes
tend to be extremely sharp, localized, and marked by
<1-3-m-high pour-offs, which denote changes in the
resistance of the exposed bedrock. Entrenchment is usually through headward erosion and the undercutting and
mass wasting of more-resistant limestone caps at the
pour-offs.
Depositional environments on the uplands and
valley slopes are rare. These surfaces are most often
nonaggrading or deflationary with very thin soil mantles,
which primarily are the result of in situ weathering or
deposition through sheetwash and rill wash. The few
depositional environments existing on the slopes are the
result of sediments filling local topographic depressions,
accumulating behind barriers (e.g., vegetation), or accumulating where gradients sharply decline (e.g., intersection points). These deposits tend to be thin (rarely
more than 40 em thick) discontinuous patches of gravelly loams.
3

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Sorage Activity
Large overhangs or rockshelters currently are not
known to exist in Camp Stanley but may fonn along
low-order streams where underlying less-resistant

FLORA AND FAUNA

Camp Stanley is located along the southern
margin of the Balconian biotic province (Blair
1950). The floral and faunal assemblages, however,

bedrock units are undercut by the stream, such as shelters
41BXI031 and 41BXI032 at Camp Bullis, Slopes
comprised of Glen Rose limestones apparently are not
conducive to rockshelter formation or such features are
very short lived and collapse quickly before fully
developing, Abbott (1994:32) has noted that rockshelter
development in the Glen Rose Formation at Fort Hood
(Bell and Coryell Counties) is very uncommon. Karst

tend to represent a mix of three biotic provinces-the
Balconian, Texan, and Tamaulipan. The area also
represents gin of the Balconian biotic province (Blair

1950). The floral and faunal assemblages, however, tend
tothe geographical limit for the distribution of many
faunal species (Blair 1950: 113-114).
Early historic accounts of the floral community

features, such as solution cavities and sinkholes, are
common in the northwestern and southeastern portions

describe upland grassland savannahs with dense wood-

of Camp Bullis but are not known to exist in Camp
Stanley.
Soils throughout Camp Stanley belong to the
Tarrant-Brackett association (Taylor et al. 1966:2).
A variety of soil series and types are included in the
Tarrant-Brackett association; however, the thin,
gravelly, calcareous Tarrant and Brackett soils are
predominant, mantling the hilltops and slopes.
Reddish brown and gravelly Crawford and Bexar
soils occupy the lower valley slopes and intervening
saddles. Dark-colored, calcareous, and clayey Krum
soils occupy the toeslopes of the larger valleys and
low-order upland drainages, while the dark-colored,
clayey Trinity and Frio soils occupy the floodplain
of Salado Creek.

lands along stream valleys (Bonnell 1840:94; Roemer
1935: 118). However, due to development, overgrazing,
and suppression of natural fires throughout the region
in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, vegetation

patterns have been severely altered. Today, upland areas consist of dense scrub forests ofjuniper (Juniperus

ashei), Texas oak (Quercus texana), and live oak (Q.
virginiana) with scattered Texas red bud (Cercis
texensis) and prickly pear (Opuntia sp.), beargrass
(Nolina texana), and sotol (Dasilyrion sp.) as understory vegetation. Dense patches of sotol and beargrass
are present in upland and slope areas that have been

subjected to recent (within the last 2-3 years) prescribed
burnings. More diverse species are present along the

stream valleys, including live oak, hackberry (Celtis
laevigata), cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia), and pecan
(Carya illinoensis). These riparian zones may be interspersed with open grassy areas of little bluestem
(Schizachyrium scoparium) and other tall grasses (Blair
1950:112-113).

CLIMATE

The climate of south-central Texas can be
classified as a modified humid subtropical climate
with Gult~influenced hot summers and continentalinfluenced mild winters. Mean daily maximum and
minimum temperatures for January are 62°F and
39°F, respectively. For July, mean daily maximum
and mininum temperatures are 95°F and 74°F,
respectively. The mean annual precipitation for the
region is 81.2 em (32 inches) but varies west to east
across the region from 66 to 106 em. Precipitation
falls throughout the year but is generally in the form
of late spring and early fall thunderstorms (Natural
Fibers Information Center 1987: 12, 49-50). The
movement of warm moist Gulf air up onto the eqge
of the Edwards Plateau during warmer months often
triggers short-lived but heavy cloudbursts, making
the region one of the most flood prone in the United
States (patton and Baker 1977).

Numerous faunal species occupy the area not
only due to the intersection of three biotic provinces,

but also

due

to

the

many

habitats

and

microenvironments along the edge of the Edwards

Plateau (Lundelius 1967:309-310). Present-day
species include white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
virginianus), coyote (Canis latrans), gray fox
(Urocyon cinereoargenteus), bobcat (Lynx rufus),
raccoon (Procyon lotor), striped skunk (Mephitis
mephitis), fox squirrel (Sciurus niger), eastern
cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus floridanus), turkey
(Meleagris gallopavo), as well as 49 other mammals,
36 species of snakes, and 16 lizard species (Blair
1950:113-115). Prehistorically, important economic
species of the area included bison (Bison bison),
pronghorn antelope (AlItilocapra americana), and
black bear (Ursus americallus) (Gerstle et al.
1978:29).

4

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

2
with appropriate references to the local periods of Black
and McGraw (1985).
The Paleoindian period (11,500-8800 B.P.)

PREHISTORIC RESEARCH CONTEXT
FOR CAMP STANLEY
Cultural Chronology

represents the earliest known cultural manifestation in

North America. Sites and isolated artifacts of this period

The prehistoric cultural sequence for Centra]
Texas can be divided into three broad periods:
Paleoindian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric, although
the terms Neoarchaic (Prewitt 1981,1985) and PostArchaic (Johnson and Goode 1994) have been used at
times in place of the tenn Late Prehistoric. Thorough
overviews of these periods are provided by Black
(1989:25-32), Collins (1995), and Hines (1993), the
latter focusing more on the chronological sequence of
the prehistoric cultural resources in the area
surrounding Camp Stanley. A prehistoric culturalhistorical framework incorporating more-discrete
temporal and technological units has been delineated
and defined by Prewitt (1981, 1985) (Figure 2). More
recently, Johnson and Goode (1994) and Collins (1995)
have presented revised cultural chronologies of the
region and at the same time discontinued the use of
the tenn phase to describe each cultural-historical unit.
Johnson and Goode (1994) and Collins (1995) have
opted for named intervals or patterns based on
diagnostic projectile point styles and associated
radiocarbon assays (e.g., Martindale-Uvalde interval)
within each period or subperiod. More applicable to
the Camp Stanley area, and also depicted in Figure 2,
is a series of local prehistoric periods for the upper
Salado Creek drainage basin defined by Black and
McGraw (1985:321-326). Although these sequences
chronologically group and order archeological
assemblages (primarily projectile point styles) and site
components, a common criticism is that these temporalstylistic units, intervals, or patterns do not specificially
address cultural process, such as the adaptive strategies
utilized by certain (ethnic) groups in a particular
territory at a certain period of time (Black 1989:35;
Collins 1995:362; Ellis et a1. 1995). Be that as it may,
the following summary of the three periods of Central
Texas prehistory is based on Collins's (1995) sequence,

are fairly common across Central Texas. The period is
often described as having been characterized by small

but highly mobile bands of foragers who were
specialized hunters of Pleistocene megafauna. However,
a more accurate view of Paleoindian lifeways probably
includes the utilization of a much wider array of
resources. Recent investigations at the Wilson-Leonard

site (41 WM235) support this view and have challenged
the fundamental defining criteria, that of artifacts in
association with late Pleistocene megafal,lna, of the

Paleoindian period (Masson and Collins 1995). Collins
(1995) divides the Paleoindian period into early and
late subperiods. The early subperiod consists of two

projectile point style intervals-Clovis (local period 1)
and Folsom (local period 2). Clovis chipped stone
artifact assemblages, including the diagnostic, fluted

lanceolate CloVis point, were produced by bifacial,
flake, and prismatic-blade techniques on high-quality
and often-exotic lithic materials (Collins 1990). Along
with chipped stone artifacts, Clovis assemblages include
engraved stones, bone and ivory points, stone bolas,

and ochre (Collins 1995:381; Collins et a1. 1992).
Analyses of Clovis artifacts and site types suggest that
Clovis "peoples" were well-adapted, generalized
hunter-gatherers with the technology to hunt larger
game but who did not rely on it solely. In contrast,
Folsom tool kits, consisting of fluted Folsom points,

thin unfluted (Midland) points, large thin bifaces, and
end scrapers, are more indicative of specialized hunting,

particularly of bison (Collins 1995:382).
Spanning the end of the early and initial late
Paleoindian subperiods are several projectile point styles
of which the temporal, technological, or cultural
significance is unclear. Included are Plainview points

(representing Black and McGraw's [1985:322] local
period 3), a type name typically given any unfluted,
5

Archeologicol Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

CEmRAllEXASARCHEOLOGICAl. CENTRAL TEXASARCHEOLOGICAL CENTRALTEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAl.
UPPERSAlADO
ERAS. PERIODS &PRQJECTILE
PERIODS, SUllPERIODS, &
CREEKWATERSHBl
PERIODS &PHASES
POII'I]'STYLEPATTERNS
PRQJECTlLE POll>!]' STYLE If'Il'ERVALS LOCAL PERIODS
(Prewll1981. 1965)
B.P. AOAl.C.
(Johnson &Goode 1994)
(Corm 1995)
(8l:x:k& M:Grow 1965)
YEARS

HISTORIC

0

HISTORIC

,-llXXJ

ARCHAIC

Austin

-

DriItll<lOO
TWr1 SistelS

LATE
2000- '-0

TriOl'!lUlar
Perdiz
SCoIkrn

POST·
ARCHAIC
ERA

Toyoh

NEQ-

~llXXJ

MIDDLE

II

""

LATE

a: ARCHAIC

RoordRock

M(J"cos

,

...................
Cas~<Ni11e

10
9

- LATE

Ensor·Frio-Fair1ord

ARCHAIC

Morcos-Mlnlell·Cos1r<Nille

Mantell
w

PERIOD
I

PedemaJes~nney

PedemaJes

Marshall Fa<d

B

Lorge-MolshollW,IIiams

Marshall

400) '-2000

7

Bulverde

Bulverde
Clear Fori<
001<0110

3000

Janell
1-400)

Nolan, Travis

"

MIDDLE
ARCHAIC
PERIOD

""

laJita
Unnamed Styles
Early Tria~ular
Merrell
Call Cree~BeIl

Nolan-Travis

ARCHAIC

Taylor

5

(Martirdole, Uvalde)

:I:

6

MIDDLE

BeIl·Ardice·Coll Creek

"

EARLY

a:

ARCHAIC

San Geiooimo

""
~5lXXJ

EARLY
ARCHAIC
PERIOD

~

Martirdale·Uvolde

~

'0

~

Kill
<njJ

j

~

a

~

~

w

4

EAR~Y

ARCHAIC

CirclO'Iil1e

Ear~ Split Stem

;/

El:XXl 1-6lXXJ

I-llXXl

ArJJOSlura
3

St. Mary's HoII

PALEOINDIAN

IUJW

SCoIkrn·E<!NGfds

11

Dart

ARCHAIC

6lXXJ

Perdiz

Ensor. Frio

UvnJde

-

PREHISTORIC

Dart. Figueroo

ARCHAIC

SonMaroos

LATE

El:XXl

PALEOINDIAN

LATE

ERA

PALEOINDIAN

Gotordriro·_
Wilson
Plainview? -

2
EARLY
~!lXlO

PALEOINDIAN

Folsom
C10'1~

1

Figure 2. Prehistoric cultural sequences of Prewitt (1981, 1985), Johnson and Goode (1994), Collins (1995), and Black and

McGraw (I985).

6

Chapter 2: Archeological Background
lanceolate dart point. However, Collins (1995:382)
notes that these points do not parallel Plainview type-

most likely represent the technological predecessors of
the larger burned rock middens extensively used later

site points in thinness and flaking technology. Also

in the Archaic period (Collins 1995:383).
During the Middle Archaic period (6000-4000

problematic are the chronological position and cultural
signifance of Dalton and San Patrice dart points. The

B.P.) the number and distribution of sites, as well as site

succeeding late Paleoindian subperiod includes three

size, increased due to probable increases in population

projectile point style intervals-Wilson (ca. 10,0009650 B.P.), GolondrinalBarber, and St. Mary's Hall
(9500-8800 B.P.). Components and artifact and feature
assemblages of these three intervals appear to be
Archaic-like in nature and in many ways may represent

densities (Prewitt 1981:73; Weir 1976: 124, 135).
Macrobands may have formed at least seasonally, or
an increased number of small groups may have utilized
the same sites for longer periods of time (Weir

1976:130-131). A greater reliance on plant foods is
suggested by the presence of burned rock middens
toward the end of the Middle Archaic, although tool

a transition between the Early Paleoindian and

succeeding Archaic periods (Collins 1995:382).
The Archaic period (8800 to 1300-1200 B.P.) is
generally believed to represent a shift toward the hunting
and gathering of a wider array of animal and plant

kits still infer a strong reliance on hunting (Prewitt

1985:222-226). Three projectile point style intervals
comprise the MiddleArchaic-Bell-Andice-Calf Creek
(local period 5), Taylor (local period 5), and NolanTravis (local period 6). The Bell-Andice-Calf Creek and
Taylor intervals reflect a shift in lithic technology from
the preceding Martindale-Uvalde (Collins 1995:384).
Johnson and Goode (1994:25) suggest that the Bell-

resources and a decrease in group mobility (Willey and

Phillips 1958:107-108), although such changes
probably were well under way by the beginning of the
Archaic. Climatic changes most likely presented
Archaic populations with varying subsistence
challenges throughout the Holocene. This broad period
is generally divided into Early, Middle, and Late Archaic
periods (Black 1989; Collins 1995; Story 1985:28-29).

Andice-Calf Creek interval represents an influx of

bison-hunting groups from the Eastern Woodland
margins into the Central Texas region during a slightly
more mesic period. Bison disappeared as more-xeric
conditions returned during the later Nolan-Travis
interval. The style change represents another shift in

Each subperiod includes several temporal-stylistic units
or intervals based on·diagnostic projectile point styles

and associated radiocarbon assays (Collins 1995). Early
Archaic (8800-6000 B.P.) sites are small and their tool
assemblages are very diverse (Weir 1976:115-122),
suggesting that populations were highly mobile and
densities low (Prewitt 1985:217). It has been noted that

lithic technology (Collins 1995:384; Johnson and
Goode 1994:27). Prewitt (personal communication,
1996) postulates that the production and morphology
of Travis and Nolan points are similar to projectile
points from the Lower Pecos region. Such
characteristics as beveled stems and overall morphology
may have origInated in the Lower Pecos since their
presence there predates their appearance in Central
Texas. The accompanying change to more-xeric
conditions bears witness to the construction and use of

Early Archaic sites are concentrated along the eastern

and southern margins of the Edwards Plateau (Johnson
and Goode 1994; McKinney 1981). This distribution
may be indicative of climatic conditions at the time, as
these environments have many more reliable water
sources and a diverse subsistence base. Microfaunal
records and sedimentary evidence from stream valleys

burned rock middens. Johnson and Goode (1994:26)
believe that the dry conditions promoted the spread of

and along the eastern Edwards Plateau depict a climatic
regime in flux, from mesic conditions during the
beginning of the Early Archaic to extremely xeric and
back to mildly xeric conditions at the end of the

xerophytic plants, such as yucca and sotol, and that it
was these plants that were collected and cooked in large

rock ovens by late Middle Archaic peoples.
During the succeeding Late Archaic period (4000
to 1300-1200 B.P.) populations continued to increase
(Prewitt 1985:217). The establishment of large

subperiod (Collins et al. 1990; Toomey et a!. 1993).
Three projectile point style intervals are recognized-

Angostura (local periods 3 and 4), Early Split Stem,
including Gower and Jelta (local period 4), and
Martindale-Uvalde (local period 5). Manos, metates,
hammers tones, Clear Fork and Guadalupe bifaces, and

cemeteries along drainages suggests strong territorial

ties by certain groups (Story 1985:40). Xeric conditions
continued but became more mesic ca. 3500-2500 B.P.

a variety of other bifacial and unifacial tools are

The Late Archaic period is comprised of six projectile

common to all three intervals. The construction and use

point style intervals (Collins 1995:376)-Bulverde
(local period 7), Pedernales-Kinney (local period 7),
Lange-Williams-Marshall (local periods 7 and 8),
Macros-Montell-Castroville (local period 8), Ensor-

of rock hearths and ovens reflect a specialized
subsistence strategy (exploitation of roots and tubers?)
during the Early Archaic. These burned rock features

7

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity
Frio-Fairland (local period 9), and Oarl (local period
9). Johnson and Goode (1994:29-35) divide the Late
Archaic into two parts-Late Archaic I and Late Archaic
II-based on increased population densities and

is often marked by evidence of violence and conflict,
as many burials have been uncovered peppered with

such weapons (prewitt 1981 :83). Subsistence strategies
and technologies (other than arrow points) did not
change much from the preceding Late Archaic. This
continuity is recognized by Prewitt's (1981) use of the

evidence of Eastern Woodland ceremonial rituals and

religious ideological influences. Middle Archaic
subsistence technology, including the use of burned rock
middens, continued into the Late Archaic period. Collins
(1995:384) states that during the Pedernales-Kinney
interval the construction and use of burned rock middens
reached its zenith and that their use declined during the
latter half of the Late Archaic. However, there are
mounting chronological data that midden formation and
use culminated much later, during the Ensor-FrioFairland and Oarl intervals, and that this high level of

term "Neoarchaic." In fact, Johnson and Goode

(1994:39-40) and Collins (1995:385) state that the
break between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric
could be easily and appropriately represented by the
break between the Austin and Toyah phases. Around
10()(}-750 B.P., slightly more xeric or drought prone
climatic conditions returned to the region, and bison

returned to the region in large numbers (Huebner 1991;
Toomey et aI. 1993). Utilizing this vast resource were
Toyah phase peoples equipped with Perdiz-tipped

use continued into the early Late Prehistoric period

(Black et aJ. 1996; Kleinbach et aJ. 1995:795). A picture
of prevalent burned rock midden use in the eastern part
of the Central Texas region after 2000 B.P. is gradually
becoming clear. This scenario parallels the widely

arrows, end scrapers, four-beveled-edge knives, and

plain bone-tempered ceramics. The technology and
subsistence strategies of the Toyah phase represent a

completely different tradition than the preceding Austin
phase. Collins (1995:388) states that burned rock
middens fell out of use, as bison hunting and group
mobility obtained a level of importance not witnessed

recognized occurrence ofpost-2000 B.P. middens in the

western reaches of the Edwards Plateau (see Goode
1991). The use of burned rock middens appears to have
been a major part of the subsistence strategy as a
decrease in the importance of hunting, inferred by the
low ratio of projectile points in relation to other tools
in site assemblages. may have occurred (Prewitt

since Folsom times. While the importance of bison

hunting and high group mobility can hardly be disputed,
the cessation of burned rock midden use during the
Toyah phase is tenuous. A recent examination of Toyah-

1981:74).
The Late Prehistoric period (1300-1200 to
300 B.P.) is marked by the introduction of the bow and

age radiocarbon assays and assemblages by Black et
aJ. (1996) suggest that their association with burned

arrow and later ceramics into the region, probably from
the north, by persons or mechanisms unknown (prewitt

capping Archaic-age features. Black et aJ. (1996) claim

1985:228). Population densities dropped considerably
from their Late Archaic peak (Prewitt 1985:217).
Subsistence strategies did not differ greatly from the

in preceding periods, played a role in the adaptive
strategies of Toyah folk.

preceding period; however, bison became an important
economic resource during the later part of the Late

interactions with the Spanish, Republic of Mexico, the
Texas Republic, and the United States throughout the
region are provided by Campbell and Campbell (1981),
Campbell (1988), Hester (1989), and Newcomb (1961).
Collins (1995:386) divides this period into three
subperiods. The first subperiod, beginning in the late

rock middens represents more than a "thin veneer"
that burned rock midden use, while not as prevalent as

Historical accounts of aboriginals and their

Prehistoric period (Prewitt 1981 :74). The use of burned
rock middens for plant food processing (?) continued
throughout the Late Prehistoric period (Black et aJ.
1996; Goode 1991; Kleinbach et a!. 1995:795).
Horticulture came into play very late in the region but
was of minor importance to the overall subsistence

seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, marks an
era of more-pennanent contact between Europeans and
Native Americans as the Spanish moved northward out
ofMexico to establish settlements and missions on their
northern frontier. There is little available infom13tion

strategy (Collins 1995:385). In Central Texas, the Late
Prehistoric period is generally associated with the Austin
and Toyah phases (Jelks 1962; Prewitt 1981:82-84);
Austin and Toyah phase horizon markers-Scallorn-

on aboriginal groups and their ways of life except for
the fragmentary data gathered by the Spanish

Edwards and Perdiz arrow points, respectively-are

missionaries. In the San Antonio and South Texas areas,

however, both phases have a much wider application.

distributed across most of the state. Local periods 10
and 11 (Black and McGraw 1985:322) are equivalent

these groups have been collectively referred to as
Coahuiltecans because of an assumed similar way of
life; however, many individual groups may have existed

to the Austin and Toyah phases. The introduction of
ScaBorn and Edwards arrow points into Central Texas

(Campbell 1988). The inevitable and disastrous impacts

8

Chapter 2: Archeological Background
to native social structures and economic systems by
disease and hostile encounters with Europeans and
intruding groups, such as the Apache, were already
under way at this time.
The second subperiod marks the establishment
ofthe mission system in the 1720s to its ultimate demise
around 1800. Some indigenous groups moved
peacefully into mission life, giving up their nomadic
hunting and gathering way of life, while others were
forced in or moved in to escape the increasingly hostile
actions of southward-moving Apaches and Comanches.
Much of the Camp Stanley area fell within the extensive
Monte Galvan, a ranch that was associated with Mission
San Antonio de Valero (McGraw 1991: 149). By the end
of this time, many Native American groups had been
decimated by European expansion and disease, and
intrusive groups, such as the Tonkawa, Apache, and
Comanche, had moved into the region to fill the void.
Few sites attributable to these groups, outside of mission
sites, have been investigated. To complicate matters,
many aboriginal ways of life continued even after
contact with the Spanish. For example, the manufacture
of stone tools continued for many groups even after
settling in the missions (Fox 1979). The third suhperiod,
from 1800 to the last half of the nineteenth century,
witnessed the final decimation of the aboriginal groups
and the defeat and removal of the Apaches and
Comanches to reservations by the United States.

west and the BlackJand Pr<;Urie to the east, one consisting
of a highly dissecfed and faulted limestone landscape
drained by low-order tributaries of the San Antonio
River.
The types of prehistoric sites (presumed site
function) and site setting (geomorphic environment)
vary across Camp Stanley and the surrounding area.
Four general types of prehistoric sites are recognized
here: campsites or habitation sites, lithic scatters, lithic
procurement sites, and cemeteries. The type of site
generally defines how an area may have been utilized
by prehistoric groups and what resources may have been
the group's main target of exploitation and utilization.
Site settings consist of uplands (which include summits,
ridges, intervening saddles, and hillslopes), alluvial
terraces, and rockshelters. The site setting also defines
how a region and its resources may have been utilized,
but more importantly, the setting generally dictates
whether sites are preserved as discrete and interpretable
units of analysis.
Each of the site types and settings is briefly
discussed below in the context of the known resources
of Camp Stanley and/or the surrounding region. A
general set of criteria for the extraction of meaningful
and interpretable archeological data from the various
site types and settings is also given. This set of criteria
will also facilitate the determination of the eligibility
of particular archeological sites for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places.

Previous Archeological Investigations
and Known Archeological Resources
in the Camp Stanley Area

Types of Prehistoric Sites
CAMPSITES OR HABITATION SITES

No archeological investigations have taken place
at Camp Stanley, with the exception of the current
survey of 2,125 acres, which documented 34
archeological sites with 20, prehistoric components.
Outside of the current survey, the nearest archeological
investigations have taken place at neighboring Camp
Bullis. Of the ca. 28,000 acres of Camp Bullis, 11,854
acres have been covered by survey (Gerstle et a!. 1978;
Quigg 1988; Boyd et a!. 1990; Kibler and Gardner
1997). Nine sites (4IBX36, 41BX377, 4IBX378,
41BX379, 41BX383, 41BX400, 4IBX425, 41BX428,
and 41CM99) have been tested (Gerstle et a!. 1978;
Kibler and Gardner 1997). Of the 154 archeological
sites recorded at Camp Bullis, 122 have prehistoric
components. Together, the Camp Stanley and Camp
Bullis prehistoric sites render an overall prehistoric site
density of 2.5 sites per km 2 . The prehistoric
archeological record of Camp Stanley and the
surrounding area represents the utilization of a unique
transitional zone between the Edwards Plateau to the

Campsites or habitation sites are localities where
general tasks such as food processing and cooking, hide
working, and tool production and maintenance took
place. Campsites are generally defined as containing
scattered burned rocks or burned rock features such as
hearths or burned rock middens, along with other
cultural debris such as faunal remains and lithic tools
and debitage. Often these localities show evidence of
repeated use, not just from year to year but from
millennium to millennium. Such evidence suggests that
these localities may be, or have been in the past,
strategically located in relation to important resources,
such as reliable water sources, or advantageous vistas
for spotting large game. Of the 142 prehistoric
archeological sites recorded at Camp Bullis and Camp
Stanley, 64 are campsites and 7 have burned rock
middens.
Because of the various activities that took place
at campsites and their relatively long tenn occupation,
9

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

primary and secondary sources of Edwards Group chert.
The Edwards Group consists ofLower Cretaceous-age
beds of limestones, dolomites, and marls, many of
which contain abundant sources of high-quality finegrained chert (Frederick et al. 1994; Rose 1979).
Outcrops of the Edwards Group and correlative
stratigraphy are prominent across the Edwards Plateau
and exposed along the plateau's eastern and southern
margins (i.e., Balcones fault zone). Primary sources of
chert consist of seams and lenses of chert within or
eroding out of limestone bedrock, such as the One at
site 41BX920, a large quarry site in the southeastern
portion of Camp Bullis. Secondary sources of chert are
represented hy alluvial gravels deposited by streams
draining the Edwards Plateau. Upland lag gravels
containing abundant chert are present along Cibolo
Creek in northwestern Camp Bums. Evidence of their
utilization comes from five sites (4IBX373, 41BX375,
41BX384, 41BX386, and 4ICM213) in Camp Bullis.
Of the 142 prehistoric archeological sites recorded at
Camp Stanley and Camp Bullis, 9 are lithic procurement
sites, all located in Camp Bullis. Four of these siles
represent primary chert sources and are located in the
southeastern portion of Camp Bullis where the Edwards
Group is subaerially exposed. Because the Edwards
Group is not present within Camp Stanley and the Glen
Rose Formation (Camp Stanley bedrock) does not
contain chert, primary sources of chert are not present
at the facility. Secondary sources are not known but
may exist in small patchy deposits of alluvial lag gravels
overlooking Salado Creek.
Like lithic scatters, litbic procurement sites are
difficult to interpret. The long-term surficial exposures
of chert resour'ces have been utilized for millennia by
various groups of people. The result of this continued
reuse is overlapping site components. Temporally
diagnostic artifacts are rarely encountered at Lithic
procurement sites; therefore, determining site
chronology rarely attains the level of precision that is
possible for other types of sites.
Aside from the obvious contextual problems,
Shafer (1993:45) has acknowledged that the main
problem facing archeologists examining lithic
procurement sites is detennining what kinds of data
can be gleaned from such sites. Magnifying this
problem is the fact that few lithic procurement sites in
Central Texas have been studied to the same extent as
other lithic procurement sites across North America
(e.g., Ahler and Vannest 1985). McGraw and Valdez
(1978) used a random surface sample and a control
sample of cultural materials at site 41BX68, a lithic
procurement site in Bexar County, to describe the
frequency and distribution of materials. However,little

many aspects of prehistoric lifeways, such as
subsistence and settlement patterns and tool production,
can be addressed from the archeological data sets
recovered from campsites. However, as many campsites
have been occupied many times over several millennia
and may yield very large samples of cultural materials,
this can be an impediment to making meaningful
analyses and interpretations if the temporal components
are not stratigraphically separate. Such sites need to
demonstrate a degree of stratification if multiple
components are present and yield temporally diagnostic
artifacts and/or materials suitable for radiocarbon dating
for chronological control over the site.

LITHIC SCATTERS
Lithic scatters are sites comprised solely of lithic
tools and debitage or chipping debris. Lithic scatters
most likely represent short-term occupations where
specific tasks such as the reduction of cores and quarry
blanks or the production and/or maintenance of chipped
stone tools took place. Often these sites are highly
visible but shallow or surficial in nature. Lithic scatters
also may be very small and/or diffuse, representing
intermittent periods of use that are difficult to separate
or date. Of the 142 prehistoric archeological sites
recorded at Camp Stanley and Camp Bullis, 49 are
identified as lithic scatters. These 49 sites represent late
Paleoindian through Late Prehistoric components.
Many are located on long-term stable surfaces in upland
settings or on valley slopes. Because of this the sites
tend to be shallow and difficult to interpret. For
analytical and interpretive purposes, it is best if a lithic
scatter consists of a single component, demonstrated
by the presence of numerous examples of one type of
temporally diagnostic projectile point. If chronological
controls can be established, the collection of a stratified
random sample of lithic debris so that its lithological
variability may be examined or traced through trace
elemental analysis or macroscopic attributes to a known
source is a potential source of data from a lithic scatter.
A stratified random sample of materials might from such
a site also define technological variability and identify
patterns regarding raw material preference and the
products of lithic reduction.

LITIIIC PROCUREMENT SITES
Litbic procurement or quarry sites are
archeological and geological, representing the
exploitation by prehistoric peoples of deposits
containing knappable lithic materials. In the Camp
Stanley area, lithic procurement sites coincide with

10

•

Chapter 2: Archeological Background

was presented on the site as a geological entity or on
prehistoric behaviors and activities associated with the
site. Understanding the data potential, including the
resource quality, technology, and temporal variability,
would help in the analysis and interpretation of such
sites (Shafer 1993:57). Shafer (1993:57) suggests the
data potential could be understood by defining the
geological and geographic context of the chert source,
mapping the extent of the procurement site within that
context, obtaining a stratified random sample of the
chert to examine its spatial and geological variability,
and obtaining a stratified random sample of cultural
materials to define technological variability and to
identify patterning with regards to material preference,
cultural activities, and the products of lithic reduction.
The absence of temporally diagnostic artifacts would
hinder the delineation of precise temporal components,
but it is conceivable that some temporal patterns might
be identified on the basis of resource extraction
technology and blank production. Abbott and Ellis
(1994:361-366)
have
proposed
similar
recommendations relevant to the investigation of lithic
procurement sites. They present their recommendations
in three broad categories: (I) investigating the
geological and geographic distribution of the resource;
(2) characterizing the properties of the chert (including
trace element analysis, patination properties, and visual
typology); and (3) understanding chert procurement and
use (i.e., the on and off-site activities of stone tool
production, use, and discard). While the investigation
of the disturbution and physical properties of chert may
be accomplished with relative ease at most lithic
procurement sites, the study of chert procurement and
use may be futile if chronological control over the site
can not be demonstrated.

human remains recovered within Camp Stanley may
provide valuable insights into the prehistory of the area,
including data on dietary patterns, pathologies, and
exchange or trade networks.

Site Settings: Geomorphic Environments
and Archeological Potential
Geomorphological characteristics provide a
setting for and interact with cultural systems (Butzer
1982:6), making their study an integral and necessary
part of any archeological investigation. Various
depositional, erosional, and pedogenic processes are
characteristic of different geomorphic environments or
site settings and play an important role in site fonnation
and development of the archeological record. Because
of this, consideration must be given to the probability
that archeological sites representing varied cultural
periods are not uniformly represented across the
landscape or in all settings due to these processes.
Gerstle et al. (1978:203) noted a clear difference
between Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric campsite
localities and those localities of earlier cultural periods
(Paleoindian to Middle Archaic) at Camp Bullis. While
the earlier campsites tend to cluster in the uplands and
slopes, the later campsites are more common along
larger stream valleys.
Initial studies of the erosional and depositional
processes behind the evolution of the Camp Bullis
landscape also suggest that not all cultural periods may
be present in the archeological record. This absence
varies from geomorphic environment to geomorphic
environment (Kibler and Gardner 1997). The
consequential effects that various geomorphic processes
have had on the archeological record must be addressed
in two parts. First, it must be discerned which cultural
periods or components are potentially preserved or
absent based on the ages of the preserved deposits, and
second, it must be detennined whether the sites are
preserved in such a manner as to yield significant and
interpretable archeological data. For although an
environment may preserve cultural component(s), it
must also be aggrading so as to provide clear
stratigraphic separation between the components and
lend sustainable integrity to the cultural deposits.

CEMETERIES
Cemeteries and isolated burials represent the
intentional disposal of the dead, one of the few
prehistoric rituals that is evidenced in the archeological
record. Mortuary practices may reflect group identity,
social status, and/or economic structure and thus
provide infonnation on the organization of prehistoric
groups (Binford 1971: 16-20).
No prehistoric cemeteries or isolated burials have
been documented at Camp Stanley and Camp Bullis,
but several isolated and multiple burials have been found
in the surrounding area. Hitzfelder Cave contained the
disarticulated remains of at least 30 individuals (Givens
1968). The articulated remains of at least 13 individuals
buried with marine shell artifacts were recovered from
site 41BXI on Olmos Creek (Lukowski 1988). Any

UPLANDS
Most of Camp Stanley and the surrounding area
can be classified as uplands, which include summits,
ridges, billslopes, and intervening saddles. Temporal
biases within the archeological record of upland settings
are rare. Sites throughout the uplands may yield a

11

An:heological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

variety of cultural materials from Paleoindian through
Historic times, but the manner in which these sites are

valley. How often this may have occurred is not known,
but since flashy discharges are now controlled to some

preserved severely limits the interpretable archeological
data obtainable from these sites. The upland and slope

alluvium has been deposited since the construction of

environments tend to be nonaggrading. many times

lhe SCS dam.

deflating, resulting in the accumulation of surface
materials of varying ages on one common surface at
any given site. These circumstances render the analysis
of discrete components difficult at best. The best

alluvial record of Salado Creek may not be preserved
and that which is preserved appears to represent high-

extenl, it is probable that much of the Salado Creek

Based on this, much of tbe earlier Holocene

energy environments of channel fills. However, much
more work is needed to delineate the alluvial

opportunity for the presence of interpretable sites in

the uplands and slopes may be single-component sites

chronology of Salado Creek in order to document the
age and nature of the alluvial fill. In relurn, a belter

that occur in the few depositional environments, such
as sediments accumulating behind vegetation barriers

or within saddles between ridge systems and slopes.

handle on the archeological record can be gained and
more-infonned interpretations can be made.

ALLUVIAL TERRACES

ROCKSHELTERS

Temporal biases in the archeological record are
more common within alluvial environments. Alluvial
environments often create a temporal bias that favors
the preservation of occupations that are coeval with

known to exist in Camp Slanley, and only three small
shelters (4IBX802, 4IBXI03I, and 4IBX1032) are
known at Camp Bullis. Sbelters may form along low-

Rockshelters or large overhangs currently are not

aggradational phases and relatively stable surfaces, and

order streams where underlying less-resistant bedrock
units are undercut by the stream, such as shelters

discriminates against occupations that are coeval with
or precede erosional episodes. However, because
alluvial environments can be aggrading, those sites that

41BXl031 and 4lBXlO32 at Camp Bullis. However,
the Glen Rose Fonnation, which occurs across Camp
Stanley, may nOlbe conducive to rockshelter formation,
or such features are very short lived and collapse quickly

are preserved tend to have relatively good integrity and
stratigraphic separation of components, which are
essential for meaningful archeological investigations
and interpretations.

before fully developing in the evolution of hillslopes.
Abbott (1994:32) has noted that rockshelter
development in the Glen Rose Formation at Fort Hood
(Bell and Coryell Counties) is very uncommon. The
fact that two of the known shelters at Camp Bullis

The Salado Creek valley is the only drainage
within Camp Stanley to house significant deposits of
alluvium. The low-order tributaries of Salado and Leon
Creeks often are deep, narrow, and scoured to bedrock,
or they only temporarily store alluvial sediments due
to their steep gradients and peripheral position in the

contain Late Prehistoric components suggests that these
features are sh'ort lived. Due to their suggested brief
existence, rockshelters are ideal localities for isolable
and interpretable archeological components.
Rockshelters in general are good sediment traps

drainage basin. A single, relatively broad geomorpbic
surface, the modern floodplain (TO>, is present in the
Salado Creek valley of Camp Stanley. The alluvial fill
helow the floodplain consists of gravelly basal units
capped by thin mantles of loamy and clayey alluvium.

(Collcutt 1979), pOlentially providing a clear separation
of archeological components for analysis and
interpretation. The protection afforded by a rockshelter
can potentially create an excellent record of past human
occupations. A comparable degree of preservation is
seldom obtained from open-air archeological sites.
These factors make any rockshelter, standing or

The modification and channelization of Salado

Creek throughout Camp Stanley has obviously
disturbed and destroyed much of lhe alluvial
stratigraphy, and undoubtedly alluvial deposition has
been affected by the Soil Conservation Service (SCS)
dam downstream in Camp Bullis. It is probable that in
the past the steep gradient of upper Salado Creek,
coupled with heavy rainfalls and impervious ground

collapsed, potentially significant and thus potentially
worthy of intensive archeological investigations.

Cultnral Adaptive Systems: Correlations
between the Archeological Record
and Prehistoric Human Behavior

cover throughout the watershed, resulted in intensive
flash floods scouring lhe channel bed and margins. It is

probable that most of tbe upper Salado Creek valley
was periodically scoured out, making the presence of
any alluvial deposits temporary features within the

The development of reconstruction or mid-range

theories has played a major role in archeological theory
12

Chapter 2: Archeological Background
and method in the last few decades by trying to establish
ties between the static empirical data of the
archeological record and the more abstract, dynamic
theories of cultural behavior (e.g., Binford 1978; Raab
and Goodyear 1984; Schiffer 1972, 1976). Middlerange theory has provided for archeologists a conceptual
tool with the ability to transform evidence into inference
and to understand the behaviors, activities, and
processes responsible for creating the various patterns
observed in the archeological record. Patterns and
variables, such as site distributions, their specific
functions, and assemblages, may best express this
relationship between the present archeological record
and past cultural behavior. These patterns can be viewed
as a product of a group's adaptive strategy, a mid-range
conceptual construct. Adaptive strategies or systems are,
as defined by Butzer (1982:285), a three-dimensional
interplay between social behavior, technology, and
resource opportunities and limitations that is reflected
in subsistence strategies and settlement patterns and that
reacts and adjusts to internal processes as well as
changes in the cultural and natural environments. The
environment provides an array of resources and
constraints leading to a range of potential behaviors,
strategies, and activities carried out by the cultural group
(Butzer 1982:293).
Delineation of prehistoric adaptive systems that
operated in the Camp Stanley area and understanding
of how these systems changed through time is a major
goal of current archeological research (e.g., Black 1989;
Collins 1995; Ellis et a1. 1995). Various ecologically
based hunter-gatherer models of cultural adaptation
have been proposed for the Camp Stanley area and the
larger Central Texas region (e.g., Gerstle et a1. 1978;
Story 1985). Ricklis and Collins (1994:323-325) have
presented arguably the most comprehensive model of
hunting and gathering strategies and settlement patterns
for the Central Texas region. They suggest that changes
in their model of adaptive strategies were influenced
by climatic and environmental changes and varying
resource bases throughout the Holocene.
The study of prehistoric adaptive systems must
obtain data on the distribution, age, and function of sites;
the resources available and the technologies to exploit
them; and population dynamics. Hines (1993) has put
forth the following research domains relevant to this
goal for Camp Bullis and Fort Sam Houston:
paleoenvironments, chronology, subsistence strategies,
settlement patterns, technology and material culture,
population dynamics, and intraregional and
extraregional interactions. Hines (1993) thoroughly
discusses each research domain, presenting the extant
data, data gaps, and research needs. The discussion

clearly reveals the interrelated nature of the research
domains and shows that the inability to fully address
one research domain can result in limitations in
addressing the others as well. While such topics have
been the focus of many past archeological investigations
in Central Texas (e.g., Black and McGraw 1985;
Johnson 1991, 1995; Ricklis and Collins 1994), most
are still not clearly understood, yielding many gaps in
our knowledge of the prehistoric adaptive systems of
the region. Many of the limitations and inabilities to
address such issues are due to the lack of appropriate
data, which can be related to the generally poor
contextual integrity of many sites in the area. Intact or
minimally disturbed sites are needed if the current data
gaps are to be addressed. A set of general criteria by
which to identify and judge such sites has been
discussed above. Improved and innovative methods and
analytical techniques also may be one way to gain the
appropriate data to deal with the research issues and
needs at hand. The research domains put forth by Hines
(1993) are summarized below, and recommendations
are provided for addressing each domain for the
investigation of Camp Stanley's prehistoric resources
within an ecologically based paradigm of cultural
adaptation.

Paleoenvironments
Paleoenvironmental data represent a basic
element in archeological investigations. Such data not
only provide an understanding of the environment in
which cultures interacted, but also provide an
understanding of the natural processes responsible for
the fonnation Of the archeological record.
On a large scale (Camp Stanley), paleoenvironmental studies should focus on obtaining an alluvial
chronology for Salado Creek, if possible, through mechanical trenching, identification of alluvial fills, and
the procurement of radiocarbon assays on in situ charcoal within alluvial deposits and humates in buried alluvial soils. Stable carbon isotope analysis of soil humates should be conducted to reconstruct and document changes in vegetation. Since upland environments
constitute much of Camp Stanley, continued geomorphic investigations on the evolution and development
of hillslopes should be conducted to augment those initial investigations conducted by Kibler (in Kibler and
Gardner 1997) at Camp Bullis.
On a smaller scale, specifically at the site level,
columns of sediment samples should be collected from
significant sites and subjected to granulometric and
chemical analyses to delineate the varying depositional
processes contributing to site formation and pedogenic
13

Archeological Survey at Camp Stallley Storage Activity

activity. Changes in depositional and pedogenic regimes

dating by radiocarbon assay. Even small samples can
be dated by accelerator mass spectrometry procedures,
yielding more-accurate dates than in the past. In the

may represent climatic and other environmental

changes, and therefore a response to these changes may
be expected in the adaptive strategies of human groups.
Palynological investigations generally have been

absence of suitable organic materials for radiocarbon

dating, which is not uncommon in the Camp Stanley
area (Ricklis and Collins 1994:325), other absolute

unsuccessful at many sites in the Camp Stanley area

due to poor preservation (e.g., Gerstle et al. 1978:225);
but the analysis of sediment samples for opal phytoliths,
which are more durable than pollen, may prove to be

dating methods must be considered and perfected.

Dating of burned limestone samples from archeological
features by thermoluminescence has produced
encouraging results (M. Collins 1994:499). Absolute

more appropriate for the reconstruction of the area's

plant community, even though the results of the
technique are somewhat limited (Pearsall 1989:343344). Other reliable indicators of environmental and

dating of burned rock features through archeomagnetic
studies bas remained elusive due to the lack of a regional

archeomagnetic dating curve (Gose 1994:507).

climatic change are the presence or absence of certain
microfauna that are sensitive to such changes (e.g"least

However, archeomagnetic data can still assess the

possible contemporaneity of a component's burned rock
features (M. Collins 1994:501). Recently, the amino

shrew [Cryptotis parvaJ vs. desert shrew [Notiosorex
craw/ordi]). For example, Toomey et al.'s (1993)

acid epimerization analysis of terrestrial snails

examination of bulk sediment samples from Hall's Cave
on the Edwards Plateau for microfaunal remains has
provided a nearly complete paleoenvironmental record

(Rabdotus sp.) has been shown to be a reliable
chronometric indicator (Ellis and Goodfriend 1994).
This method of absolute dating should be pursued

for the Holocene.

further in order to perfect and refine the method.

Chronology

Subsistence Strategies

The basis for any archeological research is the

The types of resources exploited and the manner
in which they were exploited constitute a group's
subsistence strategy. Subsistence strategies were

delineation and refinement of local and regional
chronologies, which provide temporal and cultural units

for the placement of particular archeological
assemblages (Taylor 1983: 168). The curreot chronology
for the Camp Stanley area is tenuous and does not permit

influenced by the density of a potential resource, the
effort or risk involved in obtaining tbe resource, the

available technology, and the social organization of the
group.

the placement of isolated components relative to each
other and to regional cultural and natural phenomena

with strict confidence. The cultural chronology of
Central Texas has been primarily constructed through

The identification of exploited faunal resources
within archeological sites is important, but has been
limited at many sites due to poorly preserved vertebrate

intrasite stratigraphy, temporally diagnostic projectile
points, and radiocarbon assays, which have provided

faunal assemblages (e.g., 41BX377, see Kibler and
Gardner 1997). This in tum hinders any interpretations

both relative and absolute chronological data.
Ultimately, sound contextual integrity of the

about off-site hunting activities, transport of the carcass
or parts of the carcass, and food-processing activities.

archeological site under investigation is the basis for
successful and accurate relative and absolute dating of
the site's components.
Stratigraphy, if intact and continuous, provides a
simple relative, intrasite dating method and is a sound
basis for meaningful archeological interpretations. The
use of temporally diagnostic projectile points as a means
of relative dating has been the common method for
intersite comparisons across the Camp Stanley area and

More information may be gained aboUl the exploitation

surrounding region (e.g., Johnson and Goode 1994;
Prewitt 1981, 1985). Radiocarbon absolute dating has
yielded variable results in the Camp Stanley area due

from features, may recover much more evidence of
plant food utilization, such as charred macrobotanical

and use of plant resources. Evidence of plant food
utilization is not readily apparent at most sites, bUl such

resources probably made up a large portion of the
prehistoric diet, particularly if, as many have suggested,
the ubiquitous burned rock features of Central Texas
functioned as plant food-processing features (e.g., Creel

1986;.Johnson and Goode 1994; Prewitt 1976; Wilson
1930). Flotation of bulk sediment samples, especially

to problems of context and sample preservation (Hines

remains. Phytoliths may also provide insights on the
types of plant foods processed at the site and within

1993:20). However, organic materials from
unquestionable contexts should always be collected for

features.
Evidence of subsistence may be inferred, even

14

Chapter 2: Archeological Background
though faunal and floral remains are poorly preserved,
from the types of tools, wear patterns and residues on
tools, and the nature of food-processing features
recovered (Black 1989:33). Subsistence strategies also
may be inferred from dietary patterns indicated by stable

al. 1978:251). At Scorpion Cave, the remains of
Canadian goose and green-wing teal suggest the site
was occupied during the winter (Highley et al.
1978: 186). A popular seasonal model associates burned
rock middens with collection and processing of nut
crops in the fall (Creel 1986; Weir 1976: 125).

carbon and nitrogen isotopic analyses on human skeletal
remains (DeNiro 1987; Van der Merwe 1982).

Technology a1ld Material Culture
Settlement Patterns
The organization of technology is related to a
group's subsistence strategy and settlement pattern
(Binford 1979, 1980; Kelly 1983; Shott 1986). The
study of technology and material culture is best
accomplished if their role in a group's adaptive strategy
to the natural and cultural environment is understood.
Hines (1993:27) suggests prehistoric technologies be
considered under three categories: tool manufacturing
technology, subsistence technology, and personal and
ritual technology. The stud y of all three categories
would be facilitated by the recovery of large samples
of artifacts and features through intensive excavations
at significant sites.
Tool manufacturing technology, particularly of
chipped stone tools, needs to focus on the procurement
of raw materials and the reduction sequences involved.
Understanding a site's or component's subsistence
technology may come from focusing on the variety of
tool types within an assemblage, feature utilization
(food processing or storage), and associated faunal and
botanical remains. Personal and ritual technology may
be difficult to discern if human interments are not
present at a site. However, personal or ornamental items
of shell and bone are not uncommon and have been
recovered from sites not yielding human burials in
Camp.Bullis (e.g., 4IBX377) aod the surrounding area
(e.g, 41BX228, Black and McGraw [1985:200];
41HY209-T, Ricklis [1994:200]).

Human populations positioned themselves in
relation to the distribution of resources (e.g., prickly
pear patches. chert outcrops, fresh water) across the
region. This pattern reflects the group's adaptive
strategies within the context of their environment, the
group's level of technology, and the customs of social
organization and behavior (Willey 1953: I). Aspects of
a group's settlement pattern at the site level, such as
group or camp size, duration of occupation, range of
site activities, and season of occupation. may be defined
and interpreted from the archeological record (Hines
1993:25).
More-detailed information about these site
characteristics can be obtained through intensive
excavations at significant sites yielding large samples
of artifacts, features, and other materials. Group or camp
size may be detennined through the spatial distributions,
densities, and patterning of artifacts and features. The
length of occupations can be related to the number and
variety of cultural materials recovered, reuse of features,
and the sedimentation rates of the deposits encasing
the cultural materials and features. Another possible
indicator of occupation length is burned rock size, based
on the premise that rocks continually fracture as they
are constantly recycled for feature construction and use
(Hines et al. 1994; Tunnell and Madrid 1990: 154).
Documentation of burned rock weights, counts, and size
may prove useful in determining feature reuse. Site
activities may be delineated through an analysis of
artifact assemblages, features, and other materials. In
addition to a technological perspective ofchipped stone
tool analysis, the analysis should also include a
functional aspect, such as macro and micro use-wear
analysis, in order to define tool classes based on function
and hence delineate site activities.
Evidence of seasonality may be limited to the
recovery of macrobotanical remains and phytoliths from
features, since vertebrate faunal remains usually are
either poorly preserved or the appropriate elements are
not present within the assemblage. Although poorly
preserved assemblages are common, faunal remains
have provided some seasonal data from a few sites.
Faunal remains at 41BX36 in Camp Bullis hint at a
fall-winter-spring season of site utilization (Gerstle et

Population Dynamics
Population dynamics, including data on
population density, demography, pathology, and
ethnicity. are a critical aspect of adaptive systems
because they are related to territorial ranges. resource
depletion, and group fissioning and fusion (Hines
1993:31). However, these data and interpretations are
difficult to ascertain without intersite comparisons or
human skeletal remains, and to this point in time no
human remains have been recovered from Camp Stanley
or Camp Bullis. Data such as projectile point
frequencies from sites and components can be compared
with other regional data (e.g., Prewitt 1981, 1985) so
as to contribute to a greater understanding of regional
population dynamics and culture process.
15

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

Intraregional and Extraregionallnteraction

1990:5). Use of the new training area started almost
immediately. In July and August of 1907, the small arms
range was used for the Southwestern Rifle and Pistol
Competition. The first major maneuvers were held in
1908 involving Regular Army and National Guard
Infantry, Cavalry, and Artillery (Manguso 1990:11).
The Leon Springs Military Reservation continued
to grow in importance in the years before World War 1.
With increased tensions along the United States-Mexico
border between 1910 and 1917, the reservation was
increasingly used for maneuvers and training. In 1916,
a large remount station was built near Anderson Hill
(Manguso 1990:21). In February ofl917, the facilities
at the reservation were renamed Camp Funston in honor
of Major General Frederick Funston. To avoid confusion
with another base of the same name, in October the
camp was renamed Camp Stanley in honor of Brigadier
General David Sloan Stanley, former commander of
the Department of Texas (Manguso 1990:23).
With the American entry into World War I, the
facilities at Camp Stanley grew dramatically. In May
of 1917, the First Officers Training Camp was established north of Anderson Hill "in a tent and temporary
building cantonment" (Manguso 1990:23) to trainjunior officers for the 90th Division fanning in San Antonio. In July and August, these troops conducted trench
warfare training to the east ofAnderson Hill. Also con- .
structed at this time was a Signal Corps branch school
in the northwest corner of Camp Stanley (Manguso
1990:23-24). The northwest area of the camp was also
used for cavalry units, and there was a Quartermaster
area just north of the officer training cantonment. Both
of these areas were connected by a rail line running
into the camp from Camp Bullis to the south.
With the downsizing of the military after World
War I, many of the structures at Camp Stanley seem to
have been abandoned or removed. It was also during
this time that Camp Stanley began the second phase of
its existence. In 1920 the northern half of the camp was
given over to the Ordnance Section of the Eighth Corps
Area for the storage of large stocks of surplus
ammunition, despite the lack of suitable structures for
this storage. In 1925 the storage area was taken over by
the San Antonio Arsenal, and plans were started to create
a proper storage facility. This plan was not fully
implemented until 1938. That year, Works Progress
Administration (WPA) workers began excavation and
construction of the igloos and magazines in the southern
part of the camp (Manguso 1990:47).
During the period between World Wars I and II,
Camp Stanley and Camp Bullis hosted a number of
military activities, as well as two unusual civilian
activities. In 1926, two movies-The Rough Riders and

Intraregional and extraregional interactions
consist of economic and social relations between groups
(Polanyi 1957) and represent an adaptive strategy
employed by a group for access to resources and to
fann relations and alliances. Exchange is the most
tangible of prehistoric interactions, for it may leave its
imprint on the archeological record depending on the
resources exchanged (Schortman and Urban 1987:49).
Intensive excavations at significant sites may
yield a large enough sample of artifacts to address the
aspects of extraregional and intraregional trade.
Evidence of exchange may include marine shells and
nonleeal lithic materials, which have been recovered
from other sites in the area (e.g., Black and McGraw
1985; Katz 1987; Lukowski 1988). Exotic lithic
materials, such as obsidian, should be subjected to trace
element analysis. Other sites in the region have indicated
connections with the Caddo of East Texas during the
Late Prehistoric based on the recovery of Caddoan
ceramics (Ricklis 1994:265-266).
HISTORIC PERIOD

The colonization and settlement of the central
Texas region began in the late seventeenth century with
the establishment of missions by the Spanish. Settlement
by Mexicans, Texans, Germans, and others followed.
All of these groups had a profound and unique impact
on the colorful history of the area, which is summarized
by Fox (1989). While there are several studies pertaining
to the specific historic context of neighboring Camp
Bullis (e.g., Boyd et a1. 1990; Freeman 1994a, 1994b;
Gerstle et a1. 1978; Manguso 1990), only Manguso has
dealt in detail with Camp Stanley.
Settlement in the Camp Stanley area started with
a land purchase by Nathaniel Lewis in 1838. Lewis
subsequently sold some of this land to John O.
Meusebach, who constructed a house in the Comanche
Springs area located in Camp Bullis (Boyd et a1.
1990:55). Meusebach later moved to a new location
north and farther up the Salado Creek valley in the
1850s, into what is today the Outer Cantonment of
Camp Stanley (Freeman 1994b:47).
United States military activity in the Leon Springs
area began in 1906 and 1907 with the purchase. of
17,273.87 acres from all of or parts of six ranches
(Freeman 1994a:9). This area was designated the Leon
Springs Military Reservation and was to be used as a
maneuvers and training area for troops based at Fort
Sam Houston in San Antonio. Leon Springs was praised
for its sparse population and varied terrain (Manguso
16

Chaprer 2: Archeological Background

Wings-were filmed at the bases. Wings made use of
the old training trenches to the east ofAnderson Hill as
movie sets and was laterthe winner of the first Academy
of Motion Pictures award for Best Picture in 1927.
As the United States entered World War II, the
army decided to enlarge Camp Stanley and Camp Bullis,
and land to the north of Camp Stanley was acquired by
condemnation in 1942. The condemned land included
six tracks that would later make up the northern part of
Camp Stanley's Outer Cantonment (Freeman 1994a:65;
Rogers et aI. 1940). Three of these tracts contained
known ranch complexes previously belonging to
Andrew Blank, Louis WiIlke (Wilkie), and O.
Scharmann; all three show on the 1925 map of Camp
Stanley (see Figure 4).

During World War II, what is now the Outer
Cantonment of Camp Stanley was part of Camp Bullis
and used for training. The most evident example of this
occurs around the old rifle range, which was being used
as an antitank gunnery range with moving targets. In
1943, army combat engineers built a fortified combat
training area to the east of the range (Manguso 1990:81).
Also during this time, many of the farms on the camp
property either were salvaged or used by range wardens
who patrolled the perimeter of the camp (Petsch 1942).
Camp Stanley continues to be a major munitions
storage and research facility. The only major change
since World War II has been the transfer of the Outer
Cantonment area from Camp Bullis to Camp Stanley
in 1953 and 1970 (Manguso 1990:99).

17

METHODS OF INVESTIGATIONS

3
SURVEY FIELD METHODS AND
DOCUMENTATION

The area covered during the pedestrian survey
within the Outer Cantonment was divided into five
survey parcels, primarily using manmade features such
as fence lines and roads as parcel boundaries. Survey
of these parcels often was accomplished by furtber
subdividing the parcels into smaller, more-manageable
areas using both artificial and natural features for
temporary survey boundaries and/or for the orientation
of transects.
The pedestrian survey was accomplished by a crew
offour to five people walking transects across the survey
areas at intervals of ca. 25--40 m. In densely wooded
areas, transect intervals generally were 25-30 m and
often required walking zigzag transects to traverse dense
vegetation. Larger transect spacings generally were used
in broad open areas such as floodplains and open
pastures. Areas providing good exposures, such as twotrack roads, firebreaks, eroded areas, and cutbanks, were
examined for the presence of cultural materials or
features. Although the scope of the work called for the
excavation of off-site shovel tests as a method of site
detection in certain areas, few were excavated. Many
areas of Camp 'Stanley are heavily disturbed or do not
consist of the appropriate environments for buried
cultural resources. Most areas traditionally thought of
as depositional environments, such as stream valleys,
are highly disturbed and consist of high-energy
environments. These areas are thus prone to the
eradication of archeological sites, or consist of recent
deposits (see Quaternary Geomorphology section of
Chapter I). Six off-site shovel tests ca. 30cm in diameter
were excavated to depths of 38 to 60 cm, but none
produced cultural materials. This method of site
detection has proven to be neilher an effecti ve nor
efficient technique at Camp Bullis in the past (e.g., Quigg
1988) and therefore was not used extensively in lbe
current survey.
The definition of a prehistoric site was based on
criteria similar to those utilized during previous
investigations at Camp Bullis (Boyd et aJ. 1990:8; Kibler
and Gardner 1997). When prehistoric cultural materials
were encountered, the surrounding area was intensively

The archeological survey conducted at Camp
Stanley involved a 100 percent pedestrian survey of
2,125 of the total 4,004 acres of camp property.
Approximately 977 of the 1,780 acres within lhe Inner
Cantonment and 1,148 of the 2,224 acres within the
Outer Cantonment were included in the current survey
(Figure 3). No previous archeological field
investigations had been undertaken within Camp
Stanley; therefore, no previously recorded sites are
located within the camp boundaries.
Prior to initiating the fieldwork, available maps
and reports were reviewed to identify areas potentially
containing historic period archeological sites.
Additional maps and information were obtained from
personnel at Camp Stanley and Camp Bullis following
commencement of the survey. Available reports, historic
contexts, and historic maps (e.g., Boyd et al. 1990;
Freeman 1994a, 1994b; Manguso 1990; U.S. Military
Reservation, Leon Springs, Texas, topographic maps
1917, 1925 [Figure 4]) provided invaluahle information
on the historic resources within Camp Stanley, which
aided the field crew in the location and identification
of many of these cultural resources.
The selected survey coverage of areas within the
Inner Cantonment was based on infonnation provided
by amap from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort
Worth District depicting areas of "great disturbance"
and "little disturbance" (Figure 5). Areas surveyed
within the Inner Cantonment generally included only
those areas indicated to have "little disturbance." In a
few instances, historic period resources depicted on
early camp maps but located within areas designated as
having "great disturbance" also were surveyed (e.g., the
old hospital locality). Survey areas within the Inner
Cantonment varied considerably in size but were often
divided by roads, fence lines, and/or other artificial and
natural features (e.g., creeks, drainages, etc.) that cross
the area. This generally provided manageable-sized
parcels for surveying.
19

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

"

,

~"

'

/

\
\

Outer Cantonment

"

,.--

,~

//

)
..../

.. ~- ..

f

"-'-'\

\<5'

. ''?~o.:

":0
I

,-

LEGEND

\0

..~+

-.}

/

o

1/4

1/2

E=3

Inner Cantonment

f

Kilometers

o

1/4

1/2
Miles

Ptf,1I961BW

Figure 3. Map of Camp Stanley showing areas surveyed.

20

D
CD
®

Area Surveyed

Survey Parcel

=

347 acres

Survey Parcel = 202 acres

o

Survey Parcel

8)

Survey Parcel = 124 acres

®

Survey Parcel = 78 acres

=

397 acres

Chapter 3: Methods of Investigations

~

a:

Dietz

Road

Elkhorn

A,BJank/

..(:
I

-..'
-

/

\

,

\('

,-'

t. V:~illke

' \ O.

Schacmanri~'~r--

".( /

I"

,

\.

,

.-/

0'

,--\,.
,

.'--..

0'

./

'-,

I"

':'-'. (

.......

.\~1.0

_f

/
1~~o;;,;;''''''O'-~
_i-"~"~
,."7.,,
..•.•._.1

\

Y;

\

"

'.

'
---:/

/"..J

.k-......

"_,,,0

. .

\j'
\~

~

:

.'V
.
.

.
'

',t.
I~
I
I
I
" "/
-J---

"

I
'
" ..............
.. :=~ /",'
•T argot Range

)

,

:,

(

'-0

'-.~ -~_~:"" \. Schasse !anch

- ::•.. ,:--

'%

C>
C

"§.
<JJ

--

LEGEND

+-+--+

PA1/96/8

w

f

Structure

Railroad

Leon Springs Military Reservation Boundary

0

250 500

1000

meters

0

1000 2000

4000

feet

Figure 4. 1925 u.s. Military Reservation, Leon Springs, Texas, map depicting military structures at Camp Stanley and outlying
ranches/farmsteads.

21

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity
and possible historic debris,
-including items such as wire nails,
broken glass, plain whiteware.

\ rr===:r.::==::::!==rk===",
/
~l
.v.
f-:\"J<P\

~
"-

--~\

(Ji

\_----

\0.

'\

-

\."

q;: .-......

~o.

-

--

\..

-

miscellaneous metal fragments, and
various military debris (e_g., spent

:

cartridges, exploded ordnance

. .

"';~

~~.

"',

~\

D-.

.l IY'
",~U-'....... . .
_."
"

~

scattered across many areas

surveyed. While it is likely that
much of this material predates
World War II, its disturbed and
overlapping nature makes it

:'W

:E~,.

"

~'.cfP

~

fragments, etc.) were observed

'.

~~'-'r-

~~k.'

I

'.

impractical to consider such isolated

I

scatters as siles. More-substantial

/

archeological data penaining to the
military occupation from 1906
through World War II can be found

,I

(
./

in the remains of the structures that

\

the U_S_ Army constructed to house
and train its troops_ Most of the

i

i-

',.
\..

..

·S ~

*!.
~

-."

archeological sites were initially

'<5'

marked with flagging tape when
encountered and/or initial plottings

,'?~

. .~

~

i
\0,

of their location were made on

',(9(9

"'f

;

LEGEND

o

o

Little Disturbance

f

o
o

1/4

topographic

maps_

Formal

documentation of the site was

completed after the survey of the
parcel was completed_
Recording of archeological

1/2

sites
included
surface
reconnaissance of site areas to

kilometers

cultural materials observed and to

1/2

locate potential cultural features_

miles

documented through the use of
State of Texas Site Data Forms, site
sketch maps, black-and-white

1/4

identify and document types of

Great Disturbance

Archeological

fA 1/96/8 W

Figure 5. Map of Inner Cantonment of Camp Stanley depicting areas of great and
little disturbance.
examined for additional artifacts. If three or more
artifacts were found within a 25-m-diameter area, the

sites

were

prints, color slides, and various
notes on the site or observed

features_ Although the scope of work called for a
noncollection survey strategy, temporally diagnostic or
potentially diagnostic surface artifacts were collected
because it was believed that these surficial artifacts were
subject to erosion and/or vandalism. In addition, some
of these artifacts were collected because more accurate
or proper identifications could be made once returned
to the laboratory and appropriate reference materials
consulted. On-site shovel tests were excavated only on
prehistoric sites where appreciable amounts of sediment
(> I0 cm in depth) were observed. The shovel tests were
excavated in lO-cm levels, and sediments removed fyom
the tests were screened through 'A-inch-mesb bard ware

locality was recorded as a site_ When less than three
lithic artifacts were encountered in a 25-m-diameter
area, it was not recorded as a site unless other cultural

materials (e.g_, burned rocks) or cultural features were
observed within the immediate vicinity and additienal
artifacts were found within reasonable proximity lO the
original locale. Historic sites recorded consist primarily
of localities containing historic artifact scatters and/or
historic features (e.g., foundations, building footings,
miUtary training trenches, etc.). Due to extensive use

of the property by the military, light scatters of modern

22

Chapter 3: Methods of Investigations

and military buttons.
All projectile points were related to defined types
when possible; typological identifications were made
by Elton R. Prewitt, with reference to Jelks (1962),
Johnson (1964), Hughes (1949), Kelley (I 947a, 1947b),
Shafer (1963), Sorrow (1969), and Suhm et a1. (1954).
The historic artifacts were analyzed by Kevin E.
Stork and consisted primarily of bottle glass and
ceramics. The bottle glass is described in tenns of color,
method of manufacture, makers' marks, and shape, if
possible, with reference to McKearin and McKearin
(1941), Munsey (1970), and Jones and Sullivan (1989).
Makers' marks were identified using Peterson (1968)
and Toulouse (1971). The ceramics were described by
ware type, decoration, maker's mark, and, if possible,
vessel type. Ware type and patterns were described using
Majewski and O'Brien (1987) and Cunningham (1982).
Makers' marks were identified using Godden (1964),
Lehner (1988), and DeBolt (1994). Other historic
artifacts included bricks (not collected, but marks were
noted in the field) and military buttons and equipment.
References consulted for identification of these artifacts
include McGuinn and Bazelon (1992), Lewis (1993),
and Suydam (1960) for the rim fire cartridges, and
Steinbomer (1982) for the bricks.

cloth. In several instances, the sediments consisted of
extremely wet or plastic days which could not be
screened efficiently. These sediments were troweled
through to recover any cultural materials they might
contain. Shovel test notes were completed for each
shovel test excavated, recording the presence or
absence, quantity, and types of cultural materials
recovered by level and the nature of the sediments
observed. Nondiagnostic cultural materials recovered
from the shovel tests were not collected. Additional
documentation generated as a result of the survey
included daily journal logs maintained by the Project
Archeologist, photo logs, and field maps (e.g.,
photocopies of topographic maps showing site
localities, areas surveyed, etc.).

ARTIFACT COLLECTION
AND ANALYSIS
A small number of prehistoric and historic artifacts
were collected during the survey. The prehistoric
collection consists mainly of projectile points and
projectile point fragments, while the collection of
historic materials consists of ceramics, various types
of bottle glass and bottle necks, rimfire cartridge cases,

23

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY

4
The archeological survey resulted in the documentation of 34 archeological sites, consisting of 20 prehistoric components and 18 historic components. The
following presents the descriptive site data and assessments of these components.

lower southern slopes of an interfluvial ridge, overlooking a small unnamed tributary of Leon Creek. The
site measures an estimated 40 x 60 m in size and lies at
an elevation of 1190-1195 ft ms!. Vegetation consists
predominantly of a moderate cover of junipers, a few
scattered live oaks, and sparse short grasses. Limestone
bedrock is exposed across the surface of the site, while
two shovel tests excavated within isolated deposits of
sediment revealed 15-21 em of dark brown to reddish
brown clay loam. Impacts to the site include erosion!
slopewash and a two-track road which crosses the site,
while clearing/maintenance activities associated with an
unimproved road, a nearby deer stand, and a landfill
may have obliterated the eastern portion of the site.
Cultural Materials Observed and Collected: A
sparse scatter of prehistoric cultural materials was
observed on the surface, including a very light scatter
of burned rocks, three pieces of unmodified lithic
debitage, one edge-modified flake, one biface fragment,
and a split chert cobble. The two shovel tests failed to
yield any buried cultural materials.
.
A single ,flat piece of solarized bottle glass was
collected from the surface (Figure 6). This specimen is
interesting in that it exhibits a concave working edge
prepared by percussion flaking. Attributing this artifact
to a particular group of people is somewhat tenuous.
Solarized glass postdates ca. 1875, as solarized or "sun
coloured amethyst" glass was most common from the
last quarter of the nineteenth century until World War 1
(Jones and Sullivan 1989:13); therefore, the artifact
cannot be associated with an Historic Native American
group. It most likely was purposefully flaked by a soldier
at Camp Stanley or a late-nineteenth-century rancher
or herdsman, for reasons unknown.
Assessment: Cultural materials are sparse and
appear to be mostly surficial, and the component(s) at
the site cannot be assigned to an archeological period
due to the lack of diagnostic artifacts. The research
potential of the site is very limited, and further
investigations are not warranted. It is recommended that
site 41BX1I57 be considered ineligible for listing in
the National Register of Historic Places.

SITE 4IBX1l56

Description: Site 41BXI156 is located on a small
hill within the central Inner Cantonment at an elevation
of 1240-1260 ft ms!. The site consists of prehistoric
and historic components and is approximately
300 x 150 m in size. The prehistoric component is an
open campsite consisting of a light artifact scatter. The
historic component consists of six concrete foundations.
Three (10.8 x 10.8 ft) are latrines with two toilets and
a shower stall each, two others are destroyed latrines,
and the remaining is a large (14.0 x 34.7 ft) foundation
of unidentified purpose.
Cultural Materials Observed and Collected:
Prehistoric cultural materials observed consist of 2030 flakes, 2 unifaces, I biface, 2 core fragments, and 2
biface fragments. Also present is a very sparse scatter
of burned rocks. The historic materials observed on the
surface consist of a dense scatter of wire nails, window
glass, "SECO" marked bricks, solarized glass
fragments, toilet fragments, and a shotshell base. A
single small brown glass vial was collected from the
surface.
Assessment: This site has been severely impacted
by a quarry located on the north side of the hill. Erosion
and the clearing of junipers has also disturbed both
components. The archeological potential is limited, and
further work is not warranted. It is recommended that
both components at site 41BXI156 be deemed ineligible
for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.
SITE 41BX1157

Description: Site 4lBXI157 is a prehistoric open
campsite located in the extreme southern portion of the
Inner Cantonment. It is situated on a terrace along the
25

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

650 x 900 m. The 1925 map of Camp Stanley shows
numerous structures in this area. Archeologically, this
shows up as a moderate to dense scatter of artifacts,
one intact (9.6 x 8.9 ft) concrete foundation, two
destroyed concrete foundations, and a set of seven
wooden foundation pilings. These remains could
represent Camp Samuel F. B. Morse, a Signal Corps
training school established in the northwest corner of
the Inner Cantonment in 1917. This area was also
utilized by cavalry units. Another feature of the site is a
weapons disposal area used to bum obsolete and surplus
weapons. Four shovel tests were placed on this site to
test for buried cultural materials.
Cultural Materials Observed and Collected:
Cultural materials observed on the surface consist
mainly of building materials, wire nails, window glass,
and old lumber. Two metal U.S. Army buttons were
collected from the surface (Figure 7). In the weapons
disposal area is a very dense scatter of rifle bolts, sights,
receivers, trigger groups, and cleaning implements for
model 03 Springfield rifles, MI Carbines, and
Thompson submacrnne guns, as well as for unidentified
weapons. No artifacts were recovered from the four
shovel tests, which were excavated to depths of 40 to
60 em.

012

1

1

I

centimeters

Figure 6. Flaked glass artifact from 41BX1157.

SITE 41BX1158
Description: Site 41BX1I58 is located near the
western perimeter of the camp, in the west-central
portion of the Inner Cantonment. It is situated along a
series of eroded benches or terraces on the upper
southeastern slopes of McFarland Hill. The site is a
prehistoric open campsite measuring 70 x 90 rn at an
elevation of 1335-1350 ft ms!. Moderately dense
clusters of junipers and scattered live oaks cover the
site, with dispersed open areas of short grasses. Most
of the site surface is totally eroded and deflated to
limestone bedrock. A single shovel test excavated in a
clump of trees near the southern extent of the site
revealed 23 cm of brown to dark brown clay loam
deposits. Impacts from the construction of adjacent
roads and a nearby residence have likely affected the
integrity of the site.
Cultural Materials Observed: A very light scatter
of burned rocks and four pieces of unmodified lithic
debitage were observed across the surface of the site.
The single shovel test yielded no subsurface cultural
materials, and no temporally diagnostic artifacts were
observed or collected.
Assessment: This site of an unknown prehistoric
age is extensively eroded and exhibits very few cultural
materials, thus limiting its archeological potential. It is
recommended that site 41BX1158 be considered
ineligible for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places.

o

2

1_-"_-"1
centimeters

Figure 7. Metal U.S. Army button from 41BXl159.

Assessment: The site has little contextual integrity,
and it is unclear what these remains represent and how
old they are. Due to this limited archeological potential,
it is recommended that site 4lBX1l59 be deemed
ineligible for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places,

SITE 4IBX1160
Description: Site 4lBX1l60 is located in the
central portion of the Inner Cantonment, just west of
Central Road. The size of the site is 100 x 50 m, and it
sits at an elevation of 1240-1250 ftms!. A single feature,
a large concrete foundation (92.4 x 46.2 ft), has four
areas that have been plastered and repeatedly burned.
A large amount of cinders and ash covers the floor of
the foundation. There is also a set of 3 wooden and 14
concrete foundation piers. These are located 30 m to
the southwest of the large concrete foundation.

SITE 41BX1159
Description: This large historic site is located in
the n0l1hwest corner of the Inner Cantonment, on lhe
floodplain and valley walls of Salado Creek. The site
lies at an elevation of 1250-1313 ft ms! and measures
26

I

I

Chapter 4: Results of the Survey
Cultural Materials Observed: Cultural materials
observed on the surface consist of a dense scatter of
wire nails, solarized glass fragments, aqua-colored glass
fragments, and cast iron stove parts. Melted glass and
metal slag were found on the large foundation and
around it.
Assessment: While this site was parl of the early
camp system, its structural integrity does not meet the
minimal structural requirements of eligibility for the
National Register as defined by Freeman (l994a:108)
for similar property types at Camp Bullis. As an
archeological resource, the site has little potential due
to its disturbed nature and subjection to years of various
known and unknown military activities. It is also
believed that other data sets, such as military records
and pbotographs, would be superior to any available
archeological data. Therefore, it is recommended that
site 41BX1160 be judged ineligible for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places.

considered ineligible for listing in the National Register
of Historic Places~
SITE 4IBX1I62

Description: Site 41BX1I62 is located in the
floodplain of a tributary of Salado Creek in the Inner
Cantonment. It lies at an elevation of 1190 ft msl and is
50 x 50 m in size. The site consists of a single concrete
foundation (21.6 x 21.6 ft). The edges of the foundation
are raised 10.2 inches above the floor and are inset with
bolts for securing framing, This site is in the area of the
Quartermaster depot (Manguso 1990), south of the rail
line that ran from Camp Stanley into Camp Bullis in the
early twentieth century.
Cultural Materials Observed: The floor of the
foundation is covered with a dense litter of wire nails
and solarized bottle and window glass fragments, much
of which shows signs of burning. No artifacts were seen
on the ground surface, probably due to the proximity to
the creek and removal by flood waters.
Assessment: This structure has lost most, if not
all, of its original integrity, and its archeological potential
is low. It is recommended that site 41BXI162 be
considered ineligible for listing in the National Register
of Historic Places.

SITE 4IBX1I6I
Description: This site is the location of the camp
hospital from 1906 to 1925 (Manguso 1990:37). It is
situated northeast of Anderson Hill, within the eastcentral section of the Inner Cantonment. The site lies at
an elevation of 1250-1270 ft msl and covers an area of
200 x 100 m. Several features were noted, some of which
are clearly building foundations while others are part
of the old sewer system. The largest foundation
(20.1 x 49.2 ft) is a communal showerllatrine with a
large area of shower stalls and at least 12 toilet hubs.
This foundation is partially destroyed. To the south of
the latrine is a set of concrete foundation footings. Also
on the site is an ornamental planter, 7.6 ft in diameter.
Cultural Materials Observed and Collected: The
site has a light scatter of artifacts over a large portion of
its surface. The artifacts observed on the surface consist
of "SECO" marked bricks; clear, brown, and aqua bottle
glass fragments; milk glass; and wire nails. Collected
from the surface were hotel ware ceramics with marks
identified as those of Mayer China, the Sterling China
Co. (Lehner 1988:283-286, 440-444), and Shenango
China (DeBolt 1994:198); a brown, rectangular
"NORWICH" bottle base; and a milk glass lid embossed
"GP." These artifacts date to the first half ofthe twentieth
century,
Assessment: Although this site represents a major
component of early-twentieth-century Camp Stanley,
impacts by both natural and artificial processes have
left the site with limited integrity. The potential for
recovery of further archeological data is extremely
limited. Therefore, it is recommended that the site be

SITE 4IBXI163

Description: Site 41BX1163 is located in the
eastern half of the Inner Cantonment within the
floodplain of Salado Creek at an elevation of J 180 ft
ms!. The site consists of a series of military training
trenches with 'zigzag configurations (Figure 8). The
trenches extend over an area measuring 130 x 110 m.
These likely were used for !raining purposes during
World War 1. Later they were used as movie sets for
Wings, the 1927 winner of the Academy of Motion
Pictures award for best picture, the first such award
given. The overall condition of the trenches is good.
There has been some in-filling due to erosion and
flooding; depths range from 10 to 59 inches. In several
locations along the trenches there are intact wire
entanglements in their original positions (see Figure 8).
Cultural Materials Observed: No cultural
materials were observed on the surface; this could be
due to dense leaf litter on the ground or repeated flooding
of the area.
Assessment: It is recommended that site
41BXI163 be considered eligible for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places. Although not in
pristine condition, the approximate depth, configuration,
and lateral extent of the trenches can be ascertained,
27

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

~,

\

-------~

I

>----~~~

J
~.
0\

~

•
••

..-~

_~

~'"

\~
;&J- "- Dirt Berm

•.

/~
·I ~
.~

oi ~

)

~\~~
<I);

I~
.~

/

il~

!

I

.\

.~
\

~

Wire Entanglement

~

LEGEND

:= ::: = Two- Track
•

"'V\-

Road

0, 5 10
E3

Communication Pit

20
i

meters

0, 20 40

Trench

,

80

feet
PA 1/96/B W

Figure 8. Site map. 4lBX1l63.

and therefore they meet the minimal contextual integrity

site 41 BX116I. The site is 60 x 40 m in size and lies at
an elevation of 122Q-1240 ft mst. It consists of eight
concrete foundations; three are simple squares
(15.2 x 15.2 ft), and five are rectangular foundations
(14.9 x 24.3 ft) with brick chimney bases on their
southeastern ends, facing the smaller foundations. Eight
small structures are depicted on the 1925 map of Camp
Stanley at this locality; however, the function of these
structures is unclear. It is possible that they served as
incinerators for the nearby hospital (site 4IBXl161).
Cultural Materials Observed: Cultural materials
observed at the site consist of a moderate scatter of red
"SECO" marked bricks, cream-colored fire bricks,
solarized and window glass fragments, and a U.S. Anny

requirements for eligibility defined by Freeman
(1994a: 106) for similar training devices at Camp Bullis.
The zigzag configuration of the trenches represents a
unique type of training device diagnostic of United
States military involvement in Europe during World War
I, and therefore should be considered eligible under
Criteria A and C (National Park Service 1982: I).

SITE 41BX1l64
Descriptio/!: Site 4lBXII64 is located in the eastcentral portion of the Inner Cantonment, along the lower
northeast slopes of Anderson Hill, 100 m southeast of
28

Chapter 4: Results of the Survey
metal button (same as the one depicted in Figure 7).
Assessment: This site does appear on the 1925 map
of Camp Stanley, but its specific function is not known.
The damage to the site by demolition and clearing
operations has compromised its integrity, and its
archeological potential is limited. Therefore, it is
recommended that site 41BXlJ 64 be deemed ineligible
for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.

bulldozing during road construction and clearing of
vegetation leaving the site heavily disturbed. All three
foundations have had their superstructures removed.
These structures do not show up on the 1917, 1925, or
current maps of Camp Stanley, which makes their age
unknown. Therefore, it is recommended that site
41BXJJ66 be deemed ineligible for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places.

SITE 4IBXI165

SITE 4IBX1167

Description: Site 41BXI165 is located near the
western perimeter of the Inner Cantonment, 550 III north
of the main gate of Camp Stanley. It lies at an elevation
of 1290 ft msl. The site covers an area 65 x 10 In in size
and consists of a group of 48 concrete foundation
footings set in one row of single footings and one row
of paired footings. The footings appear to be concrete
poured around wooden posts. The posts set in the single
row of footings are larger then the posts set in the paired
row offootings (6.7 x 6.7 inches compared to 3.5 x 3.5
inelies). A series of large buildings is depicted in the
site's general area on the 1925 map of Camp Stanley;
however, the function of these buildings is unknown.
Cultural Materials Observed: No artifacts were
observed in the site area.
Assessment: The limited integrity and lack of
cultural materials severely limit the archeological
potential of this site. It is recommended that site
41 BX 1165 be considered ineligible for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places.

Description: Site 41BXI 167 is located in the westcentral section of the Inner Cantonment, along the
northwestern slopes of McFarland Hill. It lies at an
elevation of 1300 ft msl and consists of 55 foundation
footings setin 5 rows of 11 footings each. The site covers
an area measuring 20 x 50 m. Three of the five rows
have wooden footings, alternating with concrete, while
the other two rows have only concrete footings. The
site suffers disturbances from natural erosion and the
construction of two gravel roads. Much of the site area
is deflated to bedrock or covered by a thin «10 em)
mantle of fine sediments. Site 41 BXIl67 is located in
the general area of the camp headquarters according to
the 1925 map of Camp Stanley.
Cultural Materials Observed: Wire nails, wood
screws, milk glass, clear window glass fragments, metal
fragments, and unidentified red bricks were among the
cultural materials observed on the site's surface.
Assessment: The disturbed nature of the site and
lack of structural integrity do not meet the minimum
requirements of eligibility for the National Register as
defined by Freeman (l994a: 108) for similar property
types at Camp Bullis. As an archeological resource, the
site has little potential due to its disturbed nature and
subjection to years of various known and unknown
military activities. It is also believed that other data sets,
such as military records and photographs, would be
superior to any available archeological data. It is
recommended that site 41BXll67 be deemed ineligible
for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.

SITE 4IBX1166
Description: Site 41BXI 166 is located in the weslcentral section of the Inner Cantonment, along the
southeastern slopes of McFarland Hill. It lies' at an
elevation of 1300--1340 ft msl and is comprised of two
concrete slabs and a building foundation in an area
measuring 60 x 20 m. The first slab is a simple
(14.2 x 14.2 ft) square with framing bolts set in each
corner. The second slab is 17.5 x 17.5 ft with an inner
raised portion (8.6 x 3.6 ft) that has the remains of a
large electrical conduit running up through it. Remains
of a chain link fence run along the perimeter of the slab.
The large building foundation is set into the side of a
hill and measures 54.5 x 13.2 ft. The west end is filled
with rubble, and the east end has two areas that appear
to have had mounted machinery.
Cultural Materials Observed: There is a scatter
of window glass and nails over the site area, including
all three foundations.
Assessment: The area has been subjected to

SITE 4IBX1168
Description: This site consists of three wells
located in the floodplain of Salado Creek in the northcentral part of the Inner Cantonment. The site measures
80 x 200 m and lies at an elevation of 1230 ft ms!. All
three wells show similar sets of concrete footings and
slabs. These consist of the well pad (35.4 x 57 inches),
a large concrete-lined depression (6.6 ft in dial11eter),
three concrele footings, and a second large concrete slab
(26 x 61.8 inches). These three wells appear on the 1925
29

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

map of Camp Stanley as "pumps."
Cultural Materials Observed: Other than the
concrete features, the only piece of cultural material
observed was a large cast iron domed cover with the
inscription "PATD. OCT7, 1902, SIN, AUG 171908."
Assessment: Despite their age and placement on
early maps of Camp Stanley, these wells fail to meet
the minimum requirements of integrity as defined by
Freeman (1994a:108) for similar utilities and
infrastructure at Camp Bullis. Additionally, the current
use of the wells as water monitoring stations has changed
the structure of all three. Therefore, it is recommended
that the site be considered ineligible for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places.

Cultural Materials Observed and Collected:
Prehistoric artifacts observed on the surface consist of
60-100 pieces of unmodified debitage, 7 bifaces, and 5
cores. A single Conejo dart point (cf. Johnson 1964:3233, Fig. lie-h) was collected from the surface (Figure
9a), as well as an untypeable dart point fragment. In
addition, burned rocks, some of which may be
prehistoric while others may be from historic trasb
burning, are scattered across the site. Historic artifacts
observed across the surface include sponge-decorated
stoneware, decal-decorated porcelain, undecorated
ironstone, fiesta ware, safety glass, solarized and clear
bottle glass fragments, Depression glass, tin cans, wire
and cut nails, and bricks. A sample of historic materials
collected from the surface consists of edged white ware
with molded, painted, and gilded edge, porcelain transfer
ware with giJded edge. sponge-decorated stoneware,
undecorated ironstone with a "I.M. & Co" mark
identified as that of the Glasgow Pottery Co. (Lehner
1988: 172-173), decal-decorated porcelain with the
"LEUCHTENBURG Germany" mark of Lehmann,
c.A., & Sohn (Chaffers 1931 :73), a solarized machinemade bottle finish, safety glass, and a shell button. These
types of artifacts date from the late 1800s to the early
1900s. A concrete block with the inscription "Mar 27
)932" also was observed.
A clear glass bottle base fragment exhibiting a
percussion-flaked, convex working edge also was
collected from the surface (Figure 9b). Attributing this
artifact to a particular group of people is somewhat
tenuous. The specimen exhibits an Owens bottlemachine scar indicating that it postdates the turn of the
century, as bottle-making machines that produce these
distinctive marks were developed by Owens in ca. 1903
(Jones and Sullivan 1989:38). The artifact most likely

SITE 41BXI169

Description: Site41BX1169 is located in the Outer
Cantonment, along the southern slopes of a large
unnamed hill in the southwest corner of Survey Parcel
1. The site covers an area measuring 600 x 250 m and
lies at an elevation of 1270-1325 ft ms!. Much of site's
surface is deflated to bedrock, leaving only thin patches
of sediment accumulations across the site. Recently the
area has been partially cleared ofjunipers, also lending
to the disturbance of the site. The site consists of
prehistoric and historic components. The prehistoric
component is an open campsite and consists of a light
scatter of artifacts over tbe entire site. The historic
component consists of a number of stone alignments,
with some seeming to have been ornamental and others
foundation remains. In addition to these, there are a stone
and mortar rectangular slab (33 x 13.2 ft) and a small
(9.9 x 9.9 ft) stone structure. There are also areas that
show evidence of being used to burn trash.

a
b

o
I

1
2
I
I
centimeters

Figure 9. Artifacts from 41BX1169. (a) Conejo dart point; (b) botlom and edge of flaked glass boUle base.

30

Chapter 4: Results of the Survey
was purposefully flaked by a soldier at Camp Stanley
or an early-twentieth~century rancher or herdsman, for

neighboring Camp Bullis. This property was later turned
over to Camp Stanley. The integrity of the site has

reasons unknown.
Assessment: The Caneja dart point suggests that

suffered from the removal of structures for salvage and
from road construction and therefore should not be
considered eligible under Criterion C (National Park
Service 1982: 1). As an archeological resource, the site
has limited potential due to disturbances from road
construction and erosion and should not be considered

a Late Archaic component is present at the site.
However, the deflated nature of the site's. surface
severely limits the archeological potential of this
component. Historically, this area of the camp has been
heavily used for both civilian and military purposes.
The 1917 map of Camp Stanley shows a saloon in this
area, but the historic artifacts observed for the most part
postdate this time period. The 1925 map shows a
structure in the vicinity of the stone and mortar slab,
but whether there is an association between the two is
not known. The disturbed nature of the site, the lack of

eligible under Criterion D.lt is also believed that other
data sets would be superior to any available
archeological information. Since little is currently
known about the Scharmann family's association with

site 41BX1170, the site cannot be fully assessed.
Potentially significant data may be available through
archival investigations. Therefore, it is recommended

depth, and the unclear association of the archeological

that the site be considered potentially eligible for listing

record to the archival record limits the research potential
of this site. Therefore, it is recommended that both
components at site 41BX1l69 be considered ineligible
for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.

in the National Register of Historic Places under Criteria
A and B, pending archival investigations.

SITE 41BXlI71

SITE 4IBX1170

Description: Site 4IBXll71 is located in the
northwestern portion of the Outer Cantonment, at the
juncture of Survey Parcels 1,2, and 3. It is situated on

Description: Site 41BXI170 is a historic ranch

an eroded upland bench overlooking the northern branch
of Salado Creek to the west and extends northward along

site on the lower hill slopes east of the northern branch

of Salado Creek in Survey Parcels I and 3 in the
northwestern section of the Outer Cantonment. The site
is 80 x 60 m in size and lies at an elevation of 1290 ft
ms!' It is identified as belonging to the Scharmann family
from the early 19008, until the land was purchased by
the military in 1942. The site has three main featuresa group of foundation stones, some of which are still
intact; a small L-shaped concrete slab (16.5 x 9.9 ft);
and a large (14.5 x 14.5 ft) square water tank made of
semidressed limestone blocks with a cement-plastered
interior. Less then 1 m to the south of the tank is a capped

a small unnamed drainage. The site is a prehistoric open
campsite measuring 175 x 300 m. The elevation ranges

from 1290 to 1330 ft ms!' Vegetation consists of a
moderate to dense cover of junipers, some live oaks,
and scaltered open areas with sparse grasses and forbs.

Most of the southern section is eroded and deflated to
limestone bedrock, while in the northern section, four
shovel tests revealed clay and clay loam sediments
ranging from 17 ern to at least 50 em in thickness.
Disturbances and impacts to the site have resulted from
the construction and maintenance of fence lines,
firebreaks, and two-track roads which crosscut the site.

well and the remains of a windmill base. There are also

several piles of concrete and limestone rubble. Much
ofthe site area is deflated to bedrock or is covered by a

Cultural Materials Observed and Collected: A

thin (<10 em) mantle of sediment.
Cultural Materials Observed and Collected:
Artifacts observed in surface contexts include poorquality bIicks, large amounts of clear and solarized glass
fragments, Owens machine-made bottles, stoneware
churn fragments, and a few sherds of undecorated

light scatter of lithic artifacts and burned rocks was
observed across the surface. Cultural materials observed
include ca. 35 pieces of unmodified debitage, 2 edge-

modified flakes, 4 biface fragments, and 1 uniface. One
complete untyped dart point was collected from the
surface. Although not typed, the specimen appears to

whiteware. Artifacts collected from the surface include
a brown glass jug handle, a green glass machine-made
bottle finish, and a clear glass machine-made bottle

have been reworked from a simple bifacial tool into a
dart point. A ca. I-m-diameter cluster of burned
limestone rocks exposed in an eroded area probably
represents the remains of a prehistoric hearth. No
cultural materials were recovered from the four shovel
tests.
Assessment: A definite age cannot be ascertained
for this prehistoric open campsite, although it may date

finish. These artifacts suggest an early 1900s to mid
1940s occupation of the site, which is consistent with
the dates of occupation by O. Scharmann.
Assessment: The Schannann ranch was part of a
purchase of land by the military in ca. 1940 to expand
31

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity
to the Archaic period based on the presence of a dart
point. While a probable prehistoric feature was
observed, much of the site is badly eroded, and cultural
materials appear to be mostly surficial. It is unlikely
that further investigations at 41BXI171 would yield
significant information due to the low artifact density
and apparent lack of buried cultural materials.
Therefore, it is recommended that the site be considered
ineligible for listing in the National Register of Ristoric
Places.

012
I

I

I

centimeters

SITE 4lBXl172
Figure 10. PedemaJes dart point from 41BXl172.

Description: Site 4IBXII72 is located in the
northwest portion of the Outer Cantonment on the lower
hill slopes east of the northern branch of Salado Creek
in Survey Parcel 1. The site measures 350 x 150 m in
size and lies at an elevation of 1260-1300 ft msl. Erosion

suggest an early to mid 1900s occupation, which is
consistent with the occupation of the site by O.
Scharmann.
Assessment: The Pedernales dart point suggests a
Late Archaic component is present. However, the low
density of artifacts and deflated nature of the site limit
its archeological potential. It is recommended that the
prehistoric component of site 41 BXII72 be considered
ineligible for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places. The historic component has suffered from the
removal of structures and bulldozing which limit its
contextual integrity, and therefore it should not be
considered eligible under Criterion C (National Park
Service 1982:1). As an archeological resource, the
disturbance from bulldozing and lack of artifacts from
shovel testing suggest that the component has limited
potential and should not be considered eligible under
Criterion D. Better and potentially significant data about
the historic component may be gained through archival
investigations. Since little is currently known about the
Scharmman or Ashley associations with site 41BXI 172,
the site cannot be fully assessed. It is recommended that
the historic component be considered potentially eligible
for listing in the National Register of Historic Places
under Criteria A and B, pending archival investigations.

has impacted the site, leaving a thin soil mantle and

areas deflated to bedrock. Prehistoric and historic
components are present. The prehistoric component is
an open campsite. A light prehistoric artifact scatter
occurs across the site, with a distinct concentration in
the northern half. The historic component consists of
two main features-a large cistern 11.5 ft tall and 40.3 ft
in circumference made of mortared fieldstones and a
square tank (15.2 x 15.2 ft) made of semidressed
limestone similar to the one at site 4IBXI170. In
addition. there is an E-shaped stone foundation and a
fieldstone chimney base. This locality is shown on the
1917 map of Camp Stanley as the Scharmann ranch
complex. Sometime between 1917 and 1940, this
property was acquired by James F. Ashley until the land
was purchased by the military in 1942. Five shovel tests
were excavated revealing a thin (16 to 40 em) clay loam
mantle. No artifacts were recovered from the shovel
tests.

Cultural Materials Observed and Collected:
Prehistoric artifacts observed consist of 15 to 20 pieces
of unmodified debitage and I uniface. A Pedernales dart
point (cf. Kelley I947a:Plate X-e; Suhm et aJ. 1954:468,
Plates 113-115) was collected from the surface (Figure
10). A light scatter of burned rocks occurs across the
site. Historic cultural materials occur in a heavy scatter
mainly over the southern portion of the site. Artifacts
observed in surface contexts include clear, green, and
solarized bottle glass fragments, milk glass, Mason jar
seals, undecorated whiteware ceramics, decal-decorated
ceramics, salt-glazed stoneware, graniteware-glazed tin,
tin cans (sanitary and ho1e-in-top), and bricks. A single
historic artifact collected from the surface consists of a
green glass bottle base fragment with "PLUTO" and a
figure embossed onto tbe base. These types of artifacts

SITE 4IBX1l73

Description: Site 41BX1l73 consists of a
prehistoric open campsite located in the northwest
portion of the Outer Cantonment in the central section
of Survey Parcel 1. The site is situated along the
midslopes of an interfluvial ridge, west of the northern
branch of Salado Creek. It occupies a series of eroded
benches on theinterfluve and measures ca. 150 x 175 m.
The site lies at an elevation of 1285-1305 ft msl.
Vegetation includes a moderate cover ofjunipers, some
live oaks, and short grasses. The site is almost totally
32

Chapter 4: Results of the Survey
eroded, with limestone bedrock exposed across much
of lhe surface; no shovellesls were excavaled. A bladed
road that crosses the site and tree/brush clearing
activities in the western sections of the site are the main
disturbance factors noted.
Cultural Materials Observed and Collected: A
moderate scatter of prehistoric cultural materials was
observed in surface contexts, including a light to
moderale scatter of burned rocks. approximately 60
pieces of lithic debitage. 6 biface fragments. I unifacial
end scraper, and 1 arrow point midsection. Additionally,
a Gower dart point (cf. Shafer 1963:64, Fig. 7a-e) and
a Uvalde darl point (cf. Suhm et al. 1954:486, Plate
122) were collected from the surface (Figure II). Three
burned rock clusters ranging from ca. I to 2 m in
diameter were found in lhe badly eroded central section
of the site and appear to represent prehistoric hearLh
remnants.

o

1

I
I
centimeters

Creek to the south. The site measures an estimated
185 x 200 m and lies at an elevalion of 1290-1310 ft
msl. Vegetation consists of a moderately dense cover
of junipers, a few live oaks, and various short grasses
and forbs. Limestone bedrock is exposed across most
of the surface in the western and northern sections of
the site, while two of three shovel tests excavated in the
eastern section revealed dark brown clay loam sediments
ranging from 32 em to at least 60 em in thickness.
Impacts associated with vegetation clearing in the site
vicinity may have contributed to minor site disturbance.
Cultural Materials Observed and Collected: A
moderate scatter of lithic artifacts and burned rocks
occurs in the western section of the site, while only a
light scatter of materials was noted in other areas.
Cultural malerials observed include ca. 100 pieces of
lithic debitage. 3 biface fragments, and 3 cores. One
Pedemales dart point (cf. Kelley 1947a:Plate X-<:; Suhm
et al. 1954:468, Plates 113-115) was collected from
the surface (Figure 12). No cultural materials were
recovered from the shovel tests.

2
I

b

012
I

Figure 11. Dart points from 4IBX1173. (al Gower; (b)
Uvalde.

I

I

centimeters

Assessment: The presence of two early Archaic
dart points and an arrow point midsection indicates that
multiple components (Early Archaic and Late
Prehistoric) are present. However, the site lacks integrity
due to the deflated nature of the cultural deposits, and
thus, separating the components for analysis is
impossible. Therefore, it is recommended that site
41BXI173 be considered ineligible for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places.

Figure 12. Pedemales dart poinl from 41BX1174.

Assessmelll: The Pedernales point suggests that a
Late Archaic component is represented at the site.
However. the site lacks integrity due to the deflated
nature of the surface across most of the area and the
lack of buried cultural deposits in areas containing
appreciable sediment accumulations. The archeological
potential of the site is limited, and further investigations
are not warranted. It is recommended that site
4IBX1174 be considered ineligible for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places.

SITE 4IBX1l74

Description: Site 41BXI174 is located in the
northwestern portion of the Outer Cantonment in. the
southern section of Survey Parcel 2. It consists of a
prehistoric open campsite situated along the lower
southern slopes of an extensive ridge system that fOlms
the divide between the Salado Creek and Cibolo Creek
drainage basins. It occupies a portion of two small
interfluves that overlook the northern branch of Salado

SITE 41BX1I75

Descriptio,,: Site 41BX 1175 is a prehistoric open
campsite located in the extreme northwest corner of both
the Outer Cantonment and Survey Parcel 2. It is situated
33

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

along the upper southern slopes of an extensive ridge
system that fonns the divide between the Salado Creek
and Cibolo Creek drainage basins, overlooking the
northern branch of Salado Creek to the south. The site
is estimated to measure 100 x 100 m and lies at an
elevation of 1325-1345 ft ms!. Vegetation consists
predominantly of a dense cover of junipers, a few live
oaks, and sparse grasses. Three shovel tests revealed
12-33 em of dark brown clay loam in dispersed areas
containing sediment accumulations; much of the site
surface exhibits only thin sediment deposits (<10 em)
or is deflated to bedrock. Nearby development and road
construction have likely obliterated portions of the site
to the north and west, while construction/maintenance
of the Camp Stanley perimeter fence and firebreaks
contributed to impacts on the remaining part of the site.
Cultural Materials Observed: A few burned rocks
and a light scatter of lithic artifacts including ca. 25
pieces of unmodified debitage, 2 bifaces, and I core
were observed across the surface of the site. Two of the
three shovel tests yielded single flakes; one was
recovered from 0-10 em and the other from 20-30 em
below the surface. No temporally diagnostic artifacts
were observed or collected.
Assessment: The component(s-) at the site cannot
be assigned to an archeological period due to the lack
of diagnostic artifacts. Although buried cultural
materials were recovered, the overall low density of
artifacts and lack of artifact variability and diagnostic
tools limit the research potential of this site. Based on
these factors, it is recommended that site 41BX1175 be
considered ineligible for listing in the National Register
of Historic Places.

fragment, 2 unifaces, and 2 biface fragments. A single
Angostura dart point base (cf. Hughes 1949; Suhm et
a!. 1954:402, Plate 80) was collected from the surface
(Figure 13).

012
I

I
I
centimeters

Figure 13. Angostura dart point from 41BX1176.

Assessment: The Angostura dart point base
indicates an Early Archaic component at the site.
However, the site lacks integrity due the deflated nature
of the deposits, and the sparse density of artifacts limits
its research potential. It is recommended that site
41BX1176 be considered ineligible for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places.

SITE 4IBX1I77
Description: Site 41BX1177 is a prehistoric open
campsite located in the extreme northern portion of the
Outer Cantonment in the central part of Survey Parcel
2. It is situated along the mid to upper slopes of an
interfluviallidge bounded on the east and west by small
ephemeral tributaries to Cibolo Creek. The site occupies
a series of eroded limestone benches on the interfluve.
It measures 130 x 130 m and occurs at an elevation of
1310-1330 ft rDs!. Junipers, a few live oaks, and sparse
grasses cover the site. The surface is completely eroded
and deflated to limestone bedrock; no shovel tests were
excavated. No modern or recent impacts were observed.
Cultural Materials Observed and Collected: A
moderate scatter of lithic artifacts and a light scatter of
burned rocks were observed in surface contexts.
Materials observed include ca. 100-120 pieces of lithic
debitage, 6 biface fragments, I gouge, and I perforator/
drill. A single triangular arrow point classified as
Granbury (cf. Jelks 1962:35-36, Fig. 14m-w) was
collected from the surface (Figure 14).
Assessment: The Granbury arrow point indicates
a Late Prehistoric occupation at the site. Although a
relatively wide variety of lithic tools was observed, the
site lacks integrity due to the deflated nature of the
deposits and the lack of buried cultural deposits or intact
stratigraphy. Due to these factors, the archeological
potential of the site is limited. Therefore, it is
recommended that site 41 BX 1177 be considered

SITE 4IBX1I76
Description: Site 41BX1l76 is located in the
northwest portion of both the Outer Cantonment and
Survey Parcel 2. It is situated on a flat, upland bench or
hilltop along the crest of a ridge that divides the Salado
Creek and Cibolo Creek drainage basins. The site
consists of a prehistoric lithic scatter measuring ca.
85 x 125 m and lies at an elevation of 1350 ft ms!. The
site area is covered by a moderate growth ofjunipers, a
few live oaks, and various short grasses. Limestone
bedrock is exposed across the totally eroded surface.
No shovel tests were excavated. Modern impacts
associated with field clearing are evident in the eastern
section of the site.
Cultural Materials Observed and Collected: A
light scatter of lithic materials was observed across the
surface of the site, including ca. 20-25 pieces of
unmodified debitage, 1 edge-modified flake, 1 core
34

Chapter 4: Results ofthe Survey

o
I

Survey Parcel 2. It measures 100 x 140 m and sits at an
elevation of 1300-1350 ft msl. It is a farmstead that
once belonged to Andrew Blank. It was purchased by
the military in 1942 and was subsequently used as a
warden station (Petsch 1942). The main features are
the remains of the house. which consist of a concrete
slab and wooden foundation piers; a 6.6-ft-high, 14.2-ftdiameter concrete water tank; and the wooden base for
a large elevated water storage tank. Located ca. 70 m
west of the house is a stone-filled septic pit with a cast
iron pipe running from the house. To the south of the
house area is a concrete slab and the wooden piers of
another building.
Cultural Materials Observed: Cultural materials
are sparse. The few artifacts observed are window and
bottle glass fragments and wire nails. Dark red bricks
marked "B UTLER" and cream-colored fire bricks
marked "LACLEDE ST LOUIS" were also obsetved.
Assessment: The structural integrity oftrus site has
suffered greatly since its original occupation and later
use as a warden station. with the demolition and removal
of structures and therefore should be considered not
eligible under Criterion C (National Park Service
1982:1). As an archeological resource, the site's
potential is limited by disturbances from military
~ctivities; it therefore should be considered not eligible
under Criterion D. It is also believed that any available
archeological data would be difficult to solely attribute
to one of the two occupations. Bettet and potentially
significant data about the historic component may be
gained through archival investigations. Since little is
currently known about Blank's association with site
4IBXI179, the site cannot be fully assessed. It is
recommended Ihat the site be considered potentially
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places under Criteria A and B. pending archival
investigations.

2
I
I
centimeters

Figure 14. Granbury arrow point from 41BX1177.

ineligible for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places.

SITE 41BXIl78
Description: Site 4IBXII78 is located in the
extreme northern portion of the Outer Cantonment and
the east-central section of Survey Parcel 2. This site
consists of a prehistoric lithic scatter and occupies a
relati vely flat, eroded upland bench that overlooks a
small unnamed tributary of Cibolo Creek to the west. It
is estimated to measure 70 x 125 m and lies at an
elevation of ca. 1350-1355 ft msl. Vegelation varies
from open grass-covered areas with scattered stands of
junipers to a moderately dense cover ofjunipers, a few
live oaks, and sparse grasses. The site surface is
generally deflated, with only some thin «5 cm), isolated
pockets of clay loam sediments observed in the northern
sections. No shovel tests were excavated. No modern
impacts were observed. although exploded ordnance
fragments/shrapnel were noted across the surface.
Cultural Materials Observed: A sparse scalter of
lithic materials was observed across lhe surface. Cullural
materials observed were limited to 14 pieces of
unmodified lithic debitage, 1 biface fragment, and I
core. No burned limestone rocks or features were
observed, although two pieces of heat-shattered chert
were noted. No temporally diagnostic artifacts were
observed or collected.
Assessment: Cultural materials are sparse and
appear to be mostly surficial, and the site has poor
integrity due to the lack of intact buried cultural deposits
or stratigraphy. This site of unknown prehistoric age
has very limited research pOlential. Based on these
factors, it is recommended that site 4IBXII78 be
considered ineligible for listing in the National Register
of Historic Places.

SITE 41BX1180
Description: Site 41BXI180 is located in the
northwest portion of the Outer Cantonment in the westcentral section of Survey Parcel 3, along the western
boundary of the parcel. It is situated along the mid and
western slopes of an interfluve that overlooks the
northern branch of Salado Creek to the west and a small
unnamed tributary to the south. It is a prehistoric open
campsite measuring 160 x 170 m, with a small (ca.
5 x 10 m) burned rock midden located in the southcentral section (Figure 15). The site lies at an elevation
of 1295-1315 ft msl. Vegetation consists predominantly
ofa moderate to dense cover ofjunipers, some live oaks.
and sparse grasses, with dispersed open areas of short

SITE 41BX1179
Description: Site 41BX1I79 is located in the
northwest portion of both the Outer Cantonment and
35

-,

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

\

\
Ig>
.~

I~

\

~
/

.

\
I~

."
."

I""
LEGEND

::::=

Two-Track Road

Fence
x

Negative Shovel Test

®

Positive Shovel Test

~

Stock Pond

(~)

'1

o

75

150

300

meters

Burned Rock Midden

o

Site Boundary

.... J

300

600
I

1200

feet

PAII96/BW

Figure 15. Site map, 41 BX 1180.
grasses and scattered stands of junipers and live oaks
present in the western sections of the site. Based on the
excavation of nine shovel tests, brown to dark reddish

sections of the site, while most other sections appear to

contain little or no sediment accumulation. Disturbances
or impacts associated with vegetation clearing and
construction/maintenance of fence lines, fIrebreaks, and
two-crack roads appears to be limited to the western

brown clay loam and silty loam sediments ranging from
9 em to at least 37 em in thickness occur in the southern
36

Chapter 4: Results a/the Survey
part of the site.
Cultural Materials Observed and
Collected: A moderate scatter of
prehistoric cultural materials is present
across the southeastern section of the
site, with only sparse materials noted

elsewhere. Cultural materials observed
in surface contexts include
approximately 80-100 pieces of lithic
debitage, 9 biface fragments, and I
hammerstone. Additionally, five dart
points were collected from the surface
in the southeastern part of the site: one

Ensor (cf. Miller and Jelks 1952:172,
Plate 22,2; Suhm et a!' 1954:422, Plate
90); one Pedernales (cf. Kelley
1947a:Plate X-c; Suhm et al.
1954:468, Plates 113-115); one Taylor
(ct. Kelley 1947a:Plate X-b; Sorrow
1969:19, Fig. 16a-d); and two
fragments identified as probable Frio
(cf. Kelley 1947b: 124, Plate 14d; Suhm
et a!' 1954:428, Plate 93) (Figure 16).
The projectile points indicate Middle

a

b

o

2

I

I

centimeters

d

e

Figure 16. Dart points from 41BXl180. (a) Ensor; (b) Pedemales; (e) Taylor;

(d-e) Frio-like.

and Late Archaic occupations at the

site. Of nine shovel tests excavated, four produced lithic
materials from depths ranging from 0 to 30 em below
the surface (two of these also yielded burned limestone
rocks), one test yielded only a single burned rock at 0
to 10 em, and a test excavated adjacent to the midden
yielded burned limestone rocks from 10 to 48 em below
the surface but failed to yield any lithic artifacts.
Assessment: Allhough portions of site 41BXI180

of the Outer Cantonment near the northwest corner of

Survey Parcel 3. It is situated on an eroded upland saddle
along the ridge that divides the Cibolo Creek and Salado
Creek drainage basins. The site measures 90 x 160 m
and occurs at an elevation of ca. 1325-1345 ft msl.
Vegetation consists predominantly of a moderate to
dense cover of junipers, with a few live oaks, sparse
grasses, and prickly pear. The surface of the site is
deflated in many areas, although two shovel tests
revealed brown clay loam ranging from 13 ern to at least
30 em in thickness. Modern disturbances and impacts
come from the construction and maintenance of a fence
line and adjacent firebreaks, which cross the northern
section of the site.

have witnessed deflation and erosion, the burned rock

midden has a demonstrated degree of integrity and intact
stratigraphy based on the depth of the cultural deposits
and recovery from shovel tests. Such characteristics (i.e.,
integrity and intact stratigraphy) are critical for
archeological research and indicate that the site has the
potential to yield significant data. This makes site

Cultural Materials Observed: A very light scatter

41BX1l80 potentially eligible for listing in the National

oflithic materials was observed on the surface, including

Register of Historic Places under Criterion D (National

25-30 pieces of unmodified lithic debitage, I edge-

Park Service 1982: I) Additional investigations in the
form of test excavations should be undertaken to
detennine the site's significance. It is recommended that

modified flake, and 2 cores. No subsurface cultural
materials were recovered from the two shovel tests, and
no temporally diagnostic artifacts were observed or

site 41BX1l80 be considered potentially eligible for

collected.

listing in the National Register of Historic Places
pending further investigations.

Assessment: Cultural materials are sparse and
appear to be mostly surficial, and the component(s)
cannot be assigned to an archeological period due to
the lack of diagnostic artifacts. The research potential
of the site is very limited, and further investigations are
not warranted. It is recommended that site 41 BX 1181
be considered ineligible for listing in the National

SITE 4IBX1181
Description: Site 4lBX1l81 consists of a
prehistoric lithic scatter located in the northwest portion

37

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

Register of Historic Places.

sparse short grasses. Two shovel tests revealed 7-16 cm
of brown silty loam across the summit, while the hill
slopes are badly eroded and consist of ex.posed
limestone bedrock. No major artificial impacts were
noted, although the site area is heavily littered with
exploded ordnance fragments and shrapnel.
Cultural Materials Observed and Collected: A
light to moderate scatter of lithic materials was observed
in the eastern and soutbeastern sections of the site, with
only a sparse scatter of cultural materials noted across
other areas. Cultural materials observed include
approximately 110-120 pieces of lithic debitage, 9
biface fragments, and 6 cores/core fragments. One Frio
dart point (ef. Kelley 1947b:124, Plate l4d; Suhm et
aJ. 1954:428, Plate 93) (Figure 17) and two untypeable
dart fragments were collected from surface contexts.
No subsurface cultural materials were recovered from
the shovel tests.

SITE 4IBX1182

.Description: Site 41BX1l82 is a prehistoric lithic
scatter located in the northern section of the Outer
Cantonment in the northwest part of Survey Parcel 3. It
is situated along the midslopes of an interfluvial ridge
that is bounded on the east and west by small low-order
tributaries of Cibolo Creek. The lithic scalier occupies
a series of eroded limestone benches on the intertluve.
The site measures 130 x 160 m and lies at an elevation
of 1320-1340 ft ms!. Vegetation consists of a moderate
to dense cover of junipers, a few live oaks, and short
grasses. Much of the surface is badly eroded and deflated
to limestone bedrock, while two shovel tests in the
southern section revealed a thin mantle (10-12 em) of
dark brown clay loam. No recent disturbances or impacts
were noted.
Cultural Materials Observed: A light to moderate
scatter of lithic materials was observed across the
surface; most of these materials were found scattered
along the eroded slopes in the northern one-half of the
site. Cultural materials observed include approximately
40-50 pieces of lithic debitage and 1 biface fragment.
The two shovel tests excavated failed to yield any buried
cultural materials, and no temporally diagnostic artifacts
were observed or collected.
Assessment: This site of unknown prehistoric age
is almost totally eroded, exhibits poor integrity due to
the deflated nature of the cultural deposits, and lacks
artifact variability and diagnostic tools. The
archeological research potential is limited, and further
investigations are not warranted. Therefore, it is
recommended that site 41BXl182 be considered
ineligible for listing in the National Register of Hjstoric
Places.

012
I
I
I
centimeters

Figure 17. Frio dart poim from 41BX1183.

Assessment: The Frio dart point indicates a Late
Archaic occupation at the site, while the two untypeable
dart point fragments may suggest additional Archaic
components. However, the integrity of the site is poor
due to the dellated nature of the deposits and lack of
intact buried deposits or site stratigraphy. Thus, the
research potential of the site is very limited. It is
recommended that site 41BXI 183 be considered
ineligible for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places.

SITE 4IBX1183

Description: Site 41BX 1183 is located in the
northeast port.ion of the Outer Cantonment in the
extreme northeast section of Survey Parcel 3. It is
situated on a prominent upland area along the northern
section of an extensive ridge system that forms the divide
between the Cibolo Creek and Salado Creek drainage
basins. This site consists of a prehistoric lithic scatter
that occupies the summit and upper northern, eastern,
and southern slopes of tbe bill. The site covers an
estimated area of 160 x 300 m and occurs at an elevation
range of 1380-1420 ft ms!. Vegetation consists
predominantly of a moderate to dense cover ofjunipers
and some live oaks, and dispersed open areas supporting

SITE 4IBX1I84

Description: Site 41BXI184 is located in the
northeast portion of the Outer Cantonment and the
northeast section of Survey Parcel 3. It is situated on a
prominent upland area along the southern side of an
extensive ridge that forms the divide between the Salado
Creek and Cibolo Creek drainage basins. The site
consists of a prehistoric open campsite occupying the
summit and upper slopes of the hill. It measures
200 x 300 m, and occurs at an elevation range of 1380144 I ft ms!. Vegetation consists predominantly of a
38

Chapter 4: Results of the Survey
Cultural Materials Obsen'ed and Collected: A
sparse scatter of prehistoric cultural materials is
generally common across most sections of the site, while
moderate concentrations of lithic materials and scattered
burned rocks were observed in the northeast, central,
and extreme western sections. Two of these areas occur
on deflated surfaces, while the third has isolated
sediment accumulations which failed to produce any
buried cultural materials. Cultural materials observed
in surface contexts include approximately 100-125
pieces of lithic debitage, 7 bifaces/fragments, 4 dart
point midsections, and 1 core. Two dart points were
collected from the surface. A dart point identified as
Uvalde (ef. Suhm et al. 1954:486, Plate 122) was found
in the northeast artifact concentration, and a specimen
identified as Kinney (cf. Suhm et al. 1954:434, Plate
96) was recovered from the western artifact
concentration (Figure 18). The six shovel tests failed to
yield any buried cultural materials, and no cultural
features were observed.

moderate to dense cover of junipers, some Ii ve oaks,
and dispersed open areas with sparse short grasses. Two
shovel tests revealed a thin (8-20 em) mantle of brown
to grayish brown silty loam across the summit, while
the hill slopes are badly eroded and cultural deposits
are deflated to limestone bedrock. Modern or recent
impacts include a bladed road which crosses the southern
and western edges of the site and a fence line near the
eastern site boundary. The site area is also heavily
littered with exploded ordnance fragments and shrapnel.
Cultural Materials Observed: A very light surface
scatter of prehistoric cultural materials was observed
across the large expanse of the site, including
approximately 50-60 pieces of unmodified lithic
debitage, 3 bifaces/fragments, and I core. No buried
cultural materials were encountered in the shovel tests,
and no temporally diagnostic materials were observed
or collected.
Assessment: This site of unknown prehistoric age
is almost totally eroded and exhibits poor integrity due
to the deflated nature of the cultural deposits. The lack
of diagnostic tools, artifact variability, and intact buried
cultural materials or site stratigraphy indicates a very
limited research potential. Therefore, it is recommended
that site 41BX1l84 be considered ineligible for listing
in the National Register of Historic Places.

012

I

SITE 4IBX1185

I

I

centimeters

Description: Site 4IBXI185 is a prehistoric open
campsite located in the northeast portion of the Outer
Cantonment in the central section of Survey Parcel 4. It
is situated along the mid to lower slopes of an unnamed
hill, along the north side of a small tributary to Cibolo
Creek. The site abuts the eastern boundary of Camp
Stanley and probably extends into the adjacent property
of Camp Bullis.ltmeasures 190 x 425 m and is situated
at an elevation of 1270-1310 ft msl. Vegetation consists
predominantly of moderate to dense clusters ofjunipers
and scattered live oaks, dispersed open areas supporting
various grasses and forbs, and moderately dense clusters
of live oaks occurring in areas along the small tributary.
Six shovel tests excavated in dispersed areas of sediment
accumulations revealed dark brown to reddish brown
clay and clay loam soils ranging from 13 em to at least
60 em in thickness. Many areas across the site were
noted to contain thin (ca. <10 ern) sediment accumulations or surfaces deflated to limestone bedrock. Modern
or recent impacts include a small well pad and pump
jack in the extreme western section, bladed unimproved
roads that cross the western and northern sections, and
construction/maintenance of the Camp Stanley
perimeter fence and firebreaks along the eastern section.

a
Figure 18. Dart points from 41BXl185. (a) Uvalde, (b)
Kinney.

Assessment: The Uvalde and Kinney dart points
suggest that portions of the site were occupied during
the Early and Late Archaic periods. However, cultural
materials appear to occur on deflated surfaces across
many sections of the site, while areas containing
sediment accumulations and sampled through shovel
testing also appear to lack buried cultural deposits. Due
to these factors, the site has limited potential to yield
significant archeological data. Therefore, it is
recommended that site 41 BXI185 be considered
ineligible for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places.

SITE 41BX1186
Description: This historic farm site is located on
the lower hill slopes east of the northern branch of Salado
Creek in the northwest sections of both the Outer
Cantonment and Survey Parcel 3. The site measures
39

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity
200 x 160 m and lies at an elevation of 1300-1330 ft
ms!. The farm once belonged to Louis H. Willke
(Wilkie) but was purchased by the military in 1942. The
remains of at least 19 structures and features are present
(Figure 19 and Table I). Structure I is the remains of
the front porcb of the house and is made of concreleand-mortar-set river cobbles. Structure 2 is a small water
trough notable for the inscriptions around the edge,
"MADE 6 4 1928 O.S. & E.M. WIS." There are also
handprints of a child at one end. Structure 3 is a larger
water trough with no inscriptions. Structure 4 is a well

disturbances by the military limit the available
archeological dau;, which are likely to be inferior to
other data sets such as archival records. Since little is
currently known abom WiUke's association with site

41BXI186, archival investigations may provide some
significant infonnation. Therefore, it is recommended

that the site be judged potentialIy eligible for listing in
the National Register of Historic Places pending archival
investigations.

SITE 41BX1187

pump and a prefabricated concrete cistern. Structure 5

is the remains of an underground hatchery that extends
7.3 ft below the ground surface with the interior plastered
with a thin layer of concrete over wire. Structure 6 is an
underground silo which measures 18.5 ft tall, 14.9 ft of
which are subsurface. Features 7-11 and 13-18 are
poured concrete foundations. The larger foundations

have center support posts and frame boilS along the
perimeter. Feature 12 is a small stone foundation made
of undressed fieldstone.
Table 1. Structures and Features at Site 41BXl186
Structure

I

2
3
4
5
6
7

8
9

10
II
12
13

14
15
16

Description: Site 41BX 1187 is a prehistoric open
campsite located in the northeast portion of the Outer
Cantonment and the southern section of Survey Parcel

4. It is situated along the lower northern slopes of a
prominent unnamed hill, soulh of a smalI tributary to
. Cibolo Creek. The site occupies a series of eroded
benches overlooking the small tributary and borders the
eastern perimeter fence of Camp Stanley. The site likely
extends east into the adjacent property ofCarnp BulIis.
The site covers an estimated area of 200 x 250 m, lying
at an elevation of 1275-1320 ft ms!. Vegetation consists

Structure Type

Dimensions (ft)

mainly of a moderate to dense cover of junipers, a few
live oaks, and sparse grasses. Most of the surface is

Front porch
Water trough
Water trough
WelVcistern
Hatchery
Underground silo
Large chicken house
Chicken house
Concrete slab
Large chicken house
Chicken house
Stone foundation
Large chicken house
Concrete slab
Concrete slab
Concrete slab

20.5 x 12.5
10.2 x 2.6
19.1 x 1.7

of sediment accumulations occur across the site. Five
shovel tests in these areas revealed brown to reddish

badly eroded and deflated, although isolated pockets

25.6 circumference

brown clay and clay loam sediments ranging from 14

16x 21

em to at least 50 em in thickness. Modern or recent
impacts include vegetation clearing in the southern
section and construction/maintenance of the Camp
Stanley perimeter fence and firebreaks along the eastern

33.6 circumference

26 x 52
31 x 20
11.2 x 12.2
62 x 20
30.4 x 14.5
14.5 x 14.5
40x 20
11.6x12.2
1\.6 x 12.2
11.2 x I\.2

extent of the sile.
Cultural Materials Observed: A sparse scatler of
lithic materials and burned rocks was observed across
most sections, although a light to moderate scatter of
materials was observed in the extreme northern and
northeastern site areas. Cultural materials observed in

surface contexts include approximately 50-60 pieces
of lithic debitage, 2 bifaces, and 2 cores. Two burned

Note: Structure identifications and dimensions were
obtained from condemnation records (Rogers et al.

rock clusters, measuring ca. 50 x 60 em and

1940).

30 x 100 em, were found in the northeast section of the
site. These burned rock clusters occur on deflated
surfaces and appear to represent the remnants of
prehistoric hearths. The five shovel tests failed to yield
any buried cultural materials, and no temporally
diagnostic artifacts were observed or collected.
Assess'!lent: The component(s) at the site cannot

Cultural Materials Observed: There is a very light
scatter of artifacts over the entire site consisting

primarily of wire nails, window glass, and bottle glass.
A few small sherds of undecorated whiteware were also
noted.
Assessment: The structural integrity of the site has
suffered greatly since its original occupation, subsequent
acquisition by the military, and later demolition and
removal of structures. As an archeological resource,

be assigned to an archeological period due to the lack
of diagnostic artifacts. The site lacks integrity due to
the deflated nature of the cultural deposits and the
apparent lack of intact buried cultural materials. It is
40

Chapter 4: Results of the Survey

®
1'-----7-

LEGEND

=::

=

Two-Track Road

_._, Fence
Structure I Feature

f

PAII961BW

Figure 19. Site map, 41 BX 1186.

41

a
I

a

5 10

20

E3
meters

20 40
E3
feet

80

Archeological Survey at Camp StanLey Storage Activity

unlikely that further investigations would yield
significant archeological data. Therefore, it is
recommended that site 41BXl187 be considered
ineligible for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places.

east of the target range in 1943 (Manguso 1990:81).
This training area extends to the east outside the area

surveyed.
Cultural Materials Observed: The cultural
materials observed are consistent with the function of

the site and consist mainly of stripper clips for loading
the model 03 Sptingfield rifle (post-1902), .30-06
cartridge casings, and practice grenades.
Assessment: Although somewhat disturbed, the
keys elements of the old target range portion of site
4lBXI188 are intact. This includes the target abutment,
target guide post, and designated shooting positions (i.e.,
the parallel stone alignments). This component's
association with World War I training activities is

SITE 4IBXII88
Description: Located in the southeastern corner
ofthe Outer Cantonment within the floodplain of Salado
Creek is site 41BX1188. It measures 250 x 400 m and
lies at an elevation of 1190-1210 ft ms!. The site is an
old target range for the Leon Springs Military
Reservation and later Camp Stanley, built in 1907 and
used that year for the Southwestern
Rifle and Pistol Competi tion
(Manguso 1990: 11). During World
War II the old target range was
converted and used as an antitank
gunnery range with moving targets .

. The original concrete abutment
and target guide post are still present
and intact (Figure 20). Associated
with and at varying distances south

of the target abutment are four stone
alignments that run parallel to the
target abutment. The positions and
distances of the four slone alignments
in relation to the target abutment are

consistent with the 200-,300-,500-,
and 600-yard shooting positions
depicted on the 1917 map of Camp
Stanley. Early photographs from the

a

1910s show these positions
consisting of rock walls and being
used by soldiers as shooting rests

(Manguso 1990:31). These were
likely constructed using rocks from
a premilitary rock wall located 45 m
east of the abutment. The rock wall
was likely constructed in the
nineteenth century and associated
with the premilitary ranching period

of the Leon Springs area. An
extensive set of these premilitary rock

walls is depicted on the 1917 map of
the Leon Springs Military
Reservation. Site 41BXII88 also
encompasses a training structure
comprised of a group of concrete
foundation piers, some with
inscriptions. The structure is part of
a fortified combat training area built

b
Figure 20. Site 41 BXl188. (a) Profile of target abutment; (b) view of target
abutment looking west.

42

Chapter 4: Results of the Survey
Historic ceramics collected from the surface include
molded ironstone, blue transfer-printed white
earthenware, and an ironstone ceramic fragment bearing
a partial maker's mark identified as Powell & Bishop

significant. These factors meet the registration

requirements defined by Freeman (1994a: 106) for
similar training devices in Camp Bullis. The site should
be protected from vandalism and future construction

1876-1878 (Godden 1964:509). Also found were two
rimfire cartridges; one is a .38 short from the mid 1870s
(Suydam 1960: 82), and one is a .46 short with a raised

activities. It is recommended that site 41BX1188 be
deemed eligible for listing in the National Register of
Historic Places, under Criterion A (National Park

"H" in an impressed circle headstamp of the Winchester

Service 1982: I).

Repeating Arms Co. (Suydam 1960:99).
Assessment: The prehistoric component at site
41BX1189 has limited archeological potential due to

SITE 4IBX1l89

Description: Site 41BX1189 is located on an

the disturbed nature of the site and paucity of artifacts.
Therefore, it is recommended that the prehistoric
component be considered ineligible for listing in the

interfluvial ridge separating Salado Creek and one of
its tributaries in Survey Parcel S in the Outer
Cantonment. The site is 400 x 300 m in size and is

National Register of Historic Places. The latenineteenth-century component has little if any of its
original structural integrity and its archeological
potential is limited due to recent disturbances.
Therefore, this component should be considered
ineligible under Criteria C and D. It is believed that
archival data could provide significant infonnation since
little is currently known about the occupation and
ownership of this structure, but a full assessment cannot
be made at this time. It is recommended that the latenineteenth-century structure at 41BXl189 be considered

situated at an elevation of 1180-1215 ft msl. Prehistoric
and historic components are present. The prehistoric
component is a small lithic scatter over the northern
half of the site. The historic component consists of the
remains of a late-nineteenth-century structure located
on the north end of the site and a group of military

training trenches (Figure 21). The late-nineteenthcentury structure includes a scatter of semidressed
foundation stones and artifacts, which were recently

bulldozed. 'This is in the locality of a house site occupied
by John O. Meusebach, who moved to the vicinity in
1853 from the Comanche Springs area 1.2 km

potentially eligible for listing in the National Register
of Historic Places under Criteria A and B, pending
archival investigations.
Although not in pristine condition, the approximate
depth, configuration, and lateral extent of the trenches
can be delineated, and therefore they meet the minimal
contextual integrity requirements for eligibility defined

downstream. Meusebach and his family lived in this
general location for approximately 14 years before

moving to Fredericksburg after the Civil War (Freeman
1994b:47). It is likely that41BX1189 was occupied after
Meusebach's departure since the artifacts collected date
to the late nineteenth century. The training trenches are
extensive and have a zigzag configuration but are better

by Freeman (1994a: 106) for similar training devices at
Camp Bullis.' It is recommended that the training

trenches at 41BX1189 be considered eligible for listing

preserved than those at site 41BX1163. The trenches at
site 41BXI189 were dug into bedrock, and infilling has

in the National Register of Historic Places. The zigzag
configuration of the trenches represents a unique type
of training device diagnostic of the United States's
military involvement in Europe during World War I and
therefore should be eligible under Criteria A and C.

been minimal. More trenches, similar in configuration,
were observed beyond the western site boundary; these

were not recorded as part of site 41BX1189 because
they occur outside Survey ParcelS and the project area.
However, these outlying trenches are most likely part
of the same training area. Because of natural erosion
and recent bulldozing, much of the site is deflated to
bedrock or is mantled by a thin deposit of sediment or

SUMMARY OF PREHISTORIC
RESOURCES
Of the 34 sites recorded during the survey within

dozer push piles.
Cultural Materials Observed and Collected:

the ca. 2,125 acres at Camp Stanley, 20 have prehistoric
components, rendering an overall prehistoric site density
of2.3 siteslkm2 . This is fairly consistent with the figures

Artifacts associated with the prehistoric component
consist of six pieces of unmodified debitage and one
biface. Historic artifacts observed in surface contexts
associated with the late-nineteenth-century house consist
of band-finished bottle fragments, solarized glass
fragments, plain and molded ironstone ceramics, and
blue transfer-printed white earthenware ceramics.

of2.7 sites/km' (Boyd et al. 1990; Gerstle et a!. 1978)
and 3 sites/km' (Kibler and Gardner 1997) calculated
for Camp Bullis. However, the density of prehistoric
sites in Camp Stanley may not reflect actual prehistoric
land-use patterns or population densities. Eonsiderable

43

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

II

-..

-...

~

--

I"I
II
//
/ /
\\
I\I

-..

/

/

I

\

........... :..--......

-- .....': ---- --.......:.--.....
.....

'\
Late 1800s Structure Area

\ \

II

-- : ..:} \.,:- .:-

~-

/

/
/

-- - -......

/

-- ----.:
......

.

~

/
/

/

/

/)

~.,

LEGEND

=- ::: = Two· Track Road

G
'"V'-

Wire Entanglement

Trench

/

PAJl961BW

Figure 21. Site map, 41 BX 1189.

44

0

25

50

100

meters

0

100

200
feet

400

Chapter 4: Results of the Survey
differences in site densities were noted between the Inner
Cantonment therefore may also reflect the strategic
position between these two water resources. Chert
and Outer Cantonment areas of the camp. For instance,
sources in the form of lag gravels along the upland
within the ca. 977 acres surveyed in the Inner
margins of Cibolo Creek (Kibler and Gardner 1997),
Cantonment, only three sites containing prehistoric
components were recorded, representing a site density
along with the more reliable water source of Cibolo
Creek also may have compelled prehistoric groups to
of only 0.8 siteslkm'. Within the ca. 1,148 acres covered
in the Outer Cantonment, a total of 17 prehistoric site
gravitate toward this area as there are no sources of chert
components were recorded, yielding a much higher
within Camp Stanley.
Of the 20 prehistoric components, 14 (70 percent)
density oD.7 siteslkm'. This difference may be the result
of considerably different land-use practices in the two
consist of open campsites, i.e., sites containing scattered
areas. There has been extensive use ofmuch of the Inner
burned rocks or burned rock features such as hearths or
middens in association with lithic artifacts (Table 2).
Cantonment by tbe military for nearly a century. Many
areas exhibit considerable disturbance associated with
Six (30 percent) components represent lithic scatters
(comprised solely of chipped stone artifacts). Nine (45
use of andlor alterations to the land, construction, and
percent) of the sites can be assigned to one or more
other military activities, as well as extensive erosion
and vegetation regrowth resulting from these practices.
archeological period based on the presence of
Ranching and military land-use pallerns in the Outer
temporally diagnostic artifacts. The other II (55
Cantonment appear to have been less extensive than in
percent) sites can only be assessed as prehistoric. Of
the Inner Cantonment. Although some areas of
the nine temporally assigned sites, six (67 percent) have
disturbance associated with military activities were
a single identified temporal component, while three
(41BX1173, 41BX1180, and 41BX1185) can be
observed, most ofthe Outer Cantonment appears to have
been subjected to less-intrusive ranching and farming
assigned to multiple time periods. Early Archaic
components are represented at three sites (4IBX1173,
activities. The varying levels of disturbance also are
41BX1176, and 4IBXI185), while Middle Archaic
reflected in site artifact densities. While sites in the Outer
Cantonment tend to have high densities of artifacts, two
occupations are represented at only one site
of the three prehistoric sites in the Inner Cantonment
(4IBX1l80). Late Archaic components are the most
have less than 10 artifacts each. Certainly modern landcommon and are represented at six sites (4IBXI169,
use practices have had a detrimental effect on the
41BXll72, 41BX1174, 41BXl180, 4lBX1183, and
prehistoric archeological record of the Inner
4IBX1l85). It has been suggested that prehistoric
Cantonment. However, the magnitude of these impacts
population densities reached their peak during the Late
Archaic (e.g., Prewitt 1985:217; Weir 1976) and these
is unclear, and the observed differences in the
archeological records ofthe Inner
and Outer Canton-ments may to
Table 2. Summary of Prehistoric Resources
some extent also reflect other
Geomorphic Archeological Period
differences between the two
Site
Site Type
Selting
(after Collins 1995)
areas.
The prehistoric site density
41BXII56 open campsite
upland
unknown
4lBXI157 open campsite
upland
unknown
of the Outer Cantonment (3.7
unknown
upland
4lBXI158 open campsite
siteslkm') is much higher than site
4lBXtl69 open campsite
upland
Late Archaic
densities calculated for Camp
4lBXl17t open campsite
unknown
upland
Bullis (cf. Boyd et al. 1990;
upland
4IBXII72 open campsite
Late Archaic
Gerstle et al. 1978; Kibler and
upland
4tBXI173 open campsite
Early Archaic, Late Prehistoric
upland
41BXI174 open campsite
Late Archaic
Gardner 1997). While upland
41BXI175 open campsite
upland
unknown
sellings dominate both the Inner
Early Archaic
41BXI176 lithic scatter
upland
and Outer Cantonments of Camp
4tBXII77 open campsite
upland
Late Prehistoric
Stanley, much of the Outer
unknown
4IBXlt78 lithic scatter
upland
Cantonment (particularly those
Middle Archaic, Late Archaic
4tBXI180 ·open campsite
upland
unknown
4tBXtl81 lithic scatter
upland
areas covered by the current
unknown
4tBXl182 lithic scatter
upland
survey) occur along the upland
Late Archaic
41BXII83 lithic scatter
upland
divide between the Cibolo Creek
unknown
41BXI184 open campsite
upland
and Salado Creek drainage
Early Archaic, Late Archaic
4lBXI185 open campsite
upland
basins. The higher density of
4lBXl187 open campsite
unknown
upland
41BXI189 lithic scatter
unknown
upland
prehistoric sites in the Outer
45

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

Prehistoric components were documented during the

World War II is found in the permanent and
semipermanent structures that the U.S. Army

survey (41BX1173 and 41BXII77).

constructed to house and train its troops.

current data may reflect this pattern. Only two Late

The 18 historic components can be divided into
13 military components and 6 premilitary components
(site 41BXl189 has premilitary and military
components) (Table 3). Evidence of the Historic period
utilization of the Inner Cantonment is heavily biased
toward military activities due to its continued use by

Thirteen of the 18 historic components investigated are related to military use. All of tbese sites predate World War II and are related to activities of early
Camp Stanley (Funston). Of these, only three retain any
of their original structural integrity; the remainder have
been heavily impacted by subsequent military activities at the camp. These three components-4IBXI 163,
41BX1I88, and the trenches at 4IBXIl89-consist of
World War I training devices. Sites 4IBXI 163 and
41BX lI89 were also used in the movie Wings in 1926.

the military for nearly a century. The northern section

The other 10 historic military components represent

SUMMARY OF HISTORIC
RESOURCES

of the Outer Cantonment, while still showing evidence

utilities and infrastructure, facility plans, housing prop-

of military activity, also has civilian farms predating
the military's presence.

erties, service/support properties, and components of

unidentified property types of early Camp Stanley.

The Camp Stanley survey areas are literally
covered with historic military debris, although few of
these locations can truly be considered as sites. The
seemingly endless scatter of 20-mm, .50-caliber, and

Of the six nonmilitary historic components

(4IBXI169, 41BXII70, 4IBXll72, 4lBX1l79,
41 BX1186, and the late-nineteenth-century structure at
41BX1I89), four are farmsteads of known ownership.
Sites 41BXIl70 and 4IBXlI72 were occupied by the
Scharmann family, with 41 BXll72 apparently

Table 3. Summary of Historic Resources
Site

Cantonment

4tBXl t56
41BXl159
41BX1l60
41BX1l61
41BXl162
41BX1l63
41BX1164
41BXl165
41BX1l66
41BX1l67
41BX1l68
41BX1l69

Inner
Outer

41BXI170
41BXII72
4IBXl179
41BXl186
41BXl188
41BXl189

Outer
Outer
Outer
Outer
Outer
Outer

Inner

Inner
Inner
Inner
Inner
Inner
Inner
Inner
Inner

Inner

representing a portion of the original Scharmann tract.
However, the time separation between the occupation
of the two sites was not long enough to result in
noticeable distinctions between site artifact assemblages.

Site Type
20th-century military
20th-century military
20th-century military
20th-century military
20th-century military
20th-century military
20th-century military
20th-century military
20th-century military
20th-century military
20th-century military
possible 20th-century
saloon
20th-century ranch
20th-century ranch
20th-century ranch
20th-century ranch
20th-century military
20th-century military and
19th~century homestead

Site 4IBXlI 79 was owned by Andrew Blank and later
was used by the military as a station for wardens who
patrolled the perimeter of the camp. The ranch at
41BX1l86 belonged to Louis H. Willke. At site
41BXIl89, the remains of a late-nineteenth-century
structure are present and may have belonged to John O.
Meusebach. All of these sites have been salvaged or
razed by the military. The remaining site, 41BXl169,
is not clearly identified by the artifacts on the ground as
the early-twentieth-century saloon depicted on the 1917
map of Camp Stanley. The presence of Depression glass
and Fiestaware ceramics does not support an early 1900s
occupation. A later structure present on the lower slopes

of the site and appearing on the 1925 map of Camp
Stanley may be represented by the foundation remains
observed in this area of the site. The actual function of
this structure is not known, nor is it evident from the
structural remains observed.
Several other historic features were encountered

.30-06-caliber cartridge cases; fragments of artillery
shells (37, 75, and 105 mm); and occasional live 20pound general-purpose aerial bombs, all left over from

throughout the Inner Cantonment. These "isolated

training and disposal activities, are associated with the

features" were not documented as sites because of their
overlapping nature with other archeological sites. These
features are part of one system or complex. a gravity-

military history of Camp Stanley. While it is likely that
much of this material predates World War II, its
disturbed and overlapping nalure makes it impractical
to consider such resources as sites. More~substantial

fed sewer system that served Camp Stanley in the early

evidence ofthe military occupation from 1906 through

of this system were brick-and-mortar bell-shaped risers

twentieth century. The most often encountered features

46

II
I

Chapter 4: Results of the Survey
aboul 0.5 m in diameter across the top with a flared
base ca. 1.5 m in diameter at ground surface. Vitrified
clay pipes or tiles entered the risers from varying heights
and directions. This system most likely dates to ca.
1916- I917 and presumably ties into the sewer treatment
plant (site 41BXIOI4) located south of Camp Stanley
in the Salado Creek valley of Camp Bullis. This site,
which was constructed in 1917, has an IS-inch sewer
main entering it from the direction of Camp Stanley

(Kibler and Gardner 1997). Attempts were made by
Camp Stanley Facilities Engineer Tom Tijerina to
located the design plans of this early sewer system at
Camp Stanley and Fort Sam Houston, but this endeavor
was unsuccessful. A plan of this system as it currently
exists in the archeological record is presented in Figure
22. The locations ofthe risers were plotted by lhe survey
crew and are depicted along with the location of site
41BXI014, the sewer treatment facility.

47

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

'y"; ~

.. ""':" '\-,

~'--_""":-'\'
,

f)

R

"""

Inner Cantonment

o
....

o

1/4

.-_._,'-

k,

1JtXI

\~

_.~.

1/2
Miles

,',

--

1/2

Kilometers

•

>

1/4

,,

.ro
·ro

JJ50

'Z:..
)1

--~ .',

/ ' ' - -_ _.L- _ _ -

.-J4Q!~ ~

'.

\ ..

_

1)300

l

t
I
'1
I

(

I
I
LEGEND

---=--

Brick Sewer Riser

I
I
I

I
41BX1014

-12501

Camp Bullis Boundary

:' flO£)

PAl/96/B W

Figure 22. The archeological remains of the early Camp Stanley sewer system.

48

I
,.I
...
\

ASSESSMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

5
prehistoric components in this report are evaluated.
Potentially, all four criteria may apply to historical
resources, but the majority of the historic sites or
components reported here lack standing structures or
association with historically important persons or events
and are thus evaluated only in terms of Criterion D.
The prehistoric and historic components recorded
during the survey are discussed separately below.

The archeological survey conducted at Camp
Stanley Storage Activity consisted of a pedestrian survey
of ca. 2,125 acres (860 hectares) in the Inner and Outer
Cantonments. The survey documented 34 archeological
sites, 20 with prehistoric components and 18 with
historic components. The significance of the
components is evaluated based on criteria provided by
the National Park Service, National Register Division,
U.S. Department of the Interior, as set forth below. In
addition, specific requirements for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places defined by Freeman (1994a)
for various military features and structures at
neighboring Camp Bullis were consulted in order to
assess similar property types at Camp Stanley.
Cultural resources are eligible for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places, and thus worthy
of avoidance, protection, or mitigation through data
recovery, if they are significant in American history,
architecture, engineering, or culture. Significant
properties are those that possess integrity of location,
design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and
association, and

PREHISTORIC COMPONENTS
Twenty prehistoric components were documented
during the survey. These components are open
campsites and lithic scatters that represent Early Archaic
through Late Prehistoric occupations based on the
temporally diagnostic artifacts. All of the prehistoric
sites are located in upland settings.
Many of the sites have limited research potential
due to deflated surfaces, a paucity of artifacts, a mix of
various temporal components, and human-induced
disturbances (e.g., brush clearing, road maintenance).
These charact~ristics are common to sites located in
upland settings, where nonaggrading environments
prevail. Table 4 lists the prehistoric components and
recommendations concerning their eligibility for listing
in the National Register of Historic Places. Only one
(site 41BX1180) of the 20 prehistoric components is
recommended as potentially eligible for listing in the
National Register, pending further test excavations.
Although portions of site 41BXI180 have
witnessed deflation and erosion, the burned rock midden
has a demonstrated degree of integrity and intact
stratigraphy based on the depth of the cultural deposits
and recovery from shovel tests. Such characteristics (i.e.,
integrity and intact stratigraphy) are critical for
archeological research, and they are lacking for much of
the archeological record at Camp Stanley and the
surrounding area. The contextual integrity of a site and
the ability to isolate cultural or temporal components for
analysis are essential for a basic understanding of cultural
chronology, technology and material culture, and culture
process, including subsistence strategies, settlement

A. that are associated with events that have
made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or
B. that are associated with the lives of
persons significant in our past; or
C. that embody the distinctive characteristics
of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent the works
of a master, or that possess high artistic
values, or that represent a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components
may lack individual distinction; or
D. that have yielded or may be likely to yield
infonnation important in prehistory or
history [National Park Service 1982: I].
Criterion D applies to prehistoric archeological
resources, and thus it is against this criterion that the
49

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

HISTORIC COMPONENTS

Table 4. Prehistoric Components and Recommended
National Register of Historic Places Eligibility Status
Site No.

NRHP Eligibility

4lBXl156
4lBXl157
4lBXl158
4lBXI169
4lBXI171
4IBXII72
4lBXl173
41BXl174
41BXI175
41BXI176
4lBXl177
41BXl178
41BXI180
41BX1l81
4lBXl182
41BXl183
4IBXll84
4lBXl185
41BXI187
41BXl189

Not eligible

Eighteen historic components were documented
during the survey. Fourteen date to the early twentieth
century or represent military use of Camp Stanley and
include utilities and infrastructure, housing facilities,
service/support facilities, and training devices properly
types. The remaining four components represent tumof-the-century to early-twentieth-century farming and
ranching sites. Table 5 lists the historic components and
recommendations concerning their eligibility for listing
in the National Register of Historic Places. Twelve of
the components have limited research potential due to
disturbances, a lack of structural or architectural
inlegrity, the fact that the data they might yield are
repetitive or inferior to published accounts of military
activities (e.g., Freeman 1994a; Manguso 1990) and
military records, and/or no association with significant
figures or historical events; therefore, these components
do not meet Criteria A, B, C. or D.

Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible

Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible

Not eligible
Not eligible

Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible -

Potentially eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible

Table 5. Historic Components and Recoinmended
National Register of Historic Places Eligibility Status

patterns, population dynamics, and intraregionaI and
extraregional interaction among prehistoric groups
(Criterion D). Whether site 41BX1180 can or will be

able to address one or all of the above research domains
and provide significant regional prehistoric data has
yet to be determined. Additional test excavations will
need to be conducted to ascertain this.
If test excavations reveal that site 41 BXl180 is
significant, then it presents a rare opportunity to define
and understand upland sile activities and the greater
utilization of upland environments throughout the
region during the Middle and Late Archaic periods.
The acquisition of data on such sites is of particular
interest due to the documented fluctuation of climatic
conditions throughout the late Holocene (e.g., Toomey
et a!' 1993). An understanding of upland site activities
in relation to environmental conditions may lead to a
better overall view of adaptive strategies and changes
in subsistence and settlement patterns.
The significance of site 41BX1I80 stems from
the contextual integrity of the site's burned rock
midden. Based on this integrity, the potential ability
of this site to add to the regional archeological or
prehistoric data base (Criterion D) is high. It is
recommended that further testing of the site be
conducted to detennine its eligibility for listing in
lhe National Register of Historic Places or that
measures be taken to protect the site from vandalism,
destruction, and erosion.

Site No.

NRHP Eligibility

4lBXIl56
4lBXl159
41BX1160
4lBXl161
41BXl162
4lBXl163
4IBXII64
41BXl165
4IBXl166
41BXl167
4lBXl168
4lBXl169
4lBXl170
4IBXII72
41BXI179
4lBXl186
4lBXl188
4lBXl189

Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible

Potentially eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible
Not eligible

Not eligible
Not eligible
Potentially eligible

Potentially eligible
Potentially eligible
Not eligible

Potentially eligible

Potentially eligible

However, it is recommended that the historic
components at siles 4IBXl163, 41BX1170, 41BXIl72,
41BX1179, 4IBX1188, and 41BXI189 (both trenches
and hite-nineteenth-century structure) be considered
potentially eligible or eligible for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places. Four of the components
(4IBX1l70, 41BXII72, 41BXl179, and 41BXI189)
consist of late-nineteenth-century and early-twentiethcentury ranch complexes and house structures. As
archeological and architectural resources, these

50

Chapter 5: Assessrnents and Recommendations

components have limited potential due to disturbances
and demolition of associated structures. However, the
four components have yet to be fully assessed and may,

trench style is representative of the United States's military involvement during World War I; therefore, these

components should be eligible for listing under Crite-

through archival investigations, yield significant data

rion C. It is not known for sure, but it is unlikely that
similar trenches are still in existence at other World War
I military training bases in the United States.

pertaining to Criteria A and B. Therefore, the four

components should be judged as potentially eligible

Although the trenches at 41BXI163 and
41BXI189 are not in pristine condition, their

for listing in the National Register of Historic Places
pending archival investigations to fully assess their
significance.
The other three components are World War I training devices. Numerous personnel took part in training
activities at Camp Stanley in preparation for World War
I, utilizing such training devices as the trenches at sites

approximate depth, configuration, and lateral extent can
be ascertained, and therefore they meet the minimal
contextual integrity requirements for eligibility defined

by Freeman (1994a: 106) for training devices. The old
target range at 41 BX 1188 is also somewhat disturbed,

41BX1163 and 41BX1l89 and the old target range at
site 41BX1188. This association should render these

but keys elements of the range are intact. This includes

the target abutment, target guide post, and designated
shooting positions (i.e., the parallel stone alignments).

sites eligible for listing under Criterion A. The combat

training trenches at sites 41BX1l63 and 41BX1l89
exhibit the unique "zigzag" configuration adopted by
the u.s. military from the French (Mercur 1914). This

These factors meet the structural integrity requirements

for listing defined by Freeman (1994a: 106) for similar
training devices in Camp Bullis.

51

l

REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, James T.
1994
Natural Environment. In Archeological Invest;·
galions OIl 57J Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood,
Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas, edited by W.
Nicholas Trierweiler, pp. 7-38. Research Report
No. 31, Archeological Resource Management
Series, United States Army Fort Hood. Mariah
Associates, Inc., Austin.

1980

Black, Stephen L.
1989
Central Texas Plateau Prairie. Chapter 3 in From
the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptations
in Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by
Thomas R. Hester, Stephen L. Black, D. Gentry
Steele, Ben W. Olive, Anne A, Fox, Karl J.
Reinhard, and Leland C. Bement, pp. 17-38.
Research Series 33. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.

Abbott, James T.• and G. Lain Ellis
1994
Programmatic Recommendations. In Archeologi.

cal Investigations on 571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort
Hood, Bell and C01yell Counties, Texas, edited
by W. Nicholas Trierweiler, pp. 361-370. Research Report No. 31, Archeological Resource
Management Series. United States Army Fort
Hood. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Black, Stephen L., Linda W. Ellis, Darrell G. Creel, and
Glenn T. Goode
1996
Hot Rock Cooking on the Greater Edward~'
Plateau: Four Bumed Rock Midden Sites in West
Central Texas. Studies in Archeology, draft report.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Ahler, Stanley A., and Jubeann Vannest
1985
Temporal Change in Knife River Flint Reduction
Strategies. In Lithic Resource Procurement:
Proceedings from the Second Conference on
Prehistoric Chert Exploitation, edited by Susan
C. Vehik, pp. 183-198. Center for Archaeological
Investigations Occasional Paper No.4. Southern
Illinois University at Carbondale.

Black, Stephen L., and A. Joachim McGraw
1985
The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change
anti Continuity within the Upper Salado Creek
Watershed, SOllth-Central Texas. Archeological
Survey Report No. 100. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Arbingast, Stanley A., Lorrin G. Kennamer, Robert H. Ryan,
Alice La, David L. Karney, Charles P. Ziatkovich,
Michael E. Bonine, and Roberta G. Steele
1973
Atlas ofTexas. Bureau of Business Research, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces ofTexas. The Texas Joumal
of Science 2(1):93-117.

Binford, Lewis R.
1971
Mortuary Practices: Their Study and Their
Potential. In Approaches to the Social
Dimensions of Mortuary Practices, edited by
James A. Brown, pp. 6-29. Memoirs of the
Society for American Archaeology 25.

1978

Nunamiut Ethlloarchaeology. Academic Press,
New York.

1979

Organization and Formation Processes: Looking
at Curated Technologies. Journal of Anthropo.
logical Research 35(3):255-273.

Willow Smoke and Dog's Tails: Hunter-Gatherer
Settlement Systems and Archaeological Site
Formation. American Antiquity 45(1 ):4-20.

Bonnell, George W.
1840
Topographic Description of Texas, to which Is
Added an Account of the Indian Tribes. Clark,
Wing, and Brown, Austin.
Boyd, Douglas K., I. Waynne Cox, and Herbert G. Uecker
1990
Archeological and HislOricallnvestigatiolls at
Camp Bullis, Bexar and Comal Counties, Texas:
The 1989 Season. Reports of Investigations No.
75. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Brown, T. E., N. B. Waechter, P. R. Rose, and V. E. Barnes
1974
Geologic Atlas of Texas: San Antonio Sheet.

53

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

Collins, Michael 8., Thomas R. Hester, and Pamela J.
Headrick
1992
Engraved Cobbles from the Gault Site, Central
Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 9:34.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The University at
Texas at Austin.
Butzer, Karl W.

1982

Archeology as Human Ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Creel, Darrell G.

Campbell, T. N.
1988
Indians of Southern Texas alld Northeastern
Mexico: Selected Writings of Thomas Nolan

1986

A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in
West Central Texas. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Arizona, Tucson.

Campbell. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Cunningham, Jo
1982
The Collector's Encyclopedia ofAmerican Dinnenvare. Collector Books, Paducah, Kentucky.

Campbell, T. N., and T. 1. Campbell
1981
Historic Indian Groups of the Choke Canyon

Reservoir and Surrounding Area, Southern Texas.
Choke Canyon Series 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San

DeBolt, Gerald
1994
DeBolt's Dictionary ofAmerican Pot/ery Marks.
Collector Books, Paducah, Kentucky.

Antonio.
Chaffers, William
1931
Marks and Monograms all European and Oriental POllery and Porcelain. Edited by Frederick
Litchfield, 14th rev. ed. Borden Publishing Company, Los Angeles.

DeNiro, Michael J.
1987
Stable Isotopy and Archaeology. American
Scientist 75:182-191.
Ellis, G. Lain, and Glenn A. Goodfriend
1994
Chronometric and Site-Formation Studies Using
Land Snail Shells: Preliminary Results. In

Collcutt, S. N.
1979
The Analysis of Quaternary Cave Sediments.
World Archaeology 10(3):290-301.

Archeological Investigations on 571 Prehistoric
Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell Counties,
Texas, edited by W. Nicholas Trierweiler, pp. 183201. Research Report No. 31, Archeological

Collins, E. W.
1994
Geologic Map of the Camp Bullis 7.5' Quadrangle, Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Resource Management Series. United States
Army Fort Hood. MariahAssociates,lnc.,Austin.
Ellis, Linda Wootan, G. Lain Ellis, and Charles D. Frederick
1995
Implications of Environmental Diversity in the
Cenfral Texas Archeological Region. Bulletin of

Collins, Michael B.
1990
The Archaeological Sequence of Kincaid
Rockshelter, Uvalde County, Texas. Transactions ofthe Twenty-ftfth Regional Archeological
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and
Western Texas, pp. 25-34.

1994

,1Ie Texas Archeology Society 66:401-426.
Fox, Anne A.
1989
Historic Anglo-European Exploration and
Colonization. Chapter 7 in From the Gulf to the

Rio Grande: Human Adaptation ill Central,
South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by Thomas R.
Hester, Stephen L. Black, D. Gentry Steele, Ben
W. Olive, Anne A. Fox, Karl J. Reinhard, and
Leland C. Bement, pp. 85-92. Research Series

Chronometric Investigations. In Archaic and

Late Prehistoric Human. Ecology in the Middle
Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by
Robert A. Ricklis and Michael B. Collins, pp.

499-505. Studies in Archeology 19. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

1995

33. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Fox, Daniel E.
1979
The Lithic Artifacts of indians at the Spanish
Colonial Missions, San An(onio, Texas. Special
Report No.8. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University ofTexas at San Antonio.

Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:361-400.
Collins, Michael 8., Bruce Ellis, and Cathy Dodt·Ellis
1990
Excavation.s at the Camp Pearl Wheat Site

Frederick, Charles D., Michael D. Glascock, Hector Neff,
and Christopher M. Stevenson

(4i KR243): An Early Archaic Campsite on Town
Creek, Kerr County, Texas. Studies in

1994

Archeology 6. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

54

Evaluation of Chert Patination as a Dating
Technique: A Case Study ftvm Fort Hood, Texas.

References Cited

Research Report No. 32, Archeological Resource
Management Series. United States Army Fort
Hood. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Hines; Margaret Howard
1993
PrehisUJric Research Contextfor Camp Bullis and
Fort Sam Houston, Bexar and Comal Counties,
Texas. Technical Reports No. 16. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Freeman, Martha Doty
Camp Bullis: A Militmy Training Facility in the
1994a
Southern Department and Eighth Corps Area,
1906-1946. KomatsuJRangel, Inc., Fort Worth.
1994b

Hines, Margaret Howard, Steve A. Tomka, and Karl W. Kibler
1994
Data Recovery Excavations at the Wind Canyon
Site, 41HZl19, Hudspeth County, Texas. Reports
of Investigations No. 99. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.

Agriculture in Texas: Ranching and Stock
Farming on the Eastern Edwards Plateau, 1845~
1941. KomatsulRangel, Inc., Fort Worth.

Huebner, Jeffery A.
1991
Late Prehistoric Bison Populations in Central and
South Texas. Plains Anthropologist 36(137):343358.

Gerstle, Andrea, Thomas C. Kelley, and Cristi Assad
1978
The Fort Sam Houston Project: An
Archaeological and Historical Assessment.
Archaeological Survey Report 40. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.

Hughes, Jack
1949
Investigations in Western South Dakota and
Northeastern Wyoming. American Antiquity

Givens, R. Dale
1968
A Preliminary Report on Excavations at
Hitzfelder Cave. Bulletin ofthe Texas Archeological Sociery 38:47-56.

14:266-277.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect
Site in Hill County, Texas. Archaeology Series
No.5. Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Godden, Geoffrey A.
1964
Encyclopaedia of British Pottery and Porcelain
Marks. Herbert Jenkins, Ltd., London.

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1964
The Devil's Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at
Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas.
Archeology Series No.6. Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Goode, Glenn T.
1991
Late Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in Central
Texas. In The Burned Rock Middens ofTexas: An
Archeological Symposium, edited by Thomas R.
Hester, pp. 71-93. Studies in Archeology ]3.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Gose, Wulf
1994
Archeomagnetism. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek
Valley, Hays County, Texas, -by Robert A. Ricklis
and Michael B. Collins, pp. 507-537. Studies in
Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hester, Thomas R.
1989
Historic Native American Populations. Chapter
6 in From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in Central, South, and Lower Pecos,
Texas, by Thomas R. Hester, Stephen L. Black,
D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, Anne A. Fox,
Karl J. Reinhard, and Leland C. Bement, pp. 7784. Research Series 33. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.

1991

Early Archaic Life at the SleeperArchaeological
Site, 41 BC65, of the Texas Hill Counf)~ Blanco
Cou,nty, Texas. Publications in Archaeology
Report 39. Texas Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, Highway Design Division,
Austin.

1995

Past Cultures and Climates at Jonas Terrace,
41ME29, Medina County, Texas. Office of the
State Archeologist Report 40. Texas Department
of Transportation and Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.

Johnson, LeRoy, and Glenn T. Goode
1994
A New Try at Dating and Characterizing
Holocene Climates, as Well as Archeological
Periods, on the Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 65: 1-51.
Jones, Olive, and Catherine Sullivan
The Parks Canada Glass Glossary for the De] 989
scription of Containers, Tableware, Flat Glass,
and Closures. Studies in Archaeology, Architecture, and History. National Historic Parks and
Sites, Canadian Park Service, Ottawa, Ontario.

Highley, Lynn, Carol Graves, Carol Land, and George Judson
1978
Archaeological Investigations at Scorpion Cave
(4lME7), Medina County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 49: 139-194.

55

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity

Katz, Paul R.
1987
Archaeological Mitigation at 41BX300, Salado
Creek Watershed. South-Central Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report 130. Center for

New Haven.
Majewski, Teresita, and Michael O'Brien
1987
The Use and Misuse of 19th Century English and
American Ceramics in Archaeological Analysis.
In Advances in Archeological Method and Theory,
vol. I I, edited by M. B. Schiffer, pp. 97-209.
Academic Press, San Diego.

Archaeological Research, The University ofTexas

at San Antonio.

Kelley, Charles J.
1947a
The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Po·
sitian of the Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity 13:97-109.
1947b

Manguso, John M.
1990
Camp Bullis: Admirably Suited to All Purposes
of Military Training. A History of the Leon
Springs Military Reservation, 1890-1990. Fort
Sam Houston Museum, San Antonio, Texas.

The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of
the Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci.
Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society 18:115-128.

Masson, Marilyn A., and Michael B. Collins
1995
The Wilson-Leonard Site (41WM235). Culhlral
Resource Management News and Views 7(1):610. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Kelly, Robert L.
1983
Hunter·Gatherer Mobility Strategies. Joumal of
Anthropological Research 39(3):277-305.

McGraw, A Joachim
1991
Spanish Mission Ranchos along the Camino Pila
and Camino de en Medio (or Lower Presidio
Road). In A Texas Legacy: The Old San Antonio
Road and the Caminos Reales, A Tricentennial
History, 1691-1991, edited by A. Joachim
McGraw, John W. Clark, Jr., and Elizabeth A.
Robbins, pp. 143-151. Texas Slate Department
of Highways and Public Transportation, Highway
Design Division, Austin.

Kibler, Karl W., and Karen M. Gardner
1995
Archeological Survey and National Register
Testing at 41BX377, Camp Bullis Military
Reservation, Bexar and Camal CoulI1ies, Texas.
Reports of Investigations No. 101. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Kleinbach, Karl, Gemma Mehalchick, James T. Abbott, and
J. Michael Quigg
1995
Other Analyses. Chapter 9 in NRHP Significance
Testing of 57 Prehistoric Archeological Sites 011
Fort Hood, Texas, Volume Il, edited by James T.
Abbott and W. Nicholas Trierweiler, pp. 765-842.
Research Report No. 34, Archeological Resource
Management Series. United States Army Fort
Hood. Mariah Associates, Inc., AUSlin.

McGraw, A. Joachim, and Fred Valdez, Jr.
1978
41BX68: A Prehistoric Quarry.Workshop in
Northern Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report No. 56. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San
An~onio.

Lehner, Lois
1988
Lehner's Encyclopedia ofU.S. Marks on Pottery,
Porcelain & Clay. Collector Books. Schroeder
Publishing Co., Inc., Paducah, Kentucky.

McGuinn, William E, and Bruce S. Bazeloo
1992
American Military Button Makers and Dealers:
Their Backmarks & Dates. REFTypeselling and
Publishing, Manassas, Virginia.

Lewis, Kenneth
1993
Doughboy 10 G.l.: US Army Clothing &
Eqllipmem 1900-1945. Notrnan D. Landing Co.,
West Midlands, England.

McKeariD, George S., and Helen McKearin
1941
American Glass. Crown Publishers, New York.
McKinney, Wilson W.
1981
Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and
Southwestern Texas: The Problem of the
Paleoindian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeology Society 52:91-120.

Lukowski, P.
1988
Archaeological Investigations at 41BX1, Bexar
County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report
135. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Mercur,James
1914
Attack ofFortified Places: Including Siege- Works,
Mining, ami Demolitions. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., New York.

Lundelius, E. L.
1967
Late-Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal Hislory of
Cenlral Texas. In Pleistocene ExtinctiotJS: The
Search for the Cause, edited by P. S. Martin and
H. E. Wright, pp. 287-319. Ynle University Press,

Miller, E. 0., and Edward B. Jelks
1952
Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reser56

•

References Cited
voir, Coryell County, Texas. Bulletin ofthe Texas
Archeological Society 23: 168-217.

1981

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Munsey, Cecil
1970
The Illustrated Guide to Collecting Bottles.
Hawthorn Books, Inc., New York.

1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central
Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 54:201-238 .

National Park Service
1982
How to Apply the National Register Criteria for
Evaluation. U.S. Department oflnterior, National
Park Service, National Register Division,
Washington, D.C.

Quigg, J. Michael
1988
Cultural Resources Reconnaissance in Secondary
Impact Areas along Salado Creek at Brooke Anny
Medical Center, Fort Sam Houston and Camp
Bullis, Bexar County, Texas. Technical Reports
No.5. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Natural Fibers Infonnation Center
1987
The Climates of Texas Counties. Natural Fibers
Infonnation Center, The University of Texas at
Austin, in cooperation with Office of the State
Climatologist, Texas A&M University. Bureau of
Business Research, Graduate Sch~ol of Business,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Raab, L. M., and A C. Goodyear
1984
A Review of Middle-range Theory in
Archaeology. American Antiquity 49:255-268.
Ricklis, Robert A
1994
Occupations in the Project Area during the Austin
Interval, or Early Part of the Late Prehistoric
Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human
Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays
County, Texas, by RobertA Ricklis and Michael
B. Collins, pp. 191-205. Studies in Archeology
19. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Newcomb, W. W" Jr.
1961
The Indians ofTexas. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Patton, Peter R, and Victor R Baker
1977
Geomorphic Response of Central Texas Stream
Channels to Catastrophic Rainfall and Runoff.
In Geomorphology of Arid Regions, edited by
D. O. Doehring, pp. 184-217. SUNY-Binghamton.

Ricklis, RobertA, and Michael B. Collins
1994
Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in
the Middle Onion Creek Valle;~ Hays County,
Texas. Studies in Archeology 19. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Pearsall, Deborah M.
1989
Paleoethnobotany: A Handbook of Procedures.
Academic Press, New York.

Roemer, F.
1935
Texqs, with Particular Reference to German
Immigration and the Physical Appearance ofthe
County. Originally published in Gennany in 1849;
translated by Oswald Mueller. Standard Printing
Co., San Antonio.

Peterson, Arthur G.
1968
400 Trademarks on Glass, with Alphabetical
Index. lr-W Book Sales, Gas City, Indiana.
Petsch, Lieutenant Colonel Alfred
1942
Letter dated August 18, 1942, regarding
disposition of vacant houses and rearrangement
of Range Warden residences to Commanding
Officer, Fort Sam Houston, Texas. Fort Sam
Houston Installation Planning Branch, Real
Property Title/Historical Files. Camp Bullis:
Leon Springs Military Reservation Real Estate.

Rogers, Wallace, P. E. Gragg, Fred Reutzel, Alfred W. Rods,
and E. J. Altgelt
1940
Appraisals of property adjoining and adjacent to
Camp Stanley and Camp Bullis, November 22,
1940. Fort Sam Houston Installation Planning
Branch, Real Property Title/Historical Files.
Camp Bullis: Leon Springs Military Reservation
Real Estate.

Polanyi, Karl
1957
The Economy as Institute Process. In Trade and
Market in the Early Empires, edited by Karl
Polanyi, Conrad M. Arensburg, and Harry, W.
Pearson, pp. 243-270. The Free Press, Glencoe,
Illinois.

Rose, Peter R. (editor)
1979
Stratigraphy of the Edwards Group and
Equivalents, Eastem Edwards Plateau, Texas.
Guidebook for the annual meeting of the Gulf
Coast Association of Geological Societies and the
Society of Economic Paleontologists and
Mineralogists. Published by the South Texas
Geological Society, San Antonio.

Prewitt, Elton R.
1976
The Rogers Spring Site: 1974 Investigation. Ms.
of Research Report 54 on file, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

57

Archeological Survey at Camp Stanley Storage Activity
Schiffer. Michael B.
1972
Archaeological Context and Systemic Context.
American Alltiquity 37: 156-165.

1976

•

Investigations, Southern Illinois University at
Carbondale.
Taylor, F. B., R. B. Hailey, and D. L. Richmond
1966
Soil Survey ofBexar Count)~ Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
in cooperation with the Texas Agriculture Experimental Station.

BehavioralArcheology. Academic Press, New York.

Schortman, Edward M., and Patricia A. Urban
1987
Modeling Interregional Interaction in Prehistory.
In Advances in Archeological Metlwd and Theory,
vol. II, edited by Michael B. Schiffer, pp. 35-95.
Academic Pres, New York.

Toomey, Rickard S., III, Michael D. Blum, and
Salvatore Valastro, Jr.
1993 .
Late Quaternary Climates and Environments of
the Edwards Plateau, Texas. Global and
Planetary Change 7:299-320.

Shafer, Harry J.
1963
Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in Bell County. Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 34:57-81.
1993

Toulouse, Julian H.
1971
Bottle Makers and Their Marks. Thomas Nelson,
Inc., New York.

Research Potential of Prehistoric Quarry Sites.
In Archaeological Site Testing and Evaluation on
the Henson Mountain Helicopter Range AWSS
Project Area. Fort Hood. Texas, edited by David
L. Carlsoo, pp. 45--59. Research Repon No. 26,
Archeological Resource Management Series.
United States Anny Fort Hood.

Thnnell, Curtis, and Enrique Madrid
Making and Taking Sotol in Chihuahua and
1990
Texas. In Papers from the Third Symposium on
the Resollrr::es o/the Chihuahuan Desert Region,
edited by A. Michael Powell, Robert R.
HoUander, Jon C. Barlow, W. Bruce McGillivray,
and David J. Schmidly, pp. 145-162. Chihuahuan
Desert Research Institute, SuI Ross Stale
University, Alpine, Texas.

Shott, Michael J.
1986
Technological Organization and Settlement
Mobility: An Ethnographic Examination. Journal
ofAnthropological Research 42(1):15-51.

Van der Merwe, Nikolaas 1.
1982
Carbon Isotopes, Photosynthesis, and Archaeology. American Scientist 70:596--606.

Sorrow, William M.
1969
Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy
Site: A Burnt Rock Midden in Williamson
County, Texas. Papers o/the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project 18:1-62.

Waters, Michael R.
1992
Principles o/Geoarchaeology: A North American
Perspective. The Uni"versity of Arizona Press,
Tuc~on.

Steinbomer, Robert
1982
Brickmaking in Texas. Ms. on file, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

Weir, F. A.
The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D.
1976
dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
Washington State University, Pullman.

Story, Dee Ann
1985
Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the
West Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric Food
Production in North America, edited by R. 1.
Ford, pp. 19-56. Anthropological Papers 75.
Museum of Anthropology, University of
Michigan, Ano Arbor.

Willey, Gordon R.
1953
Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the Vim Valley,
Peru. Bureau of American Ethnology Bullelin
155. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edwards B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Societ)' 25.

Willey, Gordon R., and Philip Phillips
1958
Method and Theory ill American Archaeology.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Suydam, Charles R.
1960
The American Cartridge: An Illustrated Sllldy of
the Rimfire Cartridge in the United Stares. G.
Robert Lawrence, Santa Ana, California.

Wilson, Ernest W.
1930
Burned Rock Mounds of Southwest Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 2:59-63.

Taylor, Walter W.
1983
A Study 0/Archeology. CenLer for Archaeological

Young, Anthony
1972
Slopes. Longman, Inc., New York.

58

References Cited

MAPS CONSULTED

1917

1925

U.S. Military Reservation, Leon Springs, Texas.
Original 1908 map, field revised and redrawn in
1917. On file, Fort Sam Houston Museum, San

U.S. Military Reservation, Leon Springs, Texas.

Corps of Engineers. U.S. Army. On file, Fort Sam
Houston Museum, San Antonio.

Antonio.

59

