A PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT OF THE CULTURAL RESOURCES IN THE
BRAZOS NATURAL SALT POLLUTION CONTROL PROJECT,
KENT, KING AND STONEWALL COUNTIES, TEXAS

by

I\~\ ~\ \ \ \ ~\~ll~\\UI\II
101723

J. Peter Thurmond
Martha Doty Freeman
and
Susan L. Andrews

with contributions by
Vance T. Holliday
Margaret A. Howard
Ray D. Kenmotsu
Elton R. Prewitt
Leroy E. Werchan

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:

Elton R. Prewitt

REPORTS OF INVESTIGATIONS, NUMBER 18

Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Consulting Archeologists
Austin, Texas -

November 1981

Figure 9

BRAZOS NATURAL SALT POLLUTION PROJECT
DAM SITE

10

KNOWN ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES 8

DICKENS

LOCALITIES

co.+· · - · - · - · - ·
KING CO,

-·-·-·
KENT CO.

STONEWALL CO.

11'

·· ......_

\

I

,,.l_

.··'-·.·

1:1
'-;,,,.-.,

/

<1

i

,1"

'i

/

(

Road

/

·.\

\

.··-··;--

/

_,·-:/
!

/'

'r"
,.J
70
Road

,,,.,-··

/

/
·{

/r

Rood

j

I

LEGEND
-

·-

County Line

D

Survey Unit

MN

~

Reservoir Outline

_;_,,

Pipeline

.,

CJ
NOTE:

Archeological

4

0
kilometers

4

0

Site

Locality

miles

AH sites and localities should be

prefaced by 41

P8A//B!/SHP

Adapted

From:

USGS,

Jayton,

Pursley House

a

Seven Diamond L Canyon, Texas,

7.5' Sheets,

1958

-..........................................

APPENDIX I: PREHISTORIC SITE DESCRIPTIONS

the terrace tread prior to the advent of the farm complex and post-dates
the deposition of the terrace fill.
The cultural material associated
with the prehistoric component is certainly too severely mixed and displaced to offer a suitable subject for controlled surface collection.
Finally, the single bone fragment found in an erosional cut along the
northern margin of the site derives from a gravel bed and appears to
have been stream rolled.
In short, the single identifiable prehistoric
component has been severely disturbed, and there is no evidence of
buried, intact cultural deposits within the terrace.
The prehistoric
resource at 41KT12 is not considered eligible for nomination to the
National Register of Historic Places, and the same assessment of its
historic component is made in Part 2 of this report. However, as in the
case of 41KT11, collection of the lithic materials associated with the
prehistoric component should be considered. The specimens would provide
a useful data base for the study of aboriginal selectivity in choosing
raw materials for use in tool manufacture and as hearthstones or boiling
stones. Given the disturbed context of the materials, their collection
need not be controlled.
Recommendations:
Uncontrolled surface collection
specimens associated with the prehistoric component.

of

the

li thic

41KT13 (Dam Site 10, Survey Unit B-17)
USGS Quadrangle:
Elevation:
Dimensions:

7.5' Jayton 1958

1815 feet/553 meters
5 meters N-S by 25 meters E-W

Location:
In the middle reaches of the Dam Site 10 basin, at the
lower end of Short Croton Creek. The site is 0.85 kilometer west of the
confluence of Short Croton and Croton creeks and 2.5 kilometers southwest of the outfall of Coker Tank.
Description:
Diffuse scatter of chipped stone debitage and heatfractured rocks.
All of the observed material is local quartzite.
A
small concentration of heat-fractured rocks, roughly 50 centimeters in
diameter, was noted at the southwestern extremity of the site; possibly
this represents a disturbed hearth. Site area is relatively small.
Physiography: Valley margin slope overlooking an intermittent tributary draw, approximately 7 meters above the floor.
Lithology:

Poorly consolidated sandstone, Whitehorse Group.

Soil:
Breaks-Yahola soils mapping unit.
Soil of the immediate
site area is a fine sandy loam, classifiable as a Lithic Torriorthent.
Vegetation: Sparse cover of mesquite, catclaw, prickly pear, yucca
and short grasses.

98

KENT COUNTY SITES

Condition:
sheet erosion.

Overgrazing and animal traffic have engendered severe

Assessment:
Surface indications suggest that the deposits are entirely deflated and have suffered moderate to severe lateral displacement.
Only a single disturbed feature was observed, and it is highly
unlikely that any additional cultural remains are present. The information yield potential of the site is low, and further investigations are
not likely to produce additional significant data.
Site 41KT13 is not
considered eligible for nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places.
Recommendations:
Further work is
productive at this time.

felt

not

to be

scientifically

41KT14 (Dam Site 10, Survey Unit B-17)
USGS Quadrangle:
Elevation:
Dimensions:

7.5' Jayton 1958

1815 feet/553 meters
6 meters NW-SE by 40 meters SW-NE

Location:
In the middle reaches of the Dam Site 10 basin, at the
lower end of Short Croton Creek. The site is 2 kilometers west of the
confluence of Short Croton and Croton creeks and 2.45 kilometers southwest of the outlet of Coker Tank.
Description:
Diffuse scatter of chert flakes and heat-altered
quartzite. One minor concentration of burned rocks, roughly 2 meters in
diameter, may represent the remains of a disturbed hearth.
Cultural
materials diminish in density toward the site periphery.
Site area is
relatively small.
Physiography:
Valley margin slope overlooking
tributary draw, approximately 7 meters above the floor.
Lithology:

an

intermittent

Poorly consolidated sandstone, Whitehorse Group.

Soil:
Breaks-Yahola soils mapping unit.
Soil of the immediate
site area is a fine sandy loam, classifiable as a Lithic Torriorthent.
Vegetation:
short grasses.

Moderately dense cover of juniper, prickly pear and

r:
, I

Condition:

Severely disturbed by sheet erosion.

Assessment: Surface indications suggest that the cultural deposits
are entirely deflated and have suffered moderate to severe lateral displacement.
Only a single disturbed feature was observed, and it is
highly unlikely that any additional buried features or other cultural
remains are present.
The information yield potential of the site is

99

, I
I1'1"'

TABLE 31
SUMMARY OF PREHISTORIC SITE DESCRIPTIONS, ASSESSMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

N
0
\.D

Site No.

Location

Description

Assessment

Recommendations

41KT5

Dam Site 10

Diffuse lithic scatter;
no features

Small, deflated;
low potential

No work at this time

41KT6

Dam Site 10

Diffuse lithic scatter;
no features

Small, deflated;
low potential

No work at this time

41KT7

Dam Site 10

Moderately dense lithic
scatter; no features

Small, deflated;
low potential

No work at this time

41KT8

Dam Site 10

Dense lithic scatter;
no features

Moderate size, relatively undisturbed;
high potential

Limited excavation

41KT9

Dam Site 10

Diffuse lithic scatter;
no features

Small, deflated;
low potential

No work at this time

41KT10

Dam Site 10

Diffuse lithic scatter;
no features

Small, deflated;
low potential

No work at this time

41KT11

Dam Site 10

Moderately dense lithic
scatter; no features

Large, deflated;
limited potential

Uncontrolled surface
collection

41KT12

Dam Site 10

Moderately dense lithic
scatter; one feature

Moderate size,
deflated; limited
potential

Uncontrolled surface
collection

41KT13

Dam Site 10

Diffuse lithic scatter;
one feature

Small, deflat~d;
low potential

No work at this time

APPENDIX V:

Geology of the Brazos Natural Salt
Pollution Control Project Area

Vance T. Holliday

INTRODUCTION

Geologic consultation was provided Prewitt and Associates, Inc. for
five field days in June 1981 as part of an archeological reconnaissance
of certain tributaries of the upper Brazos River. The geologic investigations were concerned with those aspects of the geology of the project
area pertinent to the cultural history; these include a regional examination of the bedrock stratigraphy, assessment of regional and local
landscape development, a general reconstruction of regional and local
Quaternary geology, and an assessment of types, origins, and availability of material suitable for stone tool manufacture.
ii,

The geologic investigations were carried out by means of field
examinations within the individual survey areas (Dam Sites 10, 14 and
19) and included specific archeological sites. Due to time constraints,
only selected areas within each reservoir were examined.
Selection of
these areas was dependent on ease of access and the significance of exposures or other geologic features within a given area with respect to
the Quaternary geologic and/or cultural history of the area. A general
field reconnaissance of areas surrounding each reservoir was also conducted.
Interpretations of the geology were aided by available soil
surveys, topographic maps, and airphotos.
In addition, the author's
continuing research into rates of soil formation in the Lubbock, Texas
area (200 kilometers west of the project area) aided in assessing soil
development and the age of Quaternary sediments in the project area.
All available literature on the geology of the region was reviewed.
In the following report a general review of the geologic setting,
which includes a discussion of available lithic tool resources, is presented first and is followed by a discussion of the geology of the individual reservoir areas.

REGIONAL GEOLOGIC SETTING

The project area is located within the southwestern portion of the
Osage Plains Section of the Central Lowland physiographic province and
is approximately 100 kilometers east of the Llano Estacado region of the
High Plains section, Great Plains province (Hunt 1967). Hydrologically,
the area is within the upper Brazos River drainage basin; Dam Sites 10
and 14 are within the Salt Fork drainage (major subdivision 21 of the
Brazos River; Cronin and Follett 1963:Plate 2), and Dam Site 19 is within the mainstem Brazos River drainage (major subdivision 22 of the
Brazos River; Cronin and Pollet 1963:Plate 2).
The bedrock stratigraphy of the project area has been reviewed by a
number of investigators (e.g., Patton 1930; Reeves 1971; Cronin and Follett 1963; Barnes 1967), and there is some variation in terminology of
individual formations in the area (Table 34) . The terminology used here
is that of Barnes (1967) which represents the most comprehensive and
recent geologic map of the area.

301

APPENDIX V: GEOLOGY

TABLE 34
CORRELATION OF TERMINOLOGY FOR BEDROCK STRATIGRAPHIC
UNITS IN THE BRAZOS NATURAL SALT POLLUTION
CONTROL PROJECT AREA
Barnes 1967;
Reeves 1971

Cronin and Follett 1963

Patton 1930

Whitehorse/Cloud
Chief Group

Whitehorse Formation

Peacock Formation

Blaine Formation
San Angelo Formation;
El Reno Group

Pease River Group

Blaine Formation
San Angelo
Formation

Choza Formation;
Clear Fork Group

Clear Fork Group

Clear Fork
Formation

The bedrock formations within the area are composed of Permian "red
beds" and include, from oldest to youngest, the Choza Formation of the
Clear Fork Group, the San Angelo and Blaine formations of the El Reno
Group, and the Whitehorse/Cloud Chief Group (for convenience, the latter
is referred to simply as the Whitehorse Group). These units crop out in
roughly parallel north-south-trending exposures across the project area
(Fig. 18); they decrease in age from east to west. These units are very
generally similar in that they are composed of conglomerate, sandstone,
shale, dolomite and gypsum; however, there are considerable variations
in the thickness, degree of cementation, and presence or absence of the
various lithologies listed which make each unit distinctive.
The differences between the units are reflected by significant variations in
the landscapes which have developed on the respective units.
Within the project area, the Choza Formation consists of interbedded shales and sandstones.
The shales, which are the dominant lithology, are sandy and alternately red and bluish green; the gray, finegrained quartz sandstone is massive and moderately indurated. In southeastern Stonewall County, the uppermost unit of the Choza Formation is a
massive dolomite (Merkel Dolomite); however, in the Dam Site 19 area the
dolomite is absent and a gray sandstone in the same stratigraphic position appears to be a facies of the dolomite in this area.
The shaly section of the Choza Formation is easily eroded and forms
broad valleys.
The dolomite and its sandstone facies, however, are
quite resistant and form a prominent escarpment in the area. Only the
upper 30 meters of the Choza is exposed in or near the project area
(Barnes 1967; Patton 1930:15-20).

302

Figure 18

BRAZOS NATURAL SALT POLLUTION PROJECT
KENT, KING 8

STONEWALL

OUTCROP

COUNTIES,

TEXAS

LITHOLOGY

·.·.·.·.· ... ·.·.·.' ....... .
......
.. .. . ·.·.·.·.·.·
.... . ............
. .......... ..
. . .' . . . ' . . .

Pipeline_:

/

i

·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·

··>~ S.P.e~·rrl9.11t. >· ·

j

LEGEND
QUATERNARY

I

DEPOSITS:

Alluvium
Eolian
PERMIAN

UNITS:

Whitehorse
Blaine
San

Angelo

5

0

20

10

Group

Formation

Choza

PBAl/81/SHP

MN

Sand

kilometers

0

5

20

10

Formation

Formation

miles

Adopted

From: Barnes

1967

APPENDIX V: GEOLOGY

The San Angelo Formation within the project area is predominantly a
red (sometimes gray), fine-grained quartz sandstone and also contains
red to bluish gray shales and conglomerates of dolomitic and siliceous
limestone pebbles. The formation ranges from 15 to 40 meters in thickness (Barnes 1967; Patton 1930:21-24).
The landscape of areas where the San Angelo Formation crops out are
usually open, level to gently rolling plains.
In those areas where the
unit contains indurated sandstone or thick conglomerate which are sufficiently resistant to form cliffs and steep-walled valleys, escarpments
will occasionally interrupt the otherwise horizontal landscape.
The Blaine Formation, which is quite variable in lithology, contains shales in various shades of red or gray; moderately indurated,
red, silty, fine-grained quartz sandstone; white or bluish gray to pink,
contorted gypsum beds; and dolomite in various shades of gray, pink and
white.
Some of the dolomite beds are of sufficient thickness and areal
extent to be mapped separately (e.g., Barnes 1967). The lower 30 to 50
meters of the unit, which averages 220 meters in total thickness, are
dominated by shales with interbedded gypsum, sandstone and dolomite.
Up-section the gypsum beds increase both in frequency (occupying onethird to one-half of the section) and in thickness (up to 10 meters).
Many of the gypsum beds are discontinuous and vary considerably in
thickness from one outcrop to another (Barnes 1967; Patton 1930:24-45).
Most of the beds in the Blaine Formation, in particular gypsum and
dolomite, are relatively resistant to erosion and result in rugged topography in areas of Blaine outcrops.
Numerous deep canyons, steep
cliffs, buttes, mesas and spires are characteristic.
The Whitehorse Group (Peacock Formation of Patton 1930), which
averages 200 meters in thickness, is primarily a red, fine-grained,
weakly consolidated, silty sandstone with some streaks of gray.
The
unit also contains occasional interbeds of red shale, gypsum and dolomite.
For the most part, however, the Whitehorse Group is the most
homogeneous in color and lithology of any unit in the area (Barnes 1967;
Patton 1930:45-52).
The general uniform lithology and friable nature of the Whitehorse
Group results in gently rolling topography with relatively wide shallow
valleys in most areas where the unit is exposed at the surface.
The
principal exceptions are those areas where the thicker gypsum and dolomite beds crop out, and these more resistant beds form canyons and
cliffs.
Structurally, the survey area is dominated by a westward-dipping
monocline which is the result of Permian deposition on the eastern flank
of the Midland or "Permian" basin. The beds, therefore, have a regional
westward dip with rocks in the eastern part of Stonewall County having a
steeper dip than those in the western portion. The average regional dip
is 27° N (approximately 28 ft/mile) (Patton 1930:54; Reeves 197l:A-12).
No faults or regional joint systems have been observed in the project
area; however, channel patterns suggest some control by either jointing

304

REGIONAL GEOLOGIC SETTING

or faults. Some local jointing is apparent in the gypsum beds which are
often warped, folded or otherwise contorted and affect overlying beds.
This is undoubtedly the result of solution and/or reprecipitation of the
salts.
Broader regional structural control is also suggested by the
channel patterns of the Salt Fork and Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos
River (Reeves 1971:A-12).
All of the geologic units in the survey area are subject to erosion
and most units, or at least considerable portions of these units, are
prone to dissection and the development of "badlands" topography. Even
the relatively competent beds such as the gypsum and dolomites collapse
as underlying less resistant beds are eroded.
Heavy erosion, which
appears to be a problem in all areas investigated, is probably due to
poor grazing practices in Historic times. However, given the nature of
the units and the presence of at least some flowing water (either from
springs or run-off) , erosion has probably occurred over a longer period
of time. Erosion has undoubtedly had an adverse effect on the archeological sites, many of which have certainly been destroyed as rock ledges
collapse or gullies form.
Other sites have apparently been scattered
through the effects of gullying and sheetwash on incompetent beds.
The Quaternary geologic history of the survey area has been dominated by the development and incision of the Brazos River and its various forks and tributaries. Erosion within the area is generally directly or indirectly related to alluvial activity within the Brazos River
drainage.

i

I

I

Relatively little work has been done concerning the history of the
upper Brazos River and virtually no work has been carried out on the
Salt Fork or its tributaries within the survey area.
A few general
statements, however, can be made concerning the river and its history as
it pertains to the project area. Epps (1973) believes, on the basis of
quantitative geomorphic analysis and the distribution and lithology of
gravels and terraces, that the Brazos River was established by at least
Miocene times and possibly earlier.
The "ancestral Brazos River" (age
of this not given) appears to have had bankfull discharge five to nine
times greater than that of the present river; this suggests a bankfull
width of 800 meters and bankfull depth of over 15 meters.
Epps has
identified three general terraces (hence, former floodplains) at 48
meters, 14 to 18 meters, and about 9 meters above the modern floodplain
in the project area.
Judging from the soils developed on the terraces
and their position and lithology, the oldest (highest) terrace may be
early Pleistocene and the youngest (lowest) terrace may be late Pleistocene (Wisconsin?) in age.
There are suggestions of even older, higher
terraces (gravels) in the area.
The modern Salt Fork of the Brazos River is a wide "decidedly
underfit" (Reeves 197l:A-10) meandering stream with associated extensive
sand and gravel deposits.
Prior to the present investigation, no studies of the alluvial history of the tributaries have been reported.
Nevertheless, some general comments can be made concerning the terrace
systems and modern drainage channels of the three pertinent tributaries
which are discussed below. Each tributary exhibits terraces at roughly

305

APPENDIX V: GEOLOGY

the same heights as the two lower terraces of the-Brazos River described
by Epps (1973). However, on the basis of the degree of soil development
on these terraces, there is considerable variation in the ages of the
terraces between tributaries, especially the lower terraces.
This is
not surprising inasmuch as fluvial systems are extremely complex and
sensitive to subtle, minor, local variations in bedrock competence, size
of drainage, and environmental change. Any of these factors can have a
considerable effect on cut and fill cycles, and for these reasons no
attempt is made to correlate terraces between drainages.
On Barnes' (1967) 1:250 000-scale geologic map of the area, extensive deposits of Quaternary sands are shown roughly following the
courses of the Salt Fork and its major tributaries (Fig. 18).
Reeves
(197l:A-10) considers these sediments to be derived from floodplains by
way of eolian processes, and this is undoubtedly the case. The deposits
are only found along the river, and usually only on the downwind (eastern) side of the channel where reaches are roughly perpendicular to the
prevailing wind direction (south to southwest). Only the thicker, more
conspicuous deposits of eolian material are mapped; otherwise, bedrock
is shown at the surface.
During the course of the fieldwork reported
here, it became apparent that the surface of much of the survey area,
particularly the less heavily dissected uplands in the vicinity of Dam
Sites 10 and 14, is covered by a mantle of thin (less than 1 meter) fine
sand to silt. A well-developed soil (A/carnbic B/Cca) suggests that the
material is relatively old (early Holocene?) and is a downwind, finergrained, loesslike facies of the coarser dune sands mapped by Barnes.
The areas covered by this material, although often outside the areas
subjected to archeological survey, could contain sites of respectable
antiquity at or very near the surface.

LITHIC RESOURCES

The primary sources of materials suitable for stone tool manufacture are the gravel deposits of the Salt Fork of the Brazos and its
larger tributaries, including those involved in this project. The gravels are generally composed of metaquartzites of a variety of colors
(white, shades of gray, purple) and textures (usually fine- to mediumgrained) .
Cherts, flints and jaspers which occasionally occur within
the gravel deposits are quite similar to materials noted within the
Ogallala Formation located to the west of the project area. In fact, it
seems very likely that these materials derive from that formation because the Brazos drainage heads in areas of Ogallala outcrops.
The
Ogallala at one time probably extended into the survey area, and there
are no other known sources from which to derive the metaquartzites (Epps
1973; Holliday and Welty 1981). The gravels are quite suitable for tool
manufacture if they are of adequate size, and were apparently a source
of lithic material on the Llano Estacado (Holliday and Welty 1981).
Other materials which can be utilized for toolmaking are also
available in the region, and artifacts noted within the project area·
demonstrate that they were utilized.
The well-known Alibates agate

306

occurs north of Amarillo at a distance of approximately 300 kilometers
northwest of the study area.
A similar material, Quitaque or Tecovas
jasper, occurs within the northeastern portion of the Llano Estacada in
the Quitaque area about 160 kilometers to the northwest.
Cherts of
varying, although usually high, quality are found in the Edwards Formation and are available near Gail within the southeastern portion of the
Llano Est~cado and in the Sterling City-San Angelo area 160 kilometers
west-sout'hwest and south-southwest, respectively, of the project area.
The Seymour gravels, an extensive deposit of Quaternary fluvial sediments which occurs immediately east of the project area, is usually the
source of excellent raw materials, including the gray-green Potter
"chert," also known as Ogallala quartzite, which is a silica-cemented
siltstone. The Seymour gravels were apparently derived from the Potter
Formation that comprises a basal gravel in the Ogallala Formation which
is exposed within the northeastern portion of the Llano Estacada (Holliday and Welty 1981; Hood 1978; Epps 1973).

DAM SITE 10

Dam Site 10, which is located on Croton Creek, is situated entirely
on the Whitehorse Group.
Gypsum beds of the lower Whitehorse crop out
along valley walls in the eastern portion of the reservoir area. According to Reeves (197l:A-5):
Two salt flats with associated saline seeps and springs
exist in the western part of the impoundment site, one
along Hot Springs Canyon about 3 miles south of the
Dickens County line and another near the head of Short
Croton Creek.
The landscape in the Dam Site 10 area is predominantly gently rolling although near the eastern end of the reservoir area, where the most
resistant gypsum beds crop out, the creek becomes entrenched and has
steep valley walls and deeply cut tributaries. The essentially uniform
texture, color and friable nature of the Whitehorse Group renders difficult the differentiation of reworked sediments (alluvial deposits) from
weathered or poorly consolidated bedrock, particularly on the uplands
away from the creekbed. The presence of gravels within a unit is often
the only means of detecting alluvium. Probably as a result of the uniform, easily erodable nature of the bedrock, the creeks in this area
have broad valleys with shallowly sloping valley walls.
The linear north-northwest to south-southeast trend of Croton Creek
between the Dickens County line and the mouth of Short Croton Creek is
an example of the structurally controlled valleys discussed previously.
An examination of cuts in the vicinity of Survey Unit A-10 immediately southeast of Survey Unit A-23 and just downstream from Survey Unit
B-17 (Short Croton) yielded evidence of at least four cycles of alluviation (Figs. 19 and 20).

307

,~----­

,,
tO

c""'I

BRAZOS NATURAL SALT POLLUTION PROJECT

(1)

DAM SITE 10

<.O

GENERALIZED ALLUVIAL STRATIGRAPHY ALONG CROTON CREEK
E

w
40

30

20

10

L

E

E N

D

Bedrock

0

300

~

Gravels

I

I

~

Soils

~

P8AI /81 / SHP

G

-

Fine-grained

600

1200

I

I

meters
(approximate)
Fill (sands, silts, clays)

Figure 20

BRAZOS NATURAL SALT POLLUTION PROJECT
DAM SITE 10
DISTRIBUTION OF ALLUVIAL DEPOSITS ALONG A
SELECTED SEGMENT OF CROTON CREEK

LEGEND

D.
DJ

Modern
3m

Floodplain

Fill Terrace

E2J

6-9m

Fill

Terrace

0

12-18m

Fill

Terrace

m3

Permian

Bedrock

:i

I

I
I

STONEWALL
COUNTY

j
I

MN

0

800

I

I
meters

0

I

1000

2000

E"""J

4000

I

feet

P8AI/ 81/ SHP

Adapted Fram: USGS, Jayton, Texas, 7.5' Sheet,

1958

f
APPENDIX V: GEOLOGY

At approximately 21 to 24 meters above the floor of Croton Creek
near the eastern end of the reservoir area, an extensive gravel-capped
strath terrace is apparent.
The gravels are up to 20 centimeters in
diameter and occur over a considerable area.
Lag concentrations of
these gravels along the northern valley margin were recorded as sites
41SN55 and 41SN56 and localities L41SN35 and L41SN40 (Appendices I and
II, Fig. 9).
The next highest terrace is between 12 and 18 meters above Croton
Creek and is best expressed and preserved near the confluence of that
stream with Short Croton Creek (Fig. 19). The deposits consist of silty
fine-sands up to 1 meter in thickness which, in some exposures, overlie
localized channel gravels ( c. f. , locality L41KT7, Appendix II) .
The
soil formed in this alluvium is moderately well developed and consists
of a cambic B horizon with strong prismatic structure over a zone of
secondary calcium carbonate (Caco ) accumulation which usually qualifies
3
as a calcic horizon.
On the basis of this soil development, the sediments may be mid to early Holocene in age, and archeological materials
could be expected on or within these sediments.
Between 6 and 9 meters above Croton Creek is a fill terrace composed of thinly bedded fine-sands, silty fine-sands, and silts. Bedding
is apparent to the surface of the deposit with no appreciable soil development, and these sediments appear to be typical overbank floodplain
deposits which have been accreting up to essentially modern times.
In
view of this there are probably no aboriginal archeological remains on
or near the surface of this terrace.
The youngest alluvial deposits are less than 3 meters above the
creek and include modern floodplain sediments and a low fill terrace.
The terrace consists of thicker accumulations of modern floodplain
materials cut by the creek as it meanders; these are the most recent
deposits of Croton Creek and are probably considerably less than 100
years old.
Most alluvial deposits along Croton Creek are of quite recent origin and are the result of modern floodplain accretion.
No significant
Holocene terrace deposits were observed along Short Croton Creek other
than a few small remnants of deposits similar in position and soil development to· those of the 12-to-18-meter terrace on Croton Creek.
It
was not possible to examine exposures along Salt Creek, but judging from
the soil survey of the area (Goerdel and Watson 1975), the sediments are
quite recent.

DAM SITE 14

Dam Site 14, which is located along Salt Croton Creek, covers the
uppermost Blaine Formation outcrop and is surrounded by an outcrop of
the lower Whitehorse Group. As a result of the presence of these relatively resistant units, the area has deeply entrenched canyons and constricted stream valleys. The narrowness of the valleys has resulted in

310

