ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF LOTS 3 AND 6
IN TURTLE CREEK VILLAGE, ROUND ROCK,
WILLIAMSON COUNTY, TEXAS

by

Damon Burden

Principal Investigator: Ross C. Fields

LETTER REPORT NO. 903

submitted to

D. R. Horton
Austin, Texas

by

Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Cultural Resources Services
Austin, Texas
PAI No. 214037

February 2015

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT
................................................................................................................................
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................................
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING........................................................................................................
RESULTS OF THE FILE SEARCH .................................................................................................
RESULTS OF BACKGROUND REVIEW AND FIELD INVESTIGATION ..................................
RECOMMENDATIONS ...................................................................................................................
REFERENCES CITED .....................................................................................................................

ii

iii
1
1
3
4
7
8

ABSTRACT

On December 3, 2014, an archeologist with Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted
an intensive archeological survey of two parcels totaling 13.5 acres in Round Rock
in southern Williamson County, Texas. The survey was completed prior to proposed
residential development on Lots 3 and 6 in Turtle Creek Village, just west of A. W. Grimes
Boulevard.
The survey found that the project area has been extensively disturbed by cultivation,
erosion, earthmoving, and the channelization of Dry Branch Creek, which bisects the project
area. Fourteen shovel tests excavated in the project area encountered no archeological
materials; many of them identiﬁed areas of graded ﬁll, and one contained modern trash. A
few lithic ﬂakes were observed on the surface, but they were on or near imported ﬁll and
likely of nonlocal origin; these ﬂakes were not designated an archeological site.
The project area has been substantially disturbed and has no potential for
archeological sites that are eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.
Therefore, it is recommended that the proposed project be allowed to proceed without
additional archeological investigations.
CURATION

This survey was conducted under a no artifact collection policy. Identiﬁed artifacts
were noted, brieﬂy described, and returned to the point of recovery. Project records and
photographs are on ﬁle at Prewitt and Associates, Inc.

iii

INTRODUCTION

On December 3, 2014, an archeologist with Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted
an intensive archeological survey of two parcels along A. W. Grimes Boulevard in the city of
Round Rock in southern Williamson County, Texas (see ﬁgure). The survey was completed in
advance of residential construction on Lots 3 and 6 of Turtle Creek Village by Continental
Homes of Texas, LP, on property owned by D. R. Horton. This work was performed to identify
undocumented archeological resources in compliance with Section 106 and 36 CFR part
800 of the National Historic Preservation Act. The 13.5-acre horizontal Area of Potential
Effects (APE) consists of a 9.6-acre parcel (Lot 3) and a 3.9-acre parcel (Lot 6) separated
by a channelized segment of Dry Branch Creek. Based on the characteristics of area soils,
the vertical APE is about 3 ft or less.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

The project area is on upland terrain near the leading edge of the Balcones fault zone,
which marks the physiographic transition between the rolling grasslands of the Blackland
Prairie to the east and the rugged, dissected landscape of limestone hills and canyons of
the Edwards Plateau to the west (Bureau of Economic Geology 1997; Grifﬁth et al. 2004;
McMahan et al. 1984; Werchan and Coker 1983). The APE is along an interface between
Cretaceous-age clays, marls, shales and limestones of the Eagle Ford Group and undivided
segments of Del Rio Clay (“Grayson Marl”) and the Georgetown Formation. The north half
of the APE may be on Pleistocene ﬂuviatile terrace deposits (Bureau of Economic Geology
1981; Sellards et al. 1966).
Mapped soils along Dry Branch Creek include frequently ﬂooded Tinn clay, with
Sunev silty clay loam with 0–1 percent slopes and Heiden extremely stony clay with
3–12 percent slopes north of the stream. Terrain south of the stream is mapped as Heiden
clay with 1–5 percent slopes, with the more-elevated of the two units characterized as eroded
(USDA-NRCS 2014a). Tinn series soils are very deep, moderately well-drained soils that
form in calcareous clayey alluvium on nearly level ﬂoodplains of streams in the Blackland
Prairie (USDA-NRCS 2014b). Sunev series soils are very deep, well-drained soils that
form in calcareous loamy alluvium on nearly level to moderately steep stream terraces,
valley footslopes, and ridges on dissected and undulating plateaus. Well-drained, deep to
very deep Heiden series soils form in clayey residuum derived from sedimentary bedrock.
These nearly level to moderately steep soils are found on footslopes, interﬂuve shoulders,
and ridge sideslopes on dissected plains (USDA-NRCS 2014b). Heiden series soils have high
shrink-swell potential, and surface layers in eroded units generally have been thinned by
as much as 25–50 percent (Werchan and Coker 1983).
Topography in the area is dominated by nearly level to rolling uplands incised by
tributaries draining northward into Brushy Creek. The south half of the project area slopes
gently to intermittent Dry Branch Creek from a high point of ca. 725 ft. Historically, terrain
along and north of the modiﬁed tributary was nearly level, with surface elevations at or
slightly lower than 700 ft.

1

1
2

Lot 6

3

Lot 3

7
10
6
13

5
9

11

14

8

4

12

Shovel Test
Possible Water Control Feature
Williamson County

Project Area

³

0

50

100

200

Meters

T E X A S

Figure. Project location map and modern aerial photograph showing the Area of Potential Effects, shovel test
locations, and possible water-control feature.

The Williamson County climate is characterized by hot summers and typically cool
winters punctuated by brief periods of cold arctic air. The climate of the eastern Edwards
Plateau is classiﬁed as subtropical subhumid with hot summers and dry winters, whereas
the climate of the Blackland Prairie physiographic unit is classiﬁed as modiﬁed humid
subtropical with Gulf-inﬂuenced hot summers and continental-inﬂuenced mild winters
(Goetze 1995; Natural Fibers Information Center 1987:10–12). Seasonal temperature
extremes exceeding 100ºF and dipping below 32ºF occur in both regions but are more frequent
on the Edwards Plateau (Werchan and Coker 1983:2–3). The mean annual precipitation
for Williamson County is 34.5 inches (876 mm), with peaks in the early summer and fall
months (Williamson County Weather 2014).
As with landscape and climate, the biota of Williamson County differs east to west
with geographical overlap of some species. Flora and fauna of the Edwards Plateau and
Blackland Prairie are deﬁned as Balconian and Texan, respectively (Blair 1950). The project
area is on the transition zone between the Balcones Canyonlands segment of the Edwards
Plateau ecological region and the northern Blackland Prairie (Grifﬁth et al. 2004). The
project area is in a segment of the “silver bluestem–Texas wintergrass grassland” vegetative
regime (Frye et al. 1984). Commonly associated plants include “little bluestem, sideoats
grama, Texas grama, three-awn, hairy grama, tall dropseed, buffalograss, windmillgrass,
hairy tridens, tumblegrass, western ragweed, broom snakeweed, Texas bluebonnet, live
oak, post oak, and mesquite.” Bur oak, Shumard oak, sugar hackberry, elm, ash, eastern
cottonwood, and pecan are common along tributaries (McMahan et al. 1984). Most of the
grassland in the vicinity of the project area has been converted to cropland and nonnative
pasture or subjected to urban and residential development (Grifﬁth et al. 2004).
RESULTS OF THE FILE SEARCH

Review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Archeological Sites Atlas revealed
that there are two prehistoric archeological sites (41WM468 and 41WM469), one historic
site (41WM599), and three sites with both prehistoric and historic components (41WM464,
41WM470, and 41WM598) within 1 km of the project area. Late-twentieth-century
infrastructure and residential development has extensively disturbed most of these
archeological sites.
Sites 41WM464, 41WM468, 41WM469, and 41WM470 (all 0.5–1.0 km northeast of
the APE) were recorded during an archeological survey conducted by the Texas Department
of Water Resources for the City of Round Rock (Fox et al. 1981). Site 41WM464 included an
extensive shallow scatter of chipped stone artifacts and burned rocks on a terrace overlooking
the Brushy Creek and Lake Creek ﬂoodplains and the remains of two nineteenth-century
houses and an associated trash scatter. Much of the prehistoric component was extensively
disturbed by the time the site was recorded, but the historic component was considered more
intact. Site 41WM468 consisted of a burned rock feature (hearth or burned rock pavement)
and lithic debitage observed about 20 cm below the surface in the walls of a gravel pit
north of Brushy Creek. Artifacts were observed across a 200x45 m area, but archeologists
speculated that much of the site had been destroyed by gravel mining. Site 41WM469 was a
500x125-m lithic scatter and possible occupation site on a chert source locality overlooking
the Lake Creek ﬂoodplain. The site included unmodiﬁed and heat-treated chert cobbles,

3

burned limestone, and lithic debitage. Site 41WM470 was a similarly sized scatter of lithic
debitage and burned rocks overlooking Brushy Creek that included a Middle Archaic dart
point fragment. The site’s historic component included the structural remains and an
associated dump of a mid-nineteenth- to early-twentieth-century farmstead. Site components
were extensively disturbed by modern land use activities.
Sites 41WM598 and 41WM599 (both about 0.6 km southeast of the APE) were
recorded prior to development northeast of the A. W. Grimes–Gattis School Road intersection
(Briggs 1984). Site 41WM598 included the remnants of a nineteenth-century agricultural
complex (standing barn, cistern, and associated historic artifact scatter) and a small scatter
of lithic debitage. Site 41WM599 consisted of a rectangular arrangement of stone footers
and an associated scatter of drinking vessels and bottle fragments dating to the ﬁrst half
of the twentieth century.
In 2002, Hicks and Company, Inc., surveyed 10 acres along the segment of Dry Branch
Creek that passes between Lots 3 and 6 for the City of Round Rock and the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers. Archeologists identiﬁed a historic ceramic sherd and a bone fragment in the
vicinity of an early-twentieth-century structure that once stood just east of A. W. Grimes
Boulevard. The house was not assigned an archeological site number (Feit and Jarvis 2002).
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc., did not identify any archeological resources during
a survey conducted for Round Rock ISD on a 14-acre tract immediately south of the project
area (Clark and Brownlow 2004). No new archeological sites were recorded within 1 km
of the APE during other surveys conducted by Horizon Environmental Services, Inc., and
Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc., along Brushy and Lake Creeks (Owens 2012; Voellinger
et al. 1986).
RESULTS OF BACKGROUND REVIEW AND FIELD INVESTIGATION

A review of available modern and historic aerial photographs prior to the ﬁeld
investigation indicated that nearly all of Lot 3 and part of Lot 6 were under cultivation
from at least the mid-1950s through the 1980s (NETR Online 2014). Google Earth satellite
imagery indicates that channelization of Dry Creek Branch occurred from about 2005 to
2008. Mechanical surface disturbance marking the future alignments of Rolling Oak Drive
and Heritage Springs Trail around Lot 6 and part of the parking area south of Lot 3 are
visible by 2005. A signiﬁcant portion of Lot 3 served as a staging area for construction
equipment and ﬁll material from about 2005 to 2010. Several smaller ﬁll piles, including
one that covers about 0.4 acres, are visible in the central and southern portions of Lot 6
from about 2012 to late 2013.
Fourteen shovel tests were excavated during the ﬁeld investigation, exceeding the
shovel testing intensity speciﬁed for areas of this size in the Texas Historical Commission’s
Archeological Survey Standards for Texas (see ﬁgure). Shovel tests were not systematically
spaced along survey transects because of the extensive previous disturbance. Shovel tests
were approximately 30 cm in diameter and were excavated in 20-cm-thick levels when
sediments allowed. Removed sediment was screened through 1/4-inch-mesh hardware
cloth or carefully sorted through with a trowel when too difﬁcult to screen efﬁciently. A
Shovel Test Record Form was used to record brief sediment descriptions and the presence

4

of modern trash and construction materials. Shovel Tests 1–3 were excavated in Lot 6,
and the remaining tests were in Lot 3. Depths ranged from 13 to 40 cm, with an average
of 29 cm. No trenching was done because the upland setting and thin sediments indicated
that the project area has no potential for deeply buried sites.
Lot 3

The surface across most of Lot 3 drops gently toward Dry Branch Creek from a
topographic high in the southeast part of the property. Historically, the curved north and
west edges of the parcel included a band of alluvium deposited by Dry Branch Creek and a
series of smaller meanders. A tree- and brush-lined barbed-wire fence roughly corresponds
with the transition between the upland sideslope and ﬂoodplain. The part of the lot upslope
from (south and east of) the fence has served as a staging area for ﬁll material since about
2005. Google Earth satellite imagery indicates that dirt and rock ﬁll piles covered as much
as 2.6 acres of the parcel at one time or another, and some are still present. The largest
is roughly 200 ft long by 130 ft wide and covers about 0.5 acres in the south-central part
of Lot 3. Recent satellite imagery indicates that this feature sat largely untouched for
several years, but the ﬁeld investigation revealed it is again being tapped for ﬁll material.
The composition of this pile—dark brown clayey sediment mixed with limestone and chert
cobbles—is very similar to that of the ﬁll used to grade surfaces and build house pads in
Lot 6. Mechanical equipment trafﬁc has disturbed a large area surrounding the pile, and
area two-tracks lead to a turnout at the south edge of the parcel on Thompson Trail.
Silt fencing once ringed most of the staging area, and gravel-paved haul roads
accessed the area from the parcel’s southeast corner, its north corner, and from the A. W.
Grimes–Logan Drive intersection. Naturally translocated surface sediments now mostly
cover downed silt fencing left at lower elevations to the north and west of the staging area.
Vegetation push piles and piles of dumped concrete, stacked and dumped lumber, and steel
railroad rails litter the lower half of the upland slope. An aboveground utility installation
is near the southeast corner of Lot 3, and subsurface gas, electric, and telecommunications
lines run east-west along the south edge of the property.
The scattered, irregular spacing of the eight shovel tests placed along and southeast
of the barbed wire fence reﬂect the extent of disturbance observed in this part of Lot 3.
Shovel Tests 4, 5, 8, and 9 were placed on the highest parts of the landform. Tests 4, 8, and
9 revealed 3- to 5-cm-thick surface layers of relatively loose clay loam over one or more
underlying layers of well to very well-consolidated tacky clay. Indurated limestone was
encountered at ca. 15 cm below the surface in Shovel Tests 8 and 9. Clay was present at the
surface in Shovel Test 5. Shovel Test 6, placed farther downslope near a former haul road,
exposed a 13-cm-thick surface layer of calcareous ﬁll over well-consolidated tacky clay.
Shovel Test 7 was placed about 7 m south of an artiﬁcial scarp that abruptly drops
ca. 1.5 m to the level of the walking path along the creek. Sediment exposed in this 40-cm­
deep shovel test was a mix of differently colored clays, abundant calcareous gravels and
cobbles, and occasional pieces of plastic and tin foil. Shovel Test 10 was excavated on what
appeared to be a ﬂat terrace surface about 70 m southwest of Shovel Test 7. Shovel Test
10 revealed a 5-cm-thick surface layer of loosely consolidated clay loam over a 7-cm-thick

5

layer of very well-consolidated dark brown to black clay with an uneven lower contact. The
basal layer (exposed to a depth of 16 cm below the surface) consisted of a dull yellowish
brown tacky clay interspersed between tightly packed calcareous clasts. A 1.3-m-deep tree
well is 70 m southwest of Shovel Test 10, and a partially buried stone feature is in the tree
line about 40 m southwest of the tree well. The east-west feature is a 2-m-wide by less than
1-m-high linear pile of large, irregular pieces of limestone that slopes downward from the
terrace edge on the east and disappears below artiﬁcial ﬁll a little more than 20 m to the
west. A downed barbed-wire fence follows the top of the feature. Identiﬁcation of a similar
alignment of trees across a small surface drainage in about the same location on a 1964
aerial photograph suggests that the rock alignment is a historic water-control feature
(NETR Online 2014).
Shovel Tests 11 and 12 were excavated in a low wooded area on a ﬂoodplain segment
not impacted by recent stream modiﬁcation. These tests exposed 7-cm-thick surface layers
of damp, moderately consolidated silty clay loam over layers of damp, very well-consolidated
silty clay and clay that extended to at least 40 cm below the surface in Shovel Test 11 and
only 25 cm below the surface in Test 12. The basal layer in Shovel Test 11 contained rare ﬁne
to medium-sized gravels. Small to large pieces of limestone were relatively common from
7 to 25 cm below the surface in Shovel Test 12, and the basal layer in that test consisted of
tacky clay interspersed between tightly packed pieces of limestone.
Shovel Tests 13 and 14 were along the upland sideslope–natural terrace interface.
These tests revealed 7-cm-thick surface layers of loosely consolidated clay loam over basal
layers of well-consolidated tacky clay with few small gravels or common ﬂecks of calcareous
material.
No artifacts were identiﬁed in the shovel tests excavated on Lot 3. A chert ﬂake and
ﬂake fragment were observed on the surface along a dirt two-track road near the northeast
corner of the large ﬁll pile, but no other artifacts were found during visual inspection of
surrounding vegetation-free surfaces. The ﬂakes probably are derived from the nearby ﬁll
pile and thus were not recorded as an archeological site.
Lot 6

Lot 6 had been prepared for residential construction prior to the ﬁeld survey on
December 3, 2014. Most of the trees once present on the north half of the property had
been cleared, the parcel was graded with imported ﬁll, and building pads were ready for
construction. Tree wells revealed that area surfaces were raised by as much as 1 m in some
places. Subsurface utilities were in place, and a roadway with associated storm drains and
parking areas extended north-south down the center of the property.
The extent of imported ﬁll in Lot 6 restricted shovel testing to just a few discrete
areas. Shovel Test 1, excavated in a natural surface remnant in the northwest corner of the
parcel, revealed a 7-cm-thick surface layer of clay loam over well-consolidated tacky clay
with few small gravels and numerous tree roots. Shovel Test 2 was placed in the ﬂoor of
a tree well in the north half of the property. This test exposed a 10-cm-thick surface layer
of loosely consolidated calcareous clay loam mixed with common fragments of limestone

6

and chert. Much of this upper layer may be derived from recent erosion of surrounding ﬁll
material. The next layer consisted of moderately consolidated, tacky, calcareous clay with
common limestone gravels and abundant small fragments of crushed/indurated limestone,
which ended at limestone bedrock about 30 cm below the surface. Shovel Test 3 was placed in
a 10x20-m area of what appeared to be exposed native soil at the south end of the property.
It revealed two 4-cm-thick layers of imported sediments—clay loam and calcareous ﬁll—over
tacky, well-consolidated stony clay. A few small chert ﬂakes were observed on the surface in
the vicinity of Shovel Test 3; but they are likely associated with imported sediments, and
may have been produced by heavy equipment trafﬁc. No artifacts were identiﬁed in the
shovel tests excavated on Lot 6, and none were observed during visual inspection of soils
surrounding recently planted trees on the east side of the property.
RECOMMENDATIONS

Review of available aerial photographs and Google Earth satellite imagery before the
ﬁeld investigation indicated that much of the project APE was under cultivation at least as
early as the 1950s. Linear features visible in aerial photographs attest to historic agricultural
modiﬁcation of the Dry Branch Creek ﬂoodplain in and between Lots 3 and 6. Beginning
in about 2005, most of the project APE was subjected to various levels of disturbance tied
to area infrastructure and residential development. Original surfaces along the northern
and western edges of Lot 3 have been modiﬁed by earthmoving and capped with stony ﬁll.
Elevated terrain southeast of the creek has been impacted by heavy equipment trafﬁc and
surface erosion. Recent earthmoving and construction activities in Lot 6 truncated area
soils and capped most of the parcel with imported ﬁll.
A few lithic ﬂakes were observed on the surface, but all of them were found on or
near imported ﬁll dirt and likely are nonlocal in origin; hence, they were not recorded as an
archeological site. A possible water-control feature identiﬁed on the ﬂoodplain margin in Lot
3 probably relates to a linear alignment visible on a 1964 aerial photograph (NETR Online
1964). As much as half of this feature may be buried below graded stony ﬁll likely derived
from the channelization of Dry Branch Creek. Because of the absence of associated historic
archeological deposits, this feature remnant was not recorded as an archeological site.
The project area has been substantially disturbed and has no potential for
archeological sites that are eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.
Therefore, it is recommended that the proposed project be allowed to proceed without
additional archeological investigations.

7

REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93–115.
Briggs, A.
1984

Archeological and Historical Site Investigation – South Creek, Round Rock, Texas.
Lone Star Archeological Services, Georgetown, Texas.

Bureau of Economic Geology
1981
The Geologic Atlas of Texas, Austin Sheet. Reprint. Originally published in 1974.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
1997

Tectonic Map of Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Clark, Reign, and Russell Brownlow
2004
An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 14-Acre Turtle Creek
Elementary School Tract, Round Rock, Williamson County, Texas. Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc., Austin.
Feit, Rachel, and Jonathan H. Jarvis
2002
Archeological Survey of the Proposed Channelization of Dry Branch Creek,
Williamson County, Texas. Archeological Series No. 106. Hicks & Company, Austin.
Fox, Daniel, W. Hayden Whitsett, and Christopher Jurgens
1981
An Archeological Reconnaissance at the City of Round Rock, Williamson County,
Texas. Texas Department of Water Resources, Austin.
Frye, Roy G., Kirby L. Brown, Craig A. McMahan
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas Map. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
Goetze, J. R.
1995
Distribution, Natural History and Biogeographic Relationships of Mammals on the
Edwards Plateau of Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Biological Sciences,
Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Grifﬁth, G. E., Bryce, S. A., Omernik, J. M., Comstock, J. A., Rogers, A. C., Harrison, B., Hatch,
S. L., and Bezanson, D.
2004
Ecoregions of Texas (color poster with map, descriptive text, and photographs). U.S.
Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia.
McMahan, Craig A., Roy G. Frye, and Kirby L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis. Wildlife Division, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin,
Texas.
Natural Fibers Information Center
1987
The Climates of Texas Counties. Bureau of Business Research, The University of
Texas at Austin, in cooperation with the Ofﬁce of the State Climatologist, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

8

Nationwide Environmental Title Research, L.L.C. (NETR Online)
2014
Historic Aerials. Electronic document, http://historicaerials.com, accessed December
2014.
Owens, Jeffrey D.
2012
Intensive Archeological Survey for the Proposed Brushy Creek Regional Trail Gap
Project, Round Rock, Williamson County, Texas. Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.,
Austin.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1966
The Geology of Texas. Reprint. Originally published 1932. Bulletin 3232. The
University of Texas at Austin.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (USDA-NRCS)
2014a
Web Soil Survey. Electronic document, http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/
HomePage.htm, accessed December 2014.
2014b

Soil Series Classiﬁcation Database. Electronic document, http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/
wps/portal/nrcs/detail/soils/survey/class, accessed December 2014.

Voellinger, M., J. Jameson, and L. Smyth
1986
A Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Brushy Creek and Lake Creek
Wastewater Interceptors, Williamson County, Texas. Espey, Huston and Associates,
Inc., Austin.
Werchan, L. E., and J. L. Coker
1983
Soil Survey of Williamson County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station.
Williamson County Weather
2014
Williamson County Weather. Electronic document, http://www.usa.com/williamson­
county-tx-weather.htm, accessed December 2014.

9

