PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

January 2016 — Volume 36 Number 1
PRESIDENT
Scott Brosowske
VICE PRESIDENT
Veronica Arias
SECRETARY
Mary Ruthe Carter
TREASURER
Pam Allison
PUBLICATIONS
Rolla Shaller

NEWSLETTER
Beryl C. Hughes

MARSHALLTOWN

TABLE OF CONTENTS

The December meeting is the Studer Banquet.
Traditionally, no minutes are taken.

Next Meeting: January 20, 2016, 7:00 p.m.
Downtown Branch Amarillo Public Library, 2nd floor Board Room
Pre-meeting dinner, 5:30 p.m., Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor

Page
Notice of December Minutes

2

From the Editor’s Desk

2a

January Program Information

3

Memorabilia

4 ff

FROM THE EDITOR’S DESK
As the old stories used to say, It was a dark and stormy night! when we assembled at Youngblood’s Café for the annual
Studer Banquet. The food was good, the company was great — but as you might know— there was a problem. Next to us
there was a group that was exuberantly celebrating the holiday season, effectively drowning out our program speaker.
Susan Vehik had gone to a lot of work to assemble her presentation, Origins of Plains War Societies. We certainly thank
her, and hope to persuade her to come to one of our regular meetings and repeat the program under more favorable circumstances.
As it happens, Youngblood’s Café is located in the building previously occupied by Sutphen’s Barbecue. This is where,
long-time members will recall, PAS held several Studer Banquets. This year, we were seated in the area designated
Speaker’s Dais at earlier meetings!
Later in this edition, you’ll see a photo and obituary of Ray
Thompson. Among Ray’s contributions to PAS, is the clever name of our newsletter, PAStimes.


You can see that PAS stands for the Panhandle Archaeological Society.



Archaeologists are concerned with times past, Pasttimes.



Finally, for most of us, archaeology is not a profession.
It’s a hobby, a way to pass time.

RIP Ray. You are memorialized in
PAStimes.

Enamel Hypoplasia and Longevity among Middle Ceramic Period Populations
of the Southern High Plains
Erin Frigo
Department of Sociology, Anthropology, and Social Work,
Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas
Abstract
The purpose of this study is to observe the health and longevity of two prehistoric communities from the Texas Panhandle. The samples include individuals from Antelope Creek and Odessa Phase sites. These are Native American groups of
the Southern High Plains who lived as hunter-gatherer-horticulturalists from A.D. 1200 to A.D. 1500. Data specific to the
frequency of linear enamel hypoplasias was collected. This data is then matched to longevity and life expectancy from
birth as indicated by a life table specific to this group of burials. Of the ninety-seven individuals available for assessment,
seventy individuals have teeth for enamel hypoplasias analysis. Forty-three of them (61.42%) had one or more linear
enamel hypoplasias. A burial sample with such a high frequency of dental defects suggest that there was considerable
childhood stress among these individuals and that this had an effect on their morbidly rates. Linear enamel hypoplasias
were measured using gross measuring techniques. Measurements were assessed using the distance of the linear enamel
hypoplasia from the occlusal surface of the tooth. The defects were measured to determine the approximate age at which
an individual acquired the defect. Age at defect is important in understanding potential cultural and/or environmental factors that might be linked to health stressors. The demographics of these samples were determined using skeletal age and
sex techniques. The demographics were then verified using Owsley’s 1995 assessments for the individuals in this sample.

Biography
Erin Frigo was born in Amarillo, Texas and attended Amarillo
High School and Amarillo College, having graduated from Amarillo High School in 2007 and from Amarillo College in 2010.
From there, she attended Eastern New Mexico University, having
graduated with a Bachelor’s in Anthropology in 2012. She is
currently attending Texas Tech University pursuing her Master’s
in Anthropology and hopes to graduate this coming May. She has
done two summer internships with the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum and currently works as an Anthropology Teaching Assistant at Texas Tech University. Her primary interests are in osteology
and paleopathology, and studying skeletal remains in archaeological
contexts.

MEMORABILIA
May 2015 issue of PAStimes featured articles on the history of PAS and its predecessors. The following are some
items that are intended to stir the memories of those who have been in the Society for decades, and perhaps bring
new perspectives to those of us who are relative newcomers.

*****
BOB SMITH

(President 1977-78)

remembers presenting an award for contributions

to Panhandle Archaeology to Dr. Jack T. Hughes.

Bob used to type the newsletter on a single sheet,
mimeograph it at work, and hand-deliver it at the
meeting.

Jack gave a talk
on his favorite
subject at AC .
142 showed up
to share his enthusiasm; this
contributed to
the formation of
PAS.

Honoree Dr. Jack T. Hughes. Dick Carter, President 1971-72.
Curtis Tunnell, State Archaeologist.

This inaugural lecture of the Floyd V. Studer series
Honors, for his outstanding contributions to
Panhandle Archeology, Dr. Jack T. Hughes
of Canyon, Texas.

Dr. Jack T. Hughes
Professor of Anthropology
West Texas
State University

Jack Thomas Hughes was born on October 16, 1921 at Mckinney, Texas to Joseph Erma Hughes and Frances Moreland
Hughes.
He attended 21 different public schools before graduating as valedictorian of Henderson High School.
In 1941 Jack received a B.A. degree in anthropology in geology from the University of Texas, summa cum laude. He
was elected to Phi Beta Kappa at that same time. In 1942 he received the M.A. degree in anthropology from the University of Texas. Also in 1942 Jack studied at the National University of Mexico on a Farmer scholarship.
Following service as a Naval Lieutenant in the Pacific Theater during World War ll Jack began his doctoral studies at
Columbia University. At Columbia he held one of ten all-university fellowships for two consecutive years.
During 1946-1948 he was employed by the Smithsonian Institution- River Basin Surveys, headquartered at the University of Nebraska.
During 1949-1951 Jack completed course work at Columbia for the Ph.D. in anthropology. He came to WTSU in 1952
as Associate Professor of Geology and Curator of Paleontology, Panhandle-Plains historical museum.

In 1968, upon completion of his Doctoral dissertation, " The Ethno-History of Caddoan-speaking Tribes" , Jack became
Professor of Anthropology at WTSU, which post he currently holds.
Dr. Hughes is married to Pollyanna Badgett. They have two children, David Thomas Hughes Ph.D candidate in anthropology at the University of Oklahoma and Martha Elizabeth Hughes Neel, graduate student at North Texas State University, Denton.

Jack holds membership in numerous professional societies among which are: Society for Vertebrate Paleontology,
American Quaternary Association, Society for American Archaeology, American Society for Conservation Archaeology, Society for Historical Archaeology and Society of Professional Archaeologists.

He is a life member, past president and member of the Board of Directors of the Texas Archeological Society. Also,
Dr. Hughes is a former Fellow of the American Anthropological Association and is listed in American Men of Science. He is a member of the Board of Directors of the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society, has served as guest editor
of, and contributor to, the Review, published by the Society.
In addition to his dissertation, published by Garland of New York, and the articles in the Review, Dr. Hughes has published articles in American Antiquity and the Texas Archeological Society Bulletin. He has authored numerous archaeological reports for governmental and private agencies.
In all of science, most men are followers. In Dr. Jack T. Hughes we have a leader, a teacher and a friend.

*****
This lecture series is named for Floyd V. Studer, often called the Dean of Panhandle Archaeologists.
Floyd V. Studer grew up in Hemphill County where he became interested in archaeology through hearing of the
"Buried City" on Wolf Creek.

As a student at Canadian Academy in the early 1900s Floyd participated in his first scientific archaeological excavation. It sparked a lifelong flame.
Over the years, while an Amarillo Insurance Executive, Floyd Studer discovered hundreds of Indian ruins in the Panhandle. He was instrumental in getting the landowners to preserve the sites for later testing and excavation by the
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum at which he became Curator of Archaeology and Paleontology.

Probably the outstanding contribution made to Panhandle Archaeology by Floyd studer was his discovery of, and subsequent developmental work on, the Alibates Flint Quarries, Texas' only National Monument.

*****
Curtis Tunnell is a native of Turkey, Texas. He did his undergraduate work at West Texas State University, where he
worked at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum.

After a tour of duty with the U.S. Navy Curtis earned an M.A. degree in anthropology at the University of Texas in
Austin. While at UT he worked at a variety of archaeological jobs.
From 1961 through 1963 Curtis worked for the University of Illinois supervising archaeological surveys and field
schools.
In 1963 he came back to Texas as Curator of Anthropology at the Texas Memorial Museum. In 1965 Curtis Tunnell
became Texas' first State Archaeologist, which post he now holds.

*****
The Panhandle Archaeological Society was founded in the summer of 1970 with the
following aims and objectives:
Scientific archaeological exploration and research.
Preservation of archaeological materials.
Interpretation and publication of data attendant to the foregoing activities.
Promotion of public information and education.
Membership is open to any interested person who is in sympathy with the aims and objectives of the Society.

RAY THOMPSON (1935-2015)
We recently learned of the passing of Ray Thompson 79, of Deming, New Mexico
on July 24, 2015. Ray was born November 19, 1935 in Silverton, Texas to Cornelia
Moore and Bill Thompson. He served his Country in the United States Air Force
during the Korean War. Ray graduated from West Texas State University and
worked as a draftsman in commercial construction.
Ray Thompson and his brother Roy were the driving forces behind the creation and
organization of the Panhandle Archeological Society, where Ray served as vicepresident and later president of the Society. Ray was a very active member of the
PAS during it early years of development. He designed, named and edited the first
PAS newsletter PAStimes.
Prior to moving to New Mexico in the 1980’s Ray was involved in various archeological field work including the 1969 TAS Summer Field School, Jack Allen Site, Black Dog Site, Borger Bridge
Site, Gunsight Shelter, and the Dye Site just to name a few.
Ray’s drafting talent was used in the development of the WTSU Anthropological Society’s, Projectile Point Type
wall chart drafted by Ray and edited by Dr. Jack T. Hughes. Several thousand of these charts were printed and sold.
Ray also served as the Region 1 Vice-President for the Texas Archeological Society in the 1970’s.
Ray is survived by his wife Margaret and a daughter Tammy Thompson

