PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Seven, Number Six September 2017

President
Scott Brosowske
Vice president
Veronica Arias
Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer

Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

3a

Program Information

4

Report on Lamar Science Day — by Paul Katz

5-6

From the Editor’s Desk
Eager fingers kept reaching for the little brown sack, and each was told to “Wait!” Paul was showing a presentation on
the screen, but nobody was watching. The students’ eyes were on the sacks. Adults’ eyes were on the students.
Finally—the moment came! It was okay to open the sack and dump the contents out on the tabletop. No candy, no chewing gum, no Cracker Jacks. There was a potsherd, a bullet, a length of leather. And over there a stone arrowhead.
Sort them, they were told, put like things together; things made of the same thing. After admiring the bullet, turning it in
the light, they placed it with the metal whistle. Right!
When this part was finished they were told to sort them according to use. The bullet went with the arrowhead, the wooden
bead with the leather string to make a necklace.
Finally, they were told to sort them by time. That is, what was used by primitive man but not by us, or vice versa. To everyone’s surprise, although the bullet is new, nearly all of it has been in use forever. (Well, you know what I mean!) Even
the stone arrowhead: people go bow-hunting for sport today. Today’s arrowhead itself is steel, but the stone from which
the primitive one was made is used in buildings now.

The more things change, the more they remain the same.
—Seems to be a quote from Old French, but it’s credited to many different authors.

2

PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of May 17, 2017
The meeting was called to order by Pres. Scott Brosowske at 7 PM at the downtown Amarillo Library second floor board
room.
There were 15 members in attendance.
PROGRAM: VP Veronica Arias, ,PPHM Archaeologist, presented “Recent Findings Regarding the Stinnett Bison Site.” The
first part of the program traced the discovery in 2002 an initial findings of the site:i.e., excavation for a new swimming pool
in the Stinnett City Park which uncovered the bison bones. Eight blocks of earth containing the bones were taken toPPHM
for examination. The bones were damaged by machinery and the skeleton was missing parts, including the skull. A point
was found in the ribs. It appeared the bison was killed elsewhere. There the matter rested until 2014 whenTSU became interested in the point which appeared to be Calf Creek and of nonlocal material. In 2015, NMSU tentatively identified it as Socorro Jasper. There have been to carbon-14 dating's, the last 3897 BC. The skeleton was identified as bison bison occident,
male, 12 years old. Calf Creek points are widely found, but the Stinnett site is the most complete, the only Middle Archaic
site in the Panhandle, more informative on calf Creek lithic technology, and indicates that the idea was repopulated earlier
than thought.
MINUTES: the April minutes were approved as published in the PAS Newsletter.
TREASURER’S REPORT: After the $200 sent to the Donors’ Fund in memory of Ed Day, and meeting room rent, Pam
Allison reported a balance of $3836.09.
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported a balance of $1,196.82 in the Money Market Account after paying PAS
dues to SWFAS, and $5,085.72 in the CD.
OLD BUSINESS: Paul Katz reported on the Lamar Science Day. Eight PAS members interacted with 11 classes: a total of
190 students, grades K-5.
Veronica reported on the TAS Academy at Fredericksburg which centered on emerging technologies in archaeology.
Scott reminded the members of TAS Field School the second week of June.
NEW BUSINESS: Paul suggested the possibility of a PAS field trip to the site where the TSU will be working this summer.
A show of hands indicated member interest. He will be working on scheduling a trip.
Veronica brought up the difficulty of obtaining speakers and suggested the possibility of changing the meeting schedule. The
idea of going to quarterly meetings was discussed. Scott suggested continuing monthly meetings but alternating speakers
with workshops and/or films. Along with such changes, going back to Wild Cat Bluff was brought up. No decisions were
made except to contact Wild Cat Bluff about the possibility of return.
The meeting adjourned at 8:10 PM.
Respectfully submitted:

Mary Ruthe Carter, Secretary

UPCOMING EVENTS
September 20

7:00p.m.

PAS — Amarillo Public Library Downtown

5:30 p.m.

Pre-meeting dinner — Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor

Studer Banquet — Save your “Stuff” for Silent Auction

3

Program Information
TAS Field School 2017—A Rookie’s View
The 2017 Texas Archaeological Society Field School was held in Camp Wood, Texas, from June 10-17. Excavation was
done at the site of the 1762 Spanish Colonial Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz (41RE1). Field School was under
the direction of Principal Investigator Dr. Tamara Walter (Texas Tech University).

The program for PAS relates this field school experience through the eyes of a first-time participant. There is certainly
more to this adventure than digging in a 2X2 unit!

Andy Burcham – Bio Sketch
Andy Burcham is a recently retired Chemical Engineer. He received a B. S. in Chemistry from Southwestern Oklahoma
State University, and an M.S. in Chemical Engineering from Missouri University of Science and Technology. After a 33
year work career in Borger, Andy and his wife Rita now live in Amarillo.
With a lifelong interest in Archaeology, And now has time for this avocational pursuit. He is a regular volunteer in the
Archaeology Department at Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum.Other interests include travel, history, hiking, backpacking, and membership in the Panhandle Texas Master Naturalist Chapter. Following the positive experience at the
2017 Field School, Andy looks forward to future TAS digs as well as any pending field opportunities in the Panhandle
area.

4

REPORT ON LAMAR SCIENCE DAY 2017
Members of the Panhandle Archeological Society participated in Science Day at Lamar Elementary School in Amarillo, held on Friday, May
12.
Every year representatives of technical, scientific, and community organizations are invited to share their expertise with the students at Lamar. The entire day is devoted to this activity, with classes rotating
through the various demonstrations.
This was the fifth time that the PAS has participated in Science Day. In
2011, 2012, and 2013, we introduced the students to rock art, showing
them pictures of the various types and then having them make their
own with colored markers on paper plates. In 2015 we changed to an
artifact identification and interpretation exercise, which we did again
this year. Examples of prehistoric and historic artifacts were combined
into a bag, and the students were asked to group and re-group the
items by material, function, and age. A short PowerPoint presentation
first introduced the vocabulary and techniques of excavation and laboratory procedures.
Here are the statistics of this year’s Science Day:
PAS participants = 7
Veronica Arias
Andy Burcham
Dick Carter
Beryl Hughes
Paul Katz
Rolla Shaller
Frank Willmon
+ volunteer Miranda Bible

5

Artifact Identification and Identification Exercise
At the 2017 Lamar School Science Day

PAS members working with students at the 2017 Lamar Science Day

6

