PASPresident
Scott Brosowske
Vice president
Veronica Arias
Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller

Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes
Beryl C. Hughes

TAS LITHICS ACADEMY

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
UPCOMING EVENTS

2A

MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING

3

NOTES FROM THE EDITOR’S DESK

4

PROGRAM INFORMATION

5

TAS LITHICS ACADEMY

6

*************************************
UPCOMING EVENTS

May 20

Lamar School Science Fair
Contact Paul Katz:
Katzes-PRIAM@msn.com or 806-537-5040

It’s not too late to volunteer for this worthwhile activity!
Sept. 21

Next Meeting. If the time and place are to be changed, we’ll let
you know in the September PAStimes.

Rick Williams gave us an extremely interesting program in April. All the
items you see displayed here are handmade by him. He explained the use,
the materials and the methods of creating and caring for them.

PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of April 20, 2016
The meeting was called to order by President Scott Brosowske at 7 p.m. at the Downtown Amarillo Library second
floor Board Room.
There were 18 members and the program presenter, Rick Williams of Guymon, OK, in attendance.
PROGRAM: Rick Williams has spent a lifetime fascinated by Indian artifacts, particularly those of the Antelope
Creek culture, 1100-1450 AD. He displayed and answered questions about the dozens of artifacts - stone, bone, wood,
feather, leather, fur - he has replicated as he sought to understand the manufacture and use of items he found in the
hills and canyons around Borger.
MINUTES: The March minutes were approved as published in the PAS Newsletter.
TREASURER'S REPORT: Treasurer Pam Allison reported a balance of $4192.71 after two months room rental was
paid. The report was approved.
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported that the Southwest Federation Report from 2015
has nearly sold out. The Money Market Account ended March with a balance of $1,286.41 and the Certificate of Deposit was $5060.73 as of March 8. The report was approved.
OLD BUSINESS: The Lamar School Science Fair will be May 20. There was discussion of materials needed. Unless
enough (at least 6) members volunteer to help, PAS will not participate.
The TAS Lithic Academy will be April 30- May 1 at the PPHM with bus transportation to Palo Dura canyon. Thirtysix are already registered and they are planning for 45. A show of hands indicated approximately 6 will attend from
PAS. An optional tour of Alibates will be offered by the Park Service on Friday, April 29.
The Stone Age Fair at Perryton will be April 30 as well. The Friday Alibates Tour will be available to those participants also.
The Southwest Federation in Quitaque, hosted by the Caprock Canyonlands Society was well attended. Next year's
meeting will be hosted by the San Angelo society.
NEW BUSINESS: Alvin Lynn announced that PAS has purchased new atlatls for use at events such as the Fannin
History Fair.

The meeting adjourned at 8:40 p.m.

Respectfully submitted,

Mary Ruthe Carter, secretary

NOTES FROM THE EDITOR’S DESK

The sun was going down as I approached the old hotel and passed the empty rocking chairs on the porch.

At the desk, the clerk informed me with trepidation that the place was haunted. I mean, really?
Yes. People reported hearing sounds, even voices, in the night, when there was nobody there. Nobody living, anyway.
I climbed the stairs and climbed up onto the waist-high bed (good thing I spent all those years on the steep slopes of the
Rockies) and settled down for a nap before dinner.

Before too long, I heard stealthy footsteps outside my door. I began to tremble. The only lock was one of those slide
thingies--how long could the old wood hold ?

I slid off the bed and cautiously opened the door, expecting who-knows-what to be out there. Nothing. Nobody.
But as I started down the stairs I could hear a jumble of voices, as if numerous beings were all trying to be heard at once.

As I got farther down the voices grew louder and louder, and now there were

At the foot of the stairs, I clapped my hands over my ears to shut out the awful din, and fearfully peering around the
doorway into the dining room- - - - - - -

I SAW THEM!

ARCHAEOLOGISTS!

Gathering for the SWFAS meeting the next day.

After my unnerving experience the night before, I was only too happy to arrive at the Hope Center in Quitaque Saturday.
There I was met by several members of CanyonLands Archeological Society, including Marisue Potts, who greeted me
like an old friend., though our previous contact had only been by email.
All the papers made for quality presentations. Personally, I was most interested in Doug Wilkens’ work on possible roof
construction for the Antelope Creek buildings.
Friday evening there was a tour to Clarity Tunnel to see Free-Tail Mexican
Bats. The bats performed their fly-out as expected. An unexpected thrill came
when the group discovered unannounced construction at the end of the tunnel,
leaving no room to turn around. The driver had to back the vehicle out the full
length of the tunnel! The trip was repeated Saturday evening (with no backout).
Sunday morning Rick Day led us to Caprock Canyons where we saw several
groups of bison. It is calving season, and we were treated to a glimpse of two
little black calves, of the 13-15 believed to be present. At Lake Theo, Rolla
Shaller gave an impromptu account of the history and significance of the site.
He had worked at the early archaeology dig there. His talk will be published in
the 2016 Transactions, along with the Saturday presentations.

Turkey Hotel—Built 1927

Keep up the good work! We’re all looking forward to next year!

PROGRAM INFORMATION— May 2016
BIOGRAPHY
Dr. Michael Paul Jordan is an assistant professor of ethnology at Texas Tech University and a research associate at the
National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution. His research focuses on the ethnohistory and expressive
culture of the indigenous inhabitants of the Southern Plains. He has served as a consultant for the Brooklyn Art Museum, the St. Louis Art Museum, and Minneapolis Institute of Art. Dr. Jordan is the author of several articles and essays
on Plains Indian graphic art. His current research projects include the Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument Traditional Use Study, a multi-year project funded by the National Park Service. He is also collaborating with the Washita
Battlefield National Historic Site on a project funded by the Western National Parks Association titled Nineteenth Century Southern Cheyenne Drawings: Documenting Tsistsistas History and Culture.

ABSTRACT
Reassessing Southern Plains Biographic Rock Art:

Harnessing the Interpretive Potential of Nineteenth Century
Kiowa and Comanche Drawings
While scholars have incorporated ethnographic data into their analyses of Biographic Tradition rock art sites on the
Northern Plains, studies of Southern Plains rock art have made more limited use of the ethnographic record. Reanalysis of select scenes and figures from two Southern Plains Biographic tradition rock art sites - the Hussie Miers
(41VV327) and El Caido sites - demonstrates the utility of an ethnographically informed approach. Comparison of the
pictographs and petroglyphs with ethnographic data, including nineteenth century Kiowa and Comanche drawings executed on paper, has facilitated the identification of items of material culture, as well as the interpretation of several
scenes. At the Hussie Miers site, the reinterpretation of items of material culture has raised questions regarding the
dating of the site, as well as the identity of the non-Native combatants depicted in one of the panels.

TAS LITHICS ACADEMY
Recap on TAS Lithics Academy
by Veronica Arias
The Texas Archeological Society held its 2016 Lithics Academy at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum and
Palo Duro Canyon State Park on April 30-May 1st. The two-day intensive workshop on stone tool technology drew
in fifty participants from across the state. Chris Ringstaff, an archaeologist for the Texas Department of Transportation, stepped in as the principal instructor in place of Dr. Harry Shafer, who had to withdraw due to a family
emergency. I served as the co-instructor for the workshop.

The workshop objective was to introduce participants to lithic technology through a series of lectures, hands-on
exercises, and demonstrations. Particular emphasis was on stone tool manufacture, tool identification, and analysis
of archaeological assemblages. Exercises included drawing flakes and bifaces, conducting use-wear experiments
and analyzing patterns under microscope, and documenting an archaeological collection from the Lower Pecos
Valley. Demonstrations of flintknapping and atlatl throwing helped to supplement course material. An optional
tour of the Alibates flint quarry led by Dr. Paul Katz preceded the workshop on Friday, April 29th. The tour yielded an impressive turnout given the thunderstorms that rolled through the area earlier in the day disrupting the
original tour plans.
Volunteers from the Panhandle Archaeological Society and the Canyonlands Archeological Society helped host the
event. Particular kudos goes to Donna Otto for taking care of all the refreshments and lunches, and Marisue Potts
for setting up the picnic out at Alibates. Shannon Blalock, Park Superintendent for Palo Duro Canyon, made the
Gilvin Education and Learning Center with its stunning vistas of the canyon available as the venue for the second
day of the workshop, as well as provided transportation to and from the location.
The Texas Archeological Society began holding instructional Academies on different archaeological topics in 2003,
averaging two per year each spring. Past workshops have been on Archeology 101, lithics, ceramics, historical archeology, rock art, archeobotany, and geoarcheology. The 2016 Lithics Academy was the first to be held in the Texas Panhandle. Hopefully, there will be more opportunities for members of the community to gain specialized
knowledge in the different areas of the discipline .

