PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society
November 2015 Volume 35 Number Eight

PRESIDENT
Donna Otto
VICE PRESIDENT
Scott Brosowske
SECRETARY
Mary Ruthe Carter
TREASURER

Pam Allison
PUBLICATIONS

Rolla Shaller
NEWSLETTER
Beryl C. Hughes

1

!!Notice!!
The TIME and PLACE for the November meeting have been changed.
Instead of Wednesday Nov.18, we will meet at Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum at 6:00 p.m. Thursday November 19.
We ask you to stay for a brief business meeting following the movie.
Afterward, we will have our usual dinner at a nearby restaurant.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PAGE
UPCOMING EVENTS

2A

FROM THE EDITOR’S DESK

2B

MINUTES OF THE OCTOBER MEETING

3

NOVEMBER PROGRAM: DAUGHTER OF DAWN

4

FANNIN MIDDLE SCHOOL HISTORY FEST

5

ALVIN LYNN BRINGS HOME THE GOLD

7

STUDER BANQUET: DECEMBER 12, 2015
YOUNGBLOOD’S CAFÉ 620 SW 16th Ave, Amarillo, TX 79101, (806) 342-9411.
Meet and Greet at 6:00, dinner at 7:00. For reservations,

call Alvin (806)381-8880, or email anlynn@suddenlink.net
Don’t forget to bring things for the Silent Auction!

There will be no December issue of PASTIMES

FROM THE EDITOR’S DESK:
October, Texas Archaeology Month, has been a wonderful time for History and Pre-History. Fannin
Middle School goes all-out on their annual History Fair. In addition to PAS’ own atlatl and corngrinding events, Joe D. Rogers demonstrated his 19th-century (and before) tools; there was an Indian
tipi, an old-time car (I guessed Model-T Ford, but that’s just a guess), carrier pigeons, spinners and
weavers, flintknappers, and of course the cannon was fired each hour. They served hot dogs and frito
pie for lunch, and if you wanted dessert you could try your luck at the
cake walk.
Chris Lintz was made a Fellow of the Texas Archaeological Society,
and Alvin Lynn’s book won a prestigious medal. We are all basking in
their reflected glory.
To top it all off, Scott has arranged for us to view “Daughter of the
Dawn,” a silent movie from 1920, Thursday November 19.
We extend our love and prayers to Dick and Mary Ruthe Carter.

2

MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, OCT 21, 2015
The meeting was called to order b y President Donna Otto at approximately 7:00 p.m. at the Downtown Amarillo Library
second floor Board Room.
Guests and members were greeted. There were 16 in attendance. The following upcoming meetings were announced.
Nov. 18 PAS Meeting, Amarillo Library Board Room
Dec. 12 - PAS Studer Banquet, Youngblood's Cafe
PROGRAM: Rick Day, THC Archeological Steward and member of the Caprock Canyons Archeological Society gave a program on the salvage excavations at the Mott Creek site (41MY19). Excavations were done by high school honor students
under the supervision of Stewards. Some lab work was conducted at the school in the science labs. The project has been ongoing for several years. After the flooding and extensive rainfalls last year, much of the site was lost, so the amateur excavations conducted as a learning experience resulted in site documentation, and artifact collection and curation.
MINUTES: Minutes from the previous meeting were published in the PAS Newsletter. A motion was made and seconded to
accept the minutes as published with one name spelling correction.
TREASURER REPORT: Pam Allison reported a balance of $3,780.05. Motion was made and seconded to approve the report. Report filed.
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported the Money Market Account balance 9/30/2015 of
$1,303.29 and the 180 Day CD 9/30/15 balance of $5,052.01. Motion made and seconded to approve. Report filed.
OLD BUSINESS:
TAS Lithics Academy. Harry Shafer will be teaching. Scheduled for April 30-May 1, 2016 at the Panhandle Plains Histori
cal Museum and Palo Duro Canyon. Cost $100 for TAS members. Information sheet and course registration forms were
available. On-line registration is available with payment by credit card.
Fannin Middle School History fair was a success with several members participating.
Updated membership list was provided.
NEW BUSINESS:

Nominating committee needed. President Donna Otto asked Rolla Shaller to chair and select two to assist. Slate of officers
to be presented at November meeting, with election at December meeting.
Alvin Lynn reported on use of nice Atlatl's at Flint Fest. Since our equipment is older and needing repair, he made a motion
for the society to purchase 3 new atlatls and 8-10 shafts at approximately $200.00. Motion seconded and all approved. Alvin
will coordinate purchase with treasurer.

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
Next meeting Nov 18 at Library.
The Studer Banquet is in December, so be looking for items to donate for the raffle.
Dick Carter is recovering in Vibra Hospital, is in good spirits and can receive visitors. Probably will be there a few more
weeks.
MEETING ADJOURNED: There being no further business or announcements, meeting was adjourned at 8:15 p.m.

Respectfully Submitted,

Donna Otto

3

NOVEMBER PROGRAM

Rivalry develops between Comanche Indians White and Wolf for the hand of Dawn, the daughter of the chief,
but Dawn loves White. When the chief sets up a test of bravery for the men, noble White passes, but cowardly
Wolf fails and is banished from the camp. Wolf becomes a traitor and goes to the Kiowas (who have stolen the
Comanche ponies, and are occupying their territory), to offer to lead them to the Comanche camp in order to steal
away their women. The Kiowas kidnap the women while the Comanches are away on a hunt and Wolf takes
Dawn. The Comanches go on the warpath against the Kiowas, overpowering them. White fights with Wolf and
leaves him for dead. Wolf dies in the arms of Wanada, who had loved him, and in despair she kills herself. Back
in the Comanche camp, White and Dawn are happy, together at last.

A rare silent film, “The Daughter of Dawn” will be shown at the
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
on Thursday, November 19th at 6pm in Hazlewood Lecture Hall.
Refreshments will be served.
Cost is free for members and $5 for nonmembers.

4

PAS Members and the 2015 Fannin Festival
PAS members have been participating in the History Festival at Fannin Middle School
for many years, perhaps since the first one in 1997. The Carters and Rolla would know
for sure. They certainly turned out this year for the 19th History Festival on Saturday,
October 17th.
The Panhandle Archeological Society was one of 42 participating entities, the largest
number to date according to organizer Julie Greene. Of the 142 people participating,
nine were PAS members. The weather was perfect, sunny and warm with only a light
breeze. This certainly helped the attendance, which Julie estimated to be 1,250 people
of all ages.
The PAS sponsored two venues, as we have every year. Alvin Lynn, Joe Faulkenberry,
and Rolla Shaller demonstrated atlatl throwing and supervised visitors as they attempted to master this difficult activity. Veronica Arias, Beryl Hughes, Paul Katz, and
Audrey Taylor tried to keep up with the constant flow of visitors at corn grinding, as
there was always someone waiting to kneel down in front of one of the six metates. Joe
D. Rogers was in his element as usual, demonstrating historical carpentry tools and
tricks. PAS President Donna Otto was present as well at the DAR table. Dick and
Mary Ruthe Carter were there in spirit.
Julie Greene says that there will be a Fannin Festival as long as she is at the school,
and she has no plans to retire any time soon.
SEE YOU ALL AT THE 20TH NEXT YEAR.

5

Relax and reminisce a while.
Below are some photos from previous years —
see if you recognize anyone!

Nautical Navigation —Bill Faubion

Making bullets—Joe Hayhurst

Unknown cannoneers.
6

Alvin Lynn Brings Home the Gold
Rolla Shaller
Alvin Lynn recently received the Will Rogers Gold Medallion
Award for his book submission, Kit Carson and the First Battle
of Adobe Walls (Texas Tech University Press, 2014). This annual
book contest seeks to recognize outstanding contributions to
Western literature and media in different subject categories. The
fifteen Western-themed categories include: Cowboy Poetry, Fiction, Non-Fiction, Non-Fiction Biography and Memoir, Young
Readers Fiction, Young Readers Illustrated Fiction, Inspirational
Fiction, Young Readers Illustrated Non-Fiction, Photographic
Essays, Cookbooks, Graphic Illustrations/Visual Humor/Iconic
Images, Written Humor, Film (Drama), Film (Documentary),
and Fiction Romance. The judging criteria for the awards consist
of historical accuracy, content, and artistic presentation.
Lynn’s book won the top honor in the Western Non-Fiction category. He and his wife, Naydne, were present to receive the award
at the 25th Annual Red Steagall Cowboy Gathering and Western
Swing Festival held at the Ft. Worth Stockyards. Awards were
announced on the rainy evening of Saturday, October 24th at the
famed Cattleman’s Restaurant with Hollywood stuntman Dean
Smith acting as the Master of Ceremonies and Charles Williams,
Executive Director of the Will Rogers Medallion Awards, presiding. Other awardees in the Western Non-Fiction category include the second place finalist Death of a Texas Ranger by Cynthia Leal Massey, Necessary Evil by Joe Johnson in third place,
Old 300: Gone to Texas by Paul N. Spellman in fourth place,
and The Death Row A ll-Stars by Chris Enss in fifth place.
The objective of the Will Rogers Medallion Award is to present high-quality Western scholarship and works to the general public in both an appealing and accessible manner. The award is named after Will Rogers, an American cowboy,
performer, newspaper columnist, social commentator, and actor. Rogers died in an airplane crash in 1935.

Congratulations to Alvin on a book well done!

7

