PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Seven, Number Six September 2017

President
Scott Brosowske
Vice president
Veronica Arias
Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer

Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

4

RIP Elizabeth “Liz” Melinsky

4a

Program Information: James Coverdale

5

From the Editor’s Desk

In the not-too-distant past I have
written at some length about those
fascinating little cupules. They are
the simplest, the most overlooked,
unquestionably the oldest, and very
likely the most important artifact
you will ever find. Here you see a
cluster of them beside a mortar
hole.
They go back to the days of Homo
habilis, and are found on every
continent, including our own.

What are they? I dunno!
The expert is Robert Bednarik if
you want the scientific point of
view. Charles Rau is poetic.

2

PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of September 20, 2017
The meeting was called to order by President Scott Brosowsw at 7 p,m, at the Dowmtown Amarillo Library second floor
Board Room.
There were 16 members in attendance.
PROGRAM: Member Andy Burcham shared his experience as a first-time participant at the June 2017 TAS Field
School at Camp Wood. The site was Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz, 1762-1771. Andy presented a comprehensive picture of what Field School is all about, from setting up to breaking up camp.
A feature for Newcomers was the Orientation by Pat Mercado-Alleger. Dr. Tamara Walter of Texas Tech was the Principal Investigator.
After giving some background of the Mission and prior excavation by Tunnel in 1962, Andy, with the aid of slides, gave
us a taste of Field School from the morning wake-up call and breakfast, morning excavation, free afternoons, and evening programs. New maps of the site were produced and excavations were backfilled until next year.
MINUTES: The May minutes were approved as published in the PASTIMES.
TREASURER’S REPORT: In the absence of the Treasurer there was no report.
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported a balance of $1,397.32 in the Money Market Account and $5085.72
in the Certificate of Deposit.
OLD BUSINESS: Since the Fannin History Fair will no longer be held, it was decided to put the purchase of atlatls on
hold.
NEW BUSINESS: After discussion, the motion was made by Jerry Leatherman to move the October 21 meeting to
Wild Cat Bluff, seconded by Paul Katz and approved.
The TAS annual meeting will be October 19,20,21 in Grapevine.
There will be a program at Wild Cat Bluff on October 7 with an opportunity for PAS to set up a table to publicize
PAS. There was discussion as to types of brochures for this event and others.
The meeting adjourned at 8:30 p.m.
Respectfully submitted:
Mary Ruthe Carter, Secretary

Never
Give Up!

3

UPCOMING EVENTS
October 18 7:00p.m.
5:00 p.m.

PAS — Wildcat Bluff
Pre-meeting dinner — Hoffbrau:7203 West Interstate 40
Frontage Road Ste G, Amarillo, TX 79106

Studer Banquet — Save your “Stuff” for Silent Auction
CSAW Brownbag Colloquium Series
Thursday Oct. 12, 12:30-1:30 p.m. Hazel Kelley Wilson Room, JBK 107
‘Rendered Obsolete’: Auto-Centric Amarillo and the Rise of High Plains Suburbia
Dr. Brian Ingrassia—History Department

Thursday Oct. 19, 7:30 p.m. Hazelwood Room, Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
“The Texas Gun Frontier and the Travails of Mexican History.”

Light Refreshments and book signing will follow.
Dr. Brian DeLay—History Dept. U. of CA, Berkeley

Tuesday Nov. 7, 12:30-1:30 p.m. Hazel Kelley Wilson Room, JBK 107
Deconstructing the Sphinx; the Revolutionary Environmentalism of Thomas Jefferson
Dr. Byron Pearson—History Department

Details at: http://www.wtamu.edu/csaw-upcoming-events.aspx

RIP Elizabeth “Liz” Thomas Melinsky
Liz held almost every office in the PAS from Secretary , Vice-President and President and Newsletter Editor. She
had been a member since the early 80’s or maybe before. She and her husband Mel attended almost every Studer
Banquet and usually brought one of her own hand-stitched needlepoints as an item for the silent auction.
She and Audrey Taylor spent many hours volunteering in the Archeology Department at P-PHM working on sorting
and creating a spreadsheet on the artifacts recovered by the Bakers and WPA from sites at Alibates and Antelope
Creek. We will miss her and send our condolences to her family.
Rolla Shaller

4

BIOGRAPHY
James Coverdale is an enrolled member of the Kiowa
Tribe. His great great-grandfather was a Kiowa warrior
named Two Hatchet (b.1849-d.1901). For the past 6
years he has worked for Courson Archaeological Re-

search in Perryton, Texas as a staff archaeologist. His
job is mainly working with historic period metal artifacts. identifying, cleaning, photographing, GIS mapping, and recording the artifacts into a computer database that he is designing . In his spare time he enjoys
making Native American art, replicas of artifacts, and
giving presentations about Southern Plains culture.

The Set'tan Kiowa Calendar
60 years of Kiowa Tribal History covering the years 1832 -1892

Abstract
In 1892, James Mooney, an ethnologist with the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology,
was collecting ethnographical material on the Kiowa, Comanche, and Apache (KCA) Reservation
in Indian Territory (later western Oklahoma). He heard about the Kiowa practice of recording tribal history by pictographs on animal hides. Mooney referred to this pictograph record as a "Kiowa
Calendar". Intrigued by this information, Mooney wished to locate, and if possible purchase one
of these calendars. Mooney was able to obtain a copy from a Kiowa man named Set'tan (Little
Bear).
Set'tan had kept a record of notable events since he was a young man, but now wished for Mooney
to have the calendar so that Kiowa tribal history would be preserved for future generations. This
donated copy was drawn on a sheet of manila paper instead of painted on a hide.
Around 1996 James Coverdale, a member of the Kiowa Tribe and a Kiowa artist, replicated the
Set'tan Calendar onto a brain tanned hide based on the information provided in the book "Calendar
History of the Kiowa Indians" by James Mooney. James will talk about the process of brain tanning, painting, and the history recorded on his replica calendar.

5

