PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Seven, Number 3 March 2017

President
Scott Brosowske
Vice president
Veronica Arias
Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer

Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE of CONTENTS
Page
Notes From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

3a

Program Information

4

Field School —Note from Tiffany

4b

General Information

5

Attendance Agreement and Registration Forms Sent as separate attachments.

Notes From the Editor’s Desk
The speaker at PAS this month will be Yours Truly. I’ve just been realizing how difficult it is to write your own Bio.
Should I write in the First Person, or in the Third? Why pretend that someone other than myself is writing this? Does
someone out there know more about my life than I do? On the other hand, listing my own accomplishments and credentials sounds suspiciously like bragging.
Anyway, I want to tell you a little about my reason for writing about Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument. When I
first fell in love with the flint, I tried asking about the place. What’s up there? And the answer was always the same:
Um……rocks. Today when people ask me about it, the answer is still the same: rocks. Some people think “Monument”
means a statue, or at least a large marble depiction of a battle site, or a famous pioneer, or maybe the Ten Commandments.
If you take the kids there, will you find swings, animals in cages, “Activities?” No, you’ll find: rocks.
Until last July, the Flint Quarries was the only National Monument in Texas. It’s right on Amarillo’s doorstep, and most
people had never heard of it. A few years ago I decided to try to find out why the few people who did know of it found this
place so fascinating. I thought I’d just go uptown and find a beautiful coffee table book, with lots of pictures. Sorry, there
aren’t any. There are some archaeological reports, and with due apologies to PAS members, nothing is as boring and hardto-read for the non-professional as archaeology reports.
Clearly, there is a gap here, so I started out to fill it. I began by cutting this elephant up in small pieces. Little did I know
what I was getting into. Even the little cupules required months of research. I’ve dealt with them in part two of this series,
which is being published and will be available at SWFAS this April. The present effort is part three. I realize the material
will require editing and re-writing many times before it can be made into a book palatable to the general reader without
offending the scientific community too deeply.
Ultimately the whole thing is about: rocks.

2

MINUTES OF FEBRUARY 15, 2017
PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The meeting was called to order by President Scott Brosowske at 7 p.m. at the Downtown Amarillo Library second floor
Board Room.
There were 15 members and guests in attendance.
PROGRAM: Member Joe D. Rogers' presentation, "TAS ACADEMY-Lower Pecos Canyonlands," was a report of his
attendance at the Academy in January. He gave a brief account of the history of the Academies and how this one was a
departure from the usual format in that the "classroom" was the actual canyon lands. Liberally illustrated with slides, the
program gave listeners a real sense of the scope of the Academy. The sites visited will be restored to their original states
to provide future researchers opportunity to learn more.
MINUTES: The January minutes were approved as published in the PAS Newsletter.
TREASURER'S REPORT: The Treasurer did not have an update at this time.
PUBLICATION REPORT: Rolla Shaller was absent.
NEW BUSINESS: Southwest Federation will meet in April. Our own member, Beryl Hughes, will be one of the presenters.
The exhibit and programs at P-PHM on World War I continue

The meeting adjourned at 8:15 pm.
Respectfully submitted,
Mary Ruthe Carter, Secretary

3

PROGRAM INFORMATION
ABSTRACT
Shall We Dress for Dinner?:
Food, Fiber and Flint at Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument
By

Beryl Cain Hughes
This is not a stone-and-bones archaeological report. It is pretty much cognitive archaeology; that is, it concerns the people who lived there over the centuries. Beryl’s degrees in History, Anthropology and Library Science have given her a
wide-angle view of the story of mankind.
One human group differs from another in response to climate and geomorphology; that is, Alpine dwellers will have
different challenges from those in the jungle, and even their minds and bodies will have evolved differently. She will
address briefly the three major ways Homo sapiens differs from the rest of the animal kingdom—large brains, control of
fire, and language. What did they eat, what kind of clothing did they wear, where did they go when it rained? What place
did flint have in their lives?

Upcoming Events
Next PAS Meeting: March 15, 7:00 p.m., Amarillo Public Library, Downtown Branch 2nd.
Floor. Please join us for pre-meeting dinner, 5:30 p.m., at Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor.
TAS Field School: June 10-17, Mission San Lorenzo de la Cruz. Details follow.
Look for Registration Form and Attendance Agreement, sent here as attachments.
Any problems should be addressed to Ron or Tiffany, email addresses bottom of page five.
forwarded from Tiffany Osburn
~~~
The TAS field school committee has received several inquiries for information about this summer's
field school in Camp Wood. The much anticipated new TAS website will go live very soon with
online field school registration and information. In the meantime, I'd like to provide the registration
form and required agreement attachment, as well as a sneak peak at some of the information that will
be published in the upcoming Spring
Newsletter.

4

This year, the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) invites members to attend the annual summer Field School at Mission
San Lorenzo de la Cruz in beautiful Real County. The primary Field School excavation area will at the Spanish Mission
in Camp Wood on Texas State Highway 55, 40 miles north of Uvalde. Barksdale and the TAS campground are only three
miles north the mission. The dates for the 2017 Field School will be June 10-17. We hope for a really big turn out this
year!
The field school campground will be in Barksdale, south of the Nueces Canyon High School. Our camp area is on the
north bank of the Nueces River in a lovely location on private land generously provided for our use. The river runs cool
and clear adjacent to our campground so bring your swim suit, fishing pole, and lawn chairs to relax in the shallow water. There is no potable water or electricity in the tent area but portable toilets and a trash container will be on site. Tent
camping and pop-up campers are encouraged.
Other lodging options are available locally including RV parks in the Camp Wood and Barksdale area. Please make your
reservations early, this part of the Nueces is popular in the summer months. TAS will be offering breakfast and supper as
always and will utilize the Mary B. Powers Hall as well as our usual cook’s trailer. Shower facilities will be provided in
the local school. The dining and program areas as well as the school are a short walk from the campground. Water and
ice will be available in this location also.
The field school will conduct excavations at the Spanish colonial mission in conjunction with the Texas Tech University
student field school under Dr. Tamra Walter. Take a look at the TAS Winter newsletter for her article on the Mission
excavation project.
This year, the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) invites members to attend the annual summer Field School at Mission
San Lorenzo de la Cruz in beautiful Real County. The primary Field School excavation area will at the Spanish Mission
in Camp Wood on Texas State Highway 55, 40 miles north of Uvalde. Barksdale and the TAS campground are only three
miles north the mission. The dates for the 2017 Field School will be June 10-17. We hope for a really big turn out this
year!

The field school campground will be in Barksdale, south of the Nueces Canyon High School. Our camp area is on the
north bank of the Nueces River in a lovely location on private land generously provided for our use. The river runs cool
and clear adjacent to our campground so bring your swim suit, fishing pole, and lawn chairs to relax in the shallow water. There is no potable water or electricity in the tent area but portable toilets and a trash container will be on site. Tent
camping and pop-up campers are encouraged.
Other lodging options are available locally including RV parks in the Camp Wood and Barksdale area. Please make your
reservations early, this part of the Nueces is popular in the summer months. TAS will be offering breakfast and supper as
always and will utilize the Mary B. Powers Hall as well as our usual cook’s trailer. Shower facilities will be provided in
the local school. The dining and program areas as well as the school are a short walk from the campground. Water and
ice will be available in this location also.
The field school will conduct excavations at the Spanish colonial mission in conjunction with the Texas Tech University
student field school under Dr. Tamra Walter. Take a look at the TAS Winter newsletter for her article on the Mission
excavation project.
The TAS survey crews will be working to identify and record sites on several beautiful ranches in the area.
Other activities include evening lectures, workshops, Archeolympics, and of course the Wally margarita party featuring
live music. Please review the upcoming newsletter article covering the Archeolympics event for additional information. A 1.5-hour metal detecting class will also be sponsored by the Education Committee. Also, teachers receive
CPE credit hours for most Field School activities including afternoon and evening programs (contact Robin Matthews,
Education Committee Chairman, for more information).
As always, during one evening of field school, the TAS will host an artifact identification night and public presentation
for the local community.

Please see the upcoming new TAS website for what to expect in camp, a general daily schedule, recommended equipment
for camp and field activities, camp rules, registration, and additional Field School information as it becomes available. Please contact Ron Ralph or Tiffany Osburn with questions.

Ron Ralph, ronralph@austin.rr.com
Tiffany Osburn, tiffanyosburn@yahoo.com

5

