PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Eight, Number Two February 2018

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott D.
Broskowske
Secretary
Andy Burcham

We are at the dawn of a golden age of
space exploration which will transform our
relationship with the Earth and with the
cosmos.
Sir Richard Branson, Founder, Virgin Galactic

Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor

Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

3a

Program Information:

4

CSAW — John Erickson

5

From the Editor’s Desk
The song called “On A Clear Day You Can See Forever” was written by Alan Jay
Lerner and Burton Lane in 1929 and has made the charts repeatedly ever since.
This month PAS members will be treated to a talk on ArchaeoAstronomy, reminding
all of us that our prehistoric forebears observed the sun and moon and stars, even as
we do today. They left records of the equinoxes and solstices on stone. We call it
rock art, but of course it was much more than that. It was a record of the seasons by
which they lived.

With the advent of writing in the earliest civilizations, ArchaeoAsronomy became Astrology. Like the rock art, it was a
calendar, a way of consulting the stars to predict the seasons.
Today we have seen men walk on the moon, and even you and I can fly beyond the confines of earth. There appears to be
no end to man’s ingenuity and no limit to his desire to learn more of the cosmos.
If you’d like to cruise among the stars, you can start with a virtual tour while you sit at your computer. See
www.virgingalactic.com

2

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minute of the last meeting, February 21, 2018
The meeting was called to order by President Veronica Arias at 7 p.m. at Amarillo Downtown Library.
There were 18 in attendance.
PROGRAM: Scott Brosowske began his presentation by showing a video entitled, “Exploring and Growing at the Buried
City - Can You Dig It”. The video recounted the history of several excavations at Buried City, beginning with the 1907
dig by Dr. T.L.Eyerly (with Floyd Studer present as a student). The Buried City people had a significant agricultural component in their culture. They raised corn, beans, squash, and other crops
Scott continued with a PowerPoint presentation entitled, “The Wolf Creek Indian Garden Project: Insights into Gardening
on the Southern High Plains”. He told of the ongoing experimental archeology project to grow an annual Indian Garden
with crops like those grown by the Odessa Phase occupants of Buried City. The Indian Garden project seeks out heirloom
native seeds, not modern hybrids. Seed sources have included Wichita corn, Arikara squash and watermelons, Cochiti
Pueblo popcorn, and Cherokee Trail-of-Tears black pole beans. Wolf Creek gardeners (whether modern or ancient) have
many challenges: drought, floods, wind, insects, birds, raccoons and rabbits, etc. The Indian Garden Project has now completed its 9th year.
MINUTES: The Treasurer’s Report from January’s minutes in PASTIMES was revised to read as follows: “Treasurer
Pam Allison reported a balance of $4385.64 for year-end 2017. Still pending is a donation to the Friends of the THC in
appreciation for Brad Jones’ presentation at the Studer Banquet.” The January minutes were then approved as amended.
TREASURER’S REPORT: A report of the account balance was not available at this February meeting. The planned
donation to the Friends of the THC in appreciation for Brad Jones’ presentation at the Studer Banquet is still pending.
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported a 1/31/2018 balance of $1,382.22 in the Money Market Account,
and $5,103.28 in the Certificate of Deposit.
OLD BUSINESS: The new version of the PAS Brochure should be ready to publish after a minor revision to include our
meeting location as the Downtown Amarillo Library. If the revision and printing are done soon, Scott Brosowske and
James Coverdale will distribute the new PAS Brochures while also distributing posters for their upcoming Stone Age Fair.
NEW BUSINESS: Veronica Arias noted that the Southwest Federation has issued a call for papers in their latest newsletter. The upcoming Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies 54th Symposium will be Saturday, April 21, 2018
in Iraan, Texas.
Progress continues towards holding the 2019 TAS Field School in (or near) Palo Duro Canyon. Negotiations are underway
with a willing Principal Investigator for the project.
Scott announced that the Stone Age Fair will be held on Saturday, April 21 at the Perryton Museum. A large Clovis point
display will be featured (first time to appear at this event).
The meeting adjourned at 8:30 p.m.
Respectfully submitted,
Andy Burcham, Secretary
*****

Upcoming Events
March 20 CSAW “Prairie Gothic: Writing Regional History.” John Erickson. See page 5.
March 21. Next meeting: 7:00 p.m. Amarillo Public Library, Downtown.
Pre-Meeting Dinner, 5:30, Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor, Amarillo
April 21 2018. SWFAS. Iraan Civic Center, located near the City Park. Pres. Jeff Peters.(peters5204@sbcglobal.net)
Stone Age Fair, Perryton Museum, 1200 North Main Street, Perryton, 806-435-6400

3

PROGRAM INFORMATION
Preliminary Report on a Proposed Archaeoastronomical Site in the Texas Panhandle
Abstract
Archaeoastronomy is the study of how ancient peoples studied and understood phenomena in the sky and the role
the sky played in their culture. Most commonly these studies involved observations of the movements of the sun or moon
during the various seasons of the year. Stellar positions could also have been studied.
Of primary importance was to use the movement of the sun to mark the beginning of summer and winter

(solstices) and spring and fall (equinoxes). How these sun positions were recorded shows a great deal of variation. A few
prominent examples will be presented.
A brief description of the Panhandle Aspect site where the proposed archaeoastronomical marker is located will
be given to establish context. The circumstances surrounding discovery of the marker and investigations to establish its
use as a tool for observing sunrise on the equinox will be presented.

Bio
Arthur (Jerry) Foster was born in Washington D.C. in 1943. Raised in

the D.C. and Maryland area he gained an interest in archaeology, geology, and
history from frequent visits to the Smithsonian Institute as a boy. He received
a BS and MCS in chemistry from Ole Miss and a PH.D. in physical chemistry
from the Univ. of So. Miss. where he met his future wife Patricia. After a brief
job as a chemist for General Electric, he moved to Texas and taught at Frank
Phillips in Borger. Jerry finished his teaching career as Professor of Phys. Sci.
at Amarillo College. He has been retired since 2005 and has used his time to
travel, camp, fish, hunt, and further his interests in archaeology, geology, history. The Foster family now has 2 children, 3 grandchildren, and 1 greatgrand-

child.

4

5

