PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Nine, Number Three, March 2019

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Andy Burchard
Miranda Bible
Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes
Beryl C. Hughes
1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the last meeting

3

Upcoming events

4

SWFAS
Courthouses of Texas

4a
5

Program Information:

6

Geomorphic Studies Underlie the 2019 TAS Field School Design in Palo
Duro Canyon State Park. Christopher Lintz, Research Associate, Texas
State University
7-9
Midland Maps for SWFAS

9a

From the Editor’s Desk
It’s been fun, folks! But the time has come for a new Editor.
I will finish the April and May issues, but someone else will appear here, beginning with the September issue.
Any takers? Let Veronica and Scott know if your ambitions lie in this direction.
Paul Katz has arranged once again for PAS members to go to Lamar School for one of their Science
Days, May 17. Students call themselves “mini mad scientists,” and we show them a little of the fundamentals of Archaeology. Paul arranges for each of us have a table with four or five students at a
time, rotating through the day.
Part of the Amarillo Independent School District, Lamar is an independent, non-profit entity for those
who are disadvantaged because of low income, ethnicity, non-English speaking, or other problems,
such as complete or partial deafness. They have an enrollment of 324 students, pre-k to grade five,
with 32 teachers, giving it an 11-1 ratio of students to teachers. Their students are rated as performing
better than at most other schools in the State, especially in the area of improvement year-to-year.
Teachers exhibit patience and loving kindness as they provide a variety of learning experiences for
the students. The kids may sit or sprawl on the lawn while a teacher, in appropriate costume, reads to
them, and occasionally acts out the story. One "mini mad scientist" day, they made their own harmonicas!
This is a fine learning experience for PAS members as well as for the students. (And besides, you get
a free lunch!!)
If you feel that you'd like to participate, please let Paul know by email: katzes-priam@msn.com
Never Trust an Atom. They make up everything!
(Inscription on tee shirts from Lamar).

2

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of February 16, 2019
The meeting was called to order by President Veronica Arias at 7:20 p.m. in the Amarillo Downtown Library.
There were 23 persons in attendance.
PROGRAM: The program for the evening was presented by Dr. Alex Hunt, Professor of English at WTAMU, and Director of the Center for the Study of the American West (CSAW). His presentation was entitled, “George Hunt and the
Kiowa Buffalo Hunt of 1887”.
George Hunt (1878 or 1881 – 1942) was a Kiowa interpreter and cultural informant for scholars. He was a friend of
Charles Goodnight – they visited and exchanged letters. Alex cited a 1930 letter from George Hunt to a historical scholar
recounting a Kiowa version of an 1887 Buffalo hunt. This very famous story of “The Last Buffalo Hunt” has been retold
(from several sources) in many different versions as Western History, Historical Fiction, myth, and legend. Alex discussed several books and short stories which contain a version of the Last Buffalo Hunt story.
Indigenous informants/collaborators like George Hunt have a crucial role in passing on culturally accurate information to
academic scholars. Even so, scholars (and their sources) have their own biases and blind spots.
MINUTES: The minutes from the previous meeting (Jan. 16, 2019) were accepted as printed in the PASTIMES newsletter.
TREASURER’S REPORT: Treasurer Pam Allison reported a current balance of $2644.29 in the regular account.

PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported ending January 2019 balances of $2,445.18 in the Money Market
Account, and $5,147.42 in the Certificate of Deposit.
OLD BUSINESS: No items of Old Business were mentioned.
NEW BUSINESS:
Veronica introduced two visitors from TAS (and the Tarrant County Archeological Society), Chris Meis and Gen Freix.
Chris is Chairman of the TAS Annual Meeting Committee, and also has the role of assigning participants to TAS Field
School crews. Gen is TAS Website Co-Editor and leads the Silent Auction at Annual Meeting. Chris and Gen were in
Amarillo to check out the Downtown Embassy Suites (TAS Annual Meeting location), and work with Scott Brosowske
on Annual Meeting issues. Chris reported that the Embassy Suites facilities looked very good.
Gen requested local volunteer help from a PAS Member to assist with the Silent Auction as Co-Chair. Please contact
Gen by email at ail.com if you can help with the Silent Auction in October.
An Archeology Fair event will be held one day during the June TAS Field School at PaloDuro Canyon. Rolla is planning
to have a Publications table at this Fair. Should there also be a PAS Information table?
Science Day at Lamar Elementary will be all day on May 17. PAS members will again volunteer to introduce Lamar
students to Archeology with a presentation and hands-on activities. Contact Paul Katz by email ( katzespriam@msn.com ) if you wish to participate in this event.
Other pending events were mentioned as follows:
Several GeoArcheologists and TPWD Archeologists are visiting PaloDuro Canyon State Park again this week, and will
work through the week of February 25th. This is another round of pre-work for the upcoming TAS Field School in June,
2019.
The upcoming 2019 Southwest Federation Meeting is March 30 in Midland at Midland College.
The 2019 Stone Age Fair in Perryton is scheduled for the third weekend in April.
The meeting adjourned at 8:23 p.m.
Respectfully submitted,
Andy Burcham, Secretary

3

Upcoming Events
March 20

7:00 p.m.
5:30 p.m.

Regular meeting, PAS. Amarillo Public Library, Downtown Branch, Upstairs.
Please join us for our pre-meeting dinner, Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor.

March 30

SWFAS, Midland, at Midland College. Information on Page Four.

April 30

2019 Stone Age Fair, Perryton.

May 17, all day

Lamar Elementary School Introduce students to archaeology.
Email Paul Katz katzes-priam@msn.com if you can help.

July 15-16-17

Canyonlands: Trip to Big Bend, three nights.
There is a variety of prices and sizes of rooms from $183 cottage to sleep 7, a $161 casa
to sleep 5, and a room with 2 beds $143. Bunking up will keep the price down. RVs are
limited to first come, first serve, and the road is quite a challenge.
Rick Day, Richard Galle, Carol Campbell and Ellen Fowlkes have visited the park and
are knowledgeable if you have questions.
If you are interested, check online or call Chisos Lodge at Big Bend State Park at
432 477-2291. DO NOT DELAY in making reservations is the best advice from our
leader, Rick Day.

Southwestern Federation of Archaeological Societies
announcements and information
Friday night, March 29th , 7:00 pm . Social and Dinner at Gerardo’s Casita (grill and cantina ) .
2407 North Big Spring Street
*rsvp to attend on Friday night: (robbibr@grandecom.net) or 432-553-1365

Saturday March 30th SWFAS 55th annual Symposium
Registration 8:00 am – 9:00 am, paper presentations to follow .
Midland College, 3600 North Garfield
Directions: there are two entrances off Garfield street for the college campus both feed onto the circle drive, turn right, follow the signage to F. Marie Hall Academic Building which will be on your left or the inside of the circle where most of the
campus buildings are located.
Sunday there are no activities

See Map on Page 9a

4

COUNTY COURTHOUSES OF TEXAS
According to the Texas Historical Commission, "Texas has more historic courthouses that any other state.
Today more than 234 courthouses still stand that are least 50 years old."

Donley County Courthouse
This is Donley’s third courthouse. In 1882 the brand-new
county may have leased and remodeled a private home
owned by J.S. Wright. Other sources site a rock building
used as a hotel. Charles Goodnight, among others, was
appointed to construct a temporary courthouse, which
quickly became inadequate.
Meantime, in 1887, the town was moved to its present
site, and block 14 was designated the place for the new
courthouse.
Designed by the architectural firm of Bulger and Rapp,
and built by Troutman Brothers Contractors, both of
Trinidad, Colorado, this distinctive public building
opened in November 1891. The original Romanesque
Revival design included prominent towers, contrasting
red brick and quarried limestone, and complex projecting
elements. Work in the 1930s resulted in removal of the
entire third floor, as well as many architectural details.
The county restored the courthouse to its original splendor and rededicated it on July 4, 2003. Today, it is the
oldest functioning courthouse in the Texas Panhandle.

Donley County, formed from Young and Bexar territories,
was created in 1876, and organized six years later, 1882. It
was named for attorney Stockton P. Donley. Donley had
been an officer in the Seventh Regiment of Texas Volunteers. He was a well-known defense attorney, and was
elected to the Texas Supreme Court in 1866, from which
the Reconstruction government removed him in 1867. He
died in 1871 at the age of 49.
The County seat is Clarendon, once called the Athens of the Panhandle. Rev. Lewis Henry Carhart, a Methodist minister,
and his brother-in-law, Alfred Sully, of New York, bought railroad land scrip entitling them to 343 sections of land, most
of which was in Donley County. In 1878 the Clarendon Land Investment and Agency Company, an English firm, began
backing Carhart. The investment firm named the new town, at the junction of Carroll Creek and the Salt Fork of the Red
River (site is now under Lake Greenbelt), Clarendon. The coming of the railroad dictated a move to its present location.
Of course Clarendon has its share of legends, beginning with the unlikely idea that “Clarendon” is derived from Rev. Carhart’s wife’s name, Clara. Another story is that the Indians warned the first settlers not to build at Carroll Creek and the
Salt Fork of the Red: too many evil spirits there. Many feel that subsequent tornado damage confirmed the warning.
When the cemetery was moved, several gravesites (perhaps 15 or so) could not be identified. There is a monument to
them in the new cemetery.
Perhaps the strongest legend is that Clarendon was always absolutely dry — six or seven Methodist churches and no liquor. Thus its nickname: “Saints’ Roost.” But those pesky archaeologists are not impressed. Their digs revealed one or
more caches of empty liquor bottles. Newspaper files from around the turn of the century detail barfights in the early
morning hours. Nevertheless, the nickname sticks, and the town celebrates “Saints’ Roost Day” annually.

5

PROGRAM INFORMATION
Panhandle Archaeology Society
March 20, 2019
Human Lifeways in the Oklahoma Panhandle:
10,300 Years Before Present
Dakota Larrick

University of Oklahoma
Abstract
My master’s research investigates how human lives were conditioned by the
Southern Plains ecosystem in the Oklahoma Panhandle during the Late
Dakota Larrick
Paleoindian period around 10,300 calendar years before present. During roughly
five years of excavation and ten years of broader investigation at the Bull Creek occupation site we have shown how various lines of evidence demonstrate that groups during this time had keen knowledge of resources throughout this broad
landscape and were strategic and successful in using them to survive. Bison were of central importance no matter the season; during the summer, dozens of other animal species were added to this. Few sites of such old age survive the forces of
time in the plains landscape, and even fewer have as significant a faunal assemblage as at Bull Creek. The site (and the
nearby, related Ravenscroft bison kill site) also hold a varied assemblage of stone points, tools, and debitage. Analyzing
and comparing the forms and source materials within this assemblage and combining this information with isoptopic data
on bison herd migrations further allows unique insight into the late Paleoindian landscape and human lifeways.

Biography
I am currently working on an M.A. in Anthropology at the University of Oklahoma, specializing in archaeology.
After graduating this summer and following a brief respite from academia, I hope to continue my education through a doctorate program and design a project that combines my interest in landscape archaeology with environmental sustainability
in the present. When not wandering the plains with my eyes on the ground or hands in the dirt, I’ll probably be found in
the nearest yoga studio or sleeping at my desk.

Made in
China

6

Geomorphic Studies Underlie the 2019 TAS Field School Design
in Palo Duro Canyon State Park
Christopher Lintz
Research Associate
Texas State University

Figure One. Volunteers examining the stratigraphic profile cut into an alluvial fan and
showing the locatons of OSL and sediment sample columns.

In June, 2019, an estimated 300-400 Texas Archeological Society members will converge on Palo Duro Canyon State Park
to participate in the annual field school. Planning for this event has been in the works for most of the past two years. In
early March, the second phase of geomorphological background research wrapped up in an effort to understand depositional
contexts and target areas that are to provide a most productive field school session. This brief note summarizes the recent
geomorphology field work, although the sedimentological and chronometric results are not yet available.

Palo Duro Canyon formed by the erosion of the Prairie Dog Town Fork Red River (PDTFRR) into the eastern edge of the
High Plains has resulted in 500 to 600 foot deep canyon displaying majestically colorful Ogallala, Permian and Triassic age
deposits. A portion of Palo Duro Canyon was deeded by private landowners in 1933 and became the focus of park development by the Civilian Conservation Corps under the federal New Deal program. The park is currently managed by Texas
Parks and Wildlife Division (TPWD) on behalf of the citizens of Texas. Over the years, lands encompassing the park have
expanded incrementally, so that today, the State Park contains more than 27,000 acres.
Prior to 1974, archeological studies were conducted in an informal and non-systematic fashion within the park. Since then,
archeological surveys have been required by state and federal laws for proposed developments, but most of the 20 state archeological permits have focused on revisiting earlier sites or focusing on proposed road, trail, and campsite developments

7

or brush management projects. Since 2000, archeological survey work has become more rigorous and often entails
systematic survey at regular transect intervals and shovel tests to locate buried prehistoric and historic cultural remains. Only 41 archaeological sites are presently recorded within the park. Although several metal detecting
sweeps have been conducted on several areas, only one site, 41RD66, has been the focus of archaeological testing in
the park, and only four test units were dug to assess on vs. off-site sediment characteristics.
The geoarchaeological studies of 2018-2019 are designed to enhance an understanding of where archeological sites
are likely to occur and the ages of Holocene sediments in parts of the canyon. These investigations were organized
by Dr. Charles Frederick and Arlo McKee under TPWD and state antiquities permits issued to Dr. Kevin Hanselka,
the Field School Principal Investigator. Dr. Charles Frederick and Arlo McKee were supported by a cadre of 14
student and professional volunteers from Texas and Oklahoma. Funds for obtaining dates on sediments were secured by a grant from the Summerlee Foundation. In addition, TPWD previously contracted a Lidar (aerial laser
scans) survey that provides detailed imagery at the 0.5 m topographic contour resolution throughout the park. The
team has been using the Lidar data to estimate terrace heights above streams to enable a projection of comparable
ages of landforms for mapping erosional and depositional areas and for providing context for the recorded sites in
the park. This data has also proven to be invaluable for identifying alluvial terraces and tracing their remnants along
the river and stream beds, and as a tool for identifying archaeological survey priority areas in the planning process.
Palo Duro Canyon is one of the most dynamic landforms in all of Texas. Over the centuries, occasional storms have
caused extensive gullying, and mass erosion from the steep canyon wall slopes and domes and corresponding sediment deposition on valley floors in the form of alluvial fans and terraces. Depending upon the geological beds involved, the erosion has left large boulders suspended on pillars of bedrock sediments (called hoodoos) as picturesque testimony of nature’s power. Elsewhere, thick sediments cover segments of the valley floor, as demonstrated
by the recovery by a TPWD survey crew of a ca. 1,500 year-old corner-notched arrow point at a depth of 1 m from
an alluvial terrace near Tub Springs Draw.
The recent geomorphic work has focused on identifying the depositional potential and ages on three of four kinds of
landforms: alluvial terraces, alluvial fan deposits, and erosional strath terraces. Further geomorphic work that may
be conducted before this summer’s TAS field school and will focus on the ages and deposition of the fourth landform type: pediment ramps that are residual vegetated sediment strips extending from the valley floor up the sides of
valley margins and domes. Some archaeological sites in the park, like 41RD66 mentioned above, represent prehistoric occupation on these pediment surfaces. Most of the geomorphology was not conducted on archeological sites,
and no cultural features were found during mechanical trenching on previously record sites examined during this
program.
Most of the recent geomorphic studies have focused on depositional areas along the main tributary of Sunday Canyon and the PDTFRR within the high visitor-camping/use areas of the park. The Sunday Canyon studies conducted
during November 27-29, 2018, primarily involved hand cleaning 3 to 4 m tall cut-bank terraces accessed by an extension ladder. One small pediment near the Wolfberry Campsite was also studied. Field observations involved
describing the depositional sequences exposed in the profile, looking for “soil developments” (either a darkening of
the sediments from decomposed plants, or a homogenization of strata from prolonged plant root mixing of strata as
an indicator of temporary stable landform surface suitable for occupation), and collecting a series of small samples
from stratigraphic contexts for sediment texture, magnetic susceptibility, and chemical composition. Each profile
was sketched, described and profiled, and a series of optical stimulated luminescent (OSL) dating samples was extracted from strata that provided ages of key sedimentary deposition units.
OSL is a relatively new dating method that obtains ages of how long certain minerals (mostly quartz sand or feldspar) have been buried. Essentially, these minerals accumulate luminescence signals, which are electrons “excited”
from low natural radiation levels in the surround sediments. These electrons become trapped and accumulate in
defects or holes in the lattice structure of the quartz or feldspar minerals. Exposure of the mineral grain to sunlight
will release or zero-out the accumulated luminescence, so the method determines the age when the sand grain was
last exposed to sunlight.
The grain samples are collected in metal tubes pounded into the sediment profile and sealed with masking tape to
prevent exposure to sunlight.

8

In the laboratory, individual or groups of quartz sand grains from the center of the metal tube are exposed to an external stimulus, such as a blue-green light, to release a natural photon of light; the intensity of released light is a
measure of age. However to obtain a chronometric age, a “bleached sample” (other grains from that source exposed
to light) is subjected to known doses of radiation in steps of increasing intensity and measured until light saturation
is achieved. This results in a site-specific induced luminescence response curve. A comparison of the calculation of
the natural sample light to the site-specific induced curve provides an age estimate of when the sample was last naturally zeroed-out.
Most of the geomorphic work conducted along PDTFRR in February 21-27, 2019, utilized a backhoe or small
trencher to gain access to the upper 2-3 m of alluvial terraces near the confluence of Sunday Canyon northward to
the Trading Post. Other profiles up to 3 m tall were hand-dug into the edges of alluvial profiles near Sunday Canyon or on alluvial fans near the Cactus Camp area. Impressive boulder and mud flow events were found in select
areas of some alluvial fans. The profile recording and data collection methods are essentially the same as those used
in the November field session; however, soil samples were also collected for radiocarbon dating.

The results from the geomorphic studies were successful and resulted in the collection of nine OSL dating samples,
and innumerable sediment samples for texture and chemistry. The Lidar and geomorphic samples, and chronometric results are anticipated to cover the Late and maybe Middle Holocene deposits within Palo Duro Canyon primarily within the lower few miles of Sunday Canyon and the portion of the PDTFRR valley with high visitor usage. The
goal is to develop a guidebook by the June TAS field school that can be used to guide the TAS surveys and excavation field methods, and on-site tours by the June TAS field school that can be used to guide the TAS surveys and
excavation methods, and to serve as a teaching tool for geomorphic tours to be conducted during the TAS event.
The background obtained from this effort should streamline the field approach to investigate specific areas and enhance the information obtained from the archeological field school. By all accounts, this field school should be an
amazing experience.
Acknowledgements

I want to thank Arlo McKee and Charles Frederick for allowing me to participate along with the many volunteers
who came out for these investigations. I thank Beryl Hughes for asking me for this submittal to Pastimes, I also
want to acknowledge the help of Arlo McKee, Tony Lyle, Veronica Arias and Rolla Shaller for reviewing this note
and substantially improving the accuracy and clarity of it.

*************************
Midland College
3600 North Garfield
Midland, TX

From Lubbock, go
south on 87
through LaMesa
on into Midland.
The trick will be
finding Garfield.
Ask directions. Or
follow your GPS,
as we did going to
Fort Chadbourne!

9

