PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Eight, Number Six, September 2018

President
Veronica Arias

Vice president
Scott Brosowske

Secretary
Andy Burchard
Miranda Bible

Treasurer
Pam Allison

Publications
Rolla Shaller

Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

4

Program Information:

5

Cooper Bison Kill Site

6

From the Editor’s Desk
Clovis, Folsom, and Gault
A line that has been attributed to Mark Twain, Will Rogers, and various other
people, says “It ain’t that we’re ignorant; it’s just that so much of what we
know ain’t so.”
For a very long time, probably a century or so, we have “known” that the Clovis people were the first people to enter the North American continent. Next, we were told, were the
Folsom people. We have their distinctive projectile points, both made from Alibates flint. We’ll know
more about all this after hearing Dr. Asher this month.
The Gault Site has long been considered to be a Clovis site, but it appears that there is much older
material below the Clovis layer. For want of a more precise name, as far as I know those people are
called Pre-Clovis.
It will be interesting to learn more about all of these groups, where they came from and whether they
are connected to each other somehow.

RIP

Long-time PAS member

Joyce Schultz

2

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of May 16, 2018

Minutes of May 16, 2018
The meeting was called to order by President Veronica Arias at 7 p.m. in the Amarillo Downtown
Library.
There were 12 persons in attendance.
PROGRAM: The program for the evening was “A Fourteenth Century Star Chart from the Southern
Plains” by Dr. Susan C. Vehik. Dr. Vehik discussed how she came across this finger impressed daub
and how she came to the conclusion of these impressions being a star chart.
MINUTES: Careyn Henslee moved that the April Minutes be approved as published in PASTIMES.
This was seconded by Rolla Shaller and the Minutes were accepted.
TREASURER’S REPORT: Pam Allison was absent, therefore there was no Treasurer’s Report.
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported an ending March balance of $1,253.88 in the
Money Market Account, and $5,122.16 in the Certificate of Deposit. $120 were spent on Southwest
Federation Transactions and $10 were spent on dues for the Southwest Federation.
OLD BUSINESS: Rolla announced he received the quotes for the brochures. Sir Speedy’s for 500 was
going to be $285, and for 1000 it would be $403. Swifty’s for 500 it would be $252.83, and for 1000 it
would be $310.07. Scott motioned we go with Swifty and it was unanimously approved that we would
get 1000 from Swifty.
Scott announced that TAS has signed a contract with Embassy Suites in Amarillo and almost all of the
demands set by TAS were met by Embassy. The dates for the 2019 Annual Meeting will be October 10,
11, and 12. The Chamber of Commerce said they will put down $5000 toward the conference that can
be used for things such as tours.

NEW BUSINESS: Rolla announced that two to three years ago the Southwest Federation started upgrading the constitution. It is now typed and done. He also has federation publications for sale for
$12.00. The Federation wants to develop a website. Tom Ashmore said he thinks there are free websites
available which include ads. Tom would manage the site. This was voted for unanimously. Doug announced that TAS is revamping their website. Erin Frigo is willing to set up a Facebook page and maintain it. After some discussion this was approved unanimously.
Scott said the Stone Age Fair was awesome.
The meeting adjourned at 8:19 p.m.

Miranda Bible

3

UPCOMING EVENTS
September 19, 2018

Panhandle Archaeological Society

7:00 PM

Amarillo public library, downtown
Pre-meeting dinner Napoli’s 700 So. Taylor
September 29, 2018

5:30 PM

Flint Fest, Alibates Flint Quarries Ntl. Mon.
October is Texas Archaeology Month

October 6, 2018

Star Party, Alibates Flint Quarries Ntl. Mon.

October 24-27, 2018

Plains Anthropological Society 76th Annual Conference
San Antonio, Texas

October 26-28, 2018

http://plainsanthropologicalsociety.org/

Texas Archaeological Society Annual Meeting
San Antonio, Texas

April 10-14, 2019

7:30-10:00 PM

https://txarch.org/civicrm-event/189

Society for American Archaeology 84th Annual Meeting
Albuhttp://saa.org/
AnnualMeetDeAbouttheSocitabid/138/

querque, New Mexico
AbouttheSociety/
ing/ tabid/138/
fault.aspxhttp://saa.org/
ety/AnnualMeeting/tabid/
Default.aspx

4

PROGRAM INFORMATION
Where’s the Point? Regional Pattern Interpretations in Clovis and Folsom
Artifact Distributions
By
Brendon P. Asher

Abstract

Clovis and Folsom/Midland artifacts are not evenly distributed
across the Central Plains. This presentation reviews private artifact collections and isolated artifact discoveries from the Continental Divide of Colorado to the eastern Kansas border to characterize Clovis and Folsom land use and lithic procurement across
the Central Great Plains. It is argued that artifact distributions
are influenced by a variety of modern factors including ground
surface visibility and collector/research intensity. Prehistoric factors are also considered, including changing environmental condi-

tions of the terminal Pleistocene and diverse land use and resource acquisition strategies between Clovis and Folsom groups.

Biography
Brendon P. Asher is the Director of Blackwater Draw National Historic Landmark and Museum and an anthropology instructor at Eastern New Mexico University. He received his PhD in Anthropology from the University of Kansas in 2015.
His dissertation addresses Clovis and Folsom lithic procurement and land use across the Central Plains. Through this research, he has been afforded the opportunity to work extensively with private artifact collectors and is passionate about
fostering collaborative efforts between avocational and professional archaeologists. Asher’s research interests are diverse,
ranging from early peopling of the Americas to the impact of European trade goods on traditional chipped stone technologies. He is currently leading a number of projects addressing Clovis projectile point morphology and variability from the
Clovis type-site.

PAS Visit to Blackwater Draw (Date?)

5

COOPER BISON KILL SITE
This year marks the 25th anniversary of a major discovery made by the Oklahoma Archeological Survey! In 1993,
fieldwork began at the Cooper Bison Kill site in Harper County. The site was quickly recognized as the largest Folsom bison kill site in North America. Fluted Folsom points are known to date between 10,900 and 10,200 BCE.
During the 1994 field season, crews under the direction of Dr. Leland Bement uncovered a bison skull painted with
a red lightning bolt motif. The skull was found among bison bones from one of three kill episodes represented at the
site. The skull, which was later found to have additional painted areas, is the oldest known painted object in North
America.

To celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Cooper bison kill and the discovery of the painted skull, for the next eight
weeks the Oklahoma Archeological Society will be publishing weekly posts with information about this spectacular
find. Our posts will provide details about what we have learned from the Cooper site, including information about
Paleoindian peoples, Folsom points and hunting practices, Oklahoma’s environment in 10,500 BCE, and the bison
herd itself. We’ll also be discussing other early bison kill sites in Oklahoma found since the Cooper discovery. Our
celebration of the 25th anniversary of the painted skull discovery will culminate in a public talk by Dr. Leland Bement entitled: The 25th Anniversary of the Cooper Painted Skull: What We’ve Learned about Paleoindians in Western Oklahoma.

FOLSOM SITE —Date Unknown

6

