Pastimes
Volume 35 Number Five

President

Donna Otto
Vice President
Scott Broskowske
Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer
Pan Allison

Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes
President

1

May 2015

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
TABLE OF CONTENTS

2

FROM THE EDITOR’S DESK

2b

MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING

3

SPEAKER FOR MAY 2015 — Henry B. Crawford

4

A LOOK BACK WITH AN EYE TO THE FUTURE —Calvin B. Smith

5

NORPAN LAPIDARY AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY—Dick Carter

7b

WEST TEXAS STATE UNIVERSITY ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY—

8b

Rolla Shaller
PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY — Rolla Shaller

9b

50th ANNUAL SYMPOSIUM: SOUTHWESTERN FEDERATION

11

OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETIES
ORDER TRANSACTIONS

11b

TRANSACTIONS 50TH ANNUAL SYMPOSIUM

12-13

PAS MEMBERS AT 51st ANNUAL SYMPOSIUM

14

FROM the EDITOR’S DESK
Winding up the PAS year with a BANG! This has been a fun edition to assemble: we have histories of SWFAS, PAS
and their predecessors. Then, to top it off, a special edition of TRANSACTIONS OF THE 50TH REGIONAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL SYMPOSIUM FOR SOUTHEASTERN NEW MEXICO AND WESTERN TEXAS.
To make it even easier for you to obtain your copy, we have included a coupon for ordering it. Just let us know how
many copies you will need, then tell us how you want to receive it. If you can pick it up at the meeting, return the email.
If you want to have us mail it to you, you’ll need to send us your mailing address, enclosing a check for the amount. For
PAS members, that’s $15, plus three dollars per copy for postage and handling. If you’re not a member (and this
would be a good time to join!) it will be $18 if you can attend the meeting, and add three dollars per copy for mailing.
The issue begins with Cal Smith’s History of the Federation and a list of member societies, past and present. This section
is followed by Cave and shelter studies, Paleoindian studies, Ceramic period studies, Historic period sites, and Alibates
Flint Quarries National Monument recent research. Finally, the housekeeping items, Contributors and Business
Section.
Of course we have included the Bio and Abstract of Henry B. Crawford, who will be our speaker this month. This promises to be an excellent meeting, and we’re all looking forward to it.
Finally, you’ll find a page of photos from the SWFAS Symposium in Hobbs April 25. I neglected to find out who
brought the little UAV, but there it was, flying around photographing us as we gathered outdoors
during the lunch break.
Next issue of PAStimes:
September

So congratulations to the Lea County/Southeastern New
Mexico Archaeological Society and their co-sponsors for an
outstanding meeting!

2

MINUTES of the LAST MEETING April 15, 2015

3

SPEAKER for MAY 2015
Henry B. Crawford Bio
Henry B. Crawford is Curator of History at the Museum
of Texas Tech University. He holds an M.A. in American
History/Museum Studies from University of WisconsinMilwaukee, and also holds museum training certificates
from the Smithsonian Institution and the Texas Historical
Commission Winedale program.
A museum professional for over three decades, he currently serves on the councils of the Texas Association of Museums and the Mountain-Plains Museums Association,
and has also served on several national and international
museum committees and boards. Prior to his present curatorial position he was a Museum Registrar for ten years
in two different institutions, and served on the American
Alliance of Museums Registrars Committee board.
His research fields include American military history,
western frontier transportation, frontier trade and American material culture. As a scholar of western history he
has published many articles and book reviews, and has
given numerous lectures on a variety of frontier topics for
museums and historic sites.
Mr. Crawford has been a consultant for several museums
and agencies, and has also consulted on and appeared in
various television and video productions for the History
Channel, Discovery Channel, McGraw-Hill, Montana
Public Television, the National Park Service, Rusty Spur Productions, the PBS reality series "Texas Ranch House," and
"Latino Americans" on which he served as the Texas Living History Coordinator. His most recent appearance is in
“Protecting the Plains: The Story of Fort Griffin” being shown at the Fort Griffin State Historic Site visitor center.
Mr. Crawford has been active in living history for over thirty years, and shares his expertise through lectures on living history philosophy, techniques, practices and research at museums, schools and historic sites nationwide. He has coordinated
several living history events. His favorite reenacting areas are the American Revolution, American Fur Trade, Texas Revolution and Republic (1836-45), Civil War, Buffalo Soldiers and the post-Civil War frontier military, buffalo hunting, frontier civilian life, and the European Theater of WWII, among others. He is also proficient in historic firearms and horsemanship.

Buffalo Soldier Indoor Program Abstract
This program serves as an introduction to the history of the Buffalo Soldiers and their place within the story of the frontier
army in Texas and elsewhere, during the Indian Wars era - the three decades following the Civil War. This overview is
presented in a show-and-tell format. Using the soldiers' material culture: their uniforms, weapons, equipment, horse gear
and relevant literature, their story is presented within the context of the role and disposition of the U. S. Army on the American frontier during the Indian Wars era. I will be dressed in the uniform of a soldier of the Indian Wars. The program
may take from 60-90 minutes. Questions and public interaction are encouraged.

4

A Look Back With An Eye to the Future:
A Personal History of the Southwestern Federation of Archaeological Societies

Calvin B. Smith
[Note: These remarks were prepared for delivery at the 45 th SWFAS Symposium, sponsored by the Panhandle Archeological Society in 2009 and held in Canyon, Texas. Calvin Smith was to be the keynote speaker, but health reasons prevented
him from attending. We have been waiting five years to share his thoughts with the members of the Federation, and there
is no more appropriate opportunity than this volume.]
In 1964, eight years after its founding, the Lea County Archaeological Society in Hobbs, NM recognized a need for an
exchange and comparison of archaeological information from this region. An area where much information has been collected by the individual amateurs and archaeological societies; an area where very little information has been published;
an area virtually untouched by the professional archaeologist.
In an effort to start filling this vacuum, John Corley, “Bus” Leslie, and Calvin Smith met in Corley’s garage (with his
collection) in the fall of 1964 and decided it would be good to bring in another local group as host for a symposium, and
so Smith was to represent the Lovington Junior Archaeological Society that he had started in 1961. Corley would introduce “The Eastern Extension of the Jornada Branch of the Mogollon”, Leslie would describe “The Merchant Site” and
would identify Ochoa Indented pottery, and Smith would present “A New Method of Projectile Point Classification and
Site Survey”, his New Mexico State Science Fair project that identified the distinctive Maljamar point.
The symposium, or workshop, was on held on April 3–4, 1965 in Hobbs, New Mexico and was attended by seven regional societies. Those participating societies were:
El Llano Archaeological Society (Portales, NM)
El Paso Archaeological Society (El Paso, TX)
Lea County Archeological Society (Hobbs, NM)
Llano Estacado Archaeological Society (Andrews, TX)
Lovington Junior Archaeological Society (Lovington, NM)
Midland Archeological Society (Midland, TX)
South Plains Archeological Society (Lubbock and Post, TX)
The resulting volume, published in 1965, was titled, Bulletin I, Southeastern New Mexico and West Texas Symposium
Papers. [Note: When this volume was reprinted in 1970, the title was changed to Transactions of the First Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico & Western Texas.]
But how did we get to that point?
This narrative is a retrospective of archaeological investigations, research, analysis, and best guesses of what was going
on in the region up to the formation of the Southwestern Federation of Archaeological Societies. This was a direct result
of the Second Regional Archaeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, held on April 2–3,
1966 in Midland, Texas. The papers were published in 1966 as the Transactions of the Second Regional Symposium as
well as Special Bulletin No. 1 of the Midland Archaeological Society. The results of those early efforts will also be explored, with a brief prospectus of what could be / might be a direction for the future.
In all honesty, if we hadn’t been looked on as rank ‘amateurs’ (and even as ‘pothunters’ by some) we probably would not
have taken our work so seriously. We had to literally beg, borrow, and buy every publication related to the profession to
make sure we were not making major mistakes as we tried to advance each other’s knowledge. As we attempted to put
together a chronological sequence of prehistoric events and the peopling of southeastern New Mexico, we quickly found
out why the paid archaeologists were staying in the northern and southwestern portions of the State. Given the dearth of
professional activity in our region, it became obvious that we were plowing new ground by trying to piece together the
material culture from only surface finds. However, ignorance, particularly determined ignorance, is often the motivator
needed to make a difference in the field. We began to research who, what, where, when, why, and how results were being
made and tested, and we started to achieve some positive results.
5

Although we were severely hampered by not having any references related to our specific region, we did read everything
available related to the Folsom discovery, the original work at Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1, Kidder’s The Artifacts of
Pecos, reports by Ferdon on Hermit’s Cave and Hibbin on Sandia Cave, geological reports from various sources, and of
course the Bulletins of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Our ‘handbooks’ became TAPS Bulletin 25, A n
Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology and Wormington’s Ancient Man In North America. As we got more
‘advanced’ we started corresponding with the likes of Stew Peckham, Marge Lambert, E. Mott Davis, T. N. Campbell, Alex
Krieger, and others who were kind enough to respond to an eager bunch of neophytes. As I write this I am reminded that we
had some fluted points, but until we got Wormington’s book we didn’t know the difference between Folsom and Clovis, but
then neither did some of the pros from whom we were requesting information.
By 1957 a few of the people who were exchanging information determined that it would be a good time to form a society of
interested individuals in order to share their discoveries at regularly scheduled meetings, both as related to the artifacts as
well as the knowledge being gained. Thus, the Lea County Archeological Society (LCAS) was formed under the guidance
of John Corley and Robert “Bus” Leslie. I should note here that the spelling of “archaeology’ was a major point of discussion, and it was decided to go with the same spelling used by the Texas Archeological Society. I was the second member to
join, and I have often lamented not being the first. I had already written several letters to the University of Texas (there was
only one at that time) concerning my attempts to save bone material, establish correct survey methods, and a host of other
related miscellaneous questions that included enrolling in their archaeology program. Therefore, I was looked on as the kid
with all the contacts; it did put me in good stead with the group, and I certainly didn’t mind.
The first activity as an organization was to create a map of southeastern New Mexico that was divided into easily identifiable sections (A, B, C, etc.) and to start placing known sites in each section. For example, one of the most well recognized
sites was “Horse Camp”, where the old Carlsbad highway went down off the Caprock and where Mrs. Eaves from Lovington used to collect ‘arrowheads’ in a horse and buggy. It became Site C-5. Within a year or so we had well over 100 sites
marked on the map. Unlike many avocational societies, the old LCAS was very sharing, primarily because Corley and Leslie
quickly established an example of how by working together we could accomplish much more than keeping everything to
ourselves. As we accumulated collections of mostly lithic materials, we began to record each artifact according to its discovery site, and with that information we started to see correlations and associations. We began to publish some of the results and went on to excavate Boot Hill (named by the oil field workers who thought we were digging up a grave yard),
Indian Hill (done by the Lovington Junior Archaeological Society under the direction of the myself and members of the Lea
County Archeological Society), and eventually the Merchant Site, where the Lovington Junior Archaeological Society also
participated.
It wasn’t long before we began to see the need to exchange what we were learning with adjoining regions and thus the
Southwestern Federation of Archaeological Societies (SWFAS) was created. The conferences included some extraordinary
avocational archaeologists like Vernon Brook, Emmitt Shed, Jay Blaine, Jim Warnica, John Runyan, the Stickneys, Jack
Hedrick, Aaron Riggs, Jim Word, Les Davis, and many others that were presenting ‘professional’ quality papers and were
becoming experts in specific fields and geographical locations. Many annual meetings followed, with the proceedings being
dutifully published. The profession began to take notice of the professionalism with which the studies and excavations were
being conducted, and their respect followed.
Each year new contributions and publications were being made within the field, and everyone was learning at a rapid pace.
Unfortunately, new members were often left behind, and with the legal restrictions on collecting on public lands being enforced and many of the older members slipping away from the local societies, some of the organizations died. Not uncommonly, as the original leadership passed out of the picture, the interest in coming together also waned. I also discuss the
separateness created during this period as some members of local societies began excavating in other locations in the article,
“The Future of Avocational Archaeology” in Volume 28, Papers of the Archaeological Society of New Mexico. The
SWFAS became a key element in keeping many of the more dedicated and contributing members together and sharing their
knowledge at the annual meetings.
But what of the how and when of the advancement of the archaeology of southeastern New Mexico and western Texas? I do
remember one particularly significant event that occurred as part of the 1973 SWFAS meeting in Midland. Concurrently we
held an Early Man Conference, and as one of the organizers I drew the short straw to try to get Keith “Pat” Glasscock, discoverer of the Midland site, the Midland type point and .Midland Minnie’ to come to the convocation. I called and he was
stern in rejecting the idea, but when I told him he was looked on as the epitome of the avocational archaeologist by bringing
to light one of the most important and significant finds in North American archaeology, he began to consider the possibility.
By the time I got off the phone we had established a lifelong friendship. Arnold Sommer served as moderator, and we had a
lot of extremely impressive participants, including Dr. C. Vance Haynes, who was the banquet speaker, Glasscock, Jay
Blaine, Curtis Tunnell, Ronnie Shawn, Jack Hedrick, Aaron Riggs, Claude Brown, Rosemary Rogers, Pinkie Robertson, Ed
Kennedy, Jane Schweitzer, Daily Jones, Kent Green, Dick Saxe, and Francis Stickney. We started by placing pins in a map
of the region with the known Paleo sites, and I began the discussions with an overview of the research and publications re6

lated to the area. The most lasting memory was the encouragement we gave one another to continue with our efforts both
individually and collectively — bottom line, we need to do it again! In his concluding remarks, Sommer stated, “It was
surprising to learn of so many sites and so many artifacts found by this small group….in talking to those present each knew
of several people who had from a few to large numbers of Paleo points that are in collections throughout the Federation.”

In another instance, bearing out my personal preference for, if not almost total absorption with, Paleo period studies, there
was a synopsis of Paleo points found in Gaines County that appeared as “Gaines County Paleo-Indian Projectile Point Inventory and Analysis”, written by Victor Polyak and Monty Williams with Sketches and Data Collection by Garland
Moore, Betty Moore, and Victor Polyak in the Transactions of the 21st Regional Archaeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, published by the El Paso Archaeological Society in 1986. This confirmed the specialization of the late usage of the Midland point that I proposed during the second symposium in 1966 in the paper, “The Paleo
-Indian in Southeastern New Mexico”.
Therefore, this, the associations and connections and sharing, becomes the catalyst for verification and challenges that
stimulate and question our answers and make us dig deeper into the known and unknown to make sure of the truth. This is
the place and venue where the avocational can tell of their experiences and discoveries because there are no small revelations. Something that may not be of benefit or have no immediate meaning to one member may have momentous relevance
to another and bring the problem into focus.

If you will allow me one more example. As I was doing my survey to determine the spatial boundaries of the Maljamar
point, I had traveled in a large circle around the concentration I found in southeastern New Mexico, but any other concentrations had escaped me. The key element in understanding the patterning I was missing came from a simple comment by
one of the members of the archaeological society. “Have you been up to Weed to see the postmistress’ collection?”. The
answer was, “Well, no I hadn’t but I guess its high time I get up there.” Sure enough, 5% of the collections I was able to
view in that isolated area were Maljamar points! A classic use of resources and probable climate-related migration from the
mountains to the edge of the plains along the shortest distance that a straight line can be drawn.
So, isn’t this what the Texas Archeological Society, the New Mexico Archaeological Society, and all the other major special interest groups with similar purposes are doing? That is, to share information and publish the results of the research
being conducted. Yes, but, by definition they all have a much larger, all encompassing mission that does not specifically
address the complicated and often ignored ‘remains’ of extremely diverse landscapes and varied cultural evidence that is
just now being revealed. All too often we take for granted that because we know it, everyone should be aware of ‘it’ too.

A Brief History of the
NORPAN LAPIDARY AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Dick Carter
In July, 1957 Dr. Jack T. Hughes, Curator of Archaeology at the Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum in Canyon, TX, met with the Norpan Lapidary Society to recruit
personnel to excavate the Roper site (41HC6), a Panhandle Aspect ruin. The work
was done to salvage information ahead of the construction of Sanford Dam. The site is
below the present Sanford-Yake Marina. Clara and W. A. “Dub” Dumas, Dick and
Mary Ruthe Carter, Harold Vogel, Claude Pickett, and Leland Roper were among
those involved in the excavation. Each Sunday during that summer and early fall the
group rose before dawn and drove the forty miles to the site to begin work in the cool
of the day. All were neophytes to scientific archeology, but they learned under the direction of Dr. Hughes to take elevations, map, and keep careful records. The excavations revealed the presence of five circular stone slab-walled structures.
An unusual find was a type of pottery indicating contact with people from the Upper Republican River region in Nebraska.
Other artifacts confirmed a gardening, gathering, and hunting economy. All materials and notes were eventually deposited
in the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum in Canyon.
During the fall of 1957 Norpan changed its name to the Norpan Archaeological Society and began to hold regular monthly
meetings. In November of that year members dug another small circular ruin on the east slope of the south abutment of the
Sanford Dam. High School Student Dwight Huber joined the crew, excavating what became known as the Pickett site. Although a small site, the recovered material added to the growing store of information. Material and notes again went to the
museum in Canyon.

In 1958, Norpan salvaged part of a large, square ruin threatened by oilfield construction in the Cottonwood Creek complex
between Borger and Stinnett. This site was dug with the permission of the Perkins Estate, owners of the land. New members of the excavation team included Joe Fandrich, Charles Pinkston, and Jim Jeffress. A preliminary report and a set of
photographs was supplied to the agent of the landowners. Excavated materials and notes went to the museum in Canyon.
7

In December, 1959, Norpan published A Catalog of Indian Artifacts Collectors in the Golden Spread, which listed the
names of collectors of Indian artifacts in the region together with summaries of their collections by types, i.e., bone tools,
pottery, projectile points, axes, beads, etc.
Individual members of Norpan became active in other archaeological endeavors, joining state societies (e.g., New Mexico
Archaeological Society, Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Texas Archeological Society), presenting papers at state
meetings, and providing volunteer labor for museum digs.
Declining membership, primarily due to the moves of several of the more active members, led to the demise of Norpan.
Subsequently, several Norpan members became charter members of the newly organized Panhandle Archeological Society.

NORPAN members excavating at the Roper site 41HC6) in 1957.

A Brief History of the
WEST TEXAS STATE UNIVERSITY ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Rolla H. Shaller
The West Texas State University (WTSU) Anthropological Society was a spin-off from the WTSU Geological Society and
was comprised of students who were in, or had taken, anthropology and archaeology courses under the instruction of Dr.
Jack T. Hughes or other professors in the Geology and Anthropology Department. The society was organized and chartered with the University during the fall semester of 1967. Dr. Jack Hughes would serve as the campus organization sponsor and dues were one dollar a semester. Charles Lawrence was elected as the first president of the society and Ms. Ginger
Essary was elected secretary-treasurer, a post she held for several years. During the early 1970s the society produced an
occasional newsletter, the WTSU A nthropological Society Newsletter.

Membership in the society was granted to those in sympathy with its purposes. According to organization’s bylaws, the
purpose of the society was to promote a better understanding of anthropology and its related fields. The society’s first logo
was an outline drawing of an ice age mammoth encircled with the wording of the society. A new logo was adopted in the
mid-1970s of a Folsom point with crossed pick and shovel encircled with the society’s name.
Among those early members were Charles Lawrence, Mary (Ginger) Essary, Willie Farmer, Bob T. Griffin, Elvis Sluder,
Billy R. Harrison, Roberta Speer, Katie Seewald, Peter and LaVonne Jeschofnig, Ray Thompson, Rolla Shaller, Jim Couzzourt, Margaret Smith, Jack and Pollyanna Hughes, David Hughes, Kim and Audrey Taylor, Scott George, Priscilla Williams, Henry and Jo Smith, and Eddie Kiser. Many of these people helped organize the Panhandle Archeological Society
in 1970 and then joined as charter members.
The WTSU Anthropological Society met twice monthly on weekday evenings in what was at that time the university science building. The meetings were later moved to Buffalo Courts, a campus building that Dr. Hughes secured for classrooms for the newly formed and growing Anthropology Department. The meetings usually had an evening program or
speaker relating to anthropology or a related topic. Dr. Hughes encouraged members to attend or present papers at meetings of the Southwestern Federation of Archaeological Societies and the Texas Archeological Society.

8

The WTSU Anthropological Society participated in several archeological excavations. These included the Marsh Ranch ruin, a
small stone lined Panhandle Aspect house; the Jack Allen site
(41HC219), a burned picket post pithouse in Hutchinson County,
and the Emeny Ranch ruins, a group of stone ruins along the
Canadian River in Potter County.
A very successful project that society members completed was
the development and publication of a large wall chart depicting
the projectile point types found in the Texas Panhandle and surrounding areas. Ray Thompson drafted the points and Jack
Hughes wrote the text. The wall chart measured 35”x46” and
sold for $2.50 each. Several thousand copies of the chart were
produced and sold. By 1985, over $3,500 had been collected and
deposited in the University Foundation for scholarships for WT
anthropology students. Several scholarships have been awarded
over the years from this fund. The Panhandle-Plains Historical
Museum later produced a similar chart, which is currently available in its gift shop.
In October 2000, there was an organizational meeting to establish a new West Texas A&M University (WTAMU) Anthropological Society* on campus. Elected officers included Tiffany
Bryant (President), Tracy Kenyon (Vice-President), Karli Hill
Members of the West Texas State University Anthropologi(Secretary), and Ian Weems (Treasurer). A new set of bylaws cal Society in the Blue Creek campground, Texas Archaeowas drawn, and dues were set at $10.00 per calendar year. Rob- logical Society Field School, June, 1969.
erta D. Speer of the Department of Life, Earth, and Environmental Science served as facility advisor.
In April 2001 the WTAMU Anthropological Society was accepted as a chartered student organization at West Texas A&M University, and the first meeting was held in September, 2001. Unfortunately, the society went dormant shortly after this date.
Roberta D. Speer, as an instructor of anthropology and earth science, was instrumental in the organization and continued existence of the society. With her death in 2008, the driving force behind this organization was gone.
*In 1993 the institution’s name changed from West Texas State University to West Texas A&M University

A Brief History of the
PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Rolla Shaller
Organization - The first organizational meeting of the Panhandle Archeological Society (PAS) was held on May 23, 1970 at the
Villa Inn Motel in Amarillo, Texas. Present at that meeting were: Ray Thompson, Dick Carter, Katie Seewald, Martha Parr, Roberta Speer, Mr. and Mrs. Roy Thompson, Ron Ice and Ed Day (NPS), Dr. Jack and Pollyanna Hughes, Rolla Shaller, Billy Harrison, Martha Crabb, Collier and Patti Phillips, and Floyd and Mary Isabell Blackburn. The first Officers of the Panhandle Archeological Society included Roy Thompson (President), Dick Carter (Vice-President), Roberta Speer (Secretary), and Martha Crabb
(Treasurer).

The original PAS Constitution and Bylaws were drafted by the Executive Committee and adopted in July, 1970; both were revised
in the early 1980s in order to secure 501(c)(3) tax-exempt status as a non-profit organization in 1985. The most recent modification to the PAS bylaws was approved by the membership in 2013. Our purpose and goals are the same today as they were then:
The purpose of the Society is the promotion, preservation, and dissemination of scientific knowledge concerning the regional history and prehistory. Society goals include: a) the protection and preservation of cultural resources and the natural environment; b)
the accomplishment of scientific research, including excavation, survey, and analysis; c) the dissemination of research and analysis data via scientific publications, public meetings, and other means in order to make said knowledge available to the scientific
community and the general public; and d) responsible participation in programs and projects designed to promote and provide
education and community awareness of the value and importance of conservation of regional cultural and natural resources.

9

Memberships in state and regional organizations - The Panhandle Archeological Society joined the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) in 1970. The PAS hosted the 50th Texas Archeological Society Annual Meeting in 1979 under
the leadership of President Len Slesick. The evening banquet speaker was Dr. E. Mott Davis, University of Texas,
Austin. The PAS also hosted the 60th TAS Annual Meeting in 1989 under the leadership of PAS President Rolla Shaller. The evening banquet speaker was the Honorable Stewart Udall.
The PAS became a member of the Southwestern Federation of Archaeological Societies (SWFAS) in 1978 under President Bob Smith and has continued its membership to the present day. The PAS hosted their first SWFAS annual Symposium in 1981, followed by meetings in 1987, 1992, 1999, 2004, 2009 , and most recently the 50th Symposium in
2014. The earlier meetings were held in Amarillo and the more recent ones at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
in Canyon.
Meeting Places- The Panhandle Archeological Society has met at various locations during its 44year existence. These include the Diamond Shamrock auditorium (1970–1975), , the Pioneer Natural Gas Company Flame Room (1975–1981), the Amarillo National Bank (1981–1983), the First
National Bank of Amarillo Centennial Room (1983–1998), the Robert Lee Room at the Big Texan Steak Ranch (1998–2005), Wildcat Bluff Nature Center (2005—2013), and currently at the
Amarillo Public Library Downtown Branch (2013– ).
Publications - The fir st issue of the PAS newsletter Pastimes was distributed to the member ship in 1973, edited and printed by Ray Thompson. The newsletter logo, depicting the unexcavated outline of a Panhandle Aspect stone ruin, was created by Ray. In the beginning the publication
was only an occasional newsletter, but the size of the issue and the annual number increased in
1983-84. Beginning with the January, 1999 issue (Volume 18, No. 1), a new graphic and letterhead logo was introduced. Designed by Elaine Maples, it featured a rock art image of a feathered
lance warrior recorded by the Panhandle Archeological Society from a rock art site in Potter
County. This image continues to serve as the society’s logo today.
Monographs —The first PAS monograph publication was a transcript of then Texas State Archeologist Curtis Tunnell’s program at the first Floyd V. Studer Lecture in 1977. Since then the PAS Publication Committee added nine
more monographs to their inventory, including master theses, previously unpublished reports, and manuscripts dealing
with the prehistory, history, and natural history of the Texas Panhandle. The proceeds from their sale are returned to
the Publication Fund to support future publications.
Activities - Over the year s the PAS has
been involved in numerous professional and
community activities. Among these include
rock art recording, field surveys, testing and
excavation projects, field trips, assisting
Federal and State agencies, and annual participation in the Fannin Middle School History Festival and Lamar Elementary School
Science Day. The Panhandle Archeological
Society concludes each year with the Floyd
V. Studer Banquet and Lecture. It is on that
occasion that the Society honors individuals
within its membership for their contributions
to the society and Texas Panhandle archeology.

Panhandle Archeological Society field trip to the Rocky Dell pictograph site, Oldham County, Texas in 2012.

10

.

ORDER FORM
TRANSACTIONS OF THE 50TH REGIONAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL SYMPOSIUM
For SOUTHEASTERN NEW MEXICO AND WESTERN TEXAS
Name ___________________________________________________________________
Address _________________________________________________________________
_______ Copies @ $15 (member)

________ Copies @ $18 (non-member)

I will pick them up at the regular meeting
OR please mail them to me at the above address; I have included $3 per copy.
_________________________________________________

Send email to rshaller@ suddenlink.net or Katzes-PRIAM@msn.com

11

12

13

PAS members at 51st
Annual Symposium
SWFAS

14

