PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Seven, Number 4 April 2017

President
Scott Brosowske
Vice president
Veronica Arias
Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer

Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE of CONTENTS
Page
Notes From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

3a

Program Information

4-5

Fort Chadbourne

6

NOTES FROM the EDITOR’S DESK
At the Stone Age Fair in Perryton last April, I had the privilege of sharing lunch with Ed Day. I knew him as a guide at
the Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument Visitors’ Center, and as an expert flintknapper. I had even photographed
him at Field Schools and at Fannin Middle School History Fair, as you see below. We had visited some from time to
time, but this time the conversation took a new turn. Somehow we fell into a discussion of our mutual Irish heritage. We
even agreed, maybe a little more than half-seriously, that we believed in Leprechauns. Ed said that sometimes he wouldn’t be able to find a thing. You know the feeling — I just had that in my hand, so where is it? He said his wife thought
he’d mislaid it, but we agreed that the Little People snatched it up and hid it to play a joke on him.

Photos A, B, and D by Beryl C. Hughes

With Alvin Lynn at Fannin History Fair

Photo from Ranger Jacob Collins’ page.

2

MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
March 15, 2017
meeting was called to order by President Paul Katz at 7 p.m. at the
Downtown Amarillo Library second floor Board Room.
There were 20 members and guests in attendance.
MINUTES: The February minutes were approved as published in the PAS Newsletter.
PROGRAM: Member Beryl Hughes' presentation was titled "Food, Fiber, and Flint at Alibates Flint Quarries National
Monument." She emphasized the fact that the people who lived and worked at Alibates were pre-Antelope Creek and gone
before Coronado came. The society used fire, corn, pottery, game and flint for food, shelter, clothing, tools/weapons: nothing was wasted. She posited that stone work and language developed side by side, making it possible for man to classify
and order, plan and choose outcomes, make interaction with mind and the physical world, and combine basic elements for
complex outcomes. A question period followed.
TREASURER'S REPORT: Treasurer Pam Allison reported a balance of $4,081. PUBLICATION REPORT: Rolla Shaller
reported a balance of $1,356.19 in the Money Market Account, and $5073.21 in the CD. He expects to sell a number of
reports at the Southwest Federation.
OLD BUSINESS: Discussion of the Studer Banquent resulted in the decision to make reservations at Dyer's on a Friday
night in December.
TAS Technology workshop will be at Fredricksburg, April 31-May2 SWFAS meets April 1- April 2
at Fort Chadbourne.
TAS Field School at Mission San Lorenzo de la Cruz, 2nd week of June
NEW BUSINESS: Rolla reported that John Erickson lost his home, outbuildings and some cattle in the wildfire in the
Perryton area. The archeological site was undamaged.
PPBM Dreamland Cemetery Tour will be March 25, 3-6 pm.
Paul Katz announced the Lamar School Science Fair will be May 12 and recruited members
to help.
Paul Katz was appointed Pas' representative to SWFAS.
The meeting adjourned at 8:15 PM.
Respectfully Submitted:
Mary Ruthe Carter, Secretary
*****
*

UPCOMING EVENTS
Next Meeting — April 19, 7:00 p.m.. Amarillo Public Library, 2nd Floor.
Pre-meeting Dinner, 5:30, Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor

April 31-May 2

TAS Technology Workshop, Fredericksburg . Contact Veronica Arias.

May 12

Lamar School Science Fair. If you can help, get in touch with Paul Katz

June — 2nd week

TAS Field School, Mission San Lorenzo de la Cruz

3

PROGRAM INFORMATION
Tonight (April 19) we join the area in remembering our friend.
A video will be shown in his honor.
Ed Day, flintknapper and storyteller extraordinaire, loved to conduct tours and entertain visitors to Alibates, especially children, for hours on end.
Amarillo Globe News Nov. 11, 2006 (Note: the name “Gray” in this piece is a typo. “Day” is meant.)
As the legend goes, a heavy rain doused the area and then a beautiful rainbow appeared over the Canadian River. The rainbow lingered for days until finally one man went up to take a closer look and found it was solid rock. Soon, people began
chipping away at the rainbow and it eventually collapsed, leaving hillsides scattered with beautiful broken shards of the
mythical rainbow.
Ed Gray, a retired park ranger and volunteer, keeps the legend and its long-gone inhabitants alive with colorful storytelling
and hiking tours to the quarries. Archaeologists have discovered about 600 quarry pits, some uncovered by wildfires that
swept across the park a few years ago. Alibates flint has been discovered across the country, spread by Native American
trading, and has been linked to Imperial Mammoth kills dating back 12,000 years ago, Gray said.
On Wednesday, Gray demonstrated his flint-knapping skills for a group of fourth- and fifth-graders from Our Lady of Guadalupe School and impressed upon them the importance of protecting the monument's wildlife and flint for future generations.
"Everything here's protected. Everything," Gray said, pausing during a hilltop hike to caution his inquisitive, young visitors
against taking any of the flint home in their pockets.
Gray, who has given park tours for four decades, is glad to see a new visitor center finally built.
"For a long time, that was all we had," he said, pointing to the metal shed that served as a visitor center for about 20 years.
*****
Alibates Rocks! Flintfest 2011 Will Bring To Life Age-Old Skill of Flint-Knapping
Fritch, TX – Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument will breathe life into stone this Saturday and Sunday, October 1-2,
with the second annual "Alibates Rocks!" FlintFest 2011. This event will kick off a month-long celebration of Texas Archeology Month at Alibates Flint Quarries, the only national monument in the state of Texas .
The highlight of “Alibates Rocks!” FlintFest 2011 will be a “knap-in,” featuring expert flintknappers from around the southwest who will demonstrate the skill of turning raw stone into tools and weapons.

Alibates will welcome back retired Park Ranger Ed Day, a Fritch native who is a master knapper and skilled storyteller.

Photos Provided

4

Edwin Arthur Day
Edwin Arthur Day, 81, was born in Pampa, Texas, to Arthur Beasley Day and Lela Jameson Day on July 6, 1935. He joined his
heavenly father on March 26, 2017.
He married his love Paula Ann Reigel on December 29, 1968, in Dumas, Texas. He loved God, his family and his Monument, Alibates Flint Quarries. His favorite activities were rock hunting with his wife, walkabouts with his grandkids, flint knapping, gardening, volunteering at Alibates, and Panhandle archeology.
He served his country in the Army and National Guard for six years. He worked for the National Park Service for 32 years and after
retirement volunteered twenty years at Alibates National Monument and Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument. He was the first
ranger hired by Lake Meredith National Recreation Area in 1965. He loved visitors and enjoyed giving tours and arrowheads he
knapped to children of all ages from 0 to 100 years of age.
He was honored as Fritch Citizen of the Year and nominated for the NPS Freeman Tilden Interpreter of the Year. He received the
President's Award for Volunteerism for the NPS.
He was preceded in death by his parents and nephew Mickey Mixon. He is survived by his wife of 48 years, sister Polly Mixon-van
Blommestein and Robert, daughters Rita Day, Robin Dickerson and Gary, grandson Isaac Clark, granddaughter Emily Dickerson,
brothers-in-law David, Frank and Tom, nephew Dave, nieces Molly, Amy, Julia, Ramona and Elisabeth.
He was the most beautiful, kind and giving man anyone ever met. He knew that flint chips would always be more important
to mankind than computer chips and you can do more good in a day with a Big Chief Tablet and a pencil.

Published in Borger News Herald on Mar. 29, 2017- See more at: http://www.legacy.com/obituaries/borgernewsherald/
obituary.aspx?n=edwin-arthur-day&pid=184749921&eid=sp_shareobit#sthash.duGazmMQ.dpuf

Photo Provided
5

SWFAS Meeting March 31– April 2.
Fort Chadbourne, Texas
PAS members Veronica Arias and Beryl Hughes gave papers.

Great meeting, great place. But as Creole comedian Justin Wilson might have put it:
We didn’t thought we wasn’t never gonna get there!

6

