PAS-

Newsletter of the Panhandle A
Newsletter of

the Panhandle Archaeology Society

Volume Thirty-Six Number Four —

PRESIDENT
President
Scott Brosowske
Vice president
Veronica Arias
Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter

Treasurer
Pam Allison

Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
UPCOMING EVENTS

2a

MINUTES of the LAST MEETING

3

PROGRAM INFORMATION

4

NOTES FROM the EDITOR’S DESK

4a

LAMAR SCIENCE DAY

5

Next Meeting: Wednesday, April 20, 7:p.m.
Amarillo Public Library Downtown Branch, 2nd Floor
Please join us for pre-meeting dinner at 5:30, Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor

**************************
UPCOMING EVENTS


April 8, 9, 10
Southwestern Federation of Archaeological Societies 52nd Annual Symposium
Hosted by Canyonlands Archaeological Society and Comanchero Canyons Museum
Quitaque, Texas
For information: Marisue Potts, P.O. Box 523, Matador, TX
marisuepotts@hotmail.com 9244



April 30
Stone Age Fair at Perryton

Contact Scott Brosowske at:
main: (806)-434-0157
cell:(806) 435-2910


May 20
Lamar School Science Fair
Contact Paul Katz:
Katzes-PRIAM@msn.com or 806-537-5040
See Page Five, this Newsletter.

2

PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Minutes of March 16, 2016
The meeting was called to order by president Scott Brosowske at 7:00 PM at the Downtown Amarillo Library second floor
Board Room.

There were 12 members in attendance.
PROGRAM: Beryl Hughes presented “Cupules—ALIBATES at Flint Quarries National Monument,” which piqued the
group’s interest: What are they? Where are they? Why are they? Found on every continent except Antarctica, they are
small shallow “cups” 2 inches across and half an inch deep, most often on horizontal rock surfaces but occasionally even
on vertical walls and cliffs. There has been no sign of residue, ruling out their use as mortars or querns. Beryl speculates
that they may be sources of healing minerals ingested by ancient people much as we buy calcium or zinc today. Since they
are found in so many places over so many centuries and near residential areas, they must be important whether ceremonial,
artistic, medical or a mixture. The presentation sparked several questions from the group.

MINUTES: The February minutes were approved as published in the PAS Newsletter.

TREASURER’S REPORT: Treasurer Pam Allison reported a balance of $4,306.14 after speakers fees, newsletter expense, room rentals, and state dues were paid and membership dues were collected. The report was approved.

PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE REPORT: Since Rolla Shaller was absent because of illness, there was no Publications
Report.

OLD BUSINESS: The TAS Lithic Academy will be April 30- May 1 at the PPHM with bus transportation to Palo Duro
Canyon. An optional tour of Alibates will be offered by the Park Service on Friday, April 29.
The Stone Age Fair at Perryton will be April 30 as well.
Southwest Federation will be April 8, 9, 10tin Quitaque, hosted by the Caprock Canyonlands Society.
The Lamar School Science Fair will be May 20. Planning for it will take place at the April PAS meeting.

NEW BUSINESS: There was discussion on whether to set honoraria and/or mileage, etc. for speakers. It was decided to
leave it in the hands of the executive committee on an individual basis as long as it was decided on at the time the speaker
was invited.
Alvin Lynn announced the Santa Fe Trail meeting.
Scott distributed posters for the Stone Age Fair to be placed in stores, post offices, schools, etc.

The meeting adjourned at 8:00 PM.
Respectfully submitted,

Mary Ruthe Carter, Secretary

3

Experimental Archaeology: Hands-On Approaches to Understanding the Past
Rick Williams
Guymon, Oklahoma
Abstract
Experimental Archaeology is a field of study that attempts to generate and test hypotheses by replicating or approximating
the feasibility of past cultures performing various tasks and activities. It employs a number of methods, techniques, analyses, and approaches, based upon known archaeological evidence, such as artifacts, residential structures, gardens, etc. In
this presentation, various experimental studies carried out to better understand how prehistoric peoples of the Southern
High Plains, particularly those of the Antelope Creek phase, were adapted to the region will be examined. Examples include flintknapping, the manufacture of bone tools, hunting technology, working with animal hides, and building and living in native residential structures.

Biography
Rick Williams grew up in the suburbs of Borger, Texas. As a kid in
the late 1950’s and early 1960’s he spent most of his time exploring
the canyonlands of the Canadian River. During these explorations he
inevitably discovered numerous prehistoric archaeological sites and
their associated stone, ceramic, and bone artifacts. His curiosity led
him to ask who were these people and how did they make the tools
that he found. A little research taught him that the people that had
lived at these sites had been assigned by archaeologists to the Panhandle aspect, now known as the Antelope Creek phase. However, questions as to how these people made their tools remained unanswered.
Over time Rick taught himself to become an accomplished flintknapper. Later, he experimented with making spears and atlatls, bows and
arrows, fire making, brain tanning hides, making bone and shell
beads, sewing with bone needles, and tool hafting techniques using
sinew. Rick was employed by Phillips Petroleum and worked at virtually every job in the oil patch at one time or another. He has given
numerous presentations about prehistoric technology to Boy Scouts
and local schools and groups since the late 1970’s.

*********
NOTES FROM the EDITOR’S DESK
Yes, Virginia, there really was a unicorn!
For decades, scientists have estimated that the Siberian unicorn - a long-extinct
species of mammal that looked more like a rhino than a horse -died out some
350,000 years ago, but a beautifully preserved skull found in Kazakhstan has completely overturned that assumption. Turns out, these incredible creatures were still
around as recently as 29,000 years ago. Elasmotherium sibircum.
www.sciencealert.com/

“The world is so full of a number of things, I ’m sure we should all be as happy as kings.”
― Robert Louis Stevenson

4

Lamar Science Day 2016
Friday, May 20.
Our activity last year was well received, and so we would like to do it again with the tweaks that we noted while conducting
it the first time.
First there is a brief PowerPoint presentation which provides pictures and basic vocabulary about how an archaeologist conducts fieldwork, collects artifacts, and then processes and interprets them in the laboratory. Each group of four students then
dumps a bag of representative prehistoric and historic artifacts on the table (see picture). With the coaching and assistance of
one PAS member at each table, the students dredge as much information from the artifacts as they can in 15 minutes.
We see a progression of classes during the entire school day, ranging in grade from 1–5. Class size is usually ~ 20 students.
We therefore need five PAS members (1 for each of five tables of four students), plus a moderator to give the PowerPoint
presentation to every class.
A generous lunch is provided by the teachers.
Any PAS member interested in participating in Lamar Science Day on Friday, May 20 should contact Paul Katz via
email or telephone before the April PAS meeting, so that we can make plans at the meeting:

Katzes-PRIAM@msn.com or 806-537-5040

5

