PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society
Volume 36 Number Six September 2016

President
Scott Brosowske
Vice president
Veronica Arias

Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer
Pam Allison

True West Magazine

Publications

has named P-PHM

Rolla Shaller

Number Two
in its annual list of the
best western museums in
America!

Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
Table of Contents

2

From the Editor’s Desk

2b

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

4

Program Information

5

A Woodland Site In the Texas Panhandle

6-9

From the Editor’s Desk
The recent designation of P-PHM as the number two western museum in the USA, second only to the Boot Hill Museum in Dodge City, makes us all proud of the workers there, both paid and volunteer. Also, we want to thank all those
who have contributed financially now and in the past. In the midst of the Great Depression, this building and equipment did not materialize out of thin air, and no matter how knowledgeable and dedicated our people may be, they
could not have accomplished all that they have without the physical plant.
Just as a reminder, Canyon sits in the middle of a major farming and livestock area — the breadbasket, if you will, of
the nation. P-PHM was founded by and for those tough pioneers who came to the Great Plains and stuck it out somehow, almost literally through hell and high water, not to mention the Dust Bowl. Their predecessors here were the
American Indians, and their predecessors as well, since the end of the Ice Age. All these people left their material remains, from the projectile points to the outworn, outdated, and abandoned homes and farm equipment that we see
standing forlorn in the fields.
Enter the archaeologists, the anthropologists, and that army of related scientists: geologists, water specialists, botanists,
and paleo-practically-everything. Joining with the petroleum people, the artists and architects and program planners,
they have worked together to create something wonderful.
You and I are not only the beneficiaries of all this, but in our own day and time
we are privileged to add a little. So everybody take a bow, no matter how modest
our individual contribution may be. Congratulations! And keep up the good
work.

2

MINUTES OF LAST MEETING
Minutes of May 18, 2016
The meeting was called to order by President Scott Brosowske at 7 p.m. at the Downtown Amarillo Library second
floor Board Room.
There were 18 members and guests along with the program presenter, Michael Paul Jordan, of Texas Tech, in attendance.
PROGRAM: Mike Jordan presented a program on Recent Research on Southern Plains Rock Art. Mike showed several
pictures of rock art from our area. He explained the meaning of some of the pictures and showed us how to interpret the
various pictures and their composition.
MINUTES: The April minutes were approved as published in the PAS Newsletter.
TREASURER'S REPORT: Treasurer Pam Allison reported a balance of $5060.733
NEW BUSINESS: The Studer banquet date is set for December 10, location to be decided.
The meeting adjourned at 8:40 p.m. Respectfully submitted,
Dick Carter, Secretary-pro tem.

Upcoming Events
Sept 21, 2016, 7:00 p.m. Next Meeting: PAS 2nd Floor Board Room, Amarillo Public Library, Downtown
Make room on your calendar for this meeting. We will be discussing the Studer Banquet: What food would
you like us to order?

Sept. 29-2016 to Oct. 12-2016, Canyon, Texas. Material Culture of Prairie, Plains, and Plateau (MCPPP) Indians
Conference. http://mcppp.net/Location

October 12-15, 2016, Lincoln, Nebraska. 74th Annual Plains Anthropological Society Conference
http://plainsanthropologicalsociety.org/meeting
Oct. 14-15, 2016 West Texas Trails Association, Wheeler TX. Schedule of Events and Costs, Page 4 this publication.

Dec. 9, 2016, 6:30 p.m. Studer Banquet, Dyer’s Barbecue, 1619 S. Kentucky E #526.
I-40 and Georgia in Wellington Square Shopping Center, Amarillo, TX 79102, Phone: 358-7104

NOTICE!!
The Studer Banquet will be on FRIDAY this year
due to conflict in scheduling.

Plan ahead for the Silent Auction.

3

WEST TEXAS TRAILS ASSOCIATION
Third Annual Meeting in Wheeler, Texas
October 14-15, 2016
A reception at Sandy Basin Inn, 400 South Main Street in Wheeler, Texas, will honor Dr Linda Pelon on
Friday evening, October 14,2016, starting at 6:00
P.M. Professor at McLennon County Community
College in Waco, Texas, Dr. Pelon will open the
meeting on Saturday with information on
“Comanche Marker Trees in Texas.”
Heavy hors d'oeuvres and wine will be served at
the reception for a fun time of food, fellowship,
and fun. Everyone is invited to attend. (Cost- $25
per person.)
The historic City Drug Store and Hospital in
Wheeler was renovated and is now operated as the
Sandy Basin Inn.
Rooms are available for Friday and Saturday night at an $85.00 per
night rate (plus tax). For reservations call 806-826-3790, rooms are
limited.

A Friday tour will be offered for early arrivers, starting at 12:30 P.M..
Leaving from Maxey’s Steak House, this tour will go to the Old
Mobeetie Jail Museum, the Fort Elliott site, and the March, 1869
camp site of Custer‘s Seventh Cavalry Troop on the Sweetwater
Creek. Custer negotiated the return of two white women who had
been captured in Kansas. (tour cost - $25.00 per person). Those who
wish may meet at Maxey’s for lunch at 11:30 (dutch treat).
On Saturday, October 15, 2016, breakfast is on your own. The Baymont Hotel offer a free breakfast.
The Saturday conference with presentations on various historic trails will begin at Wheeler County Ag Life
Center in Wheeler Texas (North Hyw 83) at 9:30 A.M. (Meeting registration - $15). Lunch will be served
at noon at the Center (advance registration is required - $18 per person). The meeting will resume at
1:30 and run until 5:30 P.M. A number of exhibits and book signing authors will be at the Center. After
the meeting, a full evening meal menu may be enjoyed at Maxey’s Steak House located at 7789 US 83 in
Wheeler. ($10-25.00 per person cost).
Additional accommodations for Friday and/or Saturday night are available in Wheeler at The Baymont Inn
and Hotel. For reservations call (806) 826-1012. (Rate - $79.99 per night Single, $89.99 per night
Doubles). Breakfast included. Be sure to tell them that you are with the West Texas Trails Group.
For more information, email WestTexasTrails@gmail.com , or Ada Lester at allester@windstream.net, or
WTHA at wthayb@ttu.edu , or call the event coordinator Robert Hall at 903-261-1044.
Deadline for registration: Oct. 8, 2016.

Come and join in the fellowship and fun of historic trails.

4

PROGRAM INFORMATION

Biography
L. Douglas Wilkens
I got involved in archeology in 1986 working weekends on the Courson Ruins
project under the direction of David Hughes. I joined the Texas Archeological
Society in 1987, and I am currently the director for Region 1 in the Texas
Panhandle area.
In 1991, I was asked, and accepted the opportunity to join the Texas Historical
Commission’s Texas Archeological Stewardship Network, to which I’m still
active. This network is made up of a selected group of volunteer avocational
archeologist across Texas to function as an extension of this state agency.
As an avocational archeologist, I have recorded archeological sites within the
upper northeast corner of the Texas Panhandle, mainly along the north breaks
the Canadian River.

of

I began doing testing and salvage excavations on the M-Cross ranch in Roberts County back in 1998. Owner John R.
Erickson has continually supported a group of archeologist working voluntarily within a portion of the ranch deemed
the “west pasture research project”. I am currently working full time analyzing and processing artifacts recovered during excavations from sites within this study area.
*****

Of burnt dogs and melting cats: A close look at the death (and resurrection) of two
Plains Village Tradition houses (Drover and Pete) from
Whistling Squaw, Northeast Texas Panhandle
L. Douglas Wilkens with Contributions from Charles Frederick
ABSTRACT:

This presentation will examine how the method of building demise affects the archeological presentation by comparing
the excavation of two presumably contemporaneous Plains Village houses that were but a stone’s throw apart in a small
stream valley in the Canadian River Breaks of the Texas Panhandle. Drawing upon traditional excavation as well as
geoarchaeological analysis, we examine the difference in architectural reconstruction possible from burnt and unburnt
houses.
Fifteen years of archeological research has been conducted in a broad valley known as "West Pasture" on the M-Cross
ranch. In 2004, excavations began at 41RB108, a late prehistoric village structure known as Drover’s house. This intensely burned house preserved key structural evidence allowing reverse engineering to recreate the structures superstructure. From the house fill sediments, the evidence is conclusive Drover was an earthen structure. Data recovered
from the excavation was presented to an architectural engineer and architect, and their conclusions confirmed the architectural data recovered could indeed support the construction of an earthen structure. A second structure, of the same
type and size called Pete’s House, was discovered a short distance away but its gradual decay left considerably fewer
insights into its architectural detail. Comparison of the archeological remains of the two buildings draws into sharp
focus why we now only want to dig burnt houses (!).

5

Preface
Working in a Museum you never know what little surprises await you.
Occasionally I run across an item or something in the museum's archeological collection that intrigues me. So it was
last week as I was clearing a work station of paper files, there were several pages from a legal tablet, written in pencil
and faded over time. The pages contained a 1959 report written by our fellow PAS members Mary Ruthe and Dick
Carter on a Woodland Site in the Northern Panhandle. Not having seen the report published and because of the useful
information it contained, I ask myself, "Was there a possibility of printing the report in the PAS newsletter?"
I set about typing the manuscript following the format used by Mary Ruthe and Dick.

Once completed I presented my finding to the Carters and asked their permission to print the report along with photos
in the Panhandle Archeological Society Newsletter.
The Carters had informed Professor Jack T. Hughes of their discovery and later donated their collection from the site
to the Panhandle Plains Historical Museum in Canyon. Jack Hughes later makes several trips to record the site location and to make several more surface collections for the museum. He assign the PPHM Site number A480 to the site.

It's with great pleasure I present the following for your enjoyment.:
Rolla H. Shaller

A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
by Mary Ruthe and Dick Carter with contributions by Jack T. Hughes
The thoughtfulness of a friend led to the discovery of the Panhandle’s second and possibly largest known Woodland
site.
Knowing of our interest in the Prehistory of the Panhandle, Mr. Jim Hodges, the friend, brought to us in May of 1959
several potsherds which he had found on his father-in-law's ranch in Lipscomb County. Mr. Hodges knew from his
father-in-law, Mr. C. W. Meredith, that the location of the site was well known having been hunted over by many collectors for many years but said that the pottery was rather scarce.
We recognized that the pottery was not our own familiar Borger Cordmarked variety which abounds in the many
small ruins along the Canadian River in the Panhandle.
The sherds were very thick, ranging from 8mm to 11mm and having a shell or caliche temper instead of the familiar
grit temper of the Borger Cordmarked. Also the cord marking, even on the small sherds was noticeably different from
the crosshatched effect seen on the local ware, being parallel over the entire fragment.
Realizing that our own scant knowledge of the Woodland culture had come from Mr. Jack T. Hughes of West Texas
State College in Canyon we immediately took the sherds to him. He confirmed our belief that this was different from
our usual pottery and showed us a report by Mr. Marvin "Gus" Kivett of Nebraska which has pictures of Woodland
Vessel rim sherds, discoidal shell beads and comer notched points. Mr. Hughes said, "Find some rim sherds like these
pictures and I'll say you have a Woodland site."
As soon as possible we visited the site which lies on a slight elevation within an oxbow bend of the Wolf Creek 5
miles below the old "Buried City" ruins which have been known for many years.
Mr. W. C. Meredith and his wife extended us every courtesy and Mr. Meredith told us that he first plowed the site
(now in the soil bank) in 1930 and had farmed it every year since. His friends and neighbors as well as some people
from 100 to 150 miles away have picked up points on the site for years especially during the dust-bowl days of the
1930's.
Mr. Jim Hodges and his wife Joyce, daughter of the Merediths, accompanied us on the field trip. Our two children,
Rebecca, age 11 and Dan age 7, helped in the collecting.
In 2½ hours of walking over the cultivated field we found not only plenty of potsherds to encourage us but five different types of rim sherds to match some of the pictures Mr. Hughes had shown us as well as discoidal shell beads and
corner notched points. Two and possibly 3 types of pot sherds were found along with several ordinary artifacts of
stone which are in the text below.

6

Artifacts
Pottery (Figur e 1)
5 rim sherds and 141 body sherds were gathered. 90 of the body sherds are of the thick (8 to 11mm), shell tempered, parallel corded ware. These sherds are small (2 to 3cm largest) having been farmed over for 20 years. However one sherd
measured 12 x 12cm and has in one edge a drilled hole which tapers from 1 cm on each side to 5mm in the center opening.
43 of the body sherds are of 6 to 8mm in thickness, show small dark (burnt bone?) pieces of temper, and appear to be of a
more compact, nearly chalklike texture. Some pieces show cording, not so pronounced as in the bone tempered ware and
some pieces are nearly smooth.
7 body sherds are of a plain brown ware. They have a black bone (?) temper like the 43 mentioned above. They appear to
be irregular in thickness but the small size of the sherds makes this a rather difficult trait to evaluate. These pieces show
some markings but it appears to be scratching rather than cording and is worn almost smooth.
The 5 rim sherds are all of different types and in only one is the coarse bone temper evident.
This rim sherd and another (showing the small black pieces of temper) are both cordmarked with the parallel lines running
up perpendicular to the rim. They are the two largest rim sherds (5cm x 7.5cm). Of the three small rim sherds, 2 (1 x 2cm)
and 1 (2 x 3cm) two show faint cording and one is smooth with small punctate design. The smooth rim sherd has bum
bone and sand temper. Of the two small corded rim sherds one has small bone pieces for temper and one has crushed scoria (?) for temper.
Shell (Mussel shell) (Figure 3)

Two complete discoidal beads. (1-22mm, hole 4mm,), (1-16mm, hole 4mm.) One broken discoidal bead, (1-28mm diameter.)
Two discs with no hole, (15mm and 20mm in diameter)
One pendent fragment (25mm long, 10mm wide) the finished edge (2.5mm) shows 16 or 1 7 notches, very faint, worn
down.
Glass (Figure 3)
One blue bead, tubular in shape, (5mm long, 5mm diameter), hole 2.5mm wide x 2mm ( oval) outer surface is irregularly
faceted.
Stone (figur e 2)
13 points or fragments, could all be Alibates Flint. 3- Comer or base notched
4- Side notched, 3 notched rather far back and 1 with multiple notches 6- Roughly triangular, no notching in evidence.
1- Knife (13cm long x 3.2cm wide x 6.5mm thick)- brown flint X- Knife tip fragments
3- End scrapers, (1- combination end-side)
1-Awl (2mm x 2mm)
2- Drills, broken, ( 1 worked base, 1 large base, side scraper on base) 4- Hammerstones (2-spherical) (2 circular, ( choppers?)
1- Coarse sandstone shaft smoother ( 1 cm groove approx.)

Other stone artifacts observed at the site but not necessarily collected included dozens of manos, (shaped and unshaped),
broken matates, (slab type seemed most common) and many pieces of pressure retouched flint. Mr. Meredith showed a
large oval troughed matate he had collected from the site.
As previously stated the site lies on the shoulder of a slight rise of grown within an ox-bow bend of the Wolf Creek about
5 miles below the old Buried City ruins. It is in sec ---, H&TCRR Blk. -- being about Yi mile east of the OchiltreeLipscomb County line, in Lipscomb County.
The Concentration of cultural material from which we collected the articles mentioned seem to be in a crescent around the
N.W. quarter of the high ground (see sketch) Mr. Hughes has suggested the possibility of an ossuary on the crown of the
low hill.

7

We collected several hundred flint chips in order to see if more than one verity was present.
With the exception of the knife mentioned all the flint could be of the Alibates variety. Upon close examination we found that
approximately 25% of all the flint collected had been worked indicating that it was rather hard to acquire so maximum use was
made of it. Many fist-sized pebbles of reddish brown scoria found.
Several large (10" x 12" x 2") dolomite slabs were seen in the area in loose clusters and the cultural materials may have been slightly
concentrated near the rocks. It would be hard to say definitely. Mr. Meredith had visited the Buried City many times and he says no
similar structures or walls of any kind were visible on the Woodland site when he first plowed it in 1930.
It should be noted that Dr. W. K. Moorehead in his book, A rcheology of the Arkansas River V alley, p.112, quotes Dr. Willian C.
Holden on what were apparently camp sites beneath the Buried City Ruins.
Is it possible that the Buried City was built on a similar Woodland site? We do not have access to the Smithsonian notes on their
1921 (?) dig at the Buried City site. Perhaps a study of the stratigraphy of the midden deposits of that site would show Woodland
occupation at an earlier time and was Woodland recognized during that time?

Figure 1. A Large Woodland body sherd with parallel cording and drilled hole at apex.
Three examples of Woodland rim sherds collected by the Carters.

8

Figure 2. Lithic ar tifacts including pr ojectile pints, oval knife, knife tip fr agment, side and end scraper s and awls or drills.

Figure 3. Drilled shell disc, prefor m and br oken shell disc, discoid shell bead, faceted blue glass bead and serr ated mussel
shells.

9

