PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Six, Number Nine December 2016

President
Scott Brosowske
Vice president
Veronica Arias

Even the trees and houses are shivering!
14 degrees this morning —

Raise a glass to Global Warming!

Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer

Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE of CONTENTS
Page
Notes From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

3a

Program Information

4

Side-Notched Distal Endscrapers from the Eastern Texas Panhandle

5

Notes From the Editor’s Desk
This Could Be The Last Year Of Daylight Saving Time In Texas
Daylight Saving Time – some of us love it, some of us can’t stand it. What I think we can all agree on is how unnecessary it is. Most of our country isn’t working in the fields or on the railroads all day, so there’s really no need to
maximize the length of our days. Texas has come to realize this and is toying with the idea of doing away with Daylight Saving Time. This might be our last year adhering to the practice.
A Senate bill that might opt Texas out of Daylight Saving is on the table for 2017. We wouldn't be the first state to
do so - Arizona doesn't practice the age-old tradition either.

So if you're tired of darkness at 5 pm during the winter, ...and sunlight when you're trying to fall asleep during the
summer, you just might be in luck. For those of us who'd like the time to remain the same year-round, we can only
hope Senate Bill 238 will pass next year. I know I'll be crossing my fingers.
http://www.onlyinyourstate.com/texas/last-year-of-daylight-saving-tx/
The Studer Banquet was December 9. Chris Lintz presented an interesting and informative program. There was a
good crowd, including several people we hadn’t seen for a while.

You may have noticed there was no regular PASTIMES for December.
Remember, this is YOUR newsletter. If you don’t send me articles and pictures of your
activities and research, you will be treated to more of my What I Did On My Summer
Vacation musings.

Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to all!

2

MINUTES OF NOVEMBER 16, 2016
PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The meeting was called to order by President Scott Brosowske at 7 p.m. at the Downtown Amarillo Library second floor
meeting room.
There were 12 members along with the program presenter, Jasmine Kidwell, in attendance.
PROGRAM: Ms Kidwell’s presentation was titled “Modeling Landscape Evolution Across the Pleistocene-Holocene
Transition at Blackwater Draw Locality 1.”
After a brief review of the history of the site, she described the research she had conducted - augering 36 samples of soil
and processing them in the lab - in an attempt to determine the cause of the ponding. She still had no clear-cut answer to
the question of the type of obstruction which led to the ponding identified with the Folsom Era. Following her talk, she
invited us to feel and smell samples of soil from the various levels.
MINUTES: The September minutes were approved as published in the PAS Newsletter.
TREASURER’S REPORT: Treasurer Pam Allison reported a balance of $4007.30 with current bills (room rent, mailing, etc.) yet to be paid.
OLD BUSINESS: Chris Linz will be the Studer Banquet speaker. Scott will send message reminding members to make
reservations for the banquet and of the Friday date, December 9. Dick Carter will mail the same to members who receive the newsletter by mail.
NEW BUSINESS: Pam is accepting dues for the coming year.
The meeting adjourned at 8:20 pm.
Respectfully submitted,
Mary Ruthe Carter, Secretary

Next Meeting of the Panhandle Archaeology Society: January 18, 2017
Amarillo Public Library Downtown
Have you Paid Your Dues?

3

Side-Notched Distal Endscrapers from the Eastern Texas Panhandle
Scott D. Brosowske
Recently, a collector from Pampa, Texas brought a small collection of prehistoric Indian artifacts that he had found on his
ranch to the Courson Archaeological Research laboratory for us to document. Among the collection were four unusual distal
endscrapers. These artifacts were collected from a single unrecorded site on West Cantonment Creek not far from the
Franklin Ranch site (see Lintz 2010). All of these scrapers are remarkably similar and likely represent a formal tool type
that has yet to be recognized by previous research (Figure 1). This brief discussion provides a description of these unique
scrapers in hopes that if similar tools are present in the region that they will brought to further attention by future researchers.

Figure 1 Front and Reverse Views of the Four Side-Notched Scrapers
These four scrapers are manufactured on moderately curved flakes. All of these tools are produced from what appears to be
the same raw material type. This material is highly siliceous and appears to be a white to light gray, opaque variety of Alibates silicified dolomite. Indeed, all of the scrapers when examined in a dark room using a shortwave UV light responded
with pale greenish yellow color as is common for Alibates (see Taylor 2006:52).
The scrapers are all worked unifacially. Except for one example (#1), which has a nearly straight distal end, the others have
convex working ends. The distal ends of these scrapers have fairly thin, almost sharp, working edges that suggest that these
tools were likely intended for somewhat delicate scraping activities. The lateral margins above the side notches are slightly
convex. The basal margins are also convex in outline. The side notches are generally “C” shaped. The metric measurements
for these scrapers are provided in Table 1.
Table 1 Metric Measurements for Side Notched Endscrapers
#
ML
MW
MTH
1
23.4
22.0
4.7

NW
14.5

W
2.5

SW
19.0

2

24.1

23.3

3.8

15.2

2.4

20.1

3

24.3

21.2

2.9

11.3

2.0

17.6

4

21.5

20.9

3.9

13.6

2.2

18.7

Average

23.33

21.85

3.83

13.65

2.28

18.85

ML=Max. Length, MW=Max. Width, MTH=Max. Thickness, NW=Notch Width, SW=Stem Width, W=Weight
Other artifacts recovered at this site included several corner notched arrowpoints, including Deadman’s and Scallorn-like
types. As such, although it is not entirely clear it appears that these notched scrapers likely date to the Early Ceramic period.
This seems likely considering that Middle (A.D. 1250-1500) and Late Ceramic (A.D. 1500-1800) period sites have received

4

substantial research attention in the Texas Panhandle and adjoining areas of western Oklahoma (e.g., Baugh 1986;
Brosowske and Bevitt 2006; Drass 1997; Hofman 1989; Lintz 1986; Spielmann 1982), but as far as I am aware, these types
of scrapers have yet to be recognized for these time periods.
It is somewhat remarkable that these four distal endscrapers are so similar in size and shape and were all recovered from the
same site, but yet this tool has not been recognized as a formal tool type. As such, we are left to consider if these are simply
a unique tool form manufactured for a very specific activity or if it is a common tool type, but used during a specific time
period that has received little research attention.
References Cited
Baugh, Timothy G.
1986
Culture History and Protohistoric Societies in the Southern Plains. In Current Trends in Southern Plains Archaeology, edited by Timothy G. Baugh, pp. 167-187. Plains Anthropologist Memoir 21, Pt 2.
Brosowske, Scott D. and Tod C. Bevitt
2006
Looking South: The Middle Ceramic Period in Southern Kansas and Beyond. In Kansas Archaeology, edited by
Robert J. Hoard and William E. Banks, pp. 180-205. University of Kansas Press, Lawrence.
Drass, Richard R.
1997
Culture Change on the Eastern Margins of the Southern Plains. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Studies in Oklahoma’s Past No. 19. University of Oklahoma, Norman.
Hofman, Jack L.
1989
Protohistoric Culture History on the Southern Great Plains. In From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great Plains, by Jack L. Hofman, Robert L. Brooks, Joe S. Hays, Douglas W. Owsley, Richard L. Jantz, Murray K. Marks, and Mary H. Manhein, pp. 91-100. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Research Series No. 35. University of Arkansas, Fayetteville.
Lintz, Christopher R.

1986

Architecture and Community Variability within the Antelope Creek Phase. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Studies in Oklahoma’s Past 14. University of Oklahoma, Norman.

2010

A Preliminary Report on the 1960 Excavations at the Franklin Ranch Site, 34GY80, Gray County, Texas. Oklahoma Anthropological Society Bulletin 58:47-60.

Spielmann, Katherine A.
1982
Inter-Societal Food Acquisition Among Egalitarian Societies: An Ecological Study of Plains/Pueblo Interaction in
the American Southwest. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor.
Taylor, Jeb
2006

Projectile Points of the High Plains: New Perspectives on Typology Based on Examinations of Original Type Site
Specimens. Sheridan Books, Chelsea, Michigan.

5

