PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Eight, Number Seven, October 2018

President
Veronica Arias

Vice president
Scott Brosowske

Secretary
Andy Burchard
Miranda Bible

Treasurer
Pam Allison

Publications
Rolla Shaller

Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

4

Program Information:

5

From the Editor’s Desk
I’m fascinated by the way in a pre-wifi, even PPN, era, ideas traveled around the world and reappeared in widely separated times and places, almost without change.
Some examples:

Antelope Creek house plan

Israel four-room house,

Drawing by Chris Lintz

© 1200 B.C.

In our own time, “old” houses often feature a long hall running down the center, with rooms on either side.

Southwestern Pottery

Late Neolithic pottery, Iran. © 4,000 B.C.
Even the metate, or quern, often described as developed in the American
Southwest, actually appears on the shores of the Sea of Galilee ©23,000
B.C.
(See Ecclesiastes 1:9.) Attributed to King Solomon, but of course we may
never really know!

2

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of September 19, 2018
The meeting was called to order by Vice President Scott Brosowske at 7 p.m. in the Amarillo Downtown Library.
There were approximately 20 persons in attendance.
MINUTES: The minutes from the previous meeting were accepted as printed in the newsletter.
TREASURER’S REPORT: Pam Allison reported there was $3939.63 in the checking account.

PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported an ending July balance of $944.66 in the Money
Market Account, and $5,147.42 in the Certificate of Deposit. The Money Market Account is now under
$1000. Rolla announced the new brochures are out and printed. 1000 were printed for a total of
$310.07.
OLD BUSINESS: The Federation transactions will be brought at the October meeting for those wishing
to purchase 2017 publications. It was brought up that Midland has still not decided if they will hold the
2019 Southwest Federation Meeting. There was a reminder that we will be holding the 2019 TAS annual meeting.
NEW BUSINESS: Proceeds from Studer Banquet totaling $1500 will be moved from the general fund
to the publications fund.
Annual Flint fest on September 29.
The Plains Conference and the TAS annual meeting are both in the last week of October.
The Society for American Archaeology 84th Annual Meeting will be held in Albuquerque from April
10th to 14th.
There will be an Atlatl competition at Black Water Draw on October 27.

Beryl had books and brochures out.
Joe D. to give a talk Friday, September 21 in room 325 of Old Main.
The business meeting adjourned at 7:15 p.m.
PROGRAM: Brendon P. Asher gave the program for the evening over Clovis and Folsom artifacts and
their placement from the Continental Divide of Colorado through Kansas. These artifacts were from
private collectors and isolated discoveries.

3

UPCOMING EVENTS
STUDER BANQUET DEC 8, 6:00 P.M. YOUNGBLOOD’S
October 17, 2018

Panhandle Archaeological Society
Amarillo public library, downtown

7:00 p.m.

Pre-meeting dinner Napoli’s 700 So. Taylor

5:30 PM

NOTICE!!
PAS November meeting will be a week early,
to avoid conflict with Thanksgiving.
So it will be November 14, 2018.

October Is Texas Archaeology Month

October 24-27, 2018

Plains Anthropological Society 76th Annual Conference
San Antonio, Texas

October 26-28, 2018

http://plainsanthropologicalsociety.org/

Texas Archaeological Society Annual Meeting
San Antonio, Texas

https://txarch.org/civicrm-event/189

October 27, 2018

Atlatl Competition Blackwater Draw, New Mexico

December 8 , 2018

Studer Banquet (See above)

March 29-30, 2019

Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies
Midland College, Midland Tx
Activity Friday evening, Symposium Saturday. Be sure to plan to attend, and
please be thinking of making a presentation.
Jack Lowder [mailto:jacktlowder@att.net]

April 10-14, 2019

Society for American Archaeology 84th Annual Meeting

Albuquerque, New Mexico http://saa.org/AbouttheSociety/AnnualMeeting/
tabid/138/Default.aspxhttp://saa.org/AbouttheSociety/AnnualMeeting/tabid/138/Default.aspx

4

PROGRAM INFORMATION
Abstract
A Two-Story True Story
The book tells two stories. One, the people who settled here about the end of the
Ice Age, and Two, the 40-year struggle to get the federal government to recognize
its importance and name it a National Monument.
The program reviews some of the information previously presented in the book,
“Gone to Rock and Ruin: Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument”. Presenter
will read certain portions of the book.
Much of the book has been given in programs at PAS, at SWFAS, and published
in Transactions. Although the book has 50 color photographs, there are a number
of black-and-white pictures that could not be used because of copyright issues.
These will be highlighted in the program .
Your questions and comments are invited.
The keys to the future lie in the past.
Biographic Information
Beryl Cain Hughes is a native of Colorado and Utah, and an adopted Texan. While employed at then-WTSU she decided
to finish her long-abandoned college degree. She needed one more semester of Science, and the class meeting at a time
that she could fit into her work schedule was Anthropology:Professor Jack T. Hughes! The rest, as they say, is history.
Also Prehistory. A professional librarian (retired) Beryl is not an archaeologist, nor really any kind of “ologist.” Her field
is the human condition, which seems to make Anthropology come almost close.

Anthropology is the most humanistic of the sciences and the most scientific of the humanities.
Attributed to A.L. Kroeber

5

