PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Eight, Number Six, September 2018

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Andy Burchard
Miranda Bible
Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller

Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

4

Studer Banquet Order

5

Program Information:

6

Awards

7

SAA

8-9

From the Editor’s Desk

The “From the Trenches” page in the Nov/Dec 2018 issue ARCHAEOLOGY is entitled
“The American Canine Family Tree.”
According to this article, there have been four migrations of dogs into the New World.
1) From Asia 9,900 years ago, long after the first humans arrived here.
2) By Thule people, ancestors of the Inuit, about 1,000 years ago.
3) Europeans brought dogs 500 years ago, and
4) Huskies were brought to Alaska from Siberia during the Gold Rush.
All this from genomes of seven ancient dogs in Siberia and North America, plus more
than 5,000 modern dogs, along with mitochondrial DNA from 71 samples of ancient dogs.
This may shed some light on the lack
of dog skeletons in digs in our area.
Perhaps there are no dog bones because
there were no dogs.
My Chihuahuas are supposed to be descended from Mexico’s indigenous
dogs. I’ve explained this to them, but I
don’t think they’re impressed.

2

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of October 17, 2018
The meeting was called to order by President Veronica Arias at 7 p.m. in the Amarillo Downtown Library.
There were 16 persons in attendance.
PROGRAM: The program for the evening was given by Beryl Hughes. Beryl presented an overview of her new book,
“Gone to Rock and Ruin: Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument”. She showed slides of artifacts, flint quarry sites,
Panhandle landscapes, and the people involved with the archeology of the Alibates sites. Beryl read selected passages from
her book, and sketched the story of Floyd Studer’s long quest to protect the Alibates site and finally gain it recognition as
National Monument.

MINUTES: The minutes from the previous meeting were accepted as printed in the newsletter.
TREASURER’S REPORT: Pam Allison reported a balance of $2529.63 in the checking account (this was after the $1500
transfer to the Publications fund).
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported ending September balances of $944.66 in the Money Market Account,
and $5,147.42 in the Certificate of Deposit.
OLD BUSINESS: No items were discussed.
NEW BUSINESS: The 2018 Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeological Society will be held October 26, 27, 28 at the
Menger Hotel in San Antonio.
The proposed budget for the 2019 TAS Annual Meeting (to be held in Amarillo) has been submitted by Scott Brosowske to
TAS. Further discussions regarding the 2019 meeting will be held in San Antonio.
Rolla Shaller moved that the Panhandle Archeological Society make a $150 Memorial donation in memory of Dick Carter to
the TAS Donor’s Fund. This motion was quickly seconded and unanimously approved.
Other pending events were mentioned as follows:
Texas History Days will be celebrated October 19&20 in PaloDuro Canyon State Park.
The West Texas Trails Association will hold their Annual Meeting on October 19&20 in Quanah, Texas.
The 76th Plains Anthropological Conference will be October 24-27 in San Antonio.
The Sesquicentennial (150th Anniversary) of the Battle of the Washita will be November 27, 2018. Commemorative events
will be held from 7am-2pm November 27 at the Washita Battlefield National Historic Site near Cheyenne, Oklahoma.
The meeting adjourned at 8:15 p.m.

Respectfully submitted,
Andy Burcham, Secretary

3

Upcoming Events
NOTICE!!
Due to Thanksgiving Day being Thursday, November 22,
the regular PAS meeting will be moved to
Wednesday, November 14. Usual time and place.
Please join us for our Pre-meeting dinner, 5:00 p.m.,
Napoli’s, 700 South Taylor.

Studer Banquet
December 8, 6:oo p.m.
Youngblood’s
620 SW 16th Ave, Amarillo, TX 79101

Be sure to save your “stuff” for the auction,
and your money so you can buy someone else’s!

March 29-30 Southwest Federation of Archaeology Societies
The Midland Archeological Society plans to host the 2019 Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies Symposium on Saturday, March 30, 2019 on the campus of Midland College in
Midland, with an activity scheduled on the evening of Friday, March 29, 2019. Please notify
your society members and anyone else who may be interested in attending this event to save the
date and consider making a presentation at the symposium. Thanks.
From Jack T. Lowder

4

41st ANNUAL FLOYD V. STUDER
BANQUET AND LECTURE
6:00 PM DECEMBER 8, 2018 (SATURDAY)
YOUNGBLOOD’S CAFÉ

620 SW 16th St. at Madison
AMARILLO, TEXAS
……………………………CUT HERE……………………………………..
Reservations & RSVP
Please return by December 4, 2018
NAME………………………………………………………………….
ADDRESS……………………………………………………………..
EMAIL…………………………………………PHONE………………
NUMBER OF RESERVATIONS $25.00 EA.

2018 PAS Membership Dues

$ 15.00 Individual
$ 20.00 Family
$ 10.00 Student w/ID

TOTAL AMOUNT ENCLOSED
Panhandle Archaeological Society
P.O. Box 814 Amarillo, Texas 79105
rsvp
Pam Allison (806) 570-1980 pallison@earthlink.net
Rolla Shaller(806) 570-9285 rshaller@suddenlink.net

5

$................
$................
$................
$................
$..................

PROGRAM INFORMATION

Joe D. Rogers
Joe will give an overview of some of the work at this year's TAS Field School in Camp Wood, at Mission
San Lorenzo de la Cruz.
We know Joe in his roles as history teacher and researcher. He is expert in 19th-early 20th Century tools, and has
made some working model cotton gins which are in farm museums. He has done a lot of work on the Prisoner of
War camp in Deaf Smith County.
He has long been active in both PAS and TAS. His speaking style is easy, friendly and amusing. We are looking
forward to a real treat.

6

PAS is pleased and proud to announce that two of our members have received special recognition..

These two awards are highly selective and very important within these two societies. So, it is
doubly impressive that they went to PAS members this year. Veronica Arias
Dr. Christopher Lintz was awarded the
Distinguished Service Award from the
Plains Anthropological Society on Friday,
October 26th. A description of the award
from their website is as follows:
“The award, established in 1991, recognizes outstanding lifetime achievement in
Plains anthropological research, teaching,
scholarship, and service to the profession.” (See http://
plainsanthropologicalsociety.org/awards ).
Photo of Chris receiving the award was
taken by Mike Quigg of Texas State University.
Veronica

Rolla H. Shaller, Jr. was awarded
the TAS Lifetime Achievement
Award from the Texas Archeological Society on Saturday, October
27th. A description of the award
from their website is as follows:
“Recognizes an individual TAS
member's lifetime commitment to
Texas archeology. It will be presented as deemed appropriate by the
TAS Board to a TAS member in
recognition of his or her lifetime involvement in TAS and Texas archeology.” (see https://txarch.org/about
-tas/awards ).
Photo of Rolla with his award taken
by Doug Wilkins.
Veronica

7

SOCIETY FOR AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY STATEMENT ON COLLABORATION
WITH RESPONSIBLE AND RESPONSIVE STEWARDS OF THE PAST
In the United States there are many people with an enthusiastic interest in archaeology who are
not professionally trained archaeologists. These include people who collect artifacts legally (for
example, from private land with permission of the landowner) or who own legacy collections that
have been inherited from family members. These and other examples of legal artifact collectors
and collection owners, referred to here as “responsible and responsive stewards,” are generally
knowledgeable and eager to learn more about artifacts and archaeology and to willingly share
their knowledge with archaeologists.

With this document, the SAA encourages collaboration between archaeologists and “responsible
and responsive stewards” (RRS) in ways that do not conflict with the professional ethical principles and codes that archaeologists have pledged to uphold. This position statement gives five recommendations for promoting collaboration between archaeologists and RRS of the past. What
RRS have in common—with each other and with archaeologists—is their interest in archaeology
and history and their recognition of artifacts as physical manifestations of their shared humanity
with past people.
The SAA’s “Principles of Archaeological Ethics” state that archaeologists have a responsibility to
promote public understanding and support for the long-term preservation of the archaeological
record. Recognizing that RRS are a large and diverse group of people with an interest in archaeology, archaeologists should develop positive relationships that promote understanding and support
for the preservation of the archaeological record. To achieve a positive relationship between archaeologists and RRS, both communities need to approach prospective collaboration with a mutual sense of respect and genuine interest in learning from each other. Archaeologists have much to
gain by working with indigenous communities, avocational archaeologists, and RRS in preserving, protecting, and documenting archaeological sites and collections.
Premises to the Recommendations
1. Nothing in this document or the recommendations that follow suggests that archaeologists
should breach the principles and codes of ethics that they have pledged to uphold through
SAA, Register of Professional Archaeologists, or other professional organizations.

8

2. The Society for American Archaeology does not encourage anyone to begin or continue collecting artifacts from archaeological sites. At the same time, the SAA recognizes that, in the United States, many individuals have legally collected or possess artifacts and are willing to share
these with interested professionals, and that archaeologists have much to learn when this occurs.
3. The SAA does not condone the excavation of any archaeological site that is not conducted in
accordance with all applicable laws, under the supervision of a qualified archaeologist, and in
compliance with the SAA Principles of Archaeological Ethics and other applicable codes of conduct and standards of research performance.
4. The SAA eschews the collection or disturbance of any objects or remains associated with a human grave or burial that is not legally permitted and conducted under the direct supervision of a
qualified archaeologist in compliance with the SAA and other applicable codes of conduct and
standards of research performance.
Recommendations
The Society for American Archaeology promotes the following practices in the United States:
1. Provide education for archaeologists and archaeology students regarding the importance of privately held collections as potential sources of information about sites and the irreplaceable loss of
this information when responsible and responsive stewards are ignored or treated disrespectfully.
2. Where possible, encourage responsible and responsive stewards to work with a professional or
avocational archaeologist to record and document sites and collections and to enter that information into the state archaeologist’s or State Historic Preservation Office files.
3. To capture archaeological data that may otherwise be permanently lost, encourage the development of national databases of documented and analyzed privately held and legally acquired collections, akin to those developed in England and Wales through their Portable Antiquities
schemes.
4. Encourage responsible and responsive stewards to donate their documented collections to an
appropriate museum or public curation facility. If donation is not feasible, teach responsible and
responsive stewards best curation practices so that they can provide maximum protection for collections.
5. Encourage responsible and responsive stewards to join organizations and programs that provide
training to increase their archaeological knowledge and skills and make it easier for them to share
their knowledge with archaeologists.

9

