PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Seven, Number Two February 2017

President
Scott Brosowske
Vice president
Veronica Arias
Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer

Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

Canadian River

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
Upcoming Events

2

From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Previous Meeting

3

Program Information

4
UPCOMING EVENTS

Next PAS Meeting February 15, 7:00 p.m. Amarillo Public Library, Downtown
Branch. Pre-Meeting Dinner 5:30 at Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor, Amarillo.
SWFAS Saturday April 1, 2017, Fort Chadbourne, Texas
NOTES FROM THE EDITOR’S DESK
The Canadian has a drainage area of 46,900 square
miles (if I’m interpreting the chart correctly) and a
length of 906 miles. It rises in Las Animas County,
Colorado, and empties into the Arkansas in Haskell
County, Oklahoma.. Stephen H. Long said it flowed
into the Arkansas at Fort Smith. As to the name, the
river does not flow out of Canada, nor is it named
for Canadian fur trappers. In fact, the valley furnished pasture and water for animals, mainly sheep,
going back and forth between New Mexico and Texas. This is reminiscent of the great
Can~adas (tilde should be over the “n”— wrong placement — computer refuses to cooperate) of Spain, trails for transhumant animals. We must remember that people in New Mexico and Texas spoke Peninsular Spanish, not that of the New World. Like yours truly, the
government printing office left off the tilde, changing the name to Canadian and giving
rise to centuries of speculation.

2

PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Minutes of January 18, 2017
The meeting was called to order by Vice-President Veronica Arias at 7 p.m. at the Downtown Amarillo Library second
floor meeting room.
There were 13 members assembled to hear Tamra Walter, Ph.D of Texas Tech. Dr. Walter is in charge of the upcoming
TAS Field School. Her presentation, “Presidio San Saba and Mission San Lorenzo: Looking Ahead to the 2017 TAS Field
School," outlined the history of the sites from the time of the Spanish establishment in the mid-1700's through the abandonment, up to excavation in the 1930's and to the present. Her goals for the 2017 work are to find the Lipan Apache
camps outside the Presidio, to investigate middens, to discover supply sources and more about life on the frontier, and to
expose more of the architecture to aid in planned restoration.
MINUTES: There were no minutes from December as that was the Studer Banquet.
TREASURER'S REPORT: Treasurer Pam Allison reported $4,087 with a deposit yet to be made and will have a full report later.
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported a balance of $1,378.58 in the Money Market Account and $5,073.21
in the CD Account.
OLD BUSINESS: There was no old business.
NEW BUSINESS: Several announcements were made:

Joe Faulkenberry said the Southwesterners headquarters has moved from the Cowboy Ball of Fame to PPHM.
Chris Lintz will be conducting the TAS Ceramics Academy in February.
Southwest Federation meets in April.
PPHM opens a new exhibit on WWI January 27.
Next Studer Banquet will be the second Friday in December 2017.
The meeting adjourned at 8:30 pm.
Respectfully submitted,

Mary Ruthe Carter, Secretary

3

PROGRAM INFORMATION
Abstract
“A Visit to the Suburbs of Langtry Texas”
The Texas Archeolocical Society held its first Academy of 2017 just west of Del Rio on January 14-15. The Academy
was well attended and covered recent work in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands, based out of Langtry. Excavations have
been in progress for the past few years and are soon to be backfilled to stabilize the sites, so this academy provided a once
in a lifetime opportunity to see the work in progress. The program for PAS will highlight some of the results of Texas
State University's Ancient Southwest Texas Project; six sites will be the focus: Eagle Cave, Kelley Cave, Skiles Rockshelter, Sayles Adobe, Horse Trail Shelter, and Bonfire Shelter. Instructors are Dr. Charles Frederick, Dr. Steve Black,
Charles Koenig, Ken Lawrence, and Arlo McKee.
Dr. Carolyn Boyd of the Shumla School also provided an onsite explanation of the ‘White Shaman’ rock shelter. Beautiful weather and scenery were exceptional pluses for these excursions.

Biographical Note
Joe D. Rogers is a retired public school history and shop teacher. He ‘found’ avocational archaeology at the 2000 TAS
Field School in Marfa, and has been hooked ever since. Field schools all over the state have provided a shovelbum’s paradise. Local archaeo-work With TPWD, PPHM, CAR, and the West Pasture crew at M-Cross Ranch are a few of the project that have kept him occupied. He has served as TAS Region 1 Director, President of both TAS and PAS, and is currently serving on the Board of Directors for PPHM. Joe is a member of Texas Archeological Steward’s Network for THC,
and since retirement has been teaching core history and some archaeology as a Part Time Instructor for WTAMU.
Joe lives in Hereford with his wife Cindy.

Left: Eagle Cave
Below: Joe D. Rogers

Left: Approach to Bonfire Shelter

4

