PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Nine, Number One, January 2019

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott Brosowske
Secretary

2 2019

2019

Andy Burchard
Miranda Bible

Hopes and Dreams
Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications

New Year
New Finds

Rolla Shaller

New fulfillment of
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Old Dreams

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

3a

Program Information:

3b
From the Editor’s Desk

In the interest of historic archaeology, I wanted to look at Texas’ famous county courthouses. First obstacle: Texas has 254 counties!
Luckily, there is a page listing them all alphabetically. There are pages
for individual counties, and even one listing them by the architects of
the various courthouses.

With some courthouses dating from as far back as
the mid-19th century, they were among the first
permanent structures in many counties. With
their brick and stone towers, ornate cupolas, and
soaring domes, they represent an impressive colWhen Texas was still part of Spain/Mexico, there were 23 municipos. lection of public architecture. Not surprisingly,
They became counties with Independence in 1836. By 1860 the coun- Texas has more historic courthouses than any
ties numbered 152. The Constitution of 1876 —Texas, not U.S.—
other state—242 are still in active government
use. With decades or even centuries of use, most
decreed that counties must have at least 900 square miles and be laid
of these structures have significantly deteriorated
out in grid fashion, like the original 54 (now 26) counties in the Panhandle. In general, the idea was that each county seat should be situat- due to inadequate maintenance, insensitive modied so that residents could get there, do their business and get home in a fications, or weather-related damage.
THC.Texas.gov
single day.

Although I will certainly not be able to visit all of them, modern technology allows me — and you!— to log on and look at all of them . I
hope to run this series for a few months, probably until my skittish
mind veers off to something else.

lives and works in Houston.

If you have a favorite, let me know and I’ll include it.

www.254texascourthouses.net

Leonard Lane, architect,

This website will document my travels, my photos,
and my impressions of the Texas courthouse and
its context. On May 9, 2016, nine years after I
began my project, I visited Dalhart, the seat of
Dallam County in the northwest corner of the
Texas panhandle. That afternoon I completed by
first circuit of the 254 Texas counties. At this
point I've been from "A" to "Z"; from Anderson
County to Zavala County.
leonrdlane@gmail.com

2

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of December 8, 2018
STUDER BANQUET
Banquet cancelled because weatherman predicted ten-inch snowfall.
OOPS! Storm moved to Lubbock.
Better luck next year!
*****************************************************

Upcoming Events
January 16

PAS Next Meeting, Amarillo Public Library, Downtown Branch,
7:00 p.m. Please join us for the pre-meeting dinner at Napoli’s, 700
South Taylor, 5:00 p.m.

March 31-April 1 SWFAS meeting, Midland College, Midland.
******
PROGRAM INFORMATION
Movie — professionally produced — about an early dig by group members. I believe
Rolla said 1968, but don’t hold me to that. Come to the meeting and be surprised!
*****
PASTIMES —Your contributions.
You have undoubtedly noticed that this issue is very short. That’s because YOU haven’t
sent me anything to put into it! I’m more aware than anyone else that this looks like it
must be MY newsletter. It isn’t, although my ramblings have filled two pages. It is, or
should be, a group production, by and for YOU. I’m just the editor, the compiler if you
will. Somebody out there must be doing, or maybe researching, something or other that
would enable him/her to write a short report.

BTW Archaeology cannot exist in a vacuum. If you want to make or find rock art, for example, you must know enough geology to enable you to find a rock! Same goes for flint
tools. Material remains are only valuable insofar as you can fit them into the pattern!
LOOK for it; FIND it; ANALYZE it; WRITE it up; SHARE with all of us!

3

New Year—

THE FAMOUS COUNTY COURTHOUSES OF TEXAS
Beginning with

NEW FEATURE

RANDALL COUNTY
County Seat: CANYON

Randall County was created in August, 1876
from Bexar Land District, and officially organized
in 1895. The organization process required 150
signatures, of which 45 were qualified residents.
The other 105 were passers-by. The story goes
that these included cowboys, horses, and mules
from the nearby T Anchor ranch.
The county was named for Brig. Gen. Horace
Randal. (The printer “corrected” the name by
adding an “l” on the end). Randal was the first
Texan to be entered at West Point, in 1849. He
graduated July 1, 1854, became a Colonel of Cavalry and was assigned to the 28th Regiment of
Texas on Feb. 12, 1862. However, Texas had already seceded from the Union in 1861, so Randal
resigned his new commission and became a General in the army of the CSA. He was killed at the
battle of Jenkins Ferry in Arkansas, April 30,
1864.
"A print of a painting by R. Russell Brown depicting the 1908 Randall County courthouse in its original condition." - Terry Jeanson, September 2007 photo

The new county needed a repository for its records, which was met by the construction of a modest two-room frame building. This “courthouse” also served as a church, community center, and dance hall. It became a school when the new courthouse was built. Still standing, the 1908-9 building is a three-story, brick and stone Classical Revival building, complete with
clock tower on top. The designer was Architect Robert G. Kirsch. A day-long party was held to officially celebrate the dedication, July 14, 1909.
By 1945, the roof had begun leaking, and in order to repair it, the clock tower was removed. In another 20 years, it was felt
that the by-then-old building was no longer adequate for the county’s needs, so architects and engineers Clayton B. Shiver
and Russell A. Megert were hired in 1968 to design another one. They came up with a pair of stunningly inappropriate leantos, and records and offices were moved into the new additions. In 2010, with the assistance of the State Historical Society,
the addition was torn down and the clock tower rebuilt. County business was moved to still another site, a former WalMart.
The interior of the 1909 building awaits funds for renewal.

The 1968 Randall County Courthouse, one on north and
south sides of 1908 edifice.

Randall County Justice Center north of town, east of US 87
Terry Jeanson, August 2012

Terry Jeanson,

4

