PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Seven, Number 5, May 2017

President
Scott Brosowske
Vice president
Veronica Arias
Secretary

♫ How often at night
When the heavens are bright
With the light of the glittering stars,
Have I stood there amazed, and asked as I gazed,
If their glory exceeds that of ours. ♫

Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer

Pam Allison
Publications

“Home on the Range”

Rolla Shaller

Dr. Brewster M. Higley,
Late 19th Century .

Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE of CONTENTS
Page
Upcoming Events

2a

Notes From the Editor’s Desk

2b

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Program Information

4

The Barber Collection

5-7
Upcoming Events

Next Meeting : May 17, 7:00 p.m. Downtown Public Library, 2nd Floor.
Please join us for pre-meeting dinner at Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor, 5:30 p.m.

Notes From the Editor’s Desk
♫ Home on the Range ♫
I’m old enough to remember the days before TV, when families gathered around the piano to sing, and “Home on the
Range” was a favorite. My father especially loved that part about the glittering stars; I’ll never forget the emphasis he
put on the word “amazed.” “I stood there Amazed, and asked as I gazed….”

In 2010, “Home on the Range” was named one of the Top 100 all-time western songs by Western Writers of America.
I understand the need for air and food and water, even salt. But why music? Birds sing, and we hear of the “songs” of
whales and grasshoppers and honeybees, but these may well be forms of communication: “Here’s some good stuff to
eat;” “This is MY territory;” “Ya wanna fight?” But mankind uses words for these purposes, spoken, written, sent electronically. In fact, of the great communication systems, music is the one that conveys no information at all. Feelings,
yes; fear or love or joy, yes. But it does not tell you how many miles it is to the next town.

2

PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
MINUTES OF APRIL 19, 2017

Arias

Room.

BUSINESS:
year's

was a

3

Program Information

Veronica M. Arias received her B.A. in History and International Relations from Boston University
and M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in Anthropology from the University of New Mexico. Dr. Arias currently works as the Curator of Archeology at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, a part of West
Texas A&M University in Canyon. In this capacity, she oversees the curation, care, and exhibition of
the museum’s vast anthropology and natural history collections. Apart from conducting research on
some of these collections, her research interests include the development and application of emerging
geospatial technologies to archaeological investigations. In addition, she is an Adjunct Assistant Professor of Anthropology at the University of New Mexico, a member of the Register of Professional
Archaeologists, and the Vice President of the Panhandle Archeological Society.

Recent Findings Regarding the Stinnett Bison Site (41HC220)
by Veronica Arias
A partially articulated extinct bison was found in the summer of 2002 during the installation of a new
municipal swimming pool in the city of Stinnett in the north central Texas Panhandle. To avoid delays in pool construction, the bison remains were removed in blocks by a team of archaeologists and
volunteers under a Texas Antiquities permit and later excavated at the Panhandle-Plains Historical
Museum. Among the cultural material recovered was a complete Calf Creek projectile point. Two
radiocarbon dates obtained from the skeletal material corroborates its association to the Middle Archaic Period. This paper discusses the results of new faunal, lithic sourcing, and paleobotanical analyses conducted on materials from this site. As the only excavated Middle Archaic sites in the Texas
Panhandle, these studies offer new insights on past human activity in the area and challenge traditional interpretations of regional occupation during the Late Altithermal.

4

Barber Collection
Miranda Bible
For the last few months we have been working on cataloging the Barber Collection.
This very large lithic collection, with artifacts numbering in the thousands, came to the
museum in 2010. It was collected over the span of more than fifty years by Byron L.
Barber and his son, Byron D. Barber. Byron L. Barber was a member of TAS for thirty
years and made many contributions. This short article summarizes the types of artifacts
included in this collection and the research process to document them.

This collection has over eighty different projectile point types and many other stone
tools. It includes bifaces, unifaces, scrapers, gouges, perforators, drills, and knives.
These tools are from Paleoindian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods but mostly
date to the Archaic. There are also several pieces of ceramic, bones, and an assortment
of other artifacts in this collection.
While Bryon L. collected throughout Texas, some sites were more represented. He
found many points in Denton County from a site that had different names, two of
which were “The Irish Farm Site” and “The Hackberry Site” near what is now Lake
Lewisville. He also collected a large number of Paleoindian points from Gillespie
County.
In the mid to late 1970s, Thomas Hester and Thomas Kelly were working with a new
kind of point similar to the Angostura and Plainview points. They learned that Mr.
Barber had a large collection of projectile points that included Paleoindian points and
asked if they could include it in their analysis. Mr. Barber allowed them to borrow his
collection. With this collection and a few others, Kelly was able to identify a new Late
Paleoindian point type and named it in honor of Mr. Barber (see photo B). Kelly described the differences in the different point types in an article in La Tierra Journal of
the Southern Texas Archaeological Association. In it, he said the Barber point is longer, thicker, wider, and has deeper basal concavity than the Plainview or Golondrina
point types.
At the beginning of this process we had very little information on the majority of the
artifacts. There were dozens of unique labels on artifacts that were part of the collector’s own cataloging system. We had to decipher that system using multiple lines of
evidence.

Found in the collection were some letters from Thomas Hester, who was working at
University of Texas at San Antonio Center for Archaeological Research (UTSA CAR),
to Byron L. Barber. After contacting UTSA CAR, they sent us scans of the original artifact analysis sheets of a portion of Byron L.’s collection, created under the supervision of Hester and Kelly. They had typed and measured each artifact, identifying a total of 1132 objects: 367 archaic projectile points, 494 bifaces, 57 preforms, 2 cores, 7
choppers, 7 gouges, 146 unifaces, 20 blanks, and 32 other tools (see chart below).
5

We also discovered a map of Gillespie County that had trinomials on it. From this we were
able to obtain information from the Texas Historical Sites Atlas and match specific trinomials to Byron L.’s own location identifiers for three of his sites, for example KA-1 was
identified as 41GL53.
Byron L. wrote an article on a burial at the Hackberry site which was published in The Record, journal of the Dallas Archeological Society, a copy of which was included in the collection. In it, he referenced two other articles he had written for The Record, in 1966 and
1969, on this same site. When we were finally able to locate copies of these articles we discovered that information in them allowed us to apply the same trinomial to sites that Byron
L. had designated GE-2 and GHA. Both articles included drawings of individual artifacts
that we were able to locate in the collection with these designations.
Through this process we figured out there were a lot more artifacts collected from Lake
Lewisville than we had originally thought. We realized that the UTSA CAR analysis of
1173 items did not even include the sites newly identified as being from Lake Lewisville.
In the 1966 article Byron L. stated he had collected over 1000 artifacts from GE-2 alone
(see photo C). We have not yet established a total count for these two sites, but expect it to
be much higher. There are also other location identifiers that we believe to be connected to
this area.
Byron D. collected mostly in Atascosa and McMullen counties. In the fall of 1989, he
found an exceptionally large biface (see photo A) made of Edwards Plateau chert in the
San Miguel Creek drainage. The biface was described in an article of La Tierra where it is
suggested that it was used as a trade blank. He also found many Clear Fork Gouges,
Nueces tools, knives, blades, scrapers, blanks, and preforms.

Byron D. kept a detailed scrapbook documenting his collection. Included was correspondence with Thomas Hester and copies of analysis sheets Hester produced on Byron D.’s
stone tools. Photographs of selected projectile points, gouges, preforms, and other tools
have allowed us to identify specific tools and the type they had been assigned by Byron D.
and Hester.
There is still much work to be done cataloging this collection, and far more to learn from it.
We are looking forward to putting the final pieces together to increase its value for research
and education.

6

A

C

B

Photos of this collection include: A. Large thin
biface found by Byron D. Barber, B. The Barber
Point holotype specimen found by Byron L. Barber, described by Hester and Kelly, C. A sample
of projectile points from site GE-2 (41DN57),
one of several near Lake Lewisville.
Photos by author.
References

Barber, Byron, Paul Lorrain. “A Burial at the Hackberry Site”. The Record, Vol 10, No. 1. December 1984, pp. 6-7.
Barber, Byron. “The Irish Farm Site, 18C4-2”. The Record, Vol. 22, No. 2, May 1966, pp. 9-14.
Barber, Byron. “The Hackberry Site”. The Record, Vol. 25, No. 3, January and February 1969, pp. 17-24.
Hester, Thomas R. Letter to Byron Barber. 14 December 1977. The Barber Collection. Panhandle Plains Historical Museum, Canyon, TX.
Hester, Thomas R., Byron D. Barber. “A Large Biface from Atascosa County, with Comments on the Function of Such
Artifacts in Prehistoric South Texas.” La Tierra Journal of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association, Vol.
17, No. 2, April, 1990, pp. 2-4.
Kelly, Thomas C. “The Barber Paleo-Indian Point” La Tierra Journal of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association,
Vol. 10, No. 4, 1983, pp. 10-25.

7

