PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Eight, Number Five, May 2018

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott D. Brosowske
Secretary
Andy Burcham
Treasurer

Pam Allison

Summertime Songs:

Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Summertime, and the livin’ is easy
In the Good Ol’ Summertime

Beryl C. Hughes

When we all get together in the Fall!

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Program Information:

4

Upcoming Events

4a

Report: 54th Annual Meeting SWFAS—Shaller

5

Dick and Mary Ruth Carter

6-11
From the Editor’s Desk

This month, we are all overwhelmed by the loss of one of our original PAS
members. Dick and Mary Ruthe have been faithful Curmudgeons as well.
Archaeologists in general are a pretty cheerful lot. Their work gives them a
sense of timelessness. Very few things that are happening today will be
worth worrying about tomorrow.
And of all the cheerful archaeologists, Dick Carter
was without doubt one of the cheerfullest!
He brightened Curmudgeons with his jokes, most of them pretty corny!
Why did the chicken cross the road? Because she wanted to lay it on the line.
Once a farmer was standing in front of his big John Deere tractor, making
suggestive gestures, pushing one shoulder strap down, and then the other,
with appropriate comments.
A neighbor happened into the barn and, astonished, asked “What do you
think you’re doing?”
“Well,” the farmer said, “my wife has lost interest in me, romantically. So I
went to the marriage counselor. He told me to go home and do something
sexy to a tractor.”
[Takes a minute, folks. Read it aloud for the effect!]
Now whenever lightning lights up the skies, we’ll know Dick is
regaling the inhabitants of heaven with a joke.
And when thunder rolls, we’ll know they’re all groaning!
2

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of April 18, 2018
The meeting was called to order by Paul Katz at 7 p.m. in the Amarillo Downtown Library.
There were 11 persons in attendance.

PROGRAM: The program for the evening was viewing the 56 minute documentary video, “Ishi, the Last Yahi”.
Ishi’s small band of Native American Yahi people was attacked by “Indian Fighters” in Northern California in 1865.
The survivors lived in hiding for another 40+ years, with Ishi finally emerging into the modern world as the lone
Yahi survivor in 1911. California Anthropologist Alfred Kroeber acquired protective custody of Ishi to study him.
He lived in a sheltered situation as a research assistant with the UC Berkeley Museum of Anthropology in San
Francisco. Ishi was always a curiosity as a “wild Indian”, but shared his culture with remarkable dignity and
cooperation. He passed away from tuberculosis in 1916.
MINUTES: Joe Rogers moved that the March Minutes be approved as published in PASTIMES. This was
seconded by Elaine Maples and the Minutes were accepted.
TREASURER’S REPORT: Pam Allison reported a balance of $3984.63 in the checking account.
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported an ending March balance of $1,383.25 in the Money Market
Account, and $5,122.16 in the Certificate of Deposit.
OLD BUSINESS: Paul announced that PAS will not be participating in the upcoming Lamar Science Day.
Regarding printing of new PAS Brochures, Rolla announced that quotes for printing costs have been solicited from
two local firms (Sir Speedy and Zip Print).
NEW BUSINESS: The need for a voting representative from PAS at the upcoming Southwest Federation meeting
on April 21 was brought up for consideration. Paul moved that Rolla Shaller be the voting delegate, and that Erin
Frigo be the alternate delegate. This was seconded by Beryl Hughes, and approved by all attendees.
Discussion continued regarding the next scheduled Southwest Federation Symposium in 2019. It is possible that
PAS could be asked to host the 2019 meeting, even though that is not the traditional rotation schedule. The concern
is that PAS will already be heavily loaded with existing obligations, including: a 2019 TAS Academy event in the
Panhandle, the 2019 TAS Field School at Palo Duro Canyon, and the 2019 TAS Annual Meeting in Amarillo. It was
agreed that Rolla Shaller was empowered to speak on behalf of PAS. As appropriate, he can voice PAS concerns
about 2019 scheduling and discuss alternative scheduling proposals.
The meeting adjourned at 8:40 p.m.

Respectfully submitted,

Andy Burcham, Secretary

3

PROGRAM INFORMATION
A Fourteenth Century Star Chart from the Southern Plains
Dr. Susan C. Vehik

You’ll remember that Susan came to
us once before. We had a small
space at a restaurant, and a there was
a big party in the adjoining room.
We couldn’t hear a word she said!
So welcome back, Dr. Vehik. We
promise things will go better this
time.

Abstract
In the late 1970s excavations at the Uncas site (34KA172) in north-central Oklahoma recovered some daub with finger tip
impressions. At the time there was little context for explaining these impressions. In intervening years ideology became an
important aspect of archaeological explanations. Often these explanations made reference to star deities as exemplified by
the Pawnee, especially the Skidi and their bison hide star chart. Other Plains peoples also made use of star deities in their
religious systems. However, we have no concrete examples of pre-contact concerns with mapping stars in detail. The Uncas site daub comprises the remains of a pre-contact star chart. The talk will address the stars portrayed, possible dates
for its construction, and sociopolitical context.
Biography
Susan Vehik received her BA in Anthropology from Wichita State University in 1965. Both her MA (1972) and Ph.D.
(1975) are from the University of Missouri. She recently retired from the University of Oklahoma, Department of Anthropology, after 37 years. Her research has mostly focused on the period AD 1400 to 1800 on the southern Plains investigating the intersection of politics, economics, and religion. She has published numerous articles and book chapters on those
and other topics, most notably fortification.

*****

UPCOMING EVENTS
SEPTEMBER 16, 7:00 P.M.

PAS

5:30 PRE-MEETING DINNER

LIBRARY

700 S. TAYLOR

The best-laid plans, etc. If there are changes, we’ll let you know in time to plan.
HAVE A HAPPY SUMMER!
4

The 54th Meeting of the Southwestern Federation of Archaeological Societies
Rolla Shaller and Erin Firgo attended and represented the Panhandle Archaeological Society at the 54 th annual meeting of
the Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies at the Iraan Civil Center in Iraan, Texas on April 21, 2018. The
Iraan Archaeological Society served as the host. The morning and afternoon was devoted to paper sessions. Chris Lintz,
gave a paper on recent work at Connellee Peak (41MY5) in Motley County and Erin gave a paper on Enamel Hypoplasia
and Longevity as seen in the Antelope and Wolf Creek Skeletal Sample from the Panhandle Plains Historical Museum.
Snacks and refreshment were abundant and provided throughout the day as well as various raffles and door prizes.
The Business Meeting was held at noon with five societies represented; Canyonlands AS, Concho Valley AS, Iraan AS,
Midland AS, and Panhandle AS. The last bit of discussion on the Federation’s Constitution and new updated Constitution
and bylaws were adopted. Discussion on procedures and guidelines for the publication of the Transactions. The 2018
Transactions of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Federation presented by the Concho Valley AS. were approved and priced
accordingly.
Discussion as to host for the 2019 meeting, Midland AS. Will check with their membership to determine if they are able to
Host. They will let the Federation know at a later date. Business Meeting adjourned.
Saturday afternoon tour, to the stone ruins of a mail station, the dugouts of nearby Camp Melvin, and the area once used as
a Pontoon Crossing (41CX20). see William P. Yeates, 2003
Sunday Morning tour of Fort Lancaster a State Historical Site (41CX28) Established in 1855 and closed in 1861, reopened
in 1868 for a short time. The site is mostly stone ruins of the Post’s Officers quarters Barracks, Sutler Store, Mess Hall,
Hospital, Lime Kiln and Cemetery. There is also a THC Headquarters building, interpretative center, gift shop and other
facilities located at the site.
Rolla will have for sale The Transactions of the 53rd SWFAS meeting at the PAS May meeting.

Stone ruins of Company H, Enlisted Men’s Barracks at Fort Lancaster, vacated in 1859 when the Army transferred Company H to a newly established post that would eventually become Fort Stockton.
Photo: Rolla Shaller-2018

5

From Amarillo CITIZEN, Thursday, Jan. 19, 1961.
Dan, shown at the right in front of Dick, grew up to be a minister, and preached his father’s funeral.

Dick Carter manning the first Alibates Flint Quarries NM, Visitor's Center Ca 1970's
Dick and Mary Ruthe were members of the original Norpan Archeological Society during the 1950 and 60's, They are
both Charter members of the Panhandle Archeological Society. Dick served as the first PAS Vice-President in 1970
and he served two terms as PAS President in 1971 and 1972.

6

Dick (lower right) helping students at
Lamar Science Day.

First Studer Banquet. 1977. That handsome fellow in the middle is Dick Carter!
These three (Jack T. Hughes, Dick, and Curtis Tunnell), are no doubt reminiscing about
their adventures and the ensuing hilarity in the field even as we read this.
7

Dick and Rolla at Billington #1
PAS dig about 2000.
Amongst Dick's hobbies was whittling and making wooden objects. According to Dick, "This type of Whammy-diddle was used by prehistoric
hunters, so the story goes, by using the peg to rake across the notched
wooden top the propeller on the end would spin. If the propeller spins
clockwise, there are Bison in the area, and if the propeller spins counterclockwise, there are deer or elk in the area. Attached were projectile
point amulets to protect against evil and danger. [See page nine.]

Dick also carved and decorated walking staffs, This staff, Dick gave to
Rolla Shaller for his 70th Birthday. The senior citizen model comes with
colored reflectors, a rear view mirror and air horn, good luck amulets
and an antique license plate. (by the way Dick and Rolla were both born
on the same day in November , but with an 11 year interval). [License
plate on page nine.]
Guess I had better stop. We could fill up a newsletter with
remembrances.
Rolla Shaller

8

World-Famous
(Well, who knows?
It might be famous—
sometime!)

Whammydoodle

License Plate for

Senior Walking
Stick
Created for
Rolla Shaller.

9

A member of our PAS family has gone on ahead of us.
RICHARD LEE CARTER
It seems like no matter where we went or what we did,
Dick was always quick to volunteer.

Curmudgeons, Nov. 2017. Rolla Shaller, Beryl Hughes, Mary Ruthe
and Dick Carter, Miranda Bible, Erin Frigo. It’s Dick and Rolla’s
birthday, so we’re having cake.

Millie Vandiver and Dick teaching
youngsters how to grind corn at Fannin
Middle School History Dayl

10

11

CONDOLENCES
Dick was always so kind to me-- he shared notes with me on the Roper site and I believe Cottonwood
Creek Ruins. I still plan to complete the long manuscript on Roper-- right after Jack Allen, but other
projects also tend to pop up. I will carry fond memories of Dick and Mary Ruthe.
Thanks for notifying me. Sorry that we will miss his service.
Chris Lintz
Thank you for letting me know. Please express my condolences to Mary Ruthe.
Dave Hughes
That indeed is sad news. He will be greatly missed. We would come down on Saturday, but we have
our Stone Age Fair on that day. We will be thinking of him on that day. Take care everyone.
Scott Brosowske
Alvin and I are sad to learn of Dick Carter's passing. He made me laugh every time I talked with him.
His love for people was evident.
Nadyne Lynn
Thanks for sharing the news, I will always remember Dick for his kindness and jovial manner and of
course, his keen interest in Panhandle archeology.
Pat
Patricia A. Mercado-Allinger
Archeology Division Director & State Archeologist Texas Historical Commission PO Box 12276
Austin, TX 78711-2276
Weekend is booked, but thoughts are with you and the curmudgeons. Hard to see empty chairs, but
memories are good.
Blessings to all of you, and love on Mary Ruthe. Really neat folks. Never saw one without the other!
Doug Wilkens

12

