PASTIMES
The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

President
Paul Katz

Vice-President
Jeff Indeck
Secretary
Stacy Brown
Treasurer
Lisa Jackson
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Scott Brosowske

Vol. 31, No, 6, September 2011

PASTIMES

Page 1

Vol. 31, No. 6, Sept. 2011

In this issue

Page 2

September Guest Speaker Pam Allison,
PAS September Meeting Information

Page 3-4

GPS Devices For Recording Location

Page 5-8

Further Investigations At Chill Hill:
An Antelope Creek Phase Site In
The Canadian River Valley

By James Coverdale

By Scott D. Brosowske

Page 9

Archaeological Tour Of The
Seewald Ranch

Page 10

Minutes from the last meeting

Page 11

Announcements, Updates, Upcoming Events
On The Cover: A beveled
knife recovered at Chill
Hill in 2010

Page 2

The Panhandle Archaeological Society will hold it's next meeting on Wednesday
September 21, 2011, at 7:00 pm, at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center Science Building,
2301 N. Soncy Road, in Amarillo,Texas. Our program will be presented by Pam Allison.

Born in Littlefield, Texas, Pam Allison has spent most of her adult life in the Texas Panhandle.

She received a BS degree in Wildlife Science and a MS in Biology, with a focus on plant ecology,
from West Texas State University. She has worked as an ecologist, wetland scientist, project
coordinator, and has authored or co-authored journal articles about hydrology, wetlands, and
plants of the Texas Panhandle and portions of New Mexico and Colorado. Her more recent
publications have dealt with the life history of the state threatened Texas Horned Lizard
(Phrynosoma cornutum).

Pam Allison
Rare or Endangered: What a Field Archaeologist Ought to Know

The Texas and Oklahoma panhandles straddle the boundary between the humid, well-watered
landscapes to the east and the more arid, generally higher elevation landscapes to the west.
Despite the seemingly uniform High Plains landscape, the Panhandle harbors a diversity of native
plants. Much of this diversity is still inadequately documented.
Although one of the earliest systematic collections and descriptions of plants from the region was
conducted by the Long Expedition more than 190 years ago, the inventory of plant species remains
incomplete. One recent example is the 2003 Lake Meredith NRA inventory by Neesom and
O'Kennon, in which 4 plant species were first documented to occur there - and were the first
documented occurrences for these species in Texas - and 6 other species that were unexpected for
the Panhandle. Another example is a species discovered by the author last year in Potter County
that was previously documented once before in 1926 for the Texas Panhandle.
Some of the recent discoveries occur in habitats defined by their geological substrate or by
specific water-rich habitats. Archaeological sites oftentimes are in the vicinity of seeps, springs, or
streams that may support relatively intact vegetative communities and a diverse assemblage of
plant and animal life. Field Archaeologists are in a unique position to observe plants that may be
rare or expected but not yet documented in the region. Some recent discoveries and other plants
that archaeologists working in the region might watch for will be discussed.

GPS Devices
For Recording Location

Page 3

Like they say in real estate "Location! Location! Location!"
By James Coverdale

There has always been a need in archaeology to

record a location of an artifact or feature by using
the most accurate means. GPS (Global Positioning
System) technology provides a handy way to do this
within certain limitations. There is a wide array of
GPS devices available on the market today that can
mark a location. Here are a few possible choices of
GPS technology.
The handheld personal GPS unit has been around
for many years and has been a good choice for
recording locations. It's usually small enough to fit
inside a pants pocket and it's fairly easy to operate.
The price can be around one hundred dollars and
upwards. These personal GPS units can record
hundreds of locations (as waypoints). On some units
a storage card can be uploaded with maps and then
inserted into the GPS unit for use in the field.
Collected field data can be downloaded onto a
storage card and saved or loaded onto a computer.
The major drawback of these type of units is the
accuracy. While most handheld units are WAAS
(Wide Area Augmentation System) enabled to
increase accuracy they still lack precision. WAAS is
a system that broadcasts differentially corrected
satellite position data over the United States. Even

with corrections a location fixed by a personal
handheld GPS unit can still be off by about 3.048
m (10ft.) from the actual location 95% of the time.
Their accuracy can be increased by averaging a
location (A feature available on some GPS units for
taking an average of multiple readings). Data
collected with a personal handheld GPS unit can
be used in several GIS software programs once the
data file has been converted to a file that a GIS
(Geographic Information System) program can
open and use.
The use of a PDA (Personal Digital Assistant) that
is equipped with a GPS receiver is an option that
can record locations and data about an artifact or
a site. The PDA can be set up with customized drop
down menus that require onscreen fields to be
filled in by using the touch screen. These menus
provide a quick and easy way to control what data
is collected about a location. The GPS capabilities
are about the same as the personal handheld
devices. The advantage of the PDA is with the
amount and kinds of data that are recorded for
each location, artifact, or site. A PDA device can
usually connect to the internet by a wireless (WiFi

Page 4
wireless (WiFi or Bluetooth) connection so you can
upload new data from the internet or download data
to a computer.
A more recent device, one that many people
already own and are very familiar with, is the
smartphone. The smartphone is a cell phone and a
PDA combined. The smartphone uses A-GPS
(Assisted - Global Positioning System) technology to
provide location data. A-GPS is quicker to acquire a
location through the assisted use of cell towers
and/or WiFi triangulation in addition to satellite
signals. While the accuracy of smartphone GPS
data is good, with the assistance of triangulation
from cell towers or WiFi signals it is generally better.
Of course if you are in an area where there are few
cell towers the GPS accuracy is the same as a
handheld personal GPS unit. Many smartphones
come with a built-in camera that can produce
Geotagged photographs that will have the metadata
(digitized information about time and location)
embedded into the photo. This photo can later be
accurately placed on a map by using the Geotagged
information. While the smartphone costs about the
same as a personal handheld GPS unit, it is capable
of so much more. Smartphones can be updated and
upgraded easily plus there are many apps
(application software designed for use on a
smartphone) available for Geotagging or using the
GPS feature.
Another device on our list is one that is very
accurate and includes many features that have
been highlighted in the preceding paragraphs. It is a
sub-meter accurate GPS receiver and PDA combined
into a single handheld device. This device can
collect GPS locations within an accuracy of less
than a meter (30 cm to 50 cm (11.9 in - 19.7 in)
with post processing). Data collection is easy with
the use of drop down menus and a touch screen.
This sub-meter accurate GPS can receive updated
information or maps over the internet with a
wireless connection. It has Bluetooth and WiFi
capabilities and a smartphone can be connected to
the unit so that the smartphone becomes a wireless
internet modem that works anywhere you can
receive a cell signal. Highly accurate Geotagging of
photos can also be accomplished with a digital
camera and the correct hook-up. Some models have

Recording GPS coordinates in the field
built in cameras for this purpose. These GPS units
can also receive Russian (GLONASS ) satellite
system signals in addition to the U.S. system for
increased accuracy. The cost of such a unit is very
high because of the increased accuracy and the
additional capabilities. These sub-meter GPS
receivers are definitely in the class of professional
grade use.
Now we come to the final piece of equipment for
recording GPS data in the field. It is the simple
mechanical pencil and field notebook. It is very
important to back up that electronic GPS data that
is recorded in the field. Always back up your GPS
data.

FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS AT CHILL HILL:
AN ANTELOPE CREEK PHASE SITE IN
THE CANADIAN RIVER VALLEY

Page 5

By Scott D. Brosowske

F or the fourth year Courson Archaeological
Research (CAR) has hosted an annual summer
archaeological field school. From May 23rd to
June 10th, 2011 students participated in
excavations at three different prehistoric sites,
conducted a systematic metal detecting survey at
numerous historic period sites, and worked in the
laboratory processing artifacts recovered during
the field school. All of these activities provided
participants with an excellent introduction to basic
field and laboratory techniques. This article
provides a brief overview of this year's
investigations at the Chill Hill site.
During the first two weeks of the field school,

excavations were conducted at Chill Hill (41RB132).
Chill Hill is a large Antelope Creek village located
near the confluence of Dugout Creek and the
Canadian River valley.
Six Accelerator Mass
Spectrometry (AMS) dates run on corn (Zea mays)
from Areas A, B, and C indicate that the site was
primarily occupied from about A.D. 1420 to A.D.
1440 (Figure 1). Another AMS date, also run on
corn, was obtained from a trash filled basin-shaped
pit in the far northern end of the site. This sample
yielded a date of A.D. 1350 and indicates that this
portion of the site may contain an earlier component
contemporaneous with Eastview, another Antelope
Creek site about 3.2 km north of Chill Hill.

Page 6

Figure 1
This summer we continued work at Areas A and C
and salvaged features exposed along the margins
of an existing well location designated as Area D.
Open block excavations conducted at Area C in
2008 and 2009 enabled the outlines of several
features to be identified. These features primarily
represented a number of shallow, circular to oval
basin-shaped features ranging size from about 1.5
m to 0.6 m in diameter and 0.5 m to 0.3 m deep.
These basins were clearly visible from the
surrounding soil as dark stains containing ash,
charcoal and other cultural debris. The basin
interiors did not contain any evidence for heating.
It is possible that they were features associated
with bone grease manufacture, although their
actual function still remains unclear at this time.
Interspersed with these basins were numerous post
molds. It was evident that these posts were not
associated with a permanent habitation structure.
As such, they may represent the remains of arbors
that covered outdoor activity areas.
Similar
features, also associated with basin-shaped pits,
were interpreted as arbors at the New Smith site
(34RM400), a Zimms complex site near Camargo,
Oklahoma (Brooks et al. 1992; Brosowske 2002).

The work conducted at Area D of Chill Hill
sought to investigate several features exposed
by the construction of a well location many years
ago (Figure 1). These features were along
western margins of the location where the well
pad cut into a shallow slope. As at Area C, these
features showed up as dark stains containing
ash, charcoal, and sparse to abundant cultural
remains. These features were first identified in
2005, but had remained relatively stable until
recently. With the dry and windy conditions of
the last year, these features began to actively
erode and we elected to salvage these features.
Work at Area D began by shovel skimming to
determine the horizontal extent of the features.
A total of three circular houses, three small pits,
and one post mold were identified. Due to time
constraints, only one house, the three pits, and
the post mold were excavated during the field
school. After shovel skimming and drawing a
horizontal plan view map, approximately one-half
of each feature was excavated to provide a
profile. Later, the remaining half was excavated.
Feature D1 is the bottom portion of a trash
filled pit approximately 1.5 m in diameter.
Because the upper portion of the pit had been
removed by well construction, it is difficult to
estimate to original depth of the feature below
ground surface. Except for the western side of
the feature which was slightly undercut, the pit
had straight sides, and a flat bottom. Notable
items recovered in this pit were three halves of
ceramic vessels and an Alibates Harahey knife.
Feature D4 was located approximately 2.5 m to
the southeast from Feature D1. This circular pit
was about 0.7 m in diameter and approximately
0.4 m of the bottom portion of the pit remained.
The walls of this feature were slightly sloped
inward to almost vertical and the bottom was
basin shaped. This feature contained a variety
of cultural remains, but was dominated by
abundant ash and charcoal. This suggests that
materials cleaned out from a nearby hearth were
deposited in this feature. Feature D3, the
bottom portion of a post mold, was located
about 0.5 m to the southeast of Feature D4.
This post mold was 27 cm in diameter.

Page 7
Features D2 and D5 were located about 20 meters
southeast of the above cluster of features. Feature
D2 represented a shallow, circular house that had
burned (Figure 2). This feature measured 3.1 m
north to south and 3.1 m east to west. Although
the upper portion of the house walls had been
removed by well construction, the overall depth
below ground surface was likely about 0.5 m. A low
bench or ramped entryway was present along the
south wall. Five burned posts, separated from one
another by 0.4 to 0.5 m and running north to south,
were present in the western third of the house. All
of these posts were still lodged in the ground and
ranged in diameter from 8 cm to 15 cm.
Interestingly, many of the burned posts present in
this house had been split into slats approximately 4
cm x 12 cm in size. Similar behavior was observed
at the nearby Hank site (Boyd 2004). A 1.5 m long
portion of a 15 cm diameter support post was lying
on the floor in three sections parallel to and east of
the above alignment of posts. Except for charred
posts and associated charcoal and daub, this
feature contained sparse amounts of other cultural
materials.
In November of 2008 human remains were
observed eroding from a feature about 1.25 m to
east-southeast of the burned house. Following the
guidelines outlined in the recently revised Texas
unmarked burial law, legal steps were taken to
obtain permission to salvage this feature.
Permission was granted by the state to excavate,
study, and eventually re-inter these remains in
August 2010. This feature, designated as Feature
D5, was a small basin-shaped circular pit feature
0.6 m in diameter. Well construction had removed
most of the feature with only 18 cm of pit
remaining on the western margin and only a couple
of centimeters remaining on the east side.
Nonetheless, the pit outline was easily identified by
the presence of ash and charcoal. Besides human
remains, represented by an ulna shaft fragment
and a mostly complete cranial vault, very little
other cultural materials were recovered. The latter
included burned daub and a small portion of a
burned post.
These items may indicate an
affiliation with the nearby burned house. The
cranial fragments recovered from Feature D5 were
extremely unusual in that the exterior showed

Figure 2
evidence of burning, while the interior was coated
with a shiny, black tar-like substance. In contrast,
the ulna fragment was not burned indicating that this
was not a cremation burial.
The last area investigated at Chill Hill in 2011 was
a residential structure at Area A (Figure 1). This
structure was first identified in 2009 and the
southern third was excavated in 2010. The rest of
this house was excavated this summer and was
designated as Feature A7. This house was circular in
shape, 2.0 m in diameter from northwest to
southeast, had a floor that was 1.3 m below ground
surface, and had a sloped entryway along the south
wall. The fill within this house contained localized
concentrations of trash debris and ash and charcoal.
These concentrations had the appearance of dumps
of debris perhaps from a basket or hide. This
structure had been reoccupied at least once. A small
basin shaped hearth (Feature A14) was encountered
at a depth of 0.6 m below the ground surface. It is
not clear whether the house pit was simply used as
shelter to get out of the wind or if a superstructure
had been erected at this later date. After the house
pit had completely filled in, a straight sided pit 0.7 m
in diameter, 0.5 m deep with a flat floor was
excavated into the fill. The latter, like all of the other
pits excavated at the site, showed no evidence of
burning.
A total of seven different residential structures have
been excavated at Chill Hill. From these examples it
is apparent that a single type of house structure is
present. These structures are circular to slightly oval,

Page 8
have sloped or stepped entryways, and are about two
to three meters in diameter. The only difference
noted in these houses is the depth of the house
floors. Of the houses excavated thus far at Chill Hill,
four had floors that were about 0.4 m to 0.6 m below
ground surface. The remaining three houses had
floors that were between 1.0 m and 1.5 m. The
differences in floor depth may be related to season
or length of occupation. Both house types usually
have shallow basin-shaped hearths about 0.3 m to
0.4 m in diameter that were often adjacent to the
walls of the house pit. Except for the burned house
investigated at Area D this year, evidence for the type
of roof structure has been lacking and evidence for
posts are absent. Given their small size and lack of
evidence for superstructures suggests fairly
ephemeral structures, probably occupied for
relatively short periods of time. Indeed, these
houses may have been more like the small hide tipis
used by the nomadic Querechos and described by
Coronado when he visited the Southern Plains in
1541 (Winship 1896:504).
In closing, 2011 field season at Chill Hill was a
great success despite the hot temperatures and high
winds. The students and volunteers who participated
in this summer's field school did an excellent job in
all aspects of the fieldwork. As a result, we were
able to complete a large amount of work in a very
short period of time.
With the investigations
completed at Area D, we now can compare and
contrast features and artifacts from four different
areas of this large Antelope Creek phase site. Lastly,
I would like to thank Mark Latham and Tod Bevitt who
have worked at Chill Hill for the past four summers.
They have served as principal investigators
overseeing the field investigations at this site.

References Cited
Boyd, Doug
2004 http://www.texasbeyondhistory.net/villagers
/hank1/archeology.html
Brooks, Robert L., Michael C. Moore, and Doug
Owsley
1992 New Smith, 34RM300: A Plains Village
Mortuary Site in Western Oklahoma.
Plains Anthropologist 37:59-78.
Brosowske, Scott, D.
2002 What Exactly is the Zimms Complex? A
Review and Synthesis of Architectural and
Assemblage Traits. Journal of Oklahoma
Anthropological Society 50(4):20-39
Winship, George Parker
1896 The Coronado Expedition, 1540-1542.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Fourteenth
Annual Report for the Years 1892-1893,
Part 1, pp. 329-613. Washington, D.C.

PAS Field Opportunity Saturday September 24

Page 9

Archaeological
Tour of the
Seewald Ranch

In recent years, Panhandle Archaeological Society (PAS) activities and events have included less and less
fieldwork and "hands on" opportunities. As a result, the predominant PAS events have become monthly
meetings, the Annual Studer Banquet, and activities associated with Texas Archaeology Month.
In response, the PAS will begin to offer a number of new activities that we hope will attract interest among
members and non-members alike. Planned events include guided tours of archaeological sites, pedestrian
surveys and site revisits, documentation of private collections, and monthly volunteer opportunities at the
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum. Thanks to member Alvin Lynn, who obtained permission from the
landowner, our first event will be a guided tour of the historic Seewald Ranch.
The Seewald Ranch is located approximately 10 miles north of Amarillo. The ranch is dissected by West
Amarillo Creek cutting through the Triassic and Permian formations on its way northward to the Canadian River.
The creek normally has some flow of water, but due to the drought it is now dry. There are numerous
archaeological sites on the ranch, both prehistoric and historic. The Fort Smith-Santa Fe Trail crosses the creek
just above the Permian dolomite pour-off. On the west side of the creek, a Tecovas chert outcrop forms the
caprock of some of the bluffs. There are some partially buried tipi rings north of the old historic trail.
Additional prehistoric sites occupy both bluffs and the lower terraces. There is also a CCC camp near the small
ranch house on the east side of the creek.
On the morning of Saturday September 24th we will meet at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center and leave for
the ranch at 10:00 am. Most all of the sites that will be visited are accessible by vehicle. The tour will last
several hours, so bring a lunch and water. To sign-up or for additional information please contact Scott
Brosowske at (806) 434-0157.

Page 10

Panhandle Archaeological Society
Minutes of the May 18, 2011 Meeting
President Paul Katz called the meeting to order at 7:05 p.m. at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center. Eighteen
members and one guest were in attendance. Dee Landry (NPS) was the guest of Rozanna Pfeiffer.
The next meeting of the PAS will be held on Wednesday, September 21 at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center,
beginning at 7:00 p.m. A speaker had not been invited at this time.
Paul introduced the evening speaker, Dr. Gerry Schultz, a PAS member. He spoke about the vertebrate
paleontology of the Texas Panhandle and the surrounding area.
The business meeting began at the conclusion of Dr. Schultz's presentation. The minutes of the April 20,
2010 meeting were approved unanimously.
Lisa gave the Treasurer's report. The current operating balance is $1,784.08.
Rolla submitted the Publication Committee report in writing. The current checking account balance is
$2,570.91, with $30.00 cash on hand, for a total Publication Fund of $2,600.91.
The Pollyanna Hughes manuscripts have been copied and provided to Scott and Joe D. for review and
evaluation.
There was a discussion about the publication of the Canyon City Club Cave report being edited by Chris
Lintz. In the absence of a formal publications review process, any member is welcome to read the edited
version when it becomes available. A concern was expressed about the nature and extent of the changes
that Chris might introduce during his editing process. It was the consensus of the group that changes
making the report more organized and readable were in order, but changes to Jack's interpretations were
not. A balance between the historical period in which the report was originally written and a contemporary
useful report is the ideal result of this process.
Paul asked the members to consider volunteering to serve on the Publication Committee, as editors and
as reviewers for future publications.
No progress has been made in the revision of the Bylaws.
A Nominating Committee will be appointed at the September meeting, charged with providing a slate of
officers by the October meeting. Voting will take place at the November meeting, with installation at the
Studer Banquet in December.
Suggested speakers for the fall included Pam Allison and Dr. Robert Wright.
The meeting adjourned at 9:10 p.m.

Page 11

Anouncements, Updates, and Upcoming Events
2011 Texas Archeology Month Tours at Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument
Every Weekend in October

2011 Flint Fest Knap-In at Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument
October 1-2, 2011
For Additional Information on these events Call NPS HQ at 806-857-3151

Annual Family Archaeology Field Day

Museum of the Plains, Perryton Texas
October 22, 2011 from 12:00-4:00 pm
For more information or to sign-up
(806) 434-0157 or sbrosowske@pphm.wtamu.edu

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
October 26, 2011 at 7:00 pm
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

69th Annual Plains Anthropological Conference
October 26 - 29, 2011 Tucson, Arizona
For more information visit the conference
website at: http://www.pac69.com

82nd Annual Meeting of the Texas Archaeological Society

October 28 - 29, 2011 Fort Worth, Texas
For more information visit the conference website
at: http://www.txarch.org/Activities/AnnualMeeting/am2011/index.php

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
November 16th, 2011 at 7:00 pm
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

Panhandle Archaeological Society Annual Studer Banquet
Decenber 17, 2011 from 6:00 - 10:00 pm
Hazelwood Hall; Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

