1

PASTIMES
The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

Volume 34 No. 7 October 2014

President
Donna Otto

Vice-President
Scott Brosowske

Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter

Treasurer
Pamela Allison

Publications
Rolla Shaller

Newsletter
Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

PREHISTORY OF THE CADDOANSPEAKING TRIBES
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the Degree of
Doctor of Philosophy in the Faculty of
Political Science of Columbia University
By Jack T. Hughes 1968
Original Typescript

2

TABLE OF CONTENTS
NEXT MEETING:
October 15 - 7:00 P.M. Alvin Lynn will be our speaker.
(See pages 5 and 6.)
Please join us for dinner at Fanoli’s Italian Restaurant,
700 So. Taylor, at 5:30 P.M.

Page Three

Four (a)

Minutes of PAS September 17th Meeting

From the Editor’s Desk

Five

Alvin Lynn: Abstract and Biography

Six (a)

2009 Field School Snapshots

Seven

Another Amarillo Landmark Bites the Dust

Rolla Shaller
Eight

Prehistory of the Caddoan-Speaking Tribes
Beryl Hughes

Ten

The Horace Rivers Collection: Sixty Years of Avocational
Archaeology in the Texas Panhandle

Scott D. Brosowske
Thirteen

A Kiowa Beaded Strike-A-Lite Bag
James Coverdale

Fifteen

Calendar of Events

Sixteen

Caprock Canyon State Park Archaeology Fair

3

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes September 17, 2014

The meeting was called to order by President Donna Otto shortly after 7:00 p.m.
at the Downtown Amarillo Library second floor Board Room. There were 18
members in attendance.
The following upcoming meetings and events were announced:

. Regular meetings are at 7 P.M. the third Wednesday of each month. The
next PAS meeting will be October 15 at the Amarillo Downtown Library
. October 18 - Fannin History Fair
. October 24-25 - TAS Annual Meeting, San Marcos
. October 25 - The West Texas Trails meeting, Hope Center, Quitaque, TX
See p. 7 of September newsletter

. October 29-Nov 1 - Plains Anthropological Society Conference,
Fayetteville, AR
. November 18 - PAS meeting, Downtown Library, 7 P.M.
. January 6-11, 2015 - Society for Historical Archaeology Annual Meeting,
Seattle, WA
PROGRAM: ”An Introduction to the Use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in Archaeology” was presented by member Dempsey Malaney. Melaney and the crew from
CAR have been experimenting with using small drones to locate and monitor archaeological sites around Perryton. Dempsey introduced us to various models
ranging in size from a large model of about 2 foot wing span down to a tiny one he
pulled out of his shirt pocket. The larger ones with attached cameras were the
ones used. He showed some fascinating film taken by the drones and explained
the technology.
MINUTES: Minutes of the May meeting were approved as printed in the September Newsletter.

TREASURER’S REPORT: Treasurer Pam Allison reported a balance of $3,448.78.
The report was approved.
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported a balance of
$1,416.05 in the money market account and $5,025.95 in the CD. The report was
approved.
OLD BUSINESS: The publication of the SWFAS Transactions is well on the way

4

ANNOUNCEMENTS: The Museum’s observance of the 150th Anniversary of
the First Battle of Adobe Walls on October 4 promises to be a success with five
buses chartered.

Member Alvin Lynn’s book on the Battle is finally out and already into the second printing. There will be opportunity for book signing next month.
Demonstrations for the Fannin History Fair will be finalized at the next meeting.
Concern was expressed for attracting new, younger members. It was decided
to revise handouts and actively recruit.
MEETING ADJOURNED: There being no further business or announcements,
the meeting was adjourned by Donna Otto at 8:30 P.M.
Respectfully submitted,
Mary Ruthe Carter, Secretary

From the Editor’s Desk
At the last meeting I was nominated and elected as the new editor of the PAS
Newsletter.
Let me start by thanking Jerry Leatherman for his work in the past four years,
and for his help now. He had laid out an excellent format, and gave me permission to use it.
Next I must thank those who have contributed to the Newsletter: Alvin Lynn,
who will be the speaker at our next meeting, and who has
written a remarkable book.
Rolla Shaller, with his memories and pictures of the old
Country Barn. The late Jack T. Hughes, whose original
typescript I am fortunate enough to own. Scott D.
Brosowske and James Coverdale, who reported on
Items From CAR.
And finally, that unsung heroine of every meeting,
Her Faithfulness, Mary Ruthe Carter.
Looking forward to your submissions for next month,

Beryl C. Hughes, Editor

Selfie

5

Alvin Lynn
Alvin Lynn serves as a steward for the Texas Historical Commission (THC) and received the volunteer of the year award
in 1998. He is a member of Panhandle Archeology Society,
Texas Archeology Society and Santa Fe Trail Organization.
Archeology and history have been a lifelong interest to Alvin.
He has been involved in many archeology projects throughout the Texas Panhandle, both prehistoric and historic.
During 1998, 1999 and 2003, he did field work for the Texas
Historical Commission on the Red River War project and
continues to do field work and research in that area. He also
located Major Evans’ 1868 military depot on the north side
of the Canadian River in Roberts County.
Alvin Lynn
In the fall of 2003, he served as field supervisor for metal detecting at the first battle of the Revolutionary War, the Battle of Lexington and Concord in Massachusetts.
Texas Tech Press published Alvin’s book “Kit Carson and the First Battle of Adobe Walls: A Tale of Two Journeys” August 15, 2014. Texas Tech University Press
named it the inaugural recipient of the Judith Keeling Book, an honor given to a
book that represents the best attributes of scholarly and regional trade book publishing at TTUP

Perils and Pleasures of Writing a Book
My motto, when writing about historical events, is, “If you don’t walk on it, don’t
write about it.” And, so…I walked and walked and walked and walked. And,
then…I wrote and wrote and wrote and wrote. And, finally…after many more
happenings, I finished the book.
When writing my book, I divided it into four components: Research, Fieldwork,
Writing, and Publishing.
Research
Research, to me, was rewarding, especially, when I found information that I didn’t know existed and was able to apply it to the subject on which I was working.
One of the negative things I found in researching in some large archives was the
high cost of getting photographs and documents copied and, in again paying a fee
to use them in a publication.

Fieldwork
To me, fieldwork was the most pleasurable part of producing a book—meeting
people, enjoying the outdoors, getting exercise, and finding artifacts that verified what I was writing.

6

Sometimes I had to tell myself that I was enjoying the fieldwork when gnats,
deerflies, and mosquitoes gnawed on me, and I had to navigate through
grass burrs, thorns, cacti, and rattlesnakes.
Writing
A valuable thing I learned in writing was that I had to have a thick skin and
to refuse to let red marks intimidate me. It pleased me when I finally received a chapter returned by a reader in which the black ink was more plentiful than the red.
Publishing
I was fortunate to have a great editor at Texas Tech University Press. She
helped me through tight spots. I had little control of my book in the publishing process, and that bothered me. Some of the ghost readers had no experience in my field, but they pretended to be experts. Some readers kept the
manuscript too long. I met political correctness, head-on. The best thing
about writing a book was when, on August 15, 2014, I received a finished
copy of my book.
“Perhaps

the highest honor of Lynn’s book is its selection by Texas Tech University Press as the inaugural Judith Keeling Book. The tribute goes to the book
published by the Press each year that represents the best attributes of scholarly
and regional trade book publishing.”

It is in the Series: Grover E. Murray Studies in the American Southwest.

Thanks for the
Memories!
TAS 2009

7

Another Amarillo Landmark Structure meets the Wrecking Ball
Rolla Shaller
Work began on Wednesday August 27, 2014 on the demolition of the Country Barn Steakhouse located at 8200
West Interstate 40 Amarillo, Texas. The restaurant was
sold in public auction earlier in the year to help settle loan
debts created during bankruptcy. An earlier auction had
sold all the food service fixtures and western memorabilia
décor. The building and foundations will be leveled and
another structure will be built on the location.
The earliest County Barn Steakhouse that I recall was located on Amarillo Boulevard or US-60 near Lakeside Drive
or Loop 335. This building burned to the ground in the
early 1970’s. A new Country Barn Steakhouse was constructed on Lakeside Drive, just north
of the junction of Lakeside Drive and I-40(still standing).
This Country Barn continued operation until the mid to late
1990’s when the most recent Country Barn Steakhouse was
constructed on West I-40.
This structure like many others that have come and gone, is a
piece of PAS History, It was here that the PAS held several of
its Annual Floyd V. Studer Banquet and Lecture Series with
such speakers as Dr. Mary Adair, Dr. Don Wyckoff, Towana
Spivey and Dr. Eileen Johnson. It was here that we hosted
PAS Honorees Roberta Speer, Joe D. Rogers and Dr. Jeff Indeck.
The Barn also served as a meeting place for dinner before PAS monthly meetings at Wildcat
Bluff. Several members would meet early to reminisce beneath the White Cadillac above the
bar. We will miss the dining, but most of all we will miss the western nostalgia as we walked
through the great dining hall.

8

A look at PRE-HISTORY OF THE CADDOAN-SPEAKING TRIBES
By Dr. Jack T. Hughes
Beryl C. Hughes

“When the New World was discovered, a broad unbroken belt
of the North American continent reaching from the Gulf
coastal plain on the south to the middle Missouri drainage on
the north was inhabited by many Indian communities speaking several more or less closely related dialects which have
been referred to as the Caddoan linguistic stock.”
“Caddo,” Hughes explains, refers to the southern language, while “Caddoan” refers to the
entire linguistic stock, from the Arikara on the north to Kichai and Caddo on the south.
"This study is founded on a conception of language, physical type, and culture as independent variables in time and space."
Make no mistake, although Jack Hughes often referred to himself as a "field archaeologist," he was an Anthropologist through and through. His real interest was in people. He
never looked at a village site, a potsherd or a projectile point without wondering Where
did these people come from? How did they live? What did they eat? Where did they go?
Considering the title and focus of the work, it is not surprising that the whole treatise is
loaded with scholarly references, beginning with Edward Sapir, the world-recognized expert on language. Sapir "recognizes two main kinds of evidence -- direct and indirect.
Documentary and traditional evidence he classifies as direct. Linguistic, physical, ethnological and archaeological evidence he classifies as indirect." Hughes further agrees with
Sapir that "historical reconstruction is a central interest of anthropology , serving as a
binding force which helps maintain anthropology as a distinct branch of science."
Chapter Two deals with direct evidence, that is, the relatively few documentary sources
dealing with the Caddoan peoples. As Europeans crossed the continent they met briefly
with the various groups and generally left journal and diary notations describing things
they heard, saw and felt. Indians fought the Europeans with bows and arrows and tomahawks; Europeans killed the Indians with gunshot, smallpox-laden red blankets and
whiskey.

The reliability of indirect
evidence depends largely on the quality of the
investigator, while the
reliability of direct evidence depends largely
on the quality of the informant; in neither case
is human fallibility ruled
out of the equation.

Here Hughes introduces his method of dividing the historical (documentary and traditional) from the four subsciences of Anthropology: Linguistics, Physical Anthropology, Ethnology and Archaeology. Each area is then
subdivided to cover each tribe separately-- Arikara, Pawnee, Wichita, Kichai and Caddo.
Sorry to say, although the Table of Contents gives page
numbers for each entry, the 400 or so pages of the typescript are not numbered, so it is impossible to give

See Silberman, N.A. editor in Chief, The Oxford Companion to Archaeology Second Edition, Oxford
Press 2012

9

precise references. For this we can blame the state of technology in the 1960s. Any change
that involved adding or subtracting a page would have necessitated re-typing the whole
thing. And BTW kudos to Hughes' wife Pollyanna, who typed the whole thing on an actual
typewriter. If it had been left for me to do, even with a word processor, he would still be waiting for his Ph.D
CHAPTER VII ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE
The purposes of archaeology are two: 1) to substantiate or refute the documentary record
and 2) to provide a history to those people who have no documentary history. (Hughes p.c.)
Although each chapter, and indeed every sub-chapter, amazes the reader by its breadth and
depth, members of PAS will naturally be most interested in the archaeological data presented. Hughes himself holds that, of all the evidence to be considered, "archaeology is the one
most fundamentally and most directly concerned with reconstructing the histories of human
groups."
Thinking about prehistory in general, as well as that of the Caddoan-speaking peoples,
Hughes observes that "the archaeologist is continually faced with the question of whether the
prehistoric changes he discovers indicate cultural continuity accompanied by trait diffusion,
or discontinuity resulting from migration." Ultimately, he states his preference for continuity
and diffusion, believing that most of the migrant hunting cultures in the Panhandle existed
in Paleo-Indian times. It would appear likely that some of the Plains Archaic were transformed by the Woodland traits coming into the area from the east. And if some of the Eastern Woodland were Caddoans, it follows that some of the Archaic complexes may well have
been Caddoan too.
Google the title, and you will find page after page of citations. Most are just the standard
listing, title, author, publisher etc. but I did come across this one:
Hughes, Jack Thomas. Prehistory of the Caddoan -Speaking Tribes (Caddoan Indians
III). New York:Garland Publishing, Inc., 1974, 411 pp. The last of three reports on the
Pawnee and related tribes presented to the Indian Claims Commission. The report includes historical, traditional, linguistic, physical, ethnological and archaeological evidence for Pawnee occupation of their claim area. This very useful source has an extensive bibliography, a time line for each group, plus an easily understood section comparing all aspects of the Caddoan tribes.
Cited in "The Pawnee Nation: An Annotated Research Bibliography" by Judith A.
Boughter.
Many if not most PAS members were personally acquainted with Jack Hughes, as students
and colleagues, and would be delighted to read his work. Although the hardbound edition is
all but impossible to buy, it is available in virtually every library of any size, ranging from
WTA&M to the Smithsonian. Furthermore, Alibris Cheer fu lly assu res u s that even
though “The title you're seeking is not available right now. The good news is that there's
still hope for your search.”

Language is not speech. Language is not writing. Language is not communication. Language is a system of abstract symbols that mean whatever the user group decides it
shall mean. (Hughes p.c.)

10

The Horace Rivers Collection: Sixty Years of Avocational
Archaeology in the Texas Panhandle
Scott D. Brosowske
William Horace Rivers was born on April 21, 1915 in Snyder, Texas. Five years later his
family moved to the Canadian, Texas area in 1920. It was at this time he developed a strong
interest in the native peoples of the Texas panhandle and began documenting archaeological
sites of the area. Horace, as he was better known, passed away at the age of 88 in November,
2003. In over sixty years he documented 130 archaeological sites primarily in Hemphill, Roberts, Ochiltree, Lipscomb, and Wheeler Counties, but he also collected at Palo Duro Canyon,
Arrowhead Peak near Vega, Saddleback Ruin near Boy’s Ranch, and elsewhere (see Figure 1).
Over his lifetime he amassed what is likely one of the largest artifact collections in the region.

Figure 1 Dart and Arrowpoints found by Horace Rivers at a Lipscomb County Site
Fortunately, sometime after he began collecting Horace began to carefully document the
sites he had found and their associated artifacts. He assigned sites individual numbers and recorded site locations in a fairly detailed journal. Artifacts collected were labeled with appropriate site numbers. Horace was good friends with Jack Hughes and was his main informant for
information about archaeological sites in the northeastern panhandle. As such, I suspect that it
was at Jack’s urging that Horace began keeping proper records.
Horace built a room in his basement to display a small portion of his collection, primarily complete projectile points, bifaces, scrapers, beads, drills, bone awls, bison tibia digging sticks and scapula
knives, and portions of reconstructed ceramic vessels. Each year classes of school children would take
field trips to Rivers’ house to visit his “museum” and learn about native peoples of the Southern High
Plains. Many of the people we have met remember Horace and these childhood field trips fondly.
Following his death, the Rivers family donated the majority of the artifacts that were on display
at his house to the River Valley Pioneer Museum in Canadian, Texas in 2013. These will be incorporated into new displays as the museum is renovated. The remaining items in the Horace Rivers collection, approximately 95% of the entire collection, were not accepted by the museum due to a lack of
available exhibition and storage space. These items were going to be thrown away. Thankfully, the Riv-

11

ers family donated these items
to Courson Archaeological Research (CAR) for processing,
analysis, and permanent curation.
When CAR obtained this collection none of these materials
had been washed or sorted according to individual sites.
This initial processing is taking
considerable time since there is
an estimated 80,000 artifacts in
the collection. Age diagnostic
artifacts, mainly dart and arrowpoints, are present for most
of the sites. Of the 130 sites
represented in the collection
there are a minimum of 201
identifiable components (see
Table 1).

Figure 2 Horace Rivers at 41HH23 (adapted from Caudle 2009)
Paleoindian
3

Middle Archaic

Late Archaic

5

56

Early Ceramic Middle Ceramic
51

60

Historic

Unknown

Indian

Prehistoric

4

22

Table 1 Total Number of Archaeological Components for the Rivers Collection
From the collection it is readily apparent that Horace did quite a bit of excavation and screening
at many of the Early and Middle Ceramic period sites that he had found. In addition to projectile points
and tools, these assemblages contain sizeable quantities of faunal remains, debitage, fire altered rock,
ceramics, and other miscellaneous items. It is obvious that he essentially collected all of the cultural
materials recovered during these excavations. Included in the collection are fairly large numbers of
faunal remains from the now destroyed Hoover site (41HH12), a Late Archaic period bison kill southeast of Canadian, Texas. There are also artifacts and soil samples from individual strata at the Horace
Rivers site (41HH23), an Allen complex (8500 to 7500 BP) campsite north of Canadian that he had
discovered (Figure 2).
As hinted at above, Horace often worked with professional archaeologists, freely sharing his
knowledge of site locations and the artifacts he had found. He worked with Jack Hughes on his survey
of the Red Deer watershed (Hughes 1978). He again worked with Jack, along with Billy Harrison, at
Parcell Ranch, an unrecorded Middle Ceramic period (A.D. 1250-1500) cemetery northwest of Canadian. Later, he informed Billy Harrison of an unusual burial at 41HH31 along Red Deer Creek (see Owsley and Mann 1990). During the 1990’s Horace provided information on numerous site locations to the
Office of the State Archaeologist for their survey of the Canadian River Valley and helped with excavations at 41HH23.

12

Horace Rivers spent a lifetime studying the native peoples and archaeological sites of the
Texas panhandle. Fortunately, after over 60 years of collecting in the region, the information about the sites he documented and the artifacts he found have been preserved.
Through interpretive exhibits slated for the Canadian, Texas museum, portions of his collection will continue to educate people about the archaeology of the region. Lastly, these items,
as well as the vast materials contained in the CAR collections, will be available for study by
future generations of archaeologists.

References Cited
Caudle, Susan
2009 Images of America: Hemphill County. Arcadia Publishing, Charleston, South Carolina, Chicago, Illinois, Portsmouth, New Hampshire, San Francisco, California.
Hughes, Jack T.
1978 Archeological Testing in the Red Deer Creek Watershed in Gray, Roberts, and Hemphill
Counties, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West Texas State
University.
Owsley, Douglas W. and Robert W. Mann
1990 An American Indian Skeleton with Clubfoot from the Cabin Burial Site (A1184), Hemphill
County, Texas. Plains A nthropologist Vol. 35, No. 128, pp. 93-101.

13

A Kiowa Beaded Strike-A-Lite Bag
by James Coverdale
Recently, Courson Archaeological Research began analysis of a collection brought to our lab.
While sorting through the ceramics, lithics, and assorted materials, several artifacts from the
historic period were noted. One of these artifacts was a glass beaded pouch commonly referred
to as a strike-a-lite bag. An initial assessment of the construction, condition, and beadwork
style of this bag was made. After examination, it was determined that this strike-a-lite bag is
most likely of Kiowa origin with some Southern Cheyenne or Arapaho
influence in its construction.
The name of this particular type of bag, strike-a-lite, implies its use,
which was to carry the tools used for starting a fire. These tools consist of
a "C", "U", or "V" shaped steel striker (sometimes part of a steel flat file
was used), a piece of flint, and some type of tinder material. The steel
striker is held in one hand and the flint in the other. The steel is struck
against a sharp edge of the flint in a rapid downward movement. The
flint shaves off tiny slivers of steel and friction causes them to ignite into
a shower of sparks. Once a spark lands on the tinder it will smolder and
begin to glow orange. The now burning tinder material is placed inside a
bundle of dry tinder and air is blown on it until the bundle catches fire.
A strike-a-lite bag is one part of a three piece set of small decorated bags or cases carried by men, women, and children. In addition to the strike-a-lite bag, the other items
are an awl case and a whetstone case. Usually the three are worn together
and have matching or similar beadwork designs and colors. Indian men carried the beaded set on their bow cases and women carried theirs attached to
their belt. Children also carried a set the same as adults.
Figure 1. Figure
Kiowa Strike-A-Lite
Bag
1 Kiowa

As part of the assessment of this bag to determine its age and tribal affiliation the overall condition and construction methods were examined. Old,
original beaded bags will show signs of dirt, missing beads, and use wear
from handling. The dark brown commercial leather on the front has some
stains on the sides at the top and the leather is worn and shiny where it has
Fig. 2 Lower
Right Corner
been opened and closed. The brain tanned leather flap and back piece are
still supple. Some of the brain tanned leather fringe has dried out and is
somewhat fragile. At least one of the tin cones is missing from the fringe at the bottom and two
tin cones are missing from one of the four corner drops. A repair has been made on the right
side of the front of the bag. Black cotton two ply twisted thread has been used to make a repair
where the sinew stitching is missing on the side. The area of the repair was originally edge
beaded with white and a few green seed beads. No attempt to replace the lost edge beading or
to hide the repair has been done. Most likely this repair was done by someone other than a native beadworker and at a much later date after manufacture of this bag. On the front of the bag
at the bottom right there is a single row of red white heart beads missing (fig. 2). The sinew
thread that was used to attach them is now visible. There are a few places on the corner drops
where some edge beading is missing as well.

14

A strike-a-lite bag is usually made in one of three distinct shapes; an hourglass, an isosceles
trapezoid, or a third earlier form, a rectangular shape. This Kiowa isosceles trapezoidal
shaped strike-a-lite bag is wider at the bottom and narrower at the top opening with the sides
tapering in from the bottom (fig 1). The measurements of the bag are provided in table 1.
Length

Width
Top-6.25 cm

Main body of Bag

12.5 cm
Bottom-9.0 cm

Flap

3.5 cm

6.0 cm

Tin Cones

2.0 cm

0.5 cm

Drops

18.0 cm

0.5 cm

Fringe

1.75 cm

0.2 cm

Total Length of Bag

35.5 cm
Table 1

The materials used in the construction of this Kiowa strike-a-lite bag can be helpful in identifying its age. Throughout the historic period Kiowa women adapted new materials for their
craftwork. Older labor intensive methods of making Indian brain tanned leather gave way to
the use of commercially prepared leather. Eventually, almost all Indian leather work was
done using commercial products. The front piece on this bag is made of a brown commercial
leather. The back piece is Indian made brain tanned deer hide.
Antelope or deer sinew is used as thread to attach the beads to the front, back, and sides of
the bag. The beads sewn to this strike-a-lite bag are small, 1.5 -1.7 mm diameter, glass trade
beads. The bead colors include translucent red with white centers (aka., white hearts), a dark
transparent blue, Arapaho green, translucent green, chalk white, and powder blue. On the
main body of the bag glass seed beads are applied by using the lazy stitch method (i.e., a
beading stitch that zigzags back and forth from one row to the next). There are six rows of lazy
stitched beads on the front, two rows on the back and flap of the bag. On the flap and corner
drops there are beads attached using the one up and one down edge beading method. A simple technique is used to attach a single bead per stitch to the sides of the bag while whip
stitching the sides closed. The back of the case is not fully beaded, which is normal (fig. 3). The
reason behind this is simple: the back of an object was not normally seen and so beads and
decoration were not necessary. Glass trade beads were valuable trade items and were not
wasted.

The bead colors and designs are very useful for identification as to tribal affiliation. Some
tribes were known to use either certain bead colors or a particular style of beading on their
tribal items. Some styles of beadwork stitching are even named after the tribe that used them
most frequently. One example, known as Crow stitch, is a particular style of appliqué stitch
generally associated with objects from the Crow tribe. The use of dark red translucent beads
commonly referred to as Kiowa Red, is most often seen on Kiowa beaded objects. When tribes
were relocated in close proximity on reservations, exchanges of beading techniques and designs took place. Many reservation period Kiowa objects have beadwork applied with an ap-

15

pliqué stitch that was picked up from Eastern tribes
who lived near the Kiowa reservation. Marriage between tribes also accounted for many changes in beadwork designs. The original designs used in beadwork
were considered to be the personal property of the
beadworker. She could use them exclusively, or she
could allow other women to copy her beadwork or make
similar designs if they paid for the right to use the design.

Figure 3 Back of Bag

The beaded designs used on this bag are fairly simple.
On the front of the bag the beads used for the background are red, semi-translucent white hearts. On the
front are two designs that are outlined in white beads
and filled in with the dark blue translucent beads. These
white outlined designs start at the bottom of the bag
and continue up to the bottom of the closure flap where
the beading ends. It is possible that this beaded design
could represent a dragonfly. Dragonflies seen in ledger
art and on shields often look similar to the white outline
on the front of this bag. The flap design is a series of
blue triangles and red diamonds outlined in white. The
lower portion on the back of the bag has a similar design
except that the colors are reversed.

At the bottom of the bag there are 22 pieces of fringe tipped with tin cone tinklers except one
which is missing. The fringe are made by passing the ends of one piece of leather thong
through two separate side by side holes from the back of the bag to the front. This method of
closing the bottom of the bag uses eleven strips of leather to stitch the bag closed at the bottom and also provide fringe that can be left to dangle or to adorn with tinklers. Tin cone tinklers were a favorite decoration for Southern Plains bags, clothing, and other objects. The
usual source for tin for tinklers was empty tin cans. Indians were given some food in tin cans
as annuity goods or through trade. To make tinklers the top and bottom of an empty tin can
were removed and a cut was made down the side of the can. The tin was flattened and tinkler
blanks were cut out with scissors into the shape of an isosceles trapezoid of the correct size.
The isosceles trapezoid was rolled so that it formed a cone where the edges just meet in the
center. Once the cone tinkler was made it was attached by running a piece of fringe through
the small opening at the top of the cone and out the bottom. A knot was tied in the fringe and
then pulled back inside the cone.

At the bottom corners of the bag are four strips of leather attached through holes in the corners and then back through the leather strip. These strips are commonly known as drops and
are of the wide type commonly seen on Southern Cheyenne or Arapaho bags. Kiowa corner
drops are usually very thin and covered with tin tubes or two ply reverse wrapped fringe. The
drops on this bag are edge beaded most of their length. The beading is done in descending
bands of red, white, and blue beads. At the end of each drop are two tin cone tinklers, four
tinklers to each corner. Only six are present now as two are missing from one of the drops.

16

At the top of the bag is a thong of leather tied with several knots. This leather thong is a piece of
brain tanned leather routed through a hole in the flap then through the front piece of the bag. It is
then threaded through a another hole in the front piece and back through the flap. The thong is then
tied to form a loop than can be attached to a woman's belt or a man's bow case.
Based on the materials used in its construction and the types of decoration represented, the time
frame for when this bag was made is most likely after 1850, but prior to 1875. The reservation period
for the Kiowa tribe was 1867 to 1905. The use of commercial leather (front piece), glass trade beads,
and the tin cone tinklers in combination with brain tanned leather (back piece, flap, drops, fringe,
and tie thong) and sinew thread points to a time when the Kiowa were still hunting deer and producing brain tanned leather, but were also using non-Indian made items. This Indian strike-a-lite bag is
a good example of the blending of Indian made and non-Indian trade goods together into a functional everyday beaded object.

17

Caprock Canyons State Park Archeology Fair
Celebrating 10,000 Years of Cultural History

Demonstrations/informational booths:
All demonstrations and informational booths will be held in the grassy area
surrounding the Visitor’s Center. Please let me know if you will need tables,
chairs, tarps, etc… and I will be glad to provide them for you. (The titles of
these booths can be changed to whatever the presenter would like. I just need
to know what to change them to.) The following is a list of presenters for
demonstrations/booths who have committed so far:
·

Flintknapping:
o Ed Day
o Ivan Imel
·
Native American Tipi Building:
*Program will be offered every 90 minutes*
o David Owens
·
Native American Cradleboards:
o Harry Mithlo
·
Historic Artifact I.D.:
o John Preston
·
Prehistoric Artifact I.D.:
o Paul Katz
·Native American Tipi & artifacts:
o Ken & Shirley LeBlanc
·
Primitive Hunting & Tools:
o Charles Sinclair
· Arrow Making & Bison Hunting:
o Brian Gendron
·
Artifacts of New Mexican Cultures in Texas:
o Marisue Potts & Rick Day
·
Native American Games:
o Jane McFarland
·
Life of a Comanche Woman:
o Bernice Blasingame
·
Quitaque History & Artifacts:
o Comanchero Canyons Museum

18

Presentations:
Presentations will be held in the Visitor’s Center Pavilion at various scheduled
times. There will be a screen, projector, and computer available for your use.
However, you can also bring your own computer if you prefer. Here is the tentative schedule. It is not set in stone so if you prefer to have a different time slot,
please let me know. I would like a quick “snippet” of information about each
presentation and the title of it to give to the public as well as a short biography on
each one of you who are speaking or giving presentations please! (The titles of
these presentations will be changed to whatever the presenter would like. I just
need to know what to change them to.)

Native American Ethnobotany Hike at 10:00 a.m.:
Juanita Pahdopony
Paleo-Indians, the Lake Theo site, and Lubbock Lake Landmark at 11:00 a.m.:
Stance Hurst
Native American Storytelling at 12:00 noon:
Juanita Pahdopony
“Coronado Slept Here” at 1:00 p.m.:
Paul Katz
The Comanchero Trade at 2:00 p.m.:
Marisue Potts
If you know of someone who would like to put on a demonstration/informational
booth, please let me know. We could always use some more help!

19

Calendar of Events
October 2-5 Plains Anthropological Conference, Lovelan d, CO.
October 4

Trip to Adobe Walls

October 15

Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo

Public Library, downtown, 413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.

October 17-19 PaleoAmerican Odyssey, Santa Fe, NM.
October 18

Fannin School History Fair (Pr obably the last on e!)
Caprock Canyons State Park Archaeology Fair

October 24-27 Texas Archeological Society, Annual Meeting
Del Rio, Texas
October 27

West Texas Trails, Quitaque. Reservations requested.

Jerry Leatherman at acerenewables@midplains.coop or 806-823-2217.
November 19

Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo

Public Library, downtown, 413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.
December 15

Studer Banquet (Details to come.)

January 6-11

Society for Historical Archaeology Annual Meeting,

Seattle, Washington. For more information:
http://www.sha.org/index.php/view/page/ annual_meetings

