PASTIMES
The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

President
Paul Katz

Vice-President
Jeff Indeck
Secretary
Stacy Brown
Treasurer
Lisa Jackson
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Scott Brosowske

Vol. 31, No, 7, October 2011

PASTIMES

Page 1

Vol. 31, No. 7, Oct. 2011

In this issue

Page 2

October Guest Speaker ,
PAS September Meeting Information

Page 3

Photos from a Tour of the Alibates Monument

Page 4

Flint Fest 2011

Page 5-6

PAS Field Trip Reveiw: The Seewald Ranch

Page 7

PAS Member Highlight: Beryl Hughes

Page 8

Minutes from the last meeting

Page 9

Announcements, Updates, Upcoming Events
On The Cover: Matt
Taylor opening up a new
unit at 2010 CAR F.S.

Page 2

The Panhandle Archaeological Society will hold it's next meeting on Wednesday
October 26, 2011, at 7:00 pm, at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center Science Building,,
2301 N. Soncy Road, in Amarillo,Texas Our program will be presented by David Batten.

Bringing the field into the office: the use of GIS in archaeological
research
Since the mid-1980s GIS has been
used in archaeology to predict site
locations based on such things as slope
and distance from critical resources. As
GIS matures our archaeological goals
can also progress. I will present some of
the variety of ways my students and I
have approached the relationship
between settlements and the topography
of their landscapes at the scale of site,
community, region, and beyond. We
have explored the locations of puebloan
sites relative to computer-derived leastcost pathways among Galisteo Basin
pueblos and along predicted travel
routes from the plains, as at Pintada
Arroyo.

We will be investigating the potential of
signaling at Gran Quivira by determining
viewsheds. Viewshed analysis allows us
to identify prominent locations on the
landscape that might serve as signaling
stations to warn of approaching trade
groups or potential raiding parties.
Finally, a GIS can model the hydrology
of a place. Using these tools, we can
evaluate the location of surface
artifacts relative to the action of water.
These are wonderful tools, but we must
also ask how confident we can be in the
virtual world that we create. While
insights into prehistoric behaviors and
socioeconomic relationships are the
ultimate goal, an important near term
goal is to identify weaknesses and if
possible adjust procedures to make GIS
more reliable in the future.

I began my educational career with a degree in forestry from Colorado State University. After an extended
period of experiencing-life-as-education in places such as Jackson Hole, Wyoming and Bozeman, Montana, I
returned to college at Montana State University in the field of archaeology, a long-time interest. I chose the
University of New Mexico for graduate school, and worked there under the tutelage of the late
Mesoamericanist Robert Santley, exploring the influence of transportation on the development of complex
societies. That was the subject of my dissertation.
My research interests since coming to Eastern have focused on the transport and communication linkages
between major sites in the late prehistoric period in New Mexico east of the Sandia Mountains. What can
these routes tell us about the economy and lives of the Puebloan people and their trading partners to the
east? To what extent can trade and communication routes be identified through Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) terrain modeling techniques? Can routes so identified be confirmed on the ground through
archaeological survey? These are some of the questions that interest me. Corollary interests include
interaction between Pueblo and Plains peoples, settlement pattern analysis, and 'non-site' approaches to
landscape archaeology.
I have excavated or surveyed in New Mexico, Arizona, Montana, Scotland, Germany, and Portugal, at sites
running the gamut from an iron-age fortification to a medieval Islamic village, and from Paleoindian to archaic
to late prehistoric puebloan. I have taught at Eastern New Mexico University since 1997.

Take a Tour at The Alibates Flint Quarries
National Monument - Fritch Texas

Page 3

After a short drive to the starting point then
the hike begins
This is a guided tour so there are
a few stops along the way before
reaching the top

One of a couple of rest stops
under a very nice shelter

A very nice veiw to the northwest

Page 4

2011 Flint Fest at the Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument
October 1-2, 2011
The second annual knap-in at Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument will be held on the first weekend of
Texas Archeology Month. This is Saturday, October 1 and Sunday, October 2. The 'Flint Fest' has been expanded
from one to two days due to the overwhelming public response last year. Knappers will be demonstrating their
skill at making different tools out of different materials on both days between 9:00 am-5:00 pm. Any
flintknapper is welcome to participate. Bring your own tools, and some Alibates toolstone will be provided for you
to work. The Flint Fest will be held at the Alibates Contact Station, located five miles west of the intersection of
Cas Johnson Road and Hwy. 136 (Fritch highway). For additional information regarding Flint Fest call NPS HQ in
Fritch: (806) 857-3151.

PAS Field Trip Review: The Seewald Ranch

Page 5

By Stacy L. Brown

On a clear, beautiful Saturday, PAS members and guests took advantage of a rare opportunity to

visit the historic Seewald Ranch, located just north of Amarillo. Normally closed, this is a privately
owned working ranch that contains several documented archaeological sites, as well as the
opportunity for discovering previously undocumented sites. Ranch owners welcomed tour participants
to document any new sites, features or artifacts that may have surfaced, as well as monitoring any site
deterioration that may be occurring. PAS member Alvin Lynn worked with the owners to gain access
and organize this successful trip.
The first site visited, 41PT493, was a site located
above West Amarillo Creek containing Late Archaic
and Middle Ceramic period components. While no
formal features were observed, well-used manos
and hammerstones, Middle Ceramic period sherds,
fire-cracked quartzite cooking stones, and a base
from a Late Archaic point were seen on the surface.
In addition, there were large quantities of Tecovas
debitage scattered throughout the site.
Well situated between the sites we visited was an
outcrop of Tecovas jasper. This large outcrop is
recorded as 41PT276 and was the main Tecovas
source for the peoples inhabiting the surrounding
area.

Page 6
Tecovas jasper occurs at numerous sources in the Canadian River valley west of Lake Meredith and
in canyon systems on the eastern edge of the Llano Estacado. Its coloration ranges from reddish
brown, brownish-yellow, dark gray and at times milky white. This high quality material does have
some varieties that can be misidentified as Alibates, however, the primary difference with Tecovas is
that its color tends to be a more orange-brownish red and its texture is slightly grainier than Alibates.
The second site that was visited that afternoon was the Bascom Trail Site (41PT277). This was an
ideal camping site due to its close proximity to the Fort Smith-Santa Fe Trail and West Amarillo Creek.
Previous documentation stated several tipi rings were located here. While there were several
scatterings of rocks in the area, it was difficult to make a firm determination on where exactly these
rings were located. Time and animal traffic have apparently taken their toll. Due south from the
Bascom Trail Site, was an area that had housed a late 1930's to early 1940's CCC Camp (41PT440).
Over the years all of the buildings and housing remains are almost completely deteriorated.
Currently, the only visible remains are concrete footings and foundations of 17 structures.
The third and final site was located near the top of a ridge overlooking West Amarillo Creek. This
site also contained large amounts Tecovas debitage scattered throughout, as well as two possible
cairns. GPS readings were taken to verify their location and it was discovered that the previous
positions were taken prior to 1994 before satellite corrections were made available to the general
public. New positions were documented to update the site information.
PAS member Richard Mackie made the discovery of
the day at the third site. Laying on the surface was a
percussion cap tin lid embossed "Eley Bro. London".
The tin lid was in remarkably good condition and
Richard didn't need a metal detector to locate it! Eley
Brothers manufactured musket and pistol percussion
caps beginning in 1841 through the late 1800's and
were a major supplier to the Confederacy during the
American Civil War.
All in all, it was a very successful and enjoyable day spent doing what we all are truly passionate
about; investigating the history and prehistory of the Southern Plains. Don't miss out; be sure to join
us for the next field adventure coming soon!
2011 Texas Archeology Month Tours at the Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument
Every Weekend in October 2011 the National Park Service will offer tours of the Alibates Flint Quarries
National Monument and the nearby Alibates Ruin village site. The first weekend (October 1-2) will have four
tours and the other four weekends will have just three.
The Village Tour will visit the ruins of two Antelope Creek villages occupied between A.D. 1250 and A.D.
1450 and excavated during the years of 1938 to 1941. Viewing the nearby petroglyphs is a highlight of this
tour. The Alibates Ruin Site Tours will be at 11:00 am each Saturday and Sunday. Additional tours of the
village will also be offered on October 1 and 2 only at 3:00 pm.
The Quarry Pit tours will visit the famed Alibates Flint Quarries. This tour focuses on archaeology and the
prehistoric use of the Alibates toolstone. A visit to the only excavated quarry pit will be a highlight of this
tour. Quarry Pit tours will be on Saturdays and Sundays at 10:00 am and 2:00 pm.
All tours are guided by rangers and knowledgeable volunteers and will take about two hours to complete.
All tours are free, but reservations are required, as there is a limit to the number of people that can be
accommodated at each site. Both tours will leave from the Alibates Contact Station, located five miles west
of the intersection of Cas Johnson Road and Hwy. 136 (Fritch highway). Call NPS HQ in Fritch to make a
reservation for a specific tour at a specific time on a specific day: (806) 857-3151.

PAS Member Highlight

Page 7

Beryl Hughes
1. How long have you been a member of PAS?

Since 1986 or so

2. What first sparked your interest in archaeology? My major is in history and anthropology. I'm a
cultural historian. I guess my first interest was in family history, my family was at Jamestown. My
grandmother was born before the civil war and crossed the plains in a covered wagon four times.
3. What is your best find or most interesting moment with PAS or archaeology in general? Jack and I
spent five years doing the history of Drementina, a village in northeastern NM, that formed in the
1880's and was abandoned in 1959. There was a reunion there every year and Jack and I were treated
like family.
4. If you could have any choice, what would be your dream find, site, or location? I would like to find the
earliest peoples in America.
5. What would be your vision for PAS in the next ten years? I would like PAS to be given more recognition
and I wish the Panhandle could be considered part of Texas.
6. Is there anything else you would like PAS members to know about you? Retired and moved to the
southwest Desert. Just returned from a trip to Ireland, and love and miss all of you.

Page 8

Panhandle Archaeological Society
Minutes of the September 22, 2011 Meeting
Vice President Jeff Indeck called the meeting to order at 7:15 p.m. at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center. 21 members
and 3 guests were in attendance.
The next meeting of the PAS will be held on Wednesday, October 26, 2011. David Battin (ENMU) will be our speaker.
Jeff introduced the evening speaker, Pam Allison. She spoke of the lack of documentation of Texas Panhandle flora
and focused on 10 specific species. The lecture concluded with a brief discussion of her recent work on the Texas
Horned Lizard.
The business meeting began at the conclusion of Pam's presentation. The minutes of the May 18, 2011 meeting were
approved unanimously.
Lisa gave the Treasurer's report. The current operating balance is $1,725.29.
Rolla submitted the Publication Committee report in writing. The current checking account balance is $2,691.80. The
balance of the 180 day CD at Amarillo National Bank is $5,292.10. Cash on hand is $30.38.
The preliminary draft report of the Canyon City Club Cave site has been completed. The approximate costs for
publication will be $15.00 per copy. We are planning to publish 100 hard copies and 50 CD copies and hope to have
them available for the TAS meeting in Oct.
A request was made for volunteers to serve on the 2012 Officer Nomination Committee. Alvin Lynn volunteered.
New Business
Last spring it was suggested that PAS register with TECHSOUP to allow us to receive computer software at a discount.
Some issues developed during the process and it was decided that PAS would not register.
There will be a tour of the Seewald Ranch on September 24. To sign up contact Alvin or Scott. A tour of Antelope
Creek Phase sites near Borger and Stinnett is in the works for November. Details pending.
PAS will again be participating in Fannin Jr. High School's History Festival. Volunteers are needed for spear throwing,
corn grinding, wood working, and pharmaceutical technologies.
The speaker for this year's Studer banquet will be Miles Gilbert, author of Mammal Osteology and Encyclopedia of
Buffalo Hunters and Skinners, Vol. I and II. Auction items are also being requested.
Alibates National Monument will be hosting their second annual Flint Fest on October 1st and 2nd. Reservations are
requested for tours of the ruins and quarries.
Dusty Reins, caretaker for Wildcat Bluff Nature Center offered use of their facility to advertise and promote PAS
functions and events.
Use of PAS funds to sponsor a local university scholarship was introduced to make use of surplus funds. It has been
suggested that three or more ideas be developed to investigate the feasibility of this idea. It was also suggested that
these funds could be used to bring in monthly meeting speakers from outside the panhandle area. The issue was
tabled for future discussion.
The meeting was adjourned at 9:30.

Anouncements, Updates, and Upcoming Events

Page 9

2011 Texas Archeology Month Tours at Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument
Every Weekend in October

2011 Flint Fest Knap-In at Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument
October 1-2, 2011
For Additional Information on these events Call NPS HQ at 806-857-3151

Annual Family Archaeology Field Day

Museum of the Plains, Perryton Texas
October 22, 2011 from 12:00-4:00 pm
For more information or to sign-up
(806) 434-0157 or sbrosowske@pphm.wtamu.edu

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
October 26, 2011 at 7:00 pm
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

69th Annual Plains Anthropological Conference
October 26 - 29, 2011 Tucson, Arizona
For more information visit the conference
website at: http://www.pac69.com

82nd Annual Meeting of the Texas Archaeological Society

October 28 - 29, 2011 Fort Worth, Texas
For more information visit the conference website
at: http://www.txarch.org/Activities/AnnualMeeting/am2011/index.php

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
November 16th, 2011 at 7:00 pm
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

Panhandle Archaeological Society Annual Studer Banquet
Decenber 17, 2011 from 6:00 - 10:00 pm
Hazelwood Hall; Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

Ruth Mary Conrad Maples
Ruth Mary Conrad Maples was born in Taloga, Dewey County, OK on 10 July 1917 and died on 26 September
2011 at the age of 94 in Amarillo, TX.
Family will receive friends at the funeral home from 2:00 p.m. - 4:00 p.m. on Thursday, 29 September 2011.
Arrangements are by Boxwell Brothers Funeral Directors, 2800 Paramount Blvd.
She graduated from Amarillo High in 1933 after moving to Amarillo, TX in 1929. She attended Amarillo
College and West Texas Teachers College in Canyon, TX for her Bachelor of Education degree. She began
teaching school upon graduation in 1937 at Hart, TX where she met her beloved husband, Glen Maples. They
farmed in Hart, TX until they moved to Amarillo in 1959.
She completed her Masters of Education in 1959 at West Texas State College where she then continued her
teaching career at Pleasant Valley, Hamlet, Hilltop, and Will Rogers elementary schools in Amarillo until she
retired in 1978. Her interests were always travel, archeology and genealogy, where she studied her family's
history.
She was a member of Panhandle Archeological Society, Esther McCrory Chapter Daughters of the American
Revolution, Amarillo Genealogical Society, Santa Fe Trail, the Scottish Celtic Heritage Society, the Panhandle
DAR Regents Council, and the Ruth Eccles Nugent Tent of Union Veterans. She served as president and on the
executive board of all these groups.
She has helped find where her family lines originated from and how they moved westward by proving over
thirty-five lines back to the American Revolution. Also, she has proven various family lines in Colonial America
and other lines back to Medieval Europe.
With her research in her family history, she helped write "Bollinger Connections" and "A Maples Leaf" as well
as various other stories about the family. She also worked to record various genealogical records for the
National Society of the Daughter of the American Revolution.
She was also a member of Daughter of the American Revolution, Daughters of American Colonists, Daughters
of the Colonial Dames of the 17th Century, Daughter of the War of 1812, Daughters of Colonial Wars, Society
of the Descendants of the Founders of Hartford, CT, Daughters of Loyalists and Patriots, Huguenot Society of
Missouri, Descendants of Valley Forge, Antebellum Bench & Bar, Colonial Society of Daughters of Indian Wars,
National Society of Magna Carta Dames, The Society of Descendants of Knights of the Life Most Nobel Order of
the Garter, The Sovereign Colonial Society of Americans of Royal Descent, First Families of Twin Territories, as
well as the Colonial Order of the Crown.
She also supported various historical and genealogical organizations such as the Panhandle-Plains Historical
Society, First Families of Ohio, Oklahoma Historical Society, Catawba Historical Society of North Carolina,
Virginia Historical Society, Athens County Genealogical Society of Missouri, Cabarrus Genealogy Society of
North Carolina, the National Genealogical Society, the Missouri Historical Society and the Andrew County
Museum of Missouri. She was also a member of the archeological organizations such as the El Paso
Archeological Society and Texas Archeological Society.

Ruth Maples was preceded in death by her husband, Glen Maples, son-in-law, Joe Schoen III and three
grandchildren, Jason, Scott and Stephanie Schoen.
Survivors include daughters, Mary Herring and husband Glenn, Ann Schoen, Ruth Elaine Maples; three
grandchildren, Shanell Herring, Joe Schoen IV and wife Karla, JoAnna Schoen of Japan; and six greatgrandchildren, Marine Lance Corporal Collin Trussell, Airman Nicholas Trussell, Joseph W. Schoen V, Laura
Schoen, Xander and Dalton Daniels; and her favorite pet, Kat.
The family suggest memorials be given to the Esther McCrory DAR Chapter of Amarillo, Amarillo Public
Library Genealogical Department or other genealogical groups.
Leave online condolences at www.boxwellbrothers.com

