The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

Volume 33, No. 4, April 2013

President
Donna Otto
Vice-President
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Stacy Brown
Treasurer
Lisa Jackson
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Jerry Leatherman

Reconstructed “Bent’s Old Fort National Historic Site”
North through front gate; Right is hide press with small cannon north of
it, and larger cannon in front of fort.
near La Junta, in southeastern Colorado

Photograph by Jerry Leatherman

Page 2

I ns i de …

Next PAS meeting:

V ol u m e 3 3 , N o. 4 , A p r i l 2 0 1 3

Wednesday, April 17th, 7 P.M.,

Wildcat Bluff Nature Center, 2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, TX .

Page 3

Pages 4-6

Page 7

Guest Speaker will be Dr. Paul Carlson, Texas Tech University, speaking on the “Myth and Misconception in the 1860 Capture of Cynthia Ann Parker”.

“Cleaning and Restoring, a Rare Colt Revolver Cylinder”
By James R. Coverdale

Last PAS meeting: Guest Speakers Kathryn Harrison and Dick Zahm presented “Preserving and Protecting The Washita Battlefield National Historic
Site”.

Page 8

Old West Heritage Rendezvous:

“To catch the reader's attention, place an interesting
sentence or quote from the story here.”

Page 9

Page 10

May 30-June1 at the Kwahadi Kiva Museum of the American Indian

PAS field trip in mid-June to Blackwater Draw multicomponent site in New Mexico.

3RD ANNUAL PERRYTON STONE AGE FAIR:
Fair 10:00 am to 5:00 pm, Dinner and Raffle 5:00 pm to
6:30 pm, April 13, 2013. Co-sponsored by Courson Archaeological Research and the Museum of the Plains, Perryton, Texas.

Page 11

Upcoming Events...

Page 12

Minutes from last PAS Meeting.

Page 3

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 4 , Ap r i l 2 0 1 3

Myth and Misconception in the 1860 Capture of
Cynthia Ann Parker
On Wednesday night, April 17th, Dr. Paul Carlson will be the guest speaker at the Panhandle Archaeological Society meeting at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center, 2301 North Soncy, Amarillo, Texas.
Paul Carlson is Professor Emeritus of History at Texas Tech
University. He has published numerous articles, essays, and reviews plus several books, some of which have been published in
Europe and one of which was a History Book of the Month Club
selection. He is a Fellow of the Texas State Historical Association, a member of the Philosophical Society of Texas, and a
member of the Texas Institute of Letters. He lives with his wife,
Ellen, in Ransom Canyon, near Lubbock, Texas.
On a cold December morning in 1860 Federal troops took
Naduah (Cynthia Ann Parker) from her Comanche friends and
relatives. In the Anglo world of Texas the event was hailed as a wonderful accomplishment. Neither the
34-year-old Parker (Naduah) nor her Comanche family saw the capture that way.
Anglo reports of the kidnapping gave Texas Rangers credit for the capture. The reports were (and are)
full of misconceptions and errors. People who were not there left reminiscences that suggested they were
and such reports are likewise full of errors. Sul Ross, who led the Rangers, gave conflicting reports of
what happened, and his always shifting reports formed the basis of many subsequent and incorrect accounts.
The presentation will examine such misconceptions, folklore, and outright errors about the so
called battle of Pease River; errors that in the 21st
century continue to be made in books and articles.
Why is that?

1930’s replica of Parker’s Fort, site of the 1836 massacre of the
Parker family and the kidnapping of Cynthia Ann Parker.

Cynthia Ann Parker and her
daughter, Prairie Flower,
circa 1862

Texas Ranger Sul Ross,
later became Governor of
Texas.

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 3 , Ap r i l 2 0 1 3

Page 4

Cleaning, and Identifying, A Rare Colt Revolver Cylinder
By James Coverdale, Courson Archaeological Research

In 2012 I was contacted about a gun related artifact that had been recovered from a historic period site in
Briscoe County, Texas. The artifact was a rusted and partially loaded revolver cylinder that had been recovered from beneath a Mesquite tree. The area where the cylinder was found had been traveled by Indians, Comancheros, and several military expeditions, any one of which could have lost this revolver cylinder. Several
wagon harness hardware artifacts had been recovered a short distance away. These other artifacts may or may
not have been associated with the cylinder.
The cylinder was sent to our laboratory at Courson Archaeological Research for cleaning and stabilization. After cleaning in the electrolytic bath the
serial number 1124 was revealed. Research of Colt
"Walker" model serial numbers would indicate that
this serial number belonged to an 1847 Colt
"Transition Model" Walker pistol (Dixie Gun Works
2007 catalog).
In the summer of 1846 Samuel Colt designed a
large caliber (.47 cal.) five shot revolver that he
hoped would be adopted as a new sidearm by the
U.S. military. Colt submitted a prototype of the new
design to Secretary of War William L. Marcy. Colt
also showed the prototype to Captain Samuel H. Walker of the U.S. Regiment of Mounted Riflemen. Capt.
Walker, a former Texas Ranger, advised Colt about improvements that should be made to the prototype revolver. Capt. Walker suggested an improved hand grip design, better sights, and a reloading lever. Colt took
his new friend Captain Walker’s advice and made the appropriate changes plus a few more. Colt added a sixth
chamber to the cylinder and reduced it to .44 caliber. Officially known as the U.S. Model 1847 Holster Pistol,
this revolver would later be known as the Colt "Walker Model" in honor of Captain Samuel H. Walker who
died at the Battle of Huamantla, Mexico on November 13, 1847 (Samuel Colt: Arms, Art, and Invention - Herbert G. Houze 2006).
In early October 1847 Colt assembled some Colt "Walker" model revolvers using parts produced for Colt
by the Whitneyville Connecticut Armory of Eli Whitney, and parts from Colt's new Hartford Connecticut factory (Samuel Colt - Houze 2006). These Whitneyville/Hartford pistols later became known as "Transition
Model" Walkers.
Continued on Pages 5-6

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 4 , Ap r i l 2 0 1 3

Page 5

Rare Colt Revolver Cylinder ...Continued from Page 4
When compared to the Colt "Walker Model" production of 1,100 revolvers, and the "Dragoon" 1st, 2nd,
and 3rd models combined production of 19,607, the 240 Colt "Transition Model" Walker pistols are the rarest
of these early .44 caliber revolvers.
Before starting the cleaning process, artifact photos were taken to document the original condition of the
cylinder. Then I began the initial cleaning of the artifact to remove any loose rust or dirt. As mentioned earlier, when the cylinder arrived at the CAR laboratory, several of the chambers were still loaded. Clearly seen in
three of the six chambers are the lead round ball bullets. My recommendation was to remove these lead bullets
and unused gunpowder. This way the entire cylinder could be submerged in the electrolytic bath. The owner
wished to leave the bullets in place and so the face of the cylinder was not cleaned except with a brush and
toothpick. The chambers of the cylinder that appeared unloaded were
cleared of debris.
Prior to electrolysis a Dremel
Moto Tool was used to clean a tiny
area on the inside wall of one of the
unloaded chambers. This provided
a rust free area of contact for the
negative electrical wire clamp. A
metal can was used as the positive
anode that surrounded the cylinder
and attracted the rust from the cylinder. A custom built device was
utilized to suspend the cylinder so
the face and bullets were not submerged in the bath. The electrolytic
bath process was run for approximately 48 hours. The artifact was
closely monitored and was periodically removed from the bath and
gently scrubbed with a brush. The
rear of the cylinder where the percussion cap nipples are located required some special attention because of the many nooks and crannies around the nipple recesses. The
thin metal crown of the nipples remained mostly intact. The nipple
ignition channels were plugged and
had to be cleared before light could
be seen through the empty chambers. Once it was determined that as
much of the rust as possible had
been removed, the artifact was
towel dried, and then allowed to air dry for 24 hours before being sprayed with a Teflon

Continued on Page 6

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 4 , Ap r i l 2 0 1 3

Page 6

Rare Colt Revolver Cylinder ...Continued from Page 5
Silicone lubricant to inhibit rust from returning.
The cylinder surface was originally engraved with a scene depicting the July 1844 Battle of Walkers Creek
in present day Kendall County, Texas. Texas Ranger Samuel H. Walker was wounded during this battle between the Texas Rangers and Comanche Indians (Samuel Colt - Houze 2006). Regrettably due to wear, and
years of exposure to the elements all but minute traces of the scene are gone. Most gun parts are usually
stamped with some type of maker's marks or serial numbers. These marks will sometimes identify the company that produced the part or a person who was in charge of inspecting the parts at the factory. Beside the serial number 1124, no other marks were observed. Some pitting on the surface of the cylinder occurred due to
rust, but overall the final results of the cleaning were satisfactory.
Further research may reveal the shipping destination and purchase information for Colt revolver number
1124. Some Colt company archives are still available on Colt Walker revolvers although they are limited.
There are around two dozen known Colt "Transition Model" Walker pistols still in existence, mainly in museums and private collections. This recovered Colt "Transition Model" Walker revolver cylinder is a very unique
artifact of Texas Panhandle and Colt revolver history. Hopefully it will now be preserved for many years to
come.

Colt Walker Model Cylinder Scene

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 4 , Ap r i l 2 0 1 3

Page 7

March PAS Speakers Kathryn Harrison and Dick
Zahm Presented The Preservation and Protection of
the Washita Battlefield National Historic Site
This presentation included a documentary DVD describing
the historical events leading up to the morning of November 27,
1868, when Lt. Colonel George Armstrong Custer led 700 troopers of the 7th Cavalry in a devastating charge into the sleeping
village of Cheyenne “Peace Chief” Black Kettle, camping along
the Washita River bank, in Indian Territory, just west of present day Cheyenne, Oklahoma. Black Kettle and his wife, Medicine Woman Later, were among 30 to 60 Cheyenne killed in the
snow and mud.
This is the same Black Kettle whose village on Sand Creek in Colorado Territory
was attacked November 29, 1864. Troops under the command of Colonel J.M. Chivington attacked and destroyed village while Black Kettle was pursuing a policy of
peace with the whites and believed his village to be under the protection of the U.S.
Army. At least 150 Cheyenne and Arapaho men, women and children were reported
killed and horribly mutilated. It came to be known as the Sand Creek Massacre and
resulted in a massive public outcry as well as months of retaliatory raids by Cheyenne, Arapaho and Lakota warriors.
The night before Custer’s attack Black Kettle returned to his village after a 100 mile trip to Fort
Cobb, where he and Arapaho Chief Big Mouth unsuccessfully petitioned the post commander for peace
and protection. Still confident of their safety, he resisted the entreaties of some of his people to move
their camp closer to the larger Cheyenne, Arapaho and Kiowa camps downriver.

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 4 , Ap r i l 2 0 1 3

Page 8

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 4 , Ap r i l 2 0 1 3

Page 9

A visit to the Eastern New Mexico University archaeological field school at the Blackwater
Draw Site, directed by Dr. David Kilby, on a weekday during the second week in June. This
will be the last of three weeks that the school will be operating there, before moving on to
Chaco (see attached flyer). It has been suggested that we visit the Blackwater Draw Museum
before going to the site. The drive from Amarillo to Portales is two hours, so we will bring a
lunch and find someplace to picnic either before or after the site visit. Final details may not
be available until May, after the field school itself has gotten organized.

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 4 , Ap r i l 2 0 1 3

Page 10

3RD ANNUAL PERRYTON STONE AGE FAIR
Fair 10:00 am to 5:00 pm
Dinner and Raffle 5:00 pm to 6:30 pm
April 13, 2013
Co-sponsored by Courson Archaeological Research
and the Museum of the Plains, Perryton, Texas
We are very excited to announce that the third annual Perryton Stone Age Fair will be held at
the Museum of the Plains, Perryton, Texas on April 13, 2013! The fair will run from 10:00 am to
5:00 pm. The fair will again be followed by a catered dinner and raffling of door prizes for exhibitors. The fair will again be free for all exhibitors and visitors. We will have a total of 100 tables
(72” x 30” in size) available for exhibiting collections. This year exhibitors have the option of setting up their collections at the museum on either Friday afternoon or Saturday morning. Please let
us know if you are interested in setting up on Friday so that we can plan accordingly. We have
also learned from our mistakes last year and will label all of the reserved tables so that everyone
will know where to set-up. Motel/Hotel discounts will be again available. Buying, selling, and
trading of artifacts is prohibited. As always, armed security guards will be present at the fair. We
will have additional information posted on the CAR webpage in the upcoming weeks. For additional information or to reserve table space contact Courson Archaeological Research by phone at
806-434-0157 or email at sbrosowske@pphm.wtamu.edu. Please pass on the word of our fair to
all interested parties. We are looking forward to having another fantastic fair this year and seeing
all of our old friends (and making new ones)! Take care.

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 4 , Ap r i l 2 0 1 3

Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies
April 6, 2013, 9:00 AM -5:00 PM
Sibley Nature Center. Midland, Texas,
80th Anniversary Celebration of Civilian Conservation Corp (CCC)
Palo Duro Canyon State Park
Saturday April 6, 2013
3rd Annual Perryton Stone Age Fair
Museum of the Plains
Perryton, Texas
April 13, 2013 from 10 am to 5 pm
Panhandle Archeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
April 17, 2013 at 7:00 pm
2013 Science Day at Lamar Elementary School in Amarillo
Friday, May 10. We have done this for the past two years and our presence there has been appreciated.
The students range from Kindergarten through 5th grade, and all are hearing impaired to some degree.
We see 10–11 different classes throughout the school day, each for 22 minutes, and lunch is provided.
PAS contact Paul Katz (Katzes-PRIAM@msn.com) if you can help on this day.
Panhandle Archeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
May 15, 2013 at 7:00 pm
Courson Archaeological Research Summer Field School
Perryton, Texas
May 26-June 7, 2013
http/www.coursonarchresearch.com/2013 field school/index.html
Old West Heritage Rendezvous
Kwahadi Kiva Museum of the American Indian
9151 I-40 East, Amarillo, TX 79120
May 30-June 1, 2013
Texas Archeological Society
Summer Field School
June 15-22, 2013
Hondo, Texas
Pecos Conference
August 8-11, 2013
Flagstaff, AZ.
Texas Archeological Society
Annual Meeting
October 25-27, 2013
Del Rio, Texas

Page 11

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 4 , Ap r i l 2 0 1 3

Page 12

March 20th, 2013
26 members present.
Treasurer’s report-current account balance of $2,698.50 including $55.89 in expenditures and $105.00 in deposits.
Treasurer’s report was accepted.
Publication report $1,139.15 in account, $5,000.00 in CD account. State sales and franchise tax has been turned in.
Publication report was accepted.
SWFAS conference will be held April 6th. Rolla and possibly Donna will attend.
The Perryton Stone Age Fair will be held April 13th.
The updated constitution and by-laws has been printed, reviewed and all updates were approved and accepted.
Scott has been compiling and reviewing the membership and mailing list and has found a large number of past due members
who are still receiving newsletter. It was recommended that a letter be drafted to send to overdue members.
Eastern New Mexico State University is conducting field work at Black Water Draw the last week in May/first week in June.
Wednesday the 12th would be a good time for a PAS field trip. 8-12 members are interested.
Jerry Leatherman is requesting articles for the newsletter.
Ed Benz brought flyers for the Frontier Regiment hosting an Old West Heritage Rendezvous May 30 th to June 1st.
Meeting was adjourned at 8:05.

