PASTIMES
NEWSLETTER of the PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGY SOCIETY
Volume 35 Number 2 February 2015

President

WEAPONS

Donna Otto

Vice President
Scott Broskowske
Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer

Pam Allison

THROUGH

Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter
Editor

Beryl C. Hughes

TIME
1

Table of Contents
Table of Contents

Page 2

Swiss Tools — Paul Katz

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

From the Editor’s Desk

3a

Speaker for February — Veronica Arias

4

Primitive Swiss Army Knife —Paul Katz

4a

Weapons/Tools —Bob Smith

5

Flint Knapping — Ed Day

6

Early Ceramic Period Arrowpoints of the Southern High Plains—Scott D. Brosowske

7

Madsen Lake Findings — Dick Carter

10a

The Windmill Manufacturer That Struck Gold — Rolla H. Shaller

11

132 Year-old Winchester Model 1873

12a

The Mountain Howitzer — Alvin Lynn

13

2

Minutes of the Last Meeting
January 21, 2015
It snowed!! Our speaker, Dallas Ward, and his wife were
present, along with Pres. Donna Otto and one other. Next
meeting will be February 18 in the Amarillo Public Library.
We invite everyone to join us for dinner at Napoli’s, 700 S.
Taylor, at 5:30.

A Note From the Editor’s Desk: W eapons or Tools?
When I started this edition of the Newsletter, I’m afraid I
just tossed the idea of weapons out as being something we
would all know something about. So the idea of weapons as
tools is an afterthought: if you want to peel a potato you
must have a knife; chopping firewood requires an axe. Well,
maybe another time!
For now, if you’re interested in delving deeper into the history of firearms, PBS can help:
Antique firearms history timeline:

www.pbs.org/opb/historydetectives/technique/gun-timeline/
1232: The Chinese who invented gunpowder (black powder)
first used it in a weapon - gunpowder filled tubes aka rock- 1861: Breech loaded guns
ets.
1862: Gatling Gun
1364: First recorded use of a firearm - shooter lit wicks by
1869: Center-fire cartridge
hand that ingnited gunpowder that was loaded into the gun
barrel.
1871: Cartridge revolver
1400s: Matchlock guns - first mechanically firing of guns.
1873: Winchester rifle (“The gun that won the West”)
Wicks were now attached to a clamp that sprang into gunpowder that was placed in a "flash pan".
1877: Double-action revolver
1509: Wheel lock guns - wicks were replaced the wheel lock
that generated a spark for igniting the gunpowder.
1879: Lee box magazine patented
1630: Flintlock guns - the flintlock did two things mechanically, it opened the lid of the flash pan and provided an igniting spark.

1892: Automatic handguns invented by Joseph Laumann
1893: Borchardt pistol - automatic handgun with a separate
magazine in the grip

1825: Percussion-cap guns invented by Reverend John Forsyth - firing mechanism no longer uses flash pan, a tube lead
straight into the gun barrel, the tube had an explosive cap on 1903: First automatic rifle -- a Winchester.
it that exploded when struck
1830: Back action lock
1835: Colt revolver - first mass-produced, multi-shot, revolving firearms
1840: Pin-fire cartridges
1850: Shotguns
1859: Full rim-fire cartridge
1860: Spencer repeating carbine patented

3

Speaker — February 18
Veronica Arias PhD.
Bio:
Veronica Arias, Ph.D. is the Curator of Archeology at the
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum in Canyon, Texas.
She has participated in a variety of archaeological field
projects in both North and South America. Her primary
research focus has been on the development and application of geospatial technologies to a broad range of archaeological questions. She has 15 years of experience in spatial modeling and Geographic Information Systems (GIS).
Her dissertation examined the evolutionary trajectory and
impact of GIS in the discipline since its introduction over
25 years ago, and its potential to support computationally
intensive, data-driven research approaches. As part of her
study, she developed a methodology within GIS to spatially data mine archaeological and environmental data with
the objective of producing novel and potential useful insights on past settlement patterns.

Primitive Swiss Army Knife
Courtesy Paul Katz
4

The trench knife was given to me by my
Grandfather. He was too old for service in
WW I so he didn't use it in Thant warfare. The construction of the trench knife
with knurled nut on top of the handle was
called a "skull buster" and the brass
knuckle type handle with the double edged
stiletto type blade made a formidable hand
to hand weapon. The L F & G 1918 on
the handle stands for Landers Frary &
Clark, the first American company to
make the weapon.

Bob Smith

The alibates flint ax was recovered from the Alibates pueblo in
1961 before the national monument status. Both ends have an
edge on them and would have
been good bone crushing
tools. Or as a weapon of warfare. I put it in its present cedar
handle and tried to reproduce it
as best I could with the available
research.

5

Flint Knapping — Ed Day

6

Early Ceramic Period Arrowpoints of the Southern High Plains
Scott D. Brosowske
Early Ceramic (ca. A.D. 300 to A.D. 1200) period sites of the Southern High Plains represent one of the most
numerous site types found in the region. Ironically, this era is also one of the least studied archaeological time periods.
This is surprising given that sites of this age are marked by important technological changes, including the appearance of
ceramics and the adoption of the bow-and-arrow. It is generally assumed that Early Ceramic populations practiced a
foraging economy, but that they may have experimented with some gardening involving domesticated plants. Using
examples from Beaver County, Oklahoma and nearby counties in the Texas panhandle this article examines the arrowpoints used by these peoples.
Early Ceramic arrowpoints of the region largely represent smaller versions of the larger dart point styles that
preceded them during the Late Archaic period (Figure 1). There is quite a bit of variation in these arrowpoints, but they
are generally limited to three main forms. All are shaped like isosceles triangles with convex to straight blade margins.
These points have short, expanding stems with convex bases, although some may have nearly straight bases.

Figure 1 Early Ceramic Period Arrowpoints from the Southern High Plains

The notches on complete arrowpoints that have not been reworked are of two main forms. The first type of
notches is narrow with parallel sides. The second are “V” shaped and have wider openings (see Figure 1). Based on the
few examples shown in Figure 1 the orientation of notches vary between 35° and 65°, but average about 45°. The notch
locations usually originate at or near the corner of the preform, although some specimens are clearly basally notched. In
the study area the former are usually identified as Scallorn and the latter as Deadman’s.
Utilizing a small sample of complete corner notched arrowpoints (N=54) from the eastern Oklahoma panhandle
and the northeastern Texas panhandle some additional insights may be gained. The average length, blade width, and
stem width of points in this sample are 22.83 mm, 14.99 mm, and 10.52 mm, respectively (Table 1). While these statistics are useful in a general sense, they mask the full array of size variation represented (see Table 1). The range for
length, width, and stem width are 15.1 mm to 31.2 mm, 8.5 mm to 21.9 mm, and 5.2 mm to 17.5 mm, respectively. In
contrast to later Washita, Harrell, and Fresno arrowpoints which are often at least twice as long as they are wide, the
length to width ratio for points in the sample is 1.52:1. In other words, Early Ceramic arrowpoints of the region are fairly short and wide projectiles.
Table 1 Summary of Measurements for Arrowpoints in Sample
AVG. ML
Length Range
AVG. MW
Width Range
22.83 mm

15.1 to 31.2 mm

14.99 mm

AVG. SW

Stem Width Range

L:W Ratio

8.5 to 21.9
10.52 mm
5.2 to 17.5 mm
1.52:1
mm
Preforms used to produce Early Ceramic period arrowpoints of the region are very distinctive (Figure 2). In
contrast to preforms used for Washita and Harrell arrowpoints which are triangular in shape, have straight bases, and
high length to width ratios, Early Ceramic period preforms are more “tear drop” shaped with convex or straight bases
with rounded corners. Blade margins are usually convex, but can also be straight. These preforms are produced from
flat flakes and often show minimal pressure flaking along the margins. Preforms were often rejected if they were unsuccessful in adequately thinning these flakes, particularly where the notches were to be placed.

7

Figure 2 Early Ceramic Period Arrowpoint Preforms
Early Ceramic period arrowpoints commonly identified for the region include two primary types: Scallorn and
Deadman’s (see Ballenger 1999; Boyd 1997; Cruse 1989). Although originally defined as occurring from the central
gulf coast north to the Red River, corner notched arrowpoints found in the Oklahoma and Texas panhandles are invariably classified by researchers as Scallorn. This is not unexpected since the original morphological description for this
type could apply to just about any form of corner notched arrowpoint (see Suhm and Jelks 1962:285).
For example, blades are described as broad to slender in shape with straight, convex, and sometimes concave
margins. Likewise, shoulders are noted as usually well barbed, but can also be squared. Stems are wedge shaped, but
also include rounded forms that are as wide as the shoulders. Similarly, basal margins are described as being straight,
concave, or convex. Indeed, projectile point guides depict a wide variety of Scallorn forms, including long and narrow
arrowpoints, short, reworked specimens that are nearly as wide as they are long, and everything in between (e.g., Duncan
et al. 2007; Suhm and Jelks 1962:286; Turner et al. 2011:209).
The earliest of these guides acknowledge the considerable variability subsumed under the Scallorn type and
acknowledge that it “possibly should be divided into two or more types” (Suhm and Jelks 1962:2). In contrast to the
corner notched arrowpoints in the area examined here, Scallorn points are generally much larger, have broader notches,
straight basal margins, higher length to width ratios, and have blade margins that are frequently serrated.
The second primary arrowpoint identified for the Early Ceramic period of the region is the Deadman’s point
(Figure 3). This distinctive arrowpoint type has a triangular blade with convex to straight margins (Willey and Hughes
1978:187; see also Duncan et al. 2007; Turner et al. 2011). These points are basally notched that are either “U” or “V”
shaped. Notches are usually deep, forming long, expanding to nearly straight stems. The basal edges of stems may be
squared or rounded.
Cruse (1992:133) has suggested that “the Deadman point has thus far been reported only from sites of the Palo
Duro phase.” Likewise, Boyd (1997) seems to suggest that this point type is diagnostic of the Palo Duro complex. This
does not appear to be case as Deadman’s arrowpoints are commonly recovered north of the distribution of Palo Duro
complex sites. Indeed, this arrowpoint type occurs throughout the Texas and Oklahoma panhandles, north into southwestern Kansas, and likely, southeastern Colorado (see also Ballenger 1999:72; Bement and Brosowske 2001:Figures 10
-13; Lintz 1978:Figure 2; White 1987:75; Wilkens 2001).

Figure 3. Deadman’s Arrowpoints from Hemphill County, Texas

8

Another common Early Ceramic period arrowpoint is the Shadid type (see Wyckoff and Jackman 1988). These
arrowpoints are “characterized by a convex-sided blade with downward projecting barbs and a broadly expanding stem
formed by delicate, usually narrow, corner notches” (Wyckoff and Jackman 1988:121). The stems on Shadid arrowpoints,
in comparison to the overall length, are very short with the blades comprising 75% to 80% of the overall length of the projectile. Basal margins vary from convex to straight. These arrowpoints are very small and rarely exceed 25 mm in total
length. The primary features that characterize this type are the short stems and narrow notches. Many of the arrowpoints
shown in Figure 1 are of the Shadid type.
Overall, the chronological placement of these arrowpoints is not well understood. This is primarily because so few
Early Ceramic period sites of the region have been investigated and accurately dated. It is probable that some forms represent earlier types (e.g., Deadman’s?) and others are later (e.g., Shadid?), however, until additional sites are studied these
questions will remain unanswered. As such, we are left to date these arrowpoint styles within a broad time range of perhaps
A.D. 300 to A.D. 1200.
In sum, this brief discussion has examined some the Early Ceramic period arrowpoint forms recovered from northern portions of the Southern High Plains. Previous researchers have suggested that Scallorn arrowpoints were the dominant
type found in this area and that Deadman’s points were more common south of the Canadian River. This study suggests
that many of the corner notched arrowpoints recovered from study area are not of the Scallorn type, but are Shadid points.
It is also apparent that Deadman’s arrowpoints are very common north of the Canadian River and extend into southern Kansas and probably southeastern Colorado. It is hoped that this study clarifies the arrowpoint types represented on the northern fringes of the Southern High Plains.
References Cited
Ballenger, Jesse A.M.
1999
Goff Creek: Artifact Collection Strategy and Occupation Prehistory on the Southern High Plains, Texas County,
Oklahoma. Published jointly by the Sam Noble Museum of Natural History, University of Oklahoma and Oklahoma Anthropological Society Memoir 8. Norman, Oklahoma.
Bement, Leland C., and Scott D. Brosowske
2001
Streams in No Man’s Land: A Cultural Resource Survey in Beaver and Texas Counties, Oklahoma. Oklahoma
Archeological Survey, Archeological Resource Survey Report No. 43. University of Oklahoma, Norman.
Boyd, Douglas K.
1997
Caprock Canyonlands Archeology: A Synthesis of the Prehistory of Lake Allen Henry and the Texas PanhandlePlains. Prewitt and Associates, Report of Investigations No. 110. Austin, Texas.

Duncan, Marjorie, Larry Neal, Don Shockey, Don Wyckoff, Michael Sullivan, and L.M. Sullivan
2007
Southern Plains Lithics: The Small Points. Special Bulletin No. 26, Oklahoma Anthropological Society. Norman,
Oklahoma
Cruse, Jimmy Brett
1992
Archeological Investigations at the Kent Creek Site (41HL66): Evidence of Mogollon Influence on the Southern
Plains. Panhandle Archeological Society, Publication No. 6. Amarillo, Texas.
Lintz, Christopher
1978
The Johnson-Cline Site (34-TX-40): An Upland Dune Site in the Oklahoma Panhandle. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society 27:111-140.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Published jointly by the Texas Archeological Society, Special
Publications Number One, and the Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin Number Four. Austin, Texas.
Turner, Ellen Sue, Thomas R. Hester, and Richard L. McReynolds
2011
Stone Artifacts of Texas. Completely Revised Third Edition. Taylor Trade Publications, New York.
White, Ralph W.
1987
The Muncy Site in the Oklahoma Panhandle: Indian Cultural Evidence over a Long Time Span. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society 36:39-103.
Wilkens, L. Douglas
2001The Dykema Canyon Burial (41RB106): A Violent Death in the Texas Panhandle, ca. A.D. 660. The Steward 6:81-89.
Willey, P.S., and J.T. Hughes
1978
The Deadman’s Shelter Site. In Archaeology at MacKensie Reservoir, edited by J.T. Hughes and P.S. Willey, pp.
149-190. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State Archaeologist, Archaeological Survey Report 24, Austin.

9

Willey, P.S., and J.T. Hughes
1978
The Deadman’s Shelter Site. In Archaeology at MacKensie Reservoir, edited by J.T. Hughes and P.S. Willey, pp. 149-190. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State Archaeologist, Archaeological Survey
Report 24, Austin.
Wyckoff, Don G. and David Jackman, Jr.
1988
Shadid: A New Arrowpoint Type for the Plains. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 37:111
-135.

Madsen Lake Findings by Dick Carter
Madsen Lake is a playa lying southeast of Amarillo, south of the Claude Highway, north of the Palisades.
In the springs of 1963-1966 the lake bottom was heavily eroded by wind. At the prompting of Jack Hughes, I walked over
the area and found many flint flakes, artifacts and various chunks of various kinds of rocks lying exposed like “marbles in
a bathtub,” as the saying goes. I also picked up all debitage in order not to be finding it on every trip across the lake bottom.
The accompanying photo shows some of the findings:
Top Row: shotgun shell base, four lead bullet slugs. Missing is one shotgun pellet which missed the photo –
op.
Second Row: Two possible Ar chaic points, flanking what seems to be a Plainview fr agment. Many small
Plainview-like points were found. Missed photo op.
Third Row: Possible Plainview base-plus 2.
Fourth Row: Small arr ow points.

Following is a an abbreviated list of findings:
Artifacts — 227
116 are of Alibates material, comprising 51.13% of group.
51 are of Tecovas, comprising 22.47% of group.
Others are of various types of material not unknown to our region.

Debitage
Tecovas Flint -- 1# 5 oz. 218 pieces
Alibates Flint — 3# 1 oz., 736 pieces
Chunks w/Cortex and rough chunks of unclassified material. 78 Pieces 1#
7oz.
Quartzite Mano fragments 8 pieces—1#8oz.
Respectfully submitted this 6th day of February, 2015.
Dick Carter
Enc:photo

10

THE WINDMILL MANUFACTURER THAT STRUCK GOLD

Rolla H. Shaller
The year 1882, the place, Plymouth, Michigan, Lewis C Hough founder and General Manager of the Plymouth Iron Windmill Company, a manufacturer of windmills was struggling to keep his company operational during its early years.
In 1886, a Plymouth inventor Clarence Hamilton introduced a new idea to the windmill company It was a combination of
wire and metal and somewhat resembled a gun that could fire a lead ball using compressed air. Mr. Hough then president
of the firm gave it a try and, after his first shot, he enthusiastically exclaimed, “Boy that’s a daisy!”
The name stuck and the BB gun went into production as a premium item given to farmers when they purchased a windmill. The gun was such a huge success that the Plymouth Windmill Company began manufacturing the Daisy BB gun in
place of windmills. In January of 1895 they changed their name to the Daisy Manufacturing Company Inc.

The Daisy BB gun quickly became a staple among America’s youth and for many youngsters the Daisy became their first
wish at Christmas time. In January of 1903 Daisy introduced its first lever action repeater the No. 3 which was a nickel
plated, 1,000 shot rifle. But, one gun more than any other made Daisy a household word, introduced in 1939, “The Daisy
Red Ryder” a lever action BB Gun so named for an western comic book character took the country by storm. So much so
that the 1983 movie entitled a Christmas Story.is centered on one boy’s want of a Daisy Red Ryder BB gun. Ralphie has
to convince his parents, his teacher, and Santa that a Red Ryder B.B. gun really is the perfect gift for the 1940s. Throughout the movie Ralphie is taunted by, “you’ll shoot your eye out!”

In 1958 The Daisy Manufacturing Company moved their corporate offices and manufacturing company from Plymouth,
Michigan to Rogers, Arkansas, where they continue manufacturing Daisy BB guns and other Daisy products. Over 9 million unites of the Daisy Red Rider Air Rifle have been sold, making it easily the most famous BB gun ever built.
If traveling in the vicinity of Rogers, Arkansas be sure to stop and visit the Daisy Air Rifle Museum located at 202 W.
Walnut Street.

A short drive from Rogers will lead the visitor to the Civil War Battle Site, known as Pea Ridge.
On March 7-8, 1862, 26,000 soldiers fought here to decide the fate of Missouri and the West. The 4,300 acre battlefield
honors those who fought for their beliefs. Pea Ridge was one of the most pivotal Civil War battles and is the most intact
Civil War battlefield in the United States.
References:

http://www.daisy.com
http://www.nps.gpv./peri/index.htm

11

Print of painting, That Beautiful Charge, by Andy Thomas
Pea Ridge

132 Year-old Winchester Model 1873
Found against a tree at Great Basin National Park.
You have to wonder about the story behind the Winchester Model 1873 recently found leaning against a
tree in Great Basin National Park. The Model 1873 is
the iconic rifle in the great American westward expansion, and is referred to as "The Gun That Won the
West." Many people are trying to find the back story
of this rifle. Was it just forgotten? Did something happen to its owner? Did a hunter leave it, intending to
come back and find it, but never could?
Winchester staff writer, Scott Engen, gathered a few
details provided by Nichole Andler, Chief of Interpretation at Great Basin National Park.
“Engraved on the rifle is 'Model 1873,' identifying it
distinctly as a Winchester Model 1873 repeating rifle,” continued Andler. “The serial number on the
lower tang corresponds in Winchester records held at
the Center for the West at the Cody Firearms Museum
in Cody, Wyoming, with a manufacture and shipping
date of 1882. But the detailed history of this rifle is as
yet unknown.”
12

The Mountain Howitzer by Alvin Lynn
(Excerpted from Kit Carson and the First Battle of Adobe Walls:

A Tale of Two Journeys
Texas Tech University Press—2014

When Carson topped the ridge at Adobe Walls in 1864, chances are he recognized the old fort and the surrounding
terrain from having been there in 1848, but he had no time for nostalgia. Surveying the scene before him, his quick
eye noted Dr. Courtright setting up a medical station inside the walls of the old trading post, where the cavalry had
corralled their horses. Looking farther, Carson saw hundreds of Indians charging the troops stationed as skirmishers
in the high grass around the fort.
As Carson, Pettis, and the howitzer battery reached a sandy rise, about a half-mile west of the battle site, the proximity
to battle ignited the colonel. Jabbing the flanks of his mount and ignoring his physical ailments, the seasoned warrior
advanced headlong into the battle with his mounted men close behind. Carson joined McCleave on a knoll at the west
end of a ridge about a hundred yards northeast of the adobe fort. The high point afforded an unobstructed view south
to the Canadian River and to the east for several miles, broken only by a few trees along Adobe Creek.
Pettis and his foot soldiers, the last and slowest of the detail, proceeded forward with the two howitzers. Pettis said his
men seemed to get new life and forget all their fatigue at the prospect of going into action. Only a few minutes elapsed
before the mounted officers reached the center of the field at a gallop. As soon as Pettis’s detail reached the ridge
northeast of the adobe fort, Carson yelled, “Pettis, throw a few shell into that crowd over thar,” and Pettis responded,
“Battery, halt! Section right—load with shell—LOAD!”
When Carson yelled, “that crowd over thar,” he pointed to about two hundred yelling Kiowas and Comanches who
were riding back and forth and firing under the necks of their horses at the soldiers. Behind the Indians was a line of
twelve hundred to fourteen hundred additional warriors with several chiefs riding up and down the line urging them
on.

Pettis, observing from the ridge, spoke as a true soldier when he said, “A finer sight I never saw before and probably
shall never see again.”
It took only a short time to load the sight the cannons, and then the command came, “Number one — FIRE!” followed quickly by “Number two —FIRE!” The two howitzers belched smoke as their twelve-pound, cast –iron balls
whistled across the plain toward the mounted warriors. The Indians, not familiar with the big guns, stood high in their
stirrups and pondered the firing. As the shells began to explode around them, they headed their mounts, in a dead run,
toward their villages down river. By the time the artillerymen fired another volley, the Indians were totally out of
range of the cannons.

13

Pettis’s order, “Section right,” implied that most of the Indians were south and southeast of the hill. Fragments of exploded cannon balls buried under a foot of soil, four-tenths of a mile southeast of the howitzers confirmed the direction
of fire.

The mountain howitzer could fire three types of ammunition: spherical shell, spherical cased shot, and canister. Spherical shells were powder-filled, hollow balls with a wall thickness averaging seven-tenths of an inch. The cast-iron cases
served as shrapnel upon explosion. At five degrees elevation, the spherical shell had a 1,005-yard range. Spherical cased
shot had a round, cast-iron wall averaging one-half inch in thickness. The inside of the shell contained .69-caliber lead
balls packed in sulfur. The spherical cased shot had an eight hundred yard range at five degrees elevation. Cannister
ordinance was a large tinned can filled with .69 caliber lead balls, used for close range. Cannisters had an effective
range of 200 to 250 yards.
The cannon ball fragments that I found averaged one-half inch in thickness, which is the average measurement for the
wall of spherical case shot. I also found a .69-caliber lead ball in the vicinity of the fragments. Even though Pettis commanded, “Load with shell,” I believe the soldiers also fired spherical case shot.
I found, on the ridge, five friction primers of the kind used to fire the howitzers. This helped me identify the spot where
Pettis had placed the cannons.

14

