PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society

February Vol. 31, No. 2

The Panhandle Archeological Society will hold it's next meeting on
Wednesday February 16, 2011, at 7:00pm, at the Wildcat Bluff Nature
Center Science Building, 2301 N. Soncy Road, in Amarillo, Texas.
Our program will be presented by Daniel Kerr.

Tracing ?Traces? in Texas-Archaeology,
History, and Preserving the Panhandle's
Pastore Past.

President:
Paul Katz
Vice-President:
Jeff Indeck
Secretary:
Vacant

Treasurer:
Lisa Jackson
Publications:
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor:
Scott Brosowske

Explores prospects of preserving the archaeological
heritage of Hispano "pastores" who migrated to the
western Texas Panhandle from New Mexico in the
nineteenth century. Outlines Elo J. Urbanovsky's 1973
preservation-assessment of a site in northeastern Oldham
County, "Plaza de Los Pastores," and situates the location
among other Panhandle plazas. Finally, details the author's
efforts to locate the settlement of Eugenio Romero and
Manuela Duran near the former town of Romero.

Dan was born in Bryan, Texas, an Aggie, but grew up in
Borger. After receiving a bachelor's degree in journalism
from Texas Tech University he practiced the craft for five
years before entering graduate school. In 2004 he received
a Master's degree in English from West Texas A&M
University. Last May he received a Ph.D. in American
Studies from the University of Kansas, where he studied
environmental history with Donald Worster and Karl
Brooks. His biography of Casimiro Romero is under
consideration by Oklahoma University Press. Sheepdogs
and Barbed Wire: The Life of a High Plains Don describes
a man who was in the process of "becoming" American on
the semiarid plains of Texas in the late nineteenth century.
The manuscript reveals crucial details about Romero's
early years in the Santa Fe trade, on the turmoil of pioneer
Tascosa, and on his multifaceted business in Dodge City,
Kansas. Dan is a 2009-2010 recipient of the Excellence in
West Texas History Fellowship.

Daniel Kerr

Inside this issue
Page 2-3: Minutes from
last months meeting
Page 4: Society For
Historical Archaeology
National Convention
Page 5-6: Currie Cave
(41RD94):A Dry Rockshelter Habitation Site
near Canyon Texas
Page 7: PAS Member
Highlight, Announcements, and Upcoming
Events
Page 8: 47th Annual
Meeting of the SWFAS

Page 2
Panhandle Archeological Society
Minutes of the January 19, 2011 Meeting
President Paul Katz called the meeting to order at 7:20 p.m. at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center.
Approximately 19 members were in attendance. Lisa Jackson introduced her guest, Cindy Meador.
Chance Coberley, husband of the speaker, was also in the audience.
Paul announced that the next meeting will be held on Wednesday, February 16 at 7:00 p.m. at the Wildcat
Bluff Nature Center. The guest speaker will be Dan Kerr, speaking about the Panhandle pastores.
Dr. Ann Coberley, on the faculty of Amarillo College, spoke about the current state of anthropology and
archaeology and the relationships between them.
The business meeting began after a break. The minutes of the November 17, 2010 meeting were
unanimously approved, Motion by Scott Brosowske, second by Caryn Henslee.
Lisa presented the Treasurer's report. The current bank account balance is $1,974.24. The Studer Banquet
on December 15, 2010 was attended by 44 people. The net proceeds were ~ $800. Jeff Indeck moved to
leave all of this money in the general operations account, rather than allocate some or all of it to
publications. Scott seconded. Motion passed unanimously.
Rolla Shaller presented the report of the Publications Committee. After paying the quarterly state sales
tax, the balance in the checking account is $2,619.70. Chris Lintz has sent the bulk of the illustrations for
the Canyon City Club Cave report. There will be two dedications, one to Curtis Tunnell and the other to
Jack Hughes. The Hughes dedication needs someone to write it. The two Pollyanna Hughes manuscripts
were discussed. According to the bylaws, it may not be appropriate for the PAS to publish them if they
are not archaeological in nature. Scott and Joe Rogers agreed to read one each and report on their content
and suitability for publication. Copies will be provided so the originals do not have to be circulated. A
suggestion was made to consider for publication the Master's theses of Britt Bousman and Bob Wishoff,
both of which deal with Alibates National Monument.
The current status of the PAS website was discussed. Bob Wishoff has developed a home page, but at this
time it can only be accessed through his own website. The home page has the PAS name and logo, with
images of quartzite from Alibates in the background. The tabs that we requested are available, but their
pages are empty. Rolla will provide Bob with a list of available publications, their cost, and instructions
for placing an order. Scott and Lisa have both sent Bob some images.
The distribution of Pastimes was discussed. Most of the newsletters are being distributed electronically
by the Editor. This includes all but about a dozen of the members and all of the complimentary and
reciprocal recipients. Scott asked for a volunteer to take on the responsibility of copying and mailing the
dozen or so hard copies. Dick Carter volunteered. Lisa will provide him with the names and mailing
labels. He will be reimbursed for all expenses.
continued on next page

Page 3
continued from page 2

Paul asked for a volunteer to temporarily fill the position of Secretary until the election of officers in the
fall. There were no volunteers.
The PAS bylaws must be updated, revised, and the various versions reconciled before September, when a
nominating committee will be established. Voting for new officers takes place in November, with
installation at the Studer Banquet in December. An ad hoc committee of Paul Katz, Rolla Shaller, and Joe
Rogers will work on the bylaws this spring, so that a revised version can be approved by the membership
by the September meeting. Lisa will scan all of the versions that can be identified and provide text-editable
copies to the committee.
Alvin Lynn reported on the costs and conditions for having the 2011 Studer Banquet at the Country Barn.
One change will be having only one meat dish, rather than a choice as in the past. Coffee and dessert will
be charged by the plate, regardless of how many are interested. These restrictions will have to be weighed
against the very good room that we have available. At this time, all weekends and the third Wednesday in
December are already booked. Alvin will make a reservation to hold the room, subject to another
alternative. Jeff and Alvin will look into other venues, calculating the cost of catering by the Stockyard
plus room rental against the Country Barn costs and restrictions.
Rolla announced the first call for papers for the 2011 Southwestern Federation of Archaeological Societies
annual symposium. There should be at least one paper presented by a PAS member. The symposium will
be held in San Angelo on April 9, 2011.
Scott announced that the annual Courson Archaeological Research Field School will be held from May 23
through June 10. Three sites will be investigated, including both prehistoric and historic, plus an active
laboratory. The enrollment will be limited to 50. Assistance with camp security is needed on weekdays.
For additional information: www.coursonarchresearch.com
Scott requested that material for Pastimes be submitted by the first of the month.
The meeting was adjourned at 9:20 p.m.

Page 4
Society for Historical Archaeology National Convention
The Society for Historical Archaeology held its 2011 SHA Conference in Austin from January 5-9 at the
Austin Hilton. The theme of the conference was "Boundaries and Crossroads in Action: Global Perspectives in
Historical Archaeology." The gathering featured a variety of opportunities to explore this exciting area of
archaeology including roundtable luncheons, workshops, poster sessions, panel discussions and of course the
concurrent sessions. Pre and post conference tours of the local area and social events allowed many an
opportunity to sample the history of the area and the "uniqueness" of Austin.
The Market place provided a venue for many publishers to exhibit and sell new titles. The scope of topics
left no one without a desire to take home more print materials. Some pretty exotic equipment for analysis and
processing was displayed including a portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) machine. This item allows very
precise analysis of a variety of elements in the field and while the machines are still extremely expensive ($3540,000) we did learn that they could be rented for short periods of time. Since there was a large marinearchaeological presence at the conference, a lot of the equipment there was for use in this area, including a full
size ultra-light aircraft (Still not real sure how they got it in the elevator).
Three days of concurrent sessions provided an enormous amount of variety for the nearly 1200 attendees at
this year's conference. The full conference schedule can be found by clicking on the following link:
https://www.conftool.com/sha2011/index.php?page=browse Sessions and relates the details of all the sessions
and their presenters. The Panhandle Archeological Society was represented in the session: New Deal = Old
Stuff; Challenges in Preserving the CCC Legacy by Lisa Jackson who presented in a session on the CCC in
Palo Duro Canyon and Tony Lyles related information about the CCC and other rock markings in the Big
Spring Park. They also attended other sessions including the use of Photo-Shop and metal detecting.
On Saturday the conference opened its doors for the Public
Event:Crossroads in Texas History and Archaeology Expo. This
venue provided the general public an opportunity to witness and
interact with several "hands on" activities. TAS and other local
societies provided a "mock dig," cornhusk doll making, trash
analysis, and a variety of reenactors added flavor to the event.
Groups from all over the state represented Buffalo soldiers, early
Texas Rangers, Civil War and Frontier regiments. Joe Rogers
and Doug Boyd teamed up to showcase some of the work being
done at the Ransom Williams site (41TV1051) that is located
southeast of Austin. This site was at one time a farm bought by
Joe D. Rogers explains the use of a
a former slave following the Civil War where he and his family
woodworking tool
lived until they moved to Austin around 1900. The neglected
property simply melted into the landscape until recovery work be gan last year. So far over 27,000 artifacts are
revealing a glimpse into that life. Many of the artifacts recovered were
tools and while Doug Boyd showed actual artifacts and explained the
recovery techniques, Joe showed how they were used in woodworking
and other tool demonstrations. Boys Scouts and other Youth groups
could use the experience to add to merit badges in archaeology, history,
and woodworking.
There is a long Texas connection with this society, for it actually grew
out of an "International Conference on Historical Archaeology" held at
SMU in Dallas in 1967. SHA was incorporated in 1968 and held its
first Annual Meeting in Williamsburg, Va. The SHA has published its
journal;
Historical Archaeology since that time. Since this organization
Two buffalo soldier reenctors
started in Texas, there are plans to return to the Dallas-Fort Worth area
in 2014 to celebrate their 50th year.
Information about SHA may be
found at its website: http://www.sha.org/

Joe D Rogers

Page 5
Currie Cave (41RD94): A Dry Rockshelter Habitation Site near Canyon, Texas

Looking North
At Currie Cave

Dry rockshelters containing archaeological sites with perishable remains, including sandals, cordage,
basketry, and woven matting, are well-known in regions to the south, west, and northwest of the Texas
panhandle. They appear to be less common in the study area because the caliche caprock found in the
region is less stable and more susceptible to collapse. The Currie Cave site (41RD94) in the upper reaches
of the Prairie Dog Town Fork of the Red River is therefore an exception to the rule. The following
discussion is derived from observations recorded in the field journals of Jack T. Hughes and from a brief
examination of the materials collected from the site nearly forty years ago.
Situated in a south facing overhang approximately 30 m long, 3 m tall, and
6 m from front to back, this dry shelter was first noted by Floyd V. Studer in
the early 1940's. Later, Jack T. Hughes noted the presence of one petroglyph,
three circular pictographs, and shallow bedrock mortars in the shelter on a
visit to the site in the 1960's. This site, also known as Basketmaker Cave or
Palo Duro Falls Cave, was briefly investigated by Norpan Archaeological
Society members Dick and Mary Ruth Carter and W. A. "Dub" and Clara
Dumas under the direction of Jack T. Hughes in August 1961. Prior to this date
Matting, Basketry,and the site had been badly disturbed by looting. Work conducted included laying
Cordage From Currie
out a grid in the shelter and screening looter backdirt
Cave
piles.
Materials collected from the site are contained in the collections of the PanhandlePlains Historical Museum in Canyon, Texas. Items include braided hair and yucca
cordage, woven matting and basketry fragments, modified and unmodified animal
bone, chipped stone tools and debitage, several different types of unidentified seeds,
mussel shell, corn cobs, masses of grass, arrow shaft fragments, a possible rabbit
stick fragment, a mussel shell pendant, ceramics, and sandals. There are no
radiocarbon dates for the site, although Washita arrowpoints, maize, and thin
cordmarked ceramics suggest occupation during the Middle Ceramic period (A.D.
1250-1500).
continued on next page

Possible Arrow
Shaft Fragments
From Currie
Cave

Sandal From Currie
Cave

Page 6

Projectile Points From Currie Cave

Charred Corn Cobs From Currie Cave

The overall extent of looting and the potential for intact deposits at the Currie Cave site currently remains
unknown. A housing division has sprung up near the site and it is likely that considerable damage has occurred
since the 1960's. At present, the assemblage from Currie Cave has been cataloged, but remains unanalyzed
except for two brief unpublished letter reports on the perishable materials from the site. As such, this collection
represents just one of the many amazing assemblages in storage at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum that
await rediscovery.
Scott D. Brosowske

Gourd Seeds From Currie Cave

Braided Cordage From Currie Cave

Page 7
PAS Member Highlight
How long have you been a member of PAS? Since it's inception
What first sparked your interest in archaeology? Reading library books
about King Tut's tomb - etc Traveling w/family to Mesa Verde several times as
a young kid - Hearing stories about the "buried City"near Perryton.
What is your best find or most interesting moment with PAS or with
archaeology in general? Most interesting moment - when I held in my hand
the first potsherd that I ever dug up-or-when I discovered a site near a spring all
by myself. No one had told me about it. I just discovered it for myself!

Richard L. Carter

If you could have any choice, what would be your dream find, site, or
location? An undisturbed house or villagesite that I could, in my dreams , work
on.

Tell us a little bit about yourself: 84yrs old as of Nov. 2010- Interested in archeology (of course), woodcarving,
reading, Bible class teaching at Covenant Presbyterian Church-Amarillo, Antique & junk store searching. 2
children, 5 grandchildren, 7 great grandchildren.
What is a fun fact or something most people don't know about you? Once made it to the National Whimmy
Diddle Contest Finals, held at Asheville N.C. each October.
Once met J. Alden Mason, Quannah Parkers grand daughter & husband. Dug in a fire pit at Chalk Hollow while
Waldo Wedel screened.
How much archaeological experience do you have? Praticipated in Field work & digs & surveys 1957 to
about 2009 TAS Field School 1969, 1975, 1988, 2008, 2009 Many, many small digs and surveys with Jack
Hughes.
Is there anything else you would like for PAS members to know about you? I feel blessed to be associated
w/like minded folk at PAS. Next to my church family I find them the most encouraging and upbeat folks I know.
Interested in their pursuits and willing to share their experiences and enthusiasm.

CAR 2011 Field School
Courson Archaeological Research will be conducting it's
2011 Field School from May 23rd to June 10th. The first
two weeks will be field excavations of Antelope Creek
phase sites near the Canadian River, and the third week
will consist of metal detecting historic period sites. PAS
members may attend at no cost, other than catered meals if
desired. For more information, check our website:
coursonarchresearch.com

Upcoming Events, and Announcements

.

.
.

33rd Annual Flint Hills Conference
Wichita State University, March 25th26th, 2011. For more info. contact:
donald.blakeslee@wichita.edu

Society For American Archaeology SAA 76th
Annual Meeting. Sacramento, California
March 30th - April 3rd, 2011
Southwest Federation Of Archaeological
Societies, April 9th, 2011,
San Angelo, Tx.

47th Annual Meeting of the

Southwest Federation of Archeological Societies
San Angelo, Texas, April 9, 2011
Hosted by the Concho Valley Archeological Society (CVAS)
CALL FOR PAPERS
The 47th SWFAS Symposium will be held in San Angelo, Texas on Saturday, April 9th. This symposium provides
the opportunity for avocational and student archeologists to present their work and have it published in the SWFAS
journal. The meeting is open to anyone interested in history and archeology.
Each of the six member societies is responsible for presenting at least one paper on a topic within the federation
area (west Texas and east New Mexico). Papers from others including professionals are welcome. A printed copy of
the paper and a computer file copy (preferably in Word format) will be needed for reproduction in the symposium
transactions. This is due at the April 9, 2011 meeting. Presenters will be notified of the time limit after the deadline.
Please send the title, brief abstract, and a short biographical sketch no later than February 15, 2011. If you
have special needs, please let us know. Slide (carousel) projectors and PowerPoint equipment will be available. If
you would like a table for sales of books or other items or for informational displays, please contact us.
The SWFAS board meeting will be held Saturday during lunch. At least one voting representative from each
member society should attend.
SEND ALL PRESENTER INFORMATION TO:
Bill Yeates
8775 Ducote Airpark Rd.
San Angelo, Tx 76904
email: byeates@wcc.net

Ph: 325-223-5072

