PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Seven, Number One January 2017

President
Scott Brosowske
Vice president
Veronica Arias

Hello

Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer

Pam Allison
Publications

Winter

Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE of CONTENTS
Page
Upcoming Events: Ceramics Academy
From the Editor's Desk
Program Information
Chris Lintz

2
2a
3
4-6

PAS January 18, 7:00 p.m. Amarillo Public Library, Downtown Branch. Dinner at Napoli's, 700 So. Taylor at 5:30.

Ceramics Academy
An exciting academy to be held at Fort Richardson State Park in north Texas, this academy will introduce the importance of
archeological ceramics in terms of technology, chronology, dating, trade, subsistence, and cultural identity. Definitions and origins
of ceramics, decoration and how pottery was embellished, sherd analysis and how pottery is classified and typed, and interpretations
including what we can learn from pottery analysis. For the first time in five years, the Ceramics Academy will provide numerous
hands-on exercises such as making pottery and identifying vessel types, age, and firing.
The Ceramics Academy will be held in the newly renovated Haliburton Facility at Fort Richardson State Park. This will be an
excellent opportunity for participants to enjoy the parks many amenities including hiking, biking, equestrian trails, camping, and
fishing. And take advantage of the historic Fort Richardson site tours! http://tpwd.texas.gov/state-parks/fort-richardson.
Lodging options are available throughout Fort Richardson State Park including cabins, RV hookups, and camping. Jacksboro has
motel options, with more in nearby Graham and Mineral Wells.
There are 11 cabins at Fort Richardson State Park reserved until February 10, 2017. Anyone who wants a cabin will call the park
directly and make reservations through the park at 940-567-3506 directly (not the online reservation system or 512-389-8900 phone
system).
Lodging Information
Instructors: Marybeth Tomka and Dr. Chris Lintz.
The academy is scheduled for the weekend of February 25-26, 2017; registration deadline is February 10, 2017

If you're looking for the minutes of the last meeting -- your search will be in vain. The December meeting was the Studer Banquet,
so there was no business meeting.

Notes From the Editor's Desk
I value this space on PASTIMES. It gives me the chance
to say something meaningful each month. I refuse to fill
it with all the old cliches: where did 2016 go? Happy -well, you know the rest.
So instead I give you a thought I find profound. I only
wish I had been the one to say it.

“For last year's words belong to last year's language
And next year's words await another voice.”
T.S. Eliot, Four Quartets

Page 2

Program Information
Tamra L. Walter, Ph.D.

Biographical Information
I received my B.A. From the University of Texas at Austin in 1991 and my MA from U of Montana at Missoula in 1996. I
completed my PhD at UT Austin in 2000. All three of my degrees are in Archaeology. I have primarily worked at Spanish
Colonial Sites in Texas, focusing on missions and presidios. I also work on prehistoric sites in coastal Ecuador. Currently
I am an Associate Professor of Archaeology at TTU where I have been since 2000.

Abstract
Presidio San Saba and Mission San Lorenzo: Looking Ahead to the 2017 TAS Field School
Linked by a common history, the presidio of San Saba and Mission San Lorenzo reflect an important period in Spanish
Texas History. Both sites were excavated in previous years (San Saba in 2000-2010 and Mission San Lorenzo in the
1960s) and Texas Tech University and the TAS plan on retuning to Mission San Lorenzo this coming summer. Serving as
the commander of the fort from 1760- 1769, Capt. Felipe Rábago y Theran helped to establish Mission San Lorenzo during his time at San Saba. The presidio and the mission were occupied at a time of reassessment of the frontier. Spain’s
commitment to expand, protect, and colonize the northern reaches of their empire was weakening as local and global politics reshaped their priorities. The archaeological data recovered from the San Saba excavations helped to define the building sequences of the fort that, in turn, reflect the personalities of the commanders, the changing role of the frontier forts,
and the shifting relationships between Spanish and Native peoples. As one of the last missions established for the Lipan
Apache, Mission San Lorenzo offers a unique opportunity to examine Spanish and Native interactions as the mission era
was coming to an end. Excavations at both sites will be discussed and plans for this summer’s investigations at San Lorenzo will also be reviewed.

Page 3

The Antelope Creek Phase of the Texas

Christopher (Chris) R. Lintz By

Panhandle. (Lintz 1986)

Rolla H. Shaller

Since that time Chris has returned to the
Panhandle and examined many of the
excavations and collections from WPA sites at

I was well pleased when I learned that

Chimney Rock 51, Alibates 28 and Antelope

Christopher Lintz agreed to be the 2016 PAS

Creek 22; NORPAN's excavations at Roper and

Studer Banquet and Lecture Series speaker. I

Picket, PAS/TDOT's Black Dog village Site and

was even more pleased when it was suggested

West Texas State University Anthropological

that the PAS honor Chris for his many years of

Society's Jack Allen Site (now in progress), just to

dedicated work on the Southern Plains and

name a few of the projects he has been involved

especially the Texas Panhandle.

with.

Chris has been one of our long distance members

I first became acquainted with Chris in the early

for a number of years, as he lives in Austin, Texas.

1980s while he was in charge of the excavations at

Therefore he is not around to attend the monthly

Landergin Mesa (410L2) in Oldham County. I

meetings or participate in most PAS activities. He

volunteered several weekends at the excavations.

does stay informed by reading Pastimes, keeping

Our next chance meeting was in 1987 during the

abreast of what's happening in the Society, and

field trip after the TAS Annual Meeting in Amarillo.

occasionally submitting articles for publication.

We traveled to Landergin Mesa with then State

Chris Lintz was a Cultural Resource Specialist for

Archeologist, Bob Mallouf. The seats in the van

the Wildlife Division of the Texas Parks and Wildlife

were all taken, therefore Chris, Adri Comini and I

Department in Austin, retiring in 2016. He grew up

stuffed ourselves into the rear cargo area riding

assisting his dad with paleontological projects in

roundtrip from Amarillo to Landergin Mesa. If you

Nevada and started doing archeological field work

know Adri, you will understand this was an

with the Nevada State Museum in 1963. He earned

unforgettable trip. I think this is where our

his B. A. from Arizona State University (1970), and

friendship really began.

both his M.A. (1976) and Ph.D. (1984) from the
University of Oklahoma. Prior to joining TPWD
Chris worked for several archeological consulting
firms in Oklahoma, Colorado, New Mexico and
Texas. While working in the private sector he
directed survey, testing and major archeological
excavations.
It was during the early 70's that Chris became
interested in the archeology of the Texas
Panhandle as he began studying the different
types of living structures constructed by the
people of the Panhandle Village Culture. This
became the basis for his dissertation. Architecture
and Community Variability Within

Fig. 1 PAS Honoree Chris Lintz with plaque at
the 39th Annual Floyd V. Studer Banquet and
Lecture Series December 9, 2016.
Photo by Veronica Arias

Page 4

Since that time Chris Lintz has helped with the
editing of several PAS Publications and was the
editor of the 10th PAS publication on the Canyon
City Country Club, a memorial issue dedicated to
Jack T. Hughes and Curtis D. Tunnell. Chris' recent
writings also includes two reports on flint caches
found in the area and two archeological sites along
the Trailway at Caprock Canyons State Park in
Floyd County. Presently he is working with
collections of ceramic sherds recovered from the
Cross Bar Ranch in northern Potter County. To top
that off Chris will be a presenter at the TAS Ceramic
Workshop at Ft. Richardson State Park in
Jacksboro, Texas on February 27-28, 2017.
It was indeed a pleasure for the Panhandle

Fig. 3 Chris enlightens museum visitors at the

Archeological Society to honor Christopher R.

Panhandle- Plains Historical Museum in Canyon.

Lintz for his contributions. The plaque reads:

Photo by Rolla Shaller

IN APPRECIATION TO
CHRISTOPHER R. LINTZ, PhD
FOR A DISTINGUISHED LIFETIME OF CONTRIBUTIONS
TO THE ARCHEOLOGY OF THE SOUTHERN PLAINS AND
THE TEXAS PANHANDLE
PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
DECEMBER 9, 2016

Chris Lintz and Joe D. Rogers clearing roadway to
site located along the Caprock Canyon State Park
Trailway August 2014.
Photo by Rolla Shaller
Fig. 2 Chris Lintz, Jim Word and Billy Harrison at
Landergin Mesa 1984.
Photo by Rolla Shaller

Page 5

Fig. 6 Chris Lintz gives his interpretation of the
excavations of Alibates Ruin No. 30 during a
field trip to the Alibates Ruins during the 50th
Annual Meeting of SWFAS in May of 2014.
Photo by Rolla Shaller

Fig. 4 Chris Lintz examining artifacts from the
Jack Allen Site 41HC219.
Photo by Rolla Shaller

Fig. 5 Chris Lintz presenting paper at the 50th
Annual Meeting of the Southwestern Federation
of Archeological Societies May 2014.
Photo by Panhandle Archeological Society

Fig. 7 The Jack Allen Ruin (41HC219)
Excavated 1969-1970 by WTSU
Anthropological Society. Project now in
progress.
File photo by Jack Allen

Page 6

