PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society

March Vol. 31, No. 3

The Panhandle Archeological Society will hold it's next meeting on
Wednesday March 16, 2011, at 7:00pm, at the Wildcat Bluff Nature
Center Science Building, 2301 N. Soncy Road, in Amarillo, Texas.
Our program will be presented by Paul Katz.

Irish Antiquities and Archaeoastronomy

President:
Paul Katz
Vice-President:
Jeff Indeck
Secretary:
Vacant

Treasurer:
Lisa Jackson
Publications:
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor:
Scott Brosowske

The Land of the Little People is characterized by giant
monuments of stone built throughout prehistory and history. This
talk will take you on a 5000-year tour of the Irish countryside,
beginning with the decorated high crosses and round towers of the
Early Christian period and proceeding back in time to the late
Stone Age passage graves built inside huge mounds. Some of these
passage graves were aligned to capture the light of the rising sun
on the day of the equinox or the solstice. The excavation and
restoration of Newgrange Tumulus, a World Heritage
Archaeological Site built around 3200 B.C., will be given
particular attention. Newgrange is the largest and most well-known
of the Irish passage graves and it was here that the astronomical
phenomenon was first recognized.
Dr. Paul Katz is the Curator of the Texas Pharmacy Museum, a
part of the Texas Tech School of Pharmacy in Amarillo, and an
Associate Professor in the Department of Pharmacy Practice. He
has held this position since 2000. On a part-time basis Dr. Katz
operates PRIAM, a cultural and natural resources consulting firm
based in Panhandle, Texas started by his late wife Dr. Susana Katz.
Dr. Katz has a bachelor's degree in Art History from Swarthmore
College and three graduate degrees in Anthropology from the
University of Kansas. Since then, he has conducted fieldwork,
taught at the college level, curated collections, and directed
museums in Kansas, Washington, Illinois, and Texas for 40 years.
Before moving to the Texas Panhandle in 1991, Dr. Katz was
Director of the Kampsville Archaeological Museum, a component
of the Center for American Archaeology in Kampsville, Illinois for
five years. More recently he was Director of the Carson County
Square House Museum in Panhandle, Texas, a position he held for
eight years. He is a past president of the Northwest Texas Museum
Association. He is currently President of the Panhandle
Archeological Society and President of Friends of Alibates Flint
Quarries National Monument.

Paul Katz

Inside this issue
Page 2: Minutes from
last month's meeting
Page 3-7: Landis Property
Excavations Yield Insights
Into Late Archaic and
Protohistoric Camps on
Southern High Plains
Page 8: PAS Member
Highlight, Announcements, and Upcoming
Events
Page 9: Stone Age Fair
Flyer

Page 2
Panhandle Archeological Society
Minutes of the February 16, 2011 Meeting
President Paul Katz called the meeting to order at 7:20 p.m. at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center. 15 members and
three guests were in attendance. These included Rozanna Pfeiffer, Chief of Interpretation at Lake Meredith and
Alibates; Richard Walters, Center for Big Bend Studies in Alpine; and Becky DeLeon, science teacher at Lamar
Elementary School in Amarillo.
The minutes of the January 19, 2010 meeting were approved unanimously; motion by Jeff, second by Gerry.
Lisa gave the Treasurer's report. The current operating balance is $1,924.24.
Rolla gave the Publication Committee report. The current checking account balance is $2,620.04, plus $5,000 in a
CD. Jeff will be scanning the two Pollyanna Hughes manuscripts, and Scott and Joe D. will evaluate them for
possible publication.
The 2011 Studer Banquet will be held on Saturday, December 17th from 6:00 - 10:00 in Hazlewood Hall at the
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum. It will be catered by the Stockyards. Despite these changes, the cost to
members will remain the same. Scott moved to formally approve this, seconded by Stacy. Approval was
unanimous.
The Pastimes editorial staff has prepared another excellent issue. All but 14 were distributed electronically,
including all the complimentary issues. The remaining 14 were copied and mailed by Dick Carter, using addresses
provided by Lisa. All involved were thanked for their efforts.
The PAS website is difficult to find. Bob Wishoff, the webmaster, informed us that it will take time for the URL
to appear in search engines. At this time, we appear as #8 on IE and not at all on Google. The web page can be
accessed at: http://www.txpanhandlearchaeology.org. It is recommended that this be bookmarked.
Rolla reported that the 2011 Southwestern Federation of Archaeological Societies annual symposium will be
hosted by the Concho Valley Archaeological Society on Saturday, April 9 at Fort Concho. Joe. D. will probably
present the PAS paper. Rolla and Paul are planning to attend as well.
Scott reported that the 2011 CAR Field School will be held from May 23 - June 10. The first two weeks will
investigate prehistoric sites, including Eastview and Chill Hill. The third week will be devoted to metal detecting at
historic sites. Registration is free to PAS members, and a catered meal plan is available. The enrollment is limited
to 50.
Scott also reported that there will be a Stone Age Fair at the museum in Perryton on Saturday, April 23rd from
10:00 - 5:00. Local collections will be displayed, including some exceptionally large and fine Paleoindian
collections. The public will have an opportunity to have artifacts identified and to meet local collectors. The PAS
will have a table for the sale of its publications.
Ms. Becky DeLeon, a science teacher at Lamar Elementary School in Amarillo, requested the participation of
PAS members in the annual Science Day at Lamar on April 15. Other representatives of the natural and physical
sciences participate (e.g., chemists, geologists), but archaeology has never been represented. Each discipline is
given a classroom, and groups of ~ 22 students rotate every 30 minutes from 8:30-2:00. During the discussion,
suggestions were made to have several stations, demonstrating such prehistoric activities as pottery making, tool
making, and corn grinding. Scott suggested making paintbrushes out of yucca fiber and then having the students
paint prehistoric rock art designs using projected examples. This idea has the advantages of involving the students
in a hands-on activity and minimizing the strain on the volunteers. The members voted to participate, with the
actual activity(ies) to be decided at the March meeting.
Paul announced that the next meeting will be held on Wednesday, March16 at 7:00 p.m. at the Wildcat Bluff
Nature Center. The guest speaker will be Paul Katz, who will present a special St. Patrick's Day talk on Irish
antiquities and archaeoastronomy. Joe Cepeda will speak on April 20 about the geology of the Texas Panhandle,
and Gerry Schultz will speak on May 18 about the paleontology of the Texas Panhandle.
The featured speaker for this meeting was Dr. Dan Kerr. He spoke about his ongoing research into the activities of
the Pastores, in particular the extensive and influential Romero family.
The meeting adjourned at 8:55 p.m.

Page 3
Landis Property Excavations Yield Insights Into Late Archaic and Protohistoric Camps
on Southern High Plains
J. Michael Quigg
TRC Environmental Corporation, Austin
Two well-defined cultural components near Amarillo, Texas, were investigated by the TRC Environmental
Corporation and have yielded important information about the people who inhabited the Southern High Plains
periodically over the last 2,500 years. Data recovery investigations were conducted at three archeological sites
(41PT185, 41PT186, and 41PT245) on the Landis property in Potter County, just west of Amarillo. The three
sites are within a 1.6-km-long, north-to-south section of upper West Amarillo Creek. This property was
previously managed by the U.S. Department of the Interior's Bureau of Land Management (BLM), which
funded these investigations. TRC, under contract to the BLM, conducted the fieldwork during fall 2007 and
fall 2008 (Quigg et al. 2010). The cultural resource investigations were prompted by the transfer of these
federal lands to the private sector, and were required under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 and the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations at 36 CFR Part 800.
The two-phase data recovery program conducted by TRC allowed for additional site assessments prior to fullscale, horizontal block excavations. TRC's initial assessment in fall 2007 isolated specific areas within each
site that appeared to have the best potential to yield significant information that would contribute to
understanding past events. During that time, a detailed geoarcheological investigation was conducted to
identify, document, and define the natural depositional processes in that part of the West Amarillo Creek
valley. This was done through the excavation of 47 backhoe trenches across the Landis property, both in
known sites and across selected terraces. A very complex Holocene alluvial history, represented by at least six
depositional units (designated A through F), was documented. The alluvial fills were nearly 6 m thick. Fill
thicknesses varied considerably, with most at least 4 m thick. About 60 percent of the Holocene record, the last
10,000 years, is represented in the project area. Specifically, a period of nearly 4,000 years, between (roughly)
8200 and 4300 B.P. during the mid-Holocene, was not represented in the depositional sequence in this part of
the valley.
continued on page 4

Figure 1. Unwashed Late Archaic Projectile Points from Locus
C at the Pipeline site (41PT185).

Page 4
The second season's excavations during fall 2008 focused on two sites. Locus C, at 41PT185, the Pipeline site,
was investigated with a 285 m² excavated block that targeted a shallowly buried, sloping Late Archaic
component. The horizontally extensive component actually represented two discrete Late Archaic occupations
located side by side in the same vertical zone. The more recent occupation toward the northern end of the
excavation block was radiocarbon-dated by four, 13C-corrected samples to roughly a 200-year period between
1550 and 1750 B.P. The older event, primarily across the middle and southern end, was radiocarbon-dated
between 2240 and 2540 B.P. based on 10, 13C-corrected radiocarbon dates. As a whole, this Late Archaic
component yielded 21 dart point fragments (Figure 1), 21 bifaces, 10 grinding slabs, eight scrapers, one mano,
roughly 2,500 pieces of lithic debitage, more than 5,000 bones, nearly 4,300 burned rocks, and 22 cultural
features. The features were dominated by burned rocks and included a few in-situ heating elements (Figure 2),
many burned-rock discard piles, and a bison skull. Almost no macrobotanical remains were preserved; therefore,
most radiocarbon dates were mostly derived from bison bones. One unique biface was a nearly complete cornertang knife made of Alibates and found under a 30-cm-diameter natural rock. The chipped stone tools and
debitage were dominated by Alibates, with some Tecovas material and a few obsidian flakes. The horizontal
artifact and feature distribution revealed general camp activities that centered on processing bison meat and bones
as well as cooking with burned rocks; no evidence of structures was observed. Of significance, starch grain
analysis revealed that wildrye grass (Elymus canadensis) seeds were collected, ground on the grinding slabs, and
then boiled using the burned rocks. Both Late Archaic occupations occurred during the fall, when bison meat and
grass seeds were collected and processed in preparation for the long winter ahead. The two nearly identical
occupations document repeated use of this specific locality and the valley during the fall for the collection and
processing of the same two primary resources.
continued on page 5

Figure 2. Intact Late Archaic Heating Element (Feature 8) in Locus C at the Pipeline
Site (41PT185).

Page 5
At 41PT186, the Corral site, one low alluvial terrace within the larger site revealed an isolated and sloping
occupation surface that varied in depth from 80-to-100 cmbs at the top of a buried soil. This well-defined and
deeply buried occupation was targeted, and a 144-m² block was hand-excavated. The occupation was directly
dated by three, 13C-corrected radiocarbon dates to between 200 and 300 B.P., documenting a rare Native
American Protohistoric event. This isolated event yielded very limited cultural materials in terms of quantity and
diversity, but the horizontal distribution of the five intact features and two knapping areas sheds considerable
light on human behavior during this period. The features included two well-defined, charcoal-filled basin
heating elements (hearths), a 1-m-diameter ash dump from the heating elements, a 20-cm-diameter cache of four
end scrapers, two edge-modified flakes, and two unworked flakes. Two separate lithic concentrations revealed
two isolated knapping areas where end scrapers were manufactured, one next to one of the heating elements. No
bifaces or diagnostic points were recovered, only six end scrapers, one metal tinkler cone, a few scattered burned
rocks, and animal bones. The relative lack of metal objects was surprising, since metal objects had been in the
region for at least 300 years. Butchered bison and deer bones document the meat resources procured. Starch
grain analysis on a limited suite of artifacts revealed that Canadian wildrye grass (Elymus canadensis) was also
part of the subsistence base. Alibates dominated the lithic debitage.
Investigations at 41PT245, the Pavilion site, targeted a sparse, roughly 1200 to 1400 B.P. occupation during
data recovery; however, the limited returns cut short the planned hand-excavation. The remaining efforts were
shifted to the other two sites.
During the data analyses phase, numerous technical analyses were conducted on suites of samples to gain
greater insights into past events. To document the specific ages of the features and events, 51 radiocarbon dates
were obtained on wood charcoal and bison bones. Other analyses included sourcing the 14 obsidian flakes from
the Late Archaic component (performed by the Berkeley Archaeological XRF Lab) and chert-sourcing studies by
the University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR). The latter involved Alibates and Tecovas materials that
were examined through instrumental neutron activation (INA) analyses. The results indicate these two materials
can be separated into distinct rock types.
In addition, Dr. Linda Perry, a research collaborator at the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History
performed starch grain analyses on burned rocks and stone tools to identify what plant resources were present
and used; Dr. Bruce Hardy, an associate professor of anthropology at Kenyon College, conducted high-powered
use-wear studies on the chipped stone tools to help define function; Dr. David Robinson, an independent
consultant in Austin, handled petrographic thin-section analysis on ceramic sherds to help identify what materials
were used in their construction; MURR conducted INA analyses on ceramic sherds to determine their chemical
signatures and their homogeneity; and Dr. Mary Malainey and Timothy Figol, independent consultants in
Winnipeg performed chemical (lipid residue) analysis that targeted burned rocks to help identify what foods were
cooked by these rocks.
Part of these investigations also analyzed a 5-m-tall deposit of alluvium in the bottom of the valley to examine
the depositional and environmental conditions that existed over the last 2,000 years, a timeframe that generally
corresponds with the occupational history of the sites (Figure 3). To help interpret these deposits, a variety of
technical analyses were conducted, including but not limited to pollen and phytolith analyses, diatom analysis,
stable carbon isotope analysis, and snail and shell identifications. This multidisciplinary approach toward one
depositional unit (Unit D), that dated roughly between 2000 and 430 B.P., revealed that West Amarillo Creek
alternated between a flowing stream with a sandy channel and a periodically dry pond/marsh. The first 500 years
of the deposits, dating roughly between 2000 and 1500 B.P., were characterized by a cool moist climate that
gradually changed to warm, dry conditions.
continued on page 7

Page 6

Figure 3. Five-m-Tall Alluvial Deposits used to Reconstruct the Paleoenvironment over the Last 2,000
Years.

Page 7

In summary, the 2008 investigations encompassed about 451 m² of hand excavations. Two of the three
targeted blocks yielded two intact and well-defined cultural components-a Protohistoric and Late
Archaic-and significant data used to address research questions. The rare Protohistoric assemblage was
meager by all accounts, containing only a single metal object with an otherwise limited prehistoric tool
assemblage; however, the identified cultural features reveal a continuation of similar activities often
documented in earlier prehistoric hunter-gatherer sites. The exceptional horizontal distribution of the
features provides insights into human behaviors-for instance, knapping activities next to heating
elements, cleaning and discarding ash from heating elements, and intentionally clustering bison bones.
The Late Archaic component adds considerable knowledge to our understanding of human populations
in the Southern High Plains. The documentation of people collecting, grinding and boiling wildrye grass
seeds is a first for this time period in this area. The detection of this gathered-grass-food resource
reveals at least one plant that was part of the diet in addition to bison meat, marrow, and grease.
Microwear analysis of a selected stone tool assemblage reveals an interesting tool-hafting technology
during the Late Archaic. The horizontal distribution of the burned rocks indicates an association
between the heating elements and the discarding of used rocks. The paleoenvironmental data derived
from the intensively sampled 5-m deep alluvial deposit refines our understanding of the fluctuation of
the environment over the last 2,000 years.
Highlights of the field investigations and laboratory analyses can be viewed in an exhibit in (Texas
Beyond History) web page, under Landis Project located in the Texas panhandle. From this same web
page one can down load the entire two volume report. The report can also be found on Bureau of Land
Management www.blm.gov/wo/st/en.html.
Reference
Quigg, J. Michael, Charles D. Frederick, Paul M. Matchen, and Kendra DuBois
2010
Landis Property: Data Recovery at Three Prehistoric Sites (41PT185, 41PT186,
and 41PT245) in Potter County, Texas. TRC Technical Report 150832. Manuscript on file,
TRC Environmental Corporation, Austin, and Bureau of Land Management, Santa Fe.

Page 8
PAS Member Highlight
1. Member's Name Mary Ruthe Carter
2. How long have you been a member of PAS? Since it's inception-1959
and of Norpan in 1957.
3. What first sparked your interest in archaeology? An uncle in
Cimmaron Co, Ok kept turning up artifacts in his field in the 30's. Later I
read Novels by S.S. VanDine set in Egypt that whetted my interest.
4. What is your best find or most interesting moment with PAS or with
archaeology in general? Probably seeing the fingerprints someone
hundreds of years ago left on a hearth rim. It was also exciting to dig with
Waldo Wedel and to meet other professional archaeologists and hear them
talk informally.

Mary Ruthe Carter

5. What would be your vision for PAS in the next ten years? That it would involve young people who
would be inspired to make archaeology their profession.
6. Tell us a little bit about yourself? I'm an 81 year old Great-Grandmother. I taught English 20 years and
then supervised English teachers for 8 more years. I like all sorts of needle work. I like to cook. I have a B.A.
from Panhandle State University and a M.A. from WTSU. Have done graduate work at Indiana State and
Texas Tech.

CAR 2011 Field School

Courson Archaeological Research will be conducting it's
2011 Field School from May 23rd to June 10th. The first
two weeks will be field excavations of Antelope Creek
phase sites near the Canadian River, and the third week
will consist of metal detecting historic period sites. PAS
members may attend at no cost, other than catered meals if
desired. For more information, check our website:
coursonarchresearch.com

"Can You Dig It?: Exploring and Growing at
the Buried City". Television Show on PBS
KACV channel 2.1 March 7, 2011 8:00 PM
This show will also air on March 11 at 4:30 PM
and on March 13 at 12:00 PM

Upcoming Events, and Announcements

.

.
.
.

33rd Annual Flint Hills Conference
Wichita State University, March 25th26th, 2011. For more info. contact:
donald.blakeslee@wichita.edu

Society For American Archaeology SAA 76th
Annual Meeting. Sacramento, California
March 30th - April 3rd, 2011
Southwest Federation Of Archaeological
Societies, April 9th, 2011,
San Angelo, Tx.
Perryton Stone Age Fair. Museum of
the Plains, Perryton, Texas. April 23,2011
10:00 am - 5:00 pm

