PASTIMES
The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

President
Paul Katz
Vice-President
Jeff Indeck
Secretary
Stacy Brown
Treasurer
Lisa Jackson
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Scott Brosowske

Vol. 31, No. 9, December 2011

PASTIMES

Page 1

Vol. 31, No. 9, Dec. 2011

In this issue

Page 2

Studer Banquet Guest Speaker ,
PAS Annual Studer Banquet
Meeting Information

Page 3-4

November Field Trip Reveiw: Borger /Stinett Area

Page 5-6

From The Civil War to the Southern Plains:

by Stacy Brown

This Colt Pistol has seen it’s Better Days!
by James Coverdale

Page 7

Minutes from the last meeting

Page 8

Announcements, Updates, Upcoming Events

Page 9

Studer Banquet Registration Form

On the Cover: Tecovas
Plainveiw found in
Beaver Co. Oklahoma

Page 2

The Panhandle Archaeological Society will hold it's Annual Studer Banquet on Saturday
December 17, 2011, from 6:00 pm to 10:00 pm, at Hazelwood Hall, Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum 2503 4th Ave., in Canyon,Texas. Our program will be presented
by Miles Gilbert.

Miles Gilbert

Tales of the Southern Plains Buffalo Hunters
ABSTRACT
Disregarding the Medicine Lodge Treaty of 1867, which set aside lands south of the Arkansas River as the hunting grounds of the Southern Plains Indians, Kansas buffalo hunters spilled south into what is now the Oklahoma
and Texas Panhandles in 1872 to ply their trade. Readers of Getting a Stand and the Encyclopedia of Buffalo Hunters
and Skinners have often inquired if there were other hunters and skinners who operated in the Texas
Panhandle, the Llano Estacado, Indian Territory or Southwestern Kansas that have received little attention from
historians. This presentation will examine the lives and adventures of a few of these individuals.
Biography
Miles Gilbert was born and raised in Pampa, Texas. He received his undergraduate and graduate degrees from
the University of Kansas. He served his post-doctorate at the Smithsonian Institution. From 1969 until 1992 he
served as an instructor, research associate, and lecturer at Southern Illinois University, University of MissouriColumbia, University of Wyoming, Northern Arizona University, and Yavapai Community College. Since then he has
worked as a cultural resources specialist, director of the Casa Malpais Archaeological Program, and as an archaeologist at the South Dakota State Archaeological Research Center. He has published numerous articles and five books
including Mammalian Osteology, Avian Osteology, Getting a Stand, and Encyclopedia of Buffalo Hunters and Skinners
Volumes I and II. His research interests include firearms and the American West.

November Field Trip Review:
Borger/Stinnett Area

Page 3

By Stacy Brown

PAS members, local landowners, and West Texas
A&M University students gathered early Saturday morning on November 12, 2011 anxious to visit some of the
best known archaeological sites around the area of
Borger and Stinnett, Texas. Over 20 people had the rare
opportunity to view several key sites in this region. PAS
member Bob Smith worked with local ranchers to gain
access to these privately owned sites, many of which he
personally worked on over thirty years ago. The sites
that were visited this day included an unnamed pastore
corral and dugout site, “Holden”, Tres Casas Grandes
(41HC36), and finally Zollars (41HC34).
The first site visited that day was a pastore corral and
dugout. Both the dugout and corral were built and occupied by New Mexico sheep herders known as pastores
sometime between late 1876 and 1886. The corral was
fashioned out of large caliche rocks forming a rectangle,
10.3 m by 14.0 m and 0.5 m to 1.0 m tall. During the
day the animals would be allowed to graze in the
surrounding area, but at night were brought back to the
safety of the corral. A short distance away was a large
rectangular dugout, 9.5 m by 4.3 m. Both structures
were built near the base of the surrounding cliffs. While
the footprint of these structures is still very clearly

defined, no surface artifacts were observed. It is
estimated that the sheep herders abandoned the area
around 1886 when they were driven out of the panhandle by ranchers.
The remaining sites visited that day were sites attributed to the Antelope Creek Phase. This is a little known
period of habitation occurring in the Texas and Oklahoma panhandles from A.D 1200-1500. Architecture
unique to this period was the use of horizontal and vertical stones lined together to form the base or outline of
the structure. Larger rectangular structures contain a
long central channel with a hearth, while the hearth is
typically located against the wall of the smaller circular
structures. It is hypothesized that these peoples were
semi-nomadic foragers who also practiced some
gardening. Cordmarked pottery is common at these
sites.
After a brief drive north, we arrived near the location
thought to contain an Antelope Creek Phase site known
as “Holden”. This site was to have been investigated by
Texas Tech University sometime between 1929 and
1932. After a 45 minute pedestrian survey, we were
unable to locate the site. The only artifact observed was
a single Tecovas flake.

Page 4
A lunch break was held prior to going to the next site. Everyone enjoyed the sunshine, company, and animated
discussion including but not limited to the area’s geology, biology, and of course archaeology. During the break,
Bob Smith and Scott Brosowske surveyed the best route to the next site. Upon their return, everyone loaded up
and headed for the largest site of the day.
Tres Casas Grandes (41HC36) is a large
Antelope Creek Phase site located on a
Creek consisting of over seven structures. Even though these structures
have been heavily potted through the
years, the outlines of the structures are
still visible. The structures ranged in size
from 4.0 m by 3.5 m to 7.6 m by 7.0 m.
The aspect of the site provided clear
view of all venues of approach as well as
the creek below possibly indicating it
could have been a tactical location.
Littered throughout the site were
quartzite cooking stones.

A partial

The remains of several structures can be seen in this photo. Some
observed on an eroded slope on the
of
the stones are still sitting on edge. Tres Casas Grandes site
northwest side of the site. While loading into vehicles to go to the next site, a
small Washita point made of Alibates was found near the road. Bob Smith stated that the property owners are very
interested in having PAS or some of its members map the site and its disturbed structures. They are also willing to
consider additional study of the site.
lies on a lower terrace and a nearby point adjacent to an unnamed tributary to Little Sandy Creek. Zollars is one of
several small Antelope Creek phase settlements in this valley. Zollars contains as many as nine small circular structures outlined in stone and measuring about 3.0 m by 3.0 m. Seven of these structures, including three that were
documented by Bob Smith in the 1980’s, but are currently buried, are present on the west side of the tributary. Four
of these structures had been previously excavated or potted and were clearly visible as circular depressions
outlined in stone. The two remaining small circular structures
were located atop a prominent rocky point east of the
unnamed tributary and the other structures. A small hammer
stone was found near this location.

impressed at the remarkable sites they had the privilege to visit.
Even though we ran out of daylight and did not visit all of the
sites in the area, we were able to view a wide variety of locations
in various states of preservation. We would like to thank Bob
Smith and the ranch owners for allowing us this special opportunity.
One of the small depressions at the Zollars site

Page 5

From the Civil War to the Southern Plains:
This Colt Pistol had seen its Better Days!
by James Coverdale

Historic period Native American campsites usually yield an interesting variety of artifacts. Some of the more
interesting artifacts, from an analytic perspective, are firearms or firearm parts. While conducting a survey in
Gray County, Texas for a proposed transmission line right-of-way, some parts for a Colt Pistol were recovered in a
historic period Native American campsite. While finding gun parts in such an encampment is not unusual, finding parts that have matching serial numbers is rare.
Designated as the New Model Holster Pistol, this popular sidearm was first produced by the Colt's Patented Fire
Arms Manufacturing Company in 1860. By the time the Colt Model 1860 with serial number 91556 had left the
factory in 1863, it was more commonly known as the cap and ball .44 caliber Colt's Army Model 1860 revolver.
Destined to be used by the Union Army during the conflict in the east, its life ended in the west on a rise near
McClellan Creek in the Texas Panhandle.
The Colt factory produced over 200,000 Model
1860 pistols between 1860 and 1873 in several
variants. The U.S. government purchased 129,184
for use during the Civil War. Serial number 91556
was made a few months before the government
contracts were completed late in 1863. The Colt
M1860 cap and ball pistol remained in service with
frontier cavalry units up to 1874 when it was
replaced by the Colt Model 1873 Single Action Army
in .45 caliber that used a metallic cartridge.
While this pistol is almost certainly a combat vet of
the Civil War issued to either Company L, 18th Pennsylvania Volunteer Cavalry, or Company I, 1st Maryland Volunteer Cavalry (records show that it fits in a
range of serial numbered Model 1860 Army pistols
that were issued to one or the other of these cavalry
The frame, cylinder pin, and hammer as found. This Colt
units) it became lost or discarded after it was disaspistol was still in surprisingly good shape for it’s age
sembled in the camp of a group of Native Americans
sometime before or during the Red River War of
1874.

Page 6

The serial number 91556

On this survey several sites were located including this particular one that
yielded several parts for a Colt pistol. These parts are a steel pistol frame and
associated parts and the trigger guard. Some of the other 70 artifacts recovered
at this site might tell us more about the occupants of this site and when it was
occupied once analysis is completed. A short list of some of these other artifacts
include two metal arrowpoints, arrowpoint production debris, tin cone tinklers,
metal awls, a fragment of a flat file, a .56-56 Spencer cartridge case modified for
use as an ornament, and brass, German silver, and tin ornaments.

The steel frame is from a Colt Army Model 1860 of the 3 screw variety that has the cut outs on either side of the
recoil shield for a shoulder stock that could be attached to the pistol. There are still several parts attached to the
frame. These parts include the hammer, hammer roller and pin, cylinder pin, and the hand and spring which are held
in place by the hammer. The pistol hammer is still attached, but the hammer screw head has been twisted off. All
other screws had been removed prior to being lost or discarded.
The cylinder pin is of particular interest in that it is damaged by being bent. This damage appears to have happened while the pistol was complete and before it was disassembled. Colt pistols were known to be prone to this
type of damage due to the fact that they did not have a top strap over the cylinder. This error was corrected on the
Colt SAA M1873 making it one of the strongest Colt pistols ever produced. The bend in the cylinder pin would have
made it difficult to remove the cylinder. The cylinder pin is marked with the last four digits of the 91556 serial number
that appears on the frame. The makers mark "Colt's Patent," which appears in two lines on the left hand side of the
frame near where the loading lever joins the frame, is only faintly visible due to pitting.
Approximately 3.0 m away from where the frame was discovered, the
brass (bronze) trigger guard was recovered. It is in very good shape with
several ordnance sub-inspector marks and the serial number clearly
visible. It is marked “44 CAL” on the left side of the trigger guard near the
left rear trigger guard screw hole. Lower down on the left side of the
handgrip part of the trigger guard is stamped with a small "B" by a parts
inspector. On the right hand side of the trigger guard hand grip is a
larger stamped letter "C". This larger "C" may have been placed on this
part to show that it was inspected and then marked as condemned by
the inspector. The mainspring and mainspring screw have been
removed from the trigger guard. Near where the front trigger guard
The trigger guard with markings
screw hole is located is the serial number 91556 just above a small "O"
sub-inspector’s mark.
Unfortunately, knowing exactly how these pistol parts came to be in a Native
American campsite in Texas may never be fully answered. Research shows that
the Native Americans came into possession of firearms in many ways. At the
conclusion of the Civil War soldiers were offered the opportunity to purchase
their issued pistols and accoutrements for the sum of $8.00 (when new the pistol
had cost the $13.75). Could this Model 1860 have been carried west by a former
soldier seeking adventure or an opportunity for a better life? Maybe it was sold,
traded, stolen or captured somewhere on the frontier? Was it given to Native
Americans as an annuity goods payment for signing a treaty? Claims were also
made by some military officers that some Indian agents and traders were providing Native Americans with as many weapons, lead, powder, and caps as the IndiThe matching serial number
ans wanted during the Indian Wars. Whatever the case may be, bent and disassembled, these parts of a Colt's Army Model 1860 have seen their better days.

PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Page 7

Minutes of the November 16, 2011 Meeting
-President Paul Katz called the meeting to order at 7:00 p.m. at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center. Eighteen members
were in attendance.
-The next meeting of the PAS will be the Studer Banquet held on Saturday, December 17, 2011 from 6:00 - 10:00 p.m.
at Hazelwood Hall, Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum.
PROGRAM
-Paul introduced the evening speaker, PAS member Donna Otto. She spoke of the U.S. Forest Service’s (USFS) volunteer archaeological and historical preservation program, Passport in Time (PIT). Donna provided an excellent power
point presentation and lecture on how this program utilizes volunteers to assist professional USFS archaeologists
conducting surveys, excavations, rock art restoration, analysis and curation of artifacts. Donna concluded her
presentation focusing on her experiences with the PIT program. Her lecture was a fine example of public agencies
and private volunteers working together to preserve archaeological sites on public lands.
BUSINESS MEETING
-The business meeting began at the conclusion of Donna’s lecture. The minutes of the October 26, 2011 meeting
were unanimously approved.
-Lisa gave the treasurer’s report. The current operating balance is $1,681.22. Several checks for member dues are
pending deposit.
-Rolla submitted the Publication Committee report in writing. The previous checking account balance was
$1,336.60. Last month’s transactions included the following:
•
$430.00 in book sales
•
$38.00 cash on hand
-The current balance is $1,804.60
-The Amarillo National Bank certificate of deposit balance is $5,310.37.
-Ten books were sold at the annual TAS convention. Several ideas to increase book sales were proposed including
advertising in the TAS bulletin or having Bob Wishoff publish a book review of the Canyon Club City Cave Report.
-The next proposed publication will be a collection of articles that examine the use of Alibates in the Texas panhandle and/or the Alibates Quarries.
-An inventory of past publications will be conducted within the month.
-Questions were raised as to who stocks the National Park Service’s book collections and book stores.
NEW BUSINESS
-Alvin Lynn presented a list of nominations for 2012 officers. Donna Otto is nominated for President, Jeff Indeck for
Vice-President, Lisa Jackson as Treasurer, Stacy Brown as Secretary, and Rolla Shaller for Publications.
-Scott Brosowske requested clarification of the duties of the PAS President and Vice President. Paul Katz, Jeff Indeck,
and Rolla Shaller provided the requested information.
-Motion was for acceptance of the nominations was made by Rolla Shaller, and was unanimously accepted.
OLD BUSINESS
-Scott Brosowske provided an overview of PAS field trip held on November 12th. Over 20 people attended the trip
that included site visits to a pastore corral and dugout, Holden, Tres Casas Grande, and Zollar. Due to oil field
construction we were not able to locate the Holden Site. Several students from West Texas A&M attended the field
trip in addition to PAS members and local land owners.
-Suggestions for future field trips were requested. Gaining admittance to Rocky Dell to view the rock art was
suggested for January, 2012. Alvin Lynn volunteered to talk to the property owners about gaining access. Alvin
reminded members that due to drought conditions, property owners are very hesitant to allow vehicles in pastured
areas.
-Paul Katz reported that during the TAS convention the date and site for the 2012 TAS field school was announced.
Next year’s location will be Devils River State Park and will consist of flat land surveys, rock art surveys, and rock
shelter surveys. The field school will begin the first week in June, 2012.

Page 8
-Alvin Lynn reported that all preparations for the Studer Banquet are in place. Jeff Indeck requested that a head
count of attendee’s be provided to West Texas A&M as soon as possible to allow for adequate dining accommodations. Auction items are still being requested. Accommodations for the guest speaker were discussed including
hotel and transportation.
-Paul Katz talked to Bob Wishoff about the management of the PAS website. Due to illness, Bob had not been able
to update the website as often as he liked and was very regretful that he had fallen behind maintaining the site.
Bob stated that all provided information will be posted within 1-2 days of receipt.
-Jeff Indeck wanted to clarify that the Studer Banquet was open to the public. General advertisement to the public
was discussed including the Amarillo Globe newspaper, High Plains Public Radio, and local radio stations.
-Rolla Shaller announced that the THC steward, Doug Wilkens, was now also the regional director for region one.
-Requests for January speakers were proposed. The Boys Ranch Historian was suggested. Any additional suggestion may be submitted to Paul Katz.
-The meeting was adjourned at 8:47p.m.

Anouncements, Updates, and Upcoming Events
Panhandle Archaeological Society Annual Studer Banquet
Decenber 17, 2011 from 6:00 - 10:00 pm
Hazelwood Hall; Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
January 18, 2012 at 7:00 pm
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

SPECIAL NOTICE: This is a reminder for all members of PAS to
bring some items to be used for the silent auction
at the Studer Banquet.

