PASTIMES
The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

President
Donna Otto
Vice-President
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Mary Ruthe
Carter
Treasurer
Pamela Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter
Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

1

Volume 34 No. 8 November 2014

Table of Contents

Minutes of the Last Meeting

Page 3

Speaker for Next Meeting: Dallas Ward

Page 4

Deer Hide Painting

Page 4 (a)

Adobe Walls October 4th

Pages 5-6

Caprock Canyons October 18

Pages 7-8

Fannin Middle School History Fair October 18

Pages 8(a) -11

TAS Annual Meeting October 24-26

Page 12

From the Editor’s Desk

October has been a rich month for History and Pre-History. 1) The Epic achievement of Alvin Lynn and the many
anonymous souls who assisted him, 2) The First Annual affair at Caprock Canyons, 3) the Fannin History Fair, and
finally 4) the TAS annual meeting.
If you haven't read Alvin Lynn's handsome book, Kit Carson and the First Battle of A dobe Walls, -- well, what can I
say? The atmosphere of the presentation was remarkable. We could almost see the troops and Indians and hear the
sounds of battle on that lonesome hillside. Especially when the Mountain Howitzers went off!
As an occasional genealogist, I appreciated the presence of John Carson and James Coverdale. Nothing can bring a scene to reality quite as much as a connection to real people does. This is not a fairy tale, or a page in one of those dull
history texts you were forced to read in the classroom. This event actually took place, right here where you're standing.
BTW there was a group of Kiowa dancers, but I didn't get a picture of them.
Of course all was not perfect, and at the risk of being a nitpicker, I have to add that the sound system left something to
be desired. Outdoors is not like an enclosed auditorium. It would have helped if the (sometimes inexperienced) speakers
had spoken directly into the microphone.
I didn't attend the Caprock Canyons event because of the obvious conflict in scheduling, but I do know that the First
Anything is a major achievement. 300 visitors makes you blink your eyes! I think I
might have particularly enjoyed the presentation on the Folsom culture. Congratulations to all concerned.
Congratulations too, to the people at Fannin Middle School. What a rich assemblage of
participants, many in appropriate dress! Although I well understand the difference between History (What do the documents say?) and Archaeology (Where's the stuff?) I
regard the difference between History and Prehistory as an artificial concept. To me,
human life flows on from one generation to the next, pretty much as the exhibits at
Fannin did. As we demonstrated our manos and metates, we could smell hotdogs and
chilli cooking down the hall.
Rolla Shaller represented us at the TAS Annual Meeting. Being a man of few words, he
sent in a page of photos. Period.
There won’t be a regular meeting in December of course. See you at the Studer Banquet!

2

Selfie

PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes October 15, 2014
The meeting was called to order by President Donna Otto at 7:00 p.m. at the Downtown Amarillo Library second floor
Board Room. There were 19 members and 3 guests in attendance.
The following upcoming meetings and events were announced:
Oct. 17-19

PaleoAmerican Odyssey, Santa Fe, NM

Oct. 18

Fannin School History Fair
Caprock Canyons State Park Archaeology Fair - See Newsletter Information

Oct. 24-26

TAS Annual Meeting, San Marcos - See TAS Bulletin

Oct. 25

The West Texas Trails Meeting, Hope Center, Quitaque, TX

Oct 29-Nov1

Plains Anthropological Society Conference, Fayetteville, AR

Nov. 19

PAS meeting, Downtown Amarillo Library, 7 p.m.

Dec. 13

Floyd Studer Banquet

Jan. 6-11, 2015

Society for Historical Archeology Annual Meeting, Seattle, WA

Minutes of the September meeting were approved as printed in the October Newsletter.
TREASURER’S REPORT: Pam Allison reported a balance of $ 3,423.49. The report was accepted.
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE REPORT; Rolla Shaller reported a balance of $1,416.17 in the money market account
and $5, 034.62 in the CD. The report was accepted.
OLD BUSINESS:

. SWFAS Transactions (see publication)
. Newsletter Editor- Beryl Roper Hughes needs member input for articles. Thanks again to Jerry
Leatherman for his work.
NEW BUSINESS:

. Studer Banquet - It was decided to not have the Banquet at the Museum due to restrictions on food
service. It was moved and seconded that the Executive Committee make

the decision as to where the Ban-

quet will be.
. Information on the upcoming Quitaque Meeting was presented.
. Alvin Lynn reported on the Abode Walls Centennial last weekend. There were approximately 300
in attendance on a beautiful fall Saturday. A copy of the program is filed in the PAS Minutes Book.
PROGRAM:
Member Alvin Lynn presented “Perils and Pleasures of Writing a Book.” In the 15 years of writing, he
experienced both fun and trials. He advocates “walking" the subject - both literally (he walked 200 miles from Fort Bascom to Adobe Walls) and in libraries, archives, computer, and personal interviews. Once in the field, he warned of actual physical problems: gnats, deer flies, grass burrs, rattlesnakes. Then there is writing, rewriting, more rewriting, and
finally, defending your writing to the publisher. “Kit Carson and the First Battle of Adobe Walls” is the result of Alvin’s
journey and is already in the second printing.
In the question and answer period, Alvin said he had been able to right some errors of past publication, and that
24 of the 26 ranches he had walked, had donated the artifacts he found to institutions.
A former student of Alvin’s from Dumas made a request for help in getting his Scout troop certified for Archaeological
Badges.

The meeting ended with Alvin autographing copies of his book.
3

Next Meeting: Wednesday November 19, 2014, 7:00 p.m.
Amarillo Downtown Library, 2nd floor Board Room.
Please join us for dinner at 5:30, Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor.
Our speaker will be Dallas Ward.
Abstract
In 1903, JF Maxey and his family moved to Garza County, Texas to
Dallas Ward
establish a new homestead – taking advantage of the 1895 “four section act.”
The Maxey family spent 11 years at the homestead where they farmed and raised
stock. In 1914, Maxey sold his holdings to a local rancher and moved 5 1/2
miles away establishing a new residence near Graham. Maxey moved his house
onto the new property were it now resides. Maxey later covered the structure in rocks he collected, most likely at
the new location. As part of the Lubbock Lake Landmark regional research program, the original homestead was
surveyed and several historic trash features were excavated. In addition, multi-image photogrammetry was used to
document the rock house and interviews of Maxey’s three granddaughters that reside in the Post community were
conducted. The importance of this research is that it provides an example of early homesteading in western Texas.
Digital aspects are incorporated to enhance site interpretation.
Biography
I have lived in Lubbock, Texas my whole life and graduated in 2009 from Texas Tech University with a
double major in History and Anthropology. I am currently a candidate for a Master of Sciences in Heritage Management with a minor in Museum Sciences pending the completion of my thesis work on ranching heritage. I am
the staff historic archaeologist for the Lubbock Lake Landmark regional research program. My research interests
are late 19th and early 20th century American and Texas history, historical archaeology, early settlement, and West
Texas Ranching History.

Deer Hide Painting
by James Coverdale — Pago Doti

This Kiowa deer hide painting depicts the November 1864 Kit
Carson led attack on the tipi village of former chief of the Kiowa
tribe Douhasan aka Little Bluff. The location of the village is
shown where the Canadian river and Carson creek meet. Another
indication of the location is the red bluff on the north side of Carson creek. The Kiowa tribe previously held a Sundance near this
location. The hide painting shows the beginning of the attack in
the lower left corner. In the morning the troops fired on the village
and then made their way through the village after a fierce skirmish
with Kiowa warriors . This is shown by the tracks of horses and
the arrows and bullets flying left and right. Women and children
are shown as fleeing the attack by heading north and hiding in the
sand hills near Carson creek. The path of the troops is seen moving through the village and off the hide painting in
the upper right corner. The trail of the troops reappear just above the earlier tracks. Now retreating back to and
crossing Carson creek after the perilous battle at the old Adobe Walls trading post. Which was four miles further
east down the Canadian river. Carson's command returned to burn the tipi village they had overrun in the morning.
Along with winter food supplies and lodges the soldiers also destroyed a wagon in the village which belonged to
Douhasan . The soldiers crossed Carson creek and deployed their two mountain howitzers on some sand hills north
of the village to support the soldiers who were destroying the village.

4

Trip to the Site of the First Battle of Adobe Walls, 1864—October 4, 2014
The Battle of Adobe
Walls was fought here November 25, 1864, when
Colonel Christopher (Kit)
Carson (1809-1868) with a
few companies of United
States troops under the protection of the adobe walls
attacked a band of hostile
Kiowa and Comanche Indians and killed over 60
braves. This was “Kit” Carson’s last fight.

After 150 years, these two
men, descendants of the
principles of the battle,
were able to meet here in
the spirit of camaraderie.
No more “whites” and
“Indians;” just two Americans.

James Coverdale

John Carson

Great-great grandnephew of

Great-grandson of Kit Carson.

Douhasan.
(Note imaginative
speakers’ stand.)

Alvin Lynn

Crowd Shot

Wearing blanket presented to him by
the Kiowa.

About 300 people

5

Clive Siegle, George Elmore and their crew placing the Mountain Howitzers.

The Howitzers must have contributed immensely to winning the battle.

And

Four busloads came from Amarillo; others from various places, mostly Texas and Oklahoma .

6

CAPROCK CANYONS STATE PARK
FIRST ANNUAL ARCHEOLOGY FAIR
Caprock Canyons State Park held its first Archeology Fair at the Visitors Center, just a few miles north of
Quitaque, on Saturday, October 18. The event was well-planned and well-coordinated by Le’Ann Pigg,
Park Interpreter and Volunteer Coordinator.
There were two components to the event. Exhibits, demonstrations, and activities were set up all around
the parking lot outside the Visitor Center. These included tipi building and Native American games,
flintknapping, prehistoric and historic artifact identification, bison parts and products, native plants, Native American costumes and traditions, and an extensive display of artifacts from the recently established
Comanchero Canyons Museum in nearby Quitaque.
Inside the pavilion attached to the Visitors Center, programs were presented every hour. These included
Native American storytelling, the Folsom culture, the Coronado Expedition, native plants, and the Comanchero trade.
The fair was well attended by local residents and visitors from as far away as Midland. The estimated attendance is close to 300. PAS members were well represented as presenters, exhibitors, and visitors. This
will definitely become an annual event during Texas Archeology Month.

Entrance to Caprock Canyons
State Park Visitors' Center

L’Ann Pigg, Fair Coordinator,
Introduces Dr. Stance Hurst.

Bernice Blasingame, Palo Duro
S.P., demonstrates bison products.

Ed Day demonstrates flintknapping.

7

Jerry Leatherman at his exhibit.

Tony Lyle, TPWD Regional Archaeologist, and Jerry Leatherman.

Native American Games

Tipi Building

Fannin Middle School History Fair — October 18, 2014

8

Dick, Joe and Beryl

Even the littlest ones

Oversee the corn grinding.

enjoy grinding the corn
to feed their families!

Dick and Rolla

We don’t discriminate
on the basis of age or sex, but we suspect
that then as now, food preparation was
mostly women’s work.

Manos, mutates and querns are still in use in some parts of North America. We don’t know who those
first inhabitants were, where they came from, or really how and when they got here.

American Indians,
or Native Americans, displaced
the earliest arrivals.

9

Indians in turn were displaced by the Europeans, Africans and Asians. Prehistory turned to History.

Firearms

Buffalo hunters.

Keith Latham

Joe D. Rogers

Blacksmiths

Carpenters and woodworkers of all kinds.

Cowboys

Farmers

Flint Chippers

Joe D. Rogers

Weavers

and Homemakers

Entertainers
Jugglers

Fiddles, Washboard,
Guitar and all.

10

Scots-Irish piper

Independence —Constitution

Wes Phillips

A new Nation.

Confederate

World Wars

Trip to Washington D.C.
Raising money for 21 students
to visit our nation’s capital.

The History Fair was well-attended and did a great job!
Rumor has had it that this would be the last year. We were thrilled to discover that that idea is false.
There will be another one next year, and no doubt PAS will be involved .

11

TAS Annual Meeting
San Marcos, October 24-26, 2014

Embassy Suites
Sure beats camping out!

12

