PASTIMES
The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

President
Donna Otto
Vice-President
Jeff Indeck
Secretary
Stacy Brown
Treasurer
Lisa Jackson
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Scott Brosowske

Vol. 32, No. 1, January 2012

PASTIMES

Page 1

Vol. 32, No. 1, Jan. 2012

In this issue

Page 2

January Meeting Guest Speaker ,
January Meeting Information

Page 3-6

A Study of Alibates Silicified Dolomite from a
Secondary Gravel Source
Scott D. Brosowske

Page 7-8

2011 Floyd V. Studer Banquet
Stacy L. Brown

Page 9

Announcements, Updates, Upcoming Events

On the front cover: A Texas
horned lizard at Alibates
National Park. Photo by Nathalie
Nanayakkara

Page 2

The Panhandle Archaeological Society will hold it's next meeting on Wednesday
January 18, 2012, at 7:00 pm, at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center Science Building,
2301 N. Soncy Road, in Amarillo, Texas. Our program will be presented by Jerry
Leatherman.

Jerry Leatherman

The Rock Creek Skirmish: Colonel Ranald S. Mackenzie’s Maneuvers
in Briscoe County, Texas
Abstract
The climactic battle of the Red River War of 1874 occurred on the morning of September 28 when Colonel R.S.
Mackenzie led the 4th Cavalry down a steep trail into Palo Duro Canyon and attacked villages of the Comanche,
Kiowa and Cheyenne tribes. He captured a horse herd of around 1,500 and drove them back up on top of the
Caprock where he had them killed to prevent the Indians from recapturing the herd as they had done in
Mackenzie’s 1872 Campaign. The night before this Palo Duro attack the Indians had attacked Mackenzie’s camp
with the same intent, putting the enemy afoot in late fall in a hostile country. This event is known as the Rock Creek
Skirmish. This presentation will discuss this event and recent fieldwork conducted to shed light on this military
engagement.
Biography
At the age of 14 G. D. “Jerry” Leatherman moved with his family to San Angelo and then to Hereford two years
later in 1963. He graduated from Hereford High School in 1965 and attended West Texas State University in 196566. His work history includes nine years with an aerial application company (began at 16 as a pesticide dust loader
in Hereford), as assistant manager in Dalhart, and then as manager in Canadian and Wheeler. He farmed for 4 years
in Dumas, served as editor of the newspaper, and community relations liason for the hospital district. He also
owned a photography business, real estate business, and a Borden’s Milk distributorship. He has worked for a
number of years as an independent business consultant and is presently working in Silverton as a project development consultant for Shell WindEnergy, completing a six year contract in January. He has been married to the
former Sandra Huckabee for 44 years and they have two sons.

Page 3

A Study of Alibates Silicified
Dolomite from a Secondary
Gravel Source
Scott D. Brosowske

A

libates silicified dolomite is one of the most commonly recovered tool stone types at prehistoric sites of
the Southern High Plains. While this is most certainly
true at most sites, the extent of its geographical distribution and the overall percentage of Alibates in lithic
assemblages can vary considerably through time and
across space. While this article briefly examines some
of these issues, it focuses primarily on character of
Alibates cobbles procured from secondary sources.
This study provides a description of a sample of
Alibates tool stone obtained from a gravel source
approximately 80 km downstream from the primary
sources near Fritch, Texas. This information helps
clarify the potential value and limitations of Alibates
tool stone procured from secondary sources.
Bedrock sources of Alibates silicified dolomite are
exposed on uplands along tributaries of the Canadian
River in the central Texas panhandle. The best known
source area is limited to a long, narrow horizontal
outcrop approximately 1200 m long by 200 m wide
between Turkey and Alibates creeks (see Shaeffer
1958:189-190). Here, within the present boundaries
of the Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument,

hundreds of quarry pits and production debris piles
demonstrate extensive use of this resource (Figure 1).
Bedrock sources are also found north of the river along
Plum Creek and Devil’s Canyon. These latter areas
apparently contain tool stone of poorer quality and lack
evidence for quarrying (see Bowers 1975; Shaeffer
1958: 190).
Although Alibates typically dominates lithic assemblages at sites near the quarries, other locally available
tool stone, particularly Tecovas jasper and quartzites
and cherts procured from the Ogallala formation, were
frequently relied upon by groups to the west, north, and
northeast of bedrock sources. These materials may
comprise up to 20% to 70% of lithic assemblages at
these sites. Downstream from the Alibates quarries,
high terrace benches overlooking the Canadian River
floodplain often contain cobbles of Alibates with stream
rolled surfaces (Banks 1990; Wyckoff 1993). As such,
these localities also represent sources of locally available knappable tool stone. The following discussion
provides a description of Alibates cobbles collected
from one of these secondary sources.

Page 4

Figure 1 Map Showing Alibates Bedrock Sources and Cobble Collection Locality
In February 2011 a sample of 48 Alibates cobbles
were collected on a high upland remnant near the
confluence of Couch Creek and the Canadian River in
northeastern Roberts County, Texas (Figure 1). This
locality is 77.8 km northeast of the Alibates quarries.
The collection strategy was random and was biased
toward collecting the largest cobbles available at the
locality. All of the specimens collected were easily iden-

tified as Alibates by visual inspection. A total of two
person hours was spent collecting this small sample.
While the frequency of cobbles observed at the locality
was lower than expected, they included the full range of
color variations known for this tool stone (e.g., gray,
maroon, tan, pink, cream, dark brown, and banded
combinations of these colors). Metric attributes for the
cobbles collected are provided in Table 1.

Table 1 Metric Attributes for Alibates Cobbles in Study Sample

Page 5

Using the Wentworth scale as a guide, only 28 items in
the sample are actually small cobbles; the remainder are
coarse gravels (N=20). By definition, gravels range in
size from 2 mm to 64 mm (0.079 to 2.5 inches) in diameter and cobbles are 64 to 256 mm (2.5 to 10.1 inches)
in diameter. The shapes of the cobbles and gravels
within the sample vary considerably with most items
being either subangular or subrounded (Figure 2). One
cobble (B8) was distinctly tabular. The average size of
the specimens are 68.4 mm in maximum length, 49.9
mm in maximum width, 30.0 mm in maximum thickness,
and 122.9 g in weight. The maximum length ranged
from 37.0 mm to 104.6 mm.
The exterior surfaces of the specimens in the sample
are characterized by heavy polishing and weathering and
a light to heavy patina. Many specimens exhibit
evidence of battering and fracturing caused during transport and deposition. No chalky cortex was observed on
any specimens. Each of the cobbles/gravels in the
sample was inspected to determine if they were suitable
for manufacturing usable flakes or bifaces. Only 10 or
20.8% of the specimens were classified as good quality

(i.e., Specimens G9 through G18). The maximum length
of these items ranged from 65.5 mm to 99.0 mm with an
average of 79.8 mm. The remaining 38 (79.2%) were
marked by frost fractures, inclusions or other flaws (i.e.,
B9 through B46). These specimens were graded as poor
quality as they tended to shatter or crack unpredictably
when tested with a hammerstone.

Figure 2 Alibates Specimens from the Study Sample
(Note: Scale =15 cm)

Page 6
This brief study provides some important insights into
Alibates tool stone obtained from secondary sources.
First, the amount of good quality material from the
collection locality was very low; only about one in five
specimens were suitable for the production of small
bifaces or flakes. Second, the small size of knappable
cobbles and gravels would have limited the size and
type of tools that could be produced. Considering both
good and poor quality specimens in the sample, the
largest cobble encountered was only about 105 mm in
length with an average of 68.4 mm. Although small, the
latter size is well within the range needed for the
production of arrowpoints and small dart points
common to the region. Lastly, this study emphasizes
the superior quality of Alibates tool stone obtained
from quarry contexts. In most cases, the quality of
specimens obtained from gravel contexts was poor as a
result of the effects of weathering and freezing and
thawing.

What remains unclear from this study is whether we
can assume that larger, better quality cobbles of
Alibates tool stone can be found closer to bedrock
sources or that cobbles are more numerous upstream
from the collection locality. Likewise, can it be
expected that fewer cobbles of smaller size and poorer
quality are found downstream? While this remains
uncertain, several cobbles of Alibates tool stone
obtained from secondary sources were recently
donated to Courson Archaeological Research for their
comparative collection. Unfortunately, the provenience of these items is not known. These specimens
represent very high quality tool stone with little or no
frost fractures and few inclusions. The maximum
length of these items range from 125 mm to 200 mm. I
would venture to guess that they were recovered somewhere near the Alibates quarries.

Bibliography
Banks, Larry
1990 From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A Review of Lithic Sources in the TransMississippian South, the Southern Plains, and Adjacent Southwest.
Oklahoma
Anthropological Society Memoir No. 4, Norman.
Wyckoff, Don G.
1993 Gravel Sources of Knappable Alibates Silicified Dolomite. Geoarchaeology 8:35-58.

Bowers, Roger L.
1975 Petrography and Petrogenesis of the Alibates Dolomite and Chert (Permian), Northern Texas
Panhandle of Texas. Unpublished M.A. thesis, Department of Geology, University of Texas at Arlington.
Shaeffer, J. B.
1958 The Alibates Flint Quarry, Texas. American Antiquity 24:189-191.

Page 7

2011 Floyd V. Studer Banquet
Stacy L. Brown

T

he 34th Annual Floyd V. Studer Banquet was held
December 17th at the Panhandle-Plains Historical
Museum in Canyon, Texas. This is the highlight event
for the Panhandle Archaeological Society (PAS) that
has been eagerly planned and anticipated throughout
the year.
PAS Members and their guests began arriving shortly
after 6 p.m. and made their way to the Hazelwood
Room located on the second floor of the PanhandlePlains Historical Museum. The museum was aglow,
cheerfully decorated for the holiday season, putting
everyone in the mood for a festive evening. Everyone
enjoyed the social hour, catching up on the latest
events as well as perusing the wide variety of items
donated for the auction. The total number of members
and guests attending this year’s event totaled 43
people.
A benediction was offered by PAS member Dick Carter
before the meal was served. This year’s fine meal was

catered by Amarillo’s Stockyard Restaurant and
included a succulent pot roast, roasted vegetables,
rolls, green salad, and homemade cobbler. After everyone had eaten, full and happy, the evening program
began.
Dr. Miles Gilbert was this year’s guest speaker. A
native of Pampa, Texas, Miles has worked as an
instructor and author around the country. While he has
participated extensively in the field of osteology, Miles
has always had a passion for the American West and
firearms. Following this passion, he has published
several books focusing on the subject of buffalo hunters, including Getting a Stand, and Encyclopedia of
Buffalo Hunters and Skinners, Volumes I and II. It was
on the subject of Texas Panhandle buffalo hunters that
his evening lecture focused on. He entertained the
audience with a power point presentation and personal
stories of buffalo hunters that plied their trade from
Dodge City, Kansas to the Texas Panhandle and Eastern New Mexico.

Page 8
During his lecture, Miles brought the audience’s attention to a nearby
cabinet where several weapons were displayed. A .45 Caliber Sharps
rifle owned by “Uncle” Dick Wooten of Raton Pass fame, and a 10 gauge
shotgun were brought in by Dr. Gilbert. Also on display was a .40-90
Sharps rifle owned by John Wesley Mooar, a sharpening steel and corkscrew bottle opener brought by the Museum of Texas Tech University.
Mooar’s rifle was particularly interesting due to the fact it is one of a very
few rifles that can be documented from the manufacturer to its owner
and final destination on the Great Plains in the hands of a very capable
buffalo hunter. PAS President Paul Katz presented Miles with a copy of
Brett Cruse’s book Red River War in gratitude for making the trip to give
PAS this fine presentation.
Outgoing President Paul Katz introduced the incoming 2012 PAS
Officers; President Donna Otto, Vice President Jeff Indeck, Treasurer
Lisa Jackson, Publication Committee Chairman Rolla Shaller and Secre- Bob Smith and Dempsey Malaney visit
tary Stacy Brown. In appreciation for his two years of service as PAS with Miles Gilbert after his program
President, Donna Otto presented Paul with a plaque from the PAS membership.
Wrapping up the evening’s event was the raffle and auction. Members had been
bidding on a variety of donated items throughout the evening, including books, publications, and posters. Mammoth molar castings, a brass magnifying glass, a beaded
spear point, and other items were also donated. Some hand crafted items that were
donated this year an alabaster celt and war club head made by James Coverdale.
Other hand crafted items included a wooden whimmy diddle made by Dick Carter.
Bidding was fast and furious and brought in a total of $685.52 in funds to the PAS
coffers.
Everyone in attendance was in agreement that this year’s events was one of the
best in recent memory and are eagerly making plans for next year’s event. Hope to
see you there!
The Firearms that were
on display during the
program

The audience enjoying the speaker and auction

Get those tickets ready folks!

Page 9

Anouncements, Updates, and Upcoming Events
The Society for Historical Archaeology Annual Meeting
Baltimore, Maryland January 4 - 8, 2012
http://www.sha.org/

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
January 18, 2012 at 7:00 pm
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
February 15, 2012 at 7:00 pm
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeolo

Society for American Archaeology Annual Meeting

Memphis, Tennessee April, 18 - 22, 2012
http://www.saa.org/aboutthesociety/annualmeeting/tabid/138/default.aspx

The 2nd Annual Perryton Stone Age Fair

April 28, 2012 10:00 am - 5:00 pm
at the Museum of the Plains in Perryton,Texas
for additional information please visit the CAR website:
http://www.coursonarchresearch.com/

