The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

Volume 33, No. 5, May 2013

President
Donna Otto
Vice-President
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Stacy Brown
Treasurer
Lisa Jackson
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Jerry Leatherman

One of Displays at Last Month’s Stone Age Fair in Perryton.
See more inside, Pages 4-6
Photographs by Scott Brosowske

Page 2

I ns i de …

Next PAS meeting:

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 5 , M a y 2 0 1 3

Wednesday, May 15th, 7 P.M.,

Wildcat Bluff Nature Center, 2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, TX .

Page 3

Pages 4-6

Page 7

Guest Speaker will be Cleon Roberts, Hereford, Texas speaking on the
“ Misleading History of the Texas Panhandle: Correcting Past Errors”.

3rd Annual Perryton Stone Age Fair held April 13th.

Last PAS meeting: Guest Speaker Dr. Paul Carlson, Texas Tech
University, spoke on the “Myth and Misconception in the 1860
Capture of Cynthia Ann Parker”.

Page 8

“To catch the reader's attention, place an interesting
sentence or quote from the story here.”

Pages 9-11

PAS field trip in mid-June to Blackwater Draw multicomponent site in New Mexico.

Focus on Museum of the
Plains in Perryton, TX.
A new feature of PASTimes.
We are blessed with many
outstanding rural museums
in the panhandle.

Page 12

Upcoming Events...

Page 13
Minutes from last PAS Meeting.

Page 3

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 5 , M a y 2 0 1 3

Misleading History of the Texas Panhandle:
Correcting Past Errors
On Wednesday night, May 15th, Cleon Roberts will be the guest speaker at the Panhandle Archaeological Society meeting at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center, 2301 North Soncy, Amarillo, Texas.
Cleon Roberts was born in Clovis, New Mexico, and grew up in west Texas. He served in the army, worked in business, and taught in public
schools. Roberts is a genealogist and historical researcher in the Texas Panhandle. His particular interest is the pioneers that history forgot.

Program prelude by Cleon Roberts
There never was a time when I was not interested in history. At age five, I was leaning on the show
board in front of the State Theatre in Clovis, watching the Pioneer Day Parade with my father, when I asked,
“Were there any pioneers in our family?” “You bet,” he answered. Certain that he was just trying to humor
me, I questioned him no further, and turned my attention to the important people passing in review: Roy
Rogers, Gene Autry, “Smiley” Burnett and the Sons of the Pioneers. Silver saddles were everywhere.
The passage of time found me in 7th grade in Plainview, Texas, taking an introductory history class.
We learned all about the Alamo, Davy Crocket, Sam Houston and pirates. When we studied the Panhandle, the
teacher mentioned Charles Goodnight and the Indian named Quanah Parker, and then rushed to another part of
the state. It was enough for the teacher that Goodnight was the “first cattleman in the Panhandle.” Not for me.
How did he survive among the Indians alone while the three cows he brought with him grew into a herd?
“You are wasting your time searching for Charles Newell in the Panhandle,” I told the old couple in
Oregon, who would not take no for an answer. “Hansford County was not organized to keep records until a
decade later, there were no newspapers, and nothing in the history books mentions his name.” As I dug deeper

Cleon Roberts

into original sources, however, I found plenty of information about her grandfather, Charley Newell.
The shortcomings lay partly with the history books. They were written about stay-behind settlers for stay-behind descendants—more to
glorify than inform. If these secondary sources are to serve as the basis for more general history, geography and archaeology, they should be accurate. We must separate tradition from history. Panhandle tradition has it that Indians burned Adobe Walls to the ground, leaving the archeology
pristine for a dig a hundred years later. This claim caused historians to miss ten years of history of a place significant to the Panhandle. Have you
ever heard of the Post Office at Adobe, Texas? No?
Flash back to seventh grade: No, Charles Goodnight was not the first cattleman in the Texas Panhandle, only the first cattle baron. Children should see him more as a corporate executive than as a trail blazer in these parts. He came with a large herd, a number of cowboys and an
army send-off. Does it matter? Only if the public schools of Texas require books that say he was the “first cattleman.”
Local history says that Zulu was the first store in Hansford County, and all trails emanated from that point. The truth is: there were four
stores before Zulu. And a military road, followed by buffalo hunter trails, overlapped by cattle trails and finally by freighter and stagecoach roads,
cut the route people remembered. And these converging trails were probably started by Indian and Spanish travelers in pre-historic times. Supposedly the outstanding collection of receipts and letters in the Cator Papers prove that the Cator Brothers had the first store. Here is one: “Palo Duro
Store, Texas, Robert Cator bought of A.E. Reynolds...” Wait a minute! “Of” in this case means from and is pronounced “off” the way grandpa
used it. A proper reading tells us that Reynolds owned the first store, where Bob Cator traded, not the other way around. The young Cators were
busy earning their income by hunting buffaloes, and were often in other counties. A store depended on a number of buffalo hunters trading there.
So who were they? A world of history is missing today because one little word was misinterpreted.
This presentation will discuss these findings and others pertinent to the history of the Panhandle.

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 5 , M a y 2 0 1 3

Page 4

The 2013 Perryton Stone Age Fair: A Celebration of Plains Archaeology
Scott D. Brosowske
The third annual Perryton Stone Age Fair was held at the Museum of the Plains on Saturday, April 13th. This free event
is co-sponsored by Courson
Archaeological Research and
the Museum of the Plains. The
fair is open to both avocational
and professional archaeologists
and provides an opportunity to
view some of the most amazing
Plains Indian artifact collections
in existence! This year’s event
was well attended with approximately 250 people from
six different states who
stopped by the museum to visit
the show. Each year the number of exhibitors that attend
the show has continued to
grow and this year nearly 70
tables were reserved to display
collections. In fact, even
though it is only our third year
to host the show, the Perryton
Stone Age Fair has quickly grown to become the nation’s largest non-commercial artifact show!
The Perryton Stone Age Fair is a successful event due to the very impressive group of avocational archaeologists that
attend the show each and every year. These individuals are extremely knowledgeable about Plains archaeology, and
given that they often attend several shows each year, they probably see more artifacts in a year than most professional
archaeologists will see in ten years. Importantly, these collectors willingly share the knowledge that they have gained
over the years with others. This is very evident at the show as they take the time to talk with visitors and other collectors. One noticeable difference I have observed among many collectors over the past ten years is their ability to recognize the different lithic technological strategies employed during various time periods and their ability to accurately
identify the types of raw materials used to manufacture stone tools. When presented with an unusual artifact, they
can not only tell you what the raw material is, but in what areas or time periods it seems to have been most commonly
used!
As noted above, some of the best private collections
from the Great Plains are brought to the Perryton Stone
Age Fair. Just a few of these included Richard Rose and
his incredible collection of Folsom/Midland artifacts from
the Shifting Sands site near Midland, Texas; Bill Macormic
and his wide variety of artifacts from Guymon Oklahoma;
Paul Westfall and his amazing collection from Colorado
and Western Nebraska; Lance Bussard and George Cromwell and their outstanding historic Indian collections
from Texas and Colorado, respectively; and Lynn Nickel,
of Enid, Oklahoma who has one of the most beautiful collections of artifacts from anywhere.
Continued on Pages 5-6

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 5 , M a y 2 0 1 3

Page 5

Perryton Stone Age Fair ...Continued from Page 4
While everyone enjoys meeting and talking with these and the other well-known collectors that attend the show,
perhaps some of the most exciting moments are seeing what visitors bring in for identification or simply to show off!
Every year we have people who do not exhibit collections, but will bring in beautiful Paleoindian points, complete
pipes, caches of artifacts, projectile points stuck in bone, or some unusual ornament that no one has ever seen; it is
simply amazing to see what people find!
This year we were pleased again to have portions of two well-known artifact collections from the Oklahoma panhandle on display. First, the No Man’s Land Museum in Goodwell, Oklahoma brought in a portion of the William “Uncle
Billy” Baker collection. “Uncle Bill” (1877-1957), as he was affectionately known, moved to Boise City, Oklahoma in
1922 and became the County Agricultural Extension Agent. His job took him to hundreds of farms in the area where he
documented more than a hundred
sites and collected over 14,000 artifacts. The artifacts brought to the fair
included approximately 200 of the estimated 1500 Paleo-Indian projectile
points that “Uncle Bill” found in his
lifetime. Special thanks to the No
Man’s Land Museum and Historical
Society for bringing part of this collection to the fair.
The second Oklahoma panhandle
historical collection brought to the fair
was the Ross and Clifford Goodner collection from Beaver County, Oklahoma. The Goodners moved to Beaver
County in 1904 and settled on a farm
near Slapout, Oklahoma. Later, Ross
and Clifford moved to Beaver, Oklahoma and operated the Goodner Funeral Home. The Goodner Collection
contains artifacts from the PaleoIndian to historic periods, but is dominated by artifacts from Middle Ceramic period (A.D. 1250-1500) sites
which are particularly abundant in the
area. Many collectors who attended
the show fondly remembered meeting
Ross and Clifford Goodner who freely
shared their abundant knowledge of
site locations and information about
the artifacts found there. We thank
the Goodner Family for allowing this
important collection to be on display
at the fair where it continues to educate future generations of amateur
and professional archaeologists.
Continued on Page 6

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 5 , M a y 2 0 1 3

Perryton Stone Age Fair ...Continued from Page 5
Overall, the third annual Perryton Stone Age Fair was another fun and educational
event. It continues to grow
and provides an opportunity
for the public to view some of
the most incredible Plains Indian artifact collections. Most
importantly, this free event
enables the public to meet
some of the experts in Plains
archaeology who are more
than willing to share their
knowledge with them! We
look forward to seeing everyone again next year and appreciate everyone who helps
to make this a very special and
successful event.

Page 6

Page 7

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 5 , M a y 2 0 1 3

March PAS Speaker Dr. Paul Carlson presented:

“Myth and Misconception in the 1860 Capture of
Cynthia Ann Parker”
This presentation covered many of the misstatements of facts surrounding Cynthia Ann Parker and
her Comanche family, including the following:
“On

a cold December morning in 1860 Federal

troops took Naduah (Cynthia Ann Parker) from her
Comanche friends and relatives. In the Anglo world
of Texas the event was
hailed as a wonderful
accomplishment. Neither the 34-year-old Parker (Naduah) nor her
Comanche family saw the capture that way.
Anglo reports of the kidnapping gave Texas
Rangers credit for the capture. The reports were
(and are) full of misconceptions and errors. People who were not there left reminiscences that
suggested they were and such reports are likewise
Cynthia Ann Parker and her
daughter, Prarie Flower, circa

full of errors. Sul Ross, who led the Rangers,
gave conflicting reports of what happened, and
his always shifting reports formed the basis of

many subsequent and incorrect accounts.”

The presentation examined such misconceptions, folklore, and outright errors about
the so called battle of Pease River. Errors that
in the 21st century continue to be made in
books and articles. The question was asked,
“Why is that?”

Texas Ranger Sul Ross,
later elected Governor of

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 5 , M a y 2 0 1 3

Page 8

Plan for a trip to the Eastern New Mexico University archaeological field school at the Blackwater Draw Site, directed by Dr. David Kilby, on a weekday during the second week in June.
This will be the last of three weeks that the school will be operating there, before moving on
to Chaco (see attached flyer). It has been suggested that we visit the Blackwater Draw Museum before going to the site. The drive from Amarillo to Portales is two hours, so we will
bring a lunch and find someplace to picnic either before or after the site visit. Final details
may not be available until May, after the field school itself has gotten organized.

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 5 , M a y 2 0 1 3

Page 9

FOCUS ON MUSEUM OF THE PLAINS
PERRYTON, TEXAS
Editor’s note: Each issue we will try to focus on an outstanding rural museum in our special part of the plains.

Museum of the Plains-Showcasing the History of the Texas Panhandle
Stacy L Brown, Director

In 1975 a group of civic minded individuals noted that many of the early pioneers were quickly passing.
Not willing to lose such a unique opportunity of firsthand accounts and information of European settlement of
the Great Plains, a
committee was
formed with the purpose of creating a
museum.
Perryton, Texas is
somewhat unique in
the fact that it was
formed out of two
different communities that met on the
newly formed Atchison Topeka Santa Fe
rail line. To the
south was Ochiltree,

The Great Hall in Museum of the Plains

Texas and to the
north was Gray, Oklahoma. In 1919, both towns hitched up to steam tractors and horse and mule teams and
moved to the newly formed town of Perryton, Texas.
While both Gray and Ochiltree no longer exist, Perryton has thrived as the Ochiltree county seat and center
for farming, ranching and oil field activities. In 1926, Ochiltree County became known as the “Wheatheart of
the Nation” after shipping out over 3,500,000 bushels of wheat in a single season. It would be with heavy
hearts, however, that in less than 5 years from this feat, the area would be known by a more infamous name,
the dust bowl. Early ranchers such as the Ellzeys, Jacksons, and Parnells utilized the short grass prairie to
build large ranches up and down Wolf Creek. Exploration for oil began very early in the 1920s but was unproductive until deep drilling techniques in the 1950’s became available. Natural gas was discovered early on, but
these wells were capped due to no market at that time.

Continued on Page 10

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 5 , M a y 2 0 1 3

Page 10

FOCUS ON MUSEUM OF THE PLAINS…CONTINUED FROM PAGE 9
The 20th Century was a busy and productive time for this area but
that is only a short part of a much larger story. People have inhabited
the southern plains and Ochiltree County for centuries! In 1907 students from nearby Canadian, Texas began excavations on what would
become known as the Buried City. This was a Prehistoric Native
American site dating from 1250-1400 A.D. and would become world
renowned. Archaeological excavations continue to this day finding new
information about the prehistoric and historic period Native Americans
who occupied this area.
With much foresight from that group of individuals in 1975, as well
as countless other contributors, volunteers, and board members, the
Museum of the Plains has been able to preserve and tell these stories
and many, many more.
The current museum property covers over four acres, and has six

The Gray Community Church

buildings including a railroad depot, Victorian house, general store, the
Gray Community Church, a caboose, and the main building which encompasses over 30,000 square feet housing over 20,000 artifacts.
The Museum of the Plains also hosts local
community functions, private parties, and
other events such as the annual Pioneer Day,
Perryton Stone Age Fair, and Christmas Open
House. With the input from local archaeologists and historians, the gift shop offers some
of the best book selections anywhere in the
Panhandle, as well as other items not available
elsewhere.
The community support, care, and pride
have made the Museum of the Plains the
amazing facility it has become and will continue to grow and expand in the years to come.
We can’t wait for you to come on by!
Projectile Points
Continued on Page 11

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 5 , M a y 2 0 1 3

Page 11

FOCUS ON MUSEUM OF THE PLAINS…CONTINUED FROM PAGE 10

Caboose and Depot

Norwood House

Oil and Gas

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 5 , M a y 2 0 1 3

2013 Science Day at Lamar Elementary School in Amarillo
Friday, May 10. We have done this for the past two years and our presence there has been appreciated.
The students range from Kindergarten through 5th grade, and all are hearing impaired to some degree.
We see 10–11 different classes throughout the school day, each for 22 minutes, and lunch is provided.
PAS contact Paul Katz (Katzes-PRIAM@msn.com) if you can help on this day.
Panhandle Archeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
May 15, 2013 at 7:00 pm
Courson Archaeological Research Summer Field School
Perryton, Texas
May 26-June 7, 2013
http/www.coursonarchresearch.com/2013 field school/index.html
Old West Heritage Rendezvous
Kwahadi Kiva Museum of the American Indian
9151 I-40 East, Amarillo, TX 79120
May 30-June 1, 2013
Texas Archeological Society
Summer Field School
June 15-22, 2013
Hondo, Texas
Pecos Conference
August 8-11, 2013
Flagstaff, AZ.
Texas Archeological Society
Annual Meeting
October 25-27, 2013
Del Rio, Texas

Page 12

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 5 , M a y 2 0 1 3

Page 13

April 17th, 2013















26 members and guests present.
Treasurer’s report-current account balance of $2743.94.
Treasurer’s report was accepted.
Publication report $1139.24 in account.
Publication report was accepted.
International Rock Art Congress May 27-31
TAS Field School June 15-22
Plains Anthropological Conference Oct.
Ledger Art presentation at Lamar Elementary May 10th
SWFAS will be hosted by PAS next year, membership needs to decide on
what type of conference, length, and time frame for papers will be.
Membership list has been compiled, it was suggested that the list be
available to other members only to avoid unwanted solicitations.
Alibates will be hosting junior ranger day next weekend, all members are
invited to attend or participate. All books will be 10% off during National
Park Week.
Jerry Leatherman is requesting articles for the newsletter.
Meeting was adjourned at 8:00.

