PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Seven, Number Seven November 2017

President
Scott Brosowske
Vice president
Veronica Arias
Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer

Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
Upcoming Events

2b

From the Editor’s Desk

2c

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Speaker Information for November 15

5

Speaker Preview Studer Banquet

6

UPCOMING EVENTS
November 15, 7 PM

Next Meeting, Wildcat Bluff

5 p.m. Pre-meeting Dinner, Hofbrau
December 9, 7 PM

Studer Banquet, Dyer’s

April 21, 2018

SWFAS -- Iraan, TX. Mesa View
Hotel recommended.
From the Editor’s Desk

We’re all thankful every day for Mom and home and apple pie. But November is a time set aside to give thanks, each in
his own way, for our country, for those who have toiled to build it, and for those who left their homes across one sea or
another to come here.

I know you’ve heard all this since grade school, so let me make this a bit personal.
I’m thankful for my Irish and Scots-Irish ancestors, who did as much as anyone could to stir up opposition to the British
king and bring about the American Revolution. I’m grateful for my German ancestor who crossed the Atlantic in a paddle
-wheel steamer, just in time for the Civil War. Looks like we’re just generally a quarrelsome bunch!
Now if you grew up in a cozy house or apartment in town, you may find this a bit strange: I am thankful every day for hot
water! You just turn a faucet and out it comes —Hot Water!
Some of you may remember, as I do, a time when we had a bucket of water on a cabinet by the sink. There was a dipper,
and we all drank out of it family, guests and hired men. We didn’t get sick from exchanging germs, I suppose because our
semi-outdoor lives caused us to build up immunity to everything.

Hot water was hard to come by. Grandma had a big copper boiler she set on
the wood stove so she could boil the white clothes she had washed on the
board. Otherwise, it was a big teakettle, the reservoir on the side of the
stove or a coffee percolator. People crossing the Plains in covered wagons
had no hot shower to look forward to at the end of a hard day.
Finally, I’m grateful for all of you. You provide fun and intellectual stimulation to me every day. People my age are tempted to just vegetate. Thank
you for keeping me up and going!

2

PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of October 18, 2017
The meeting was called to order by Vice-President Veronica Arias at 7 PM at Wild Cat Bluff.

There were 18 members in attendance.

PROGRAM: James Coverdale presented “The Set’tan Kiowa Calendar, 60 years of Kiowa History 1832-1892.” James
shared with us a calendar of his Kiowa ancestor. Set’tan began his calendar at age 16 in 1832. The copy games has is on manila paper, But James gave us a lesson on tanning a hide with brains which takes a week to week and a half. The pigments
were natural. Deciding what events to paint on the calendar was a group process. James shared some of the more important
events pictured over the years and what the various pictures represented. James has made his own copy on hide that he
tanned himself.

MINUTES: The September minutes were approved as published in the PASTIMES.

TREASURER’S REPORT: PAM ALLISON reported a balance of $3836.05 in the checking account, although we may owe
a month rent at the library.

PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller Reported a balance of

OLD BUSINESS: ROLLA and Veronica reported on the program at Wild Cat Bluff on October 7. The attendance was
sparse. However, they did give us three samples of PAS brochures to vote on. Although all were attractive, one was an almost unanimous choice.
It was agreed that we meet at Wild Cat Bluff again next month.

NEW BUSINESS: Rolla presented the need to have a membership form on the website It was agreed to look for other options for our site the coming year. It was decided to shop around for options other than the present financial arrangements.
It was agreed that those members who elect to receive [a print copy of ] the newsletter will pay an additional fee to cover
printing and postage.
The Studer Banquet will be December 9 at Dyer’s. There is no speaker as yet, but Veronica is working on it.
There was discussion on the TAS proposal that PAS and/or PPHM host the TAS annual meeting next year. It was agreed that
we would be unable to undertake such a project with our small and scattered membership.

The meeting adjourned at 8:55 p.m.
Respectfully submitted:

Mary Ruthe Carter, Secretary

3

Our Speaker for November 15, 2017
Spatial and Temporal Distribution of Obsidian in Oklahoma
Matt Oliver
University of Oklahoma
Abstract
Obsidian does not naturally occur in Oklahoma and the closest sources are in the
Jemez Mountains of north-central New
Mexico. Though scarce, obsidian artifacts
still occur throughout Oklahoma’s archaeological record. Archaeologists can approach
social interaction and exchange through obsidian artifact movement by utilizing techniques such as geochemical sourcing. Geochemical sourcing identifies the volcanic
field where the material of a particular artifact originated. To date, only about 25% of
obsidian found in Oklahoma has been
sourced. Available data prior to my research revealed that the majority of obsidian present in the state originated from two
primary areas – the Jemez Mountains in
New Mexico and the volcanic fields surrounding Yellowstone National Park in Idaho and
Wyoming. As a part of this study I submitted 112 samples for geochemical source analysis.
In this presentation I will discuss the results of these analyses, including both the spatial and
temporal patterns of the source areas represented and for what purposes obsidian was used.
In the end, these patterns are examined to interpret large-scale social interaction in Oklahoma through time and across space.
Biography
I am a graduate student at the University of Oklahoma. Originally I am from Fort Gibson,
Oklahoma and attended college at Fort Lewis College in Durango, Colorado. My research
interests include social interaction and exchange, source analysis of exotic exchange items,
lithic technology and ideology, and individuals in the archaeological record.

4

Speaker for Studer Banquet.

5

Folks I found them.. well at least the copy that highlights changes to be approved. They were in E-mails from Jerry Leatherman and
Donna Otto in Feb-March 2013. Also the minutes of March 20, 2013 show that they were approved and accepted. I’ll attach what
was submitted for approval.

Joe D
*****

Amended
CONSTITUTION

And
BYLAWS
Of the
PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
CONSTITUTION
ARTICLE I
Name

The name of the Society is the Panhandle Archeological Society.
ARTICLE II
Purpose and Goals
The purpose of the Society is the promotion, preservation, and dissemination of scientific
knowledge concerning regional history and prehistory.
Society Goals include:
Protection and preservation of cultural resources and the natural environment;
Accomplishment of scientific research, including excavation, survey, and analysis;
Dissemination of research and analysis of data via scientific publications, public meetings, and other
means in order to make said knowledge available to the scientific community and the general public;
Responsible participation in programs and projects designed to promote and provide education and community awareness of the value and importance of conservation of regional cultural and natural resources.

ARTICLE III
Status
The Society is organized exclusively for educational and scientific purposes as a non-profit mutualinterest organization whose efforts and activities are directed toward achieving its Goals and promoting
its Purpose in serving the regional and general public, including the scientific community.
ARTICLE IV

6

Membership
Membership to the Society is open without reservation to those who espouse the Society’s goals or
share an interest in any field or activity the Society may be involved in at any time. Membership is
open to the general public without regard to “race,” color, national origin, political or religious creed,
age, sex, or physical and/or mental handicap.
Exception: Membership may be withheld from those prospective or current members who are or have
been convicted of one or more involved in acts of vandalism (including all commonly understood
meanings and connotations of the term) of or at sites known to contain cultural resources and/or to have
been nominated to protected status under state and federal antiquities protection acts. Said exclusion
from membership is not automatic and must be dealt with according to standard accepted parliamentary
procedures that guarantee maximum membership knowledge and involvement.
ARTICLE V
Limitations
No part of the net earnings of the Society shall inure to the benefit of, or be distributable to its members, trustees, officers, or other private persons, except that the Society shall be authorized and empowered to pay reasonable compensations for services rendered and to make payments and distributions in
furtherance of the purposes set forth in Article Third (II) hereof. No substantial part of the activities of
the Society shall be the carrying on of propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation, and
the corporation shall not participate in, or intervene in (including the publishing or distribution of statements) any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office. Notwithstanding any other
provision of these articles, this Society shall not, except to an insubstantial degree, engage in any activities or exercise any powers that are not in furtherance of the purposes of this Society.
ARTICLE VI
Ethics
No Society member shall engage in acts that are contradictory to provisions of state and federal antiquities protection legislations that impose penalties in case of a verdict of guilty.
• Members of PAS must abide by all terms and conditions of the PAS Bylaws and all Federal and State antiquities laws or regulations.
• PAS does not condone the practice of buying and selling artifacts for commercial purposes.
• PAS does not condone the disregard of proper archeological research techniques or the willful destruction
or distortion of archeological data.
Vandalism of protected sites and sites containing cultural resources is contrary to the Society’s Purpose
and Goals and will not be tolerated from among the Society membership.
The Society may adopt Amendments or Bylaws that further spell out ethical behavior acceptable to the
Society and appropriate to Society Purpose and Goals provided that said Amendments and Bylaws do
not violate member civil rights and do not exceed or attempt to supersede existing federal, state, and
local statutes.
ARTICLE VII

7

Governing Body
The Society shall have a Governing Body composed of elected Officers. In addition, the Society may,
at its discretion, maintain a separate ex-officio position of Sponsor(s). Duties of each Officer and
Sponsor are delineated in the Bylaws.
Officers elected are President, Vice-President/Program Chairperson, Secretary, and Treasurer. These
Officers comprise the basic Executive Committee.
The duly elected President may, at his/her discretion, appoint other members to the Executive Committee; the membership at large is to be notified of such appointments and the rationale for same. The
Sponsor(s) may also be appointed to the Executive Committee.
ARTICLE VIII
Projects/Publications
Section 1: Projects. The Society may embark on or be involved in any project that can be shown to be
related to the achievement of its Purpose and Goals. The Society may also participate in any such project as a correlative or volunteer force and resource when requested by a responsible individual, agency, institution, or group. The Society will not serve as a paid or contracted resource, and no member,
acting under the auspices of the Society or using its name, shall accept remuneration for his/her services and/or expertise. Personal expenses outlaid by Society members and expenses outlaid by the Society as a group during performance of volunteer activity may be reimbursed by the appropriate responsible party so long as such reimbursement does not meet the generally accepted definition of income.
All projects proposed for involvement by the Society as a whole or any group of officers/
members using the Society’s name must be fully presented to the Society for approval at a regularly
scheduled meeting or by some other means of communication if time constraints prohibit waiting for
the next regularly scheduled meeting. The membership must approve Society participation or involvement by accepted (Bylaws) democratic principles and practices. No Officer or Sponsor shall agree to
commit the Society, any of its members, or its resources to any project until the above-specified membership notification and approval has taken place.
The Society shall not become involved in any project that can be shown to be in violation of
existing federal, state, or local antiquities protection legislation or codes.
Section 2: Publications. The Society shall publish articles and reports as it deems necessary or beneficial. All publications produced or sponsored by the Society must be in accordance with
its Purpose and Goals. Publications other than the Newsletter must be reviewed by the Publication
Committee prior to actual publication and release. All Society Publications, except the Newsletter, are
to be made available to the membership, the scientific community, and the general public. All Society
Publications, except the Newsletter, will be sold or made available at cost or on a cost-reimbursement
basis or at “profit” levels that meet Internal Revenue and other tax-exempt requirements, guidelines,
and policies: . Publications are intended to provide scientific and educational/public awareness information and to document Society project involvement, not as a major source of income or “profit.”
Any/all “profit” derived from Publication sales shall be utilized for further Publications or research or
other projects designed or intended to achieve Society Purpose and Goals.

8

expertise. Personal expenses outlaid by Society members and expenses outlaid by the Society as a
group during performance of volunteer activity may be reimbursed by the appropriate responsible party
so long as such reimbursement does not meet the generally accepted definition of income.
All projects proposed for involvement by the Society as a whole or any group of officers/
members using the Society’s name must be fully presented to the Society for approval at a regularly
scheduled meeting or by some other means of communication if time constraints prohibit waiting for
the next regularly scheduled meeting. The membership must approve Society participation or involvement by accepted (Bylaws) democratic principles and practices. No Officer or Sponsor shall agree to
commit the Society, any of its members, or its resources to any project until the above-specified membership notification and approval has taken place.
The Society shall not become involved in any project that can be shown to be in violation of
existing federal, state, or local antiquities protection legislation or codes.
Section 2: Publications. The Society shall publish articles and reports as it deems necessary or beneficial. All publications produced or sponsored by the Society must be in accordance with
its Purpose and Goals. Publications other than the Newsletter must be reviewed by the Publication
Committee prior to actual publication and release. All Society Publications, except the Newsletter, are
to be made available to the membership, the scientific community, and the general public. All Society
Publications, except the Newsletter, will be sold or made available at cost or on a cost-reimbursement
basis or at “profit” levels that meet Internal Revenue and other tax-exempt requirements, guidelines,
and policies: . Publications are intended to provide scientific and educational/public awareness information and to document Society project involvement, not as a major source of income or “profit.”
Any/all “profit” derived from Publication sales shall be utilized for further Publications or research or
other projects designed or intended to achieve Society Purpose and Goals.
Details concerning Publications, other than the Newsletter, and Publication requirements
and procedures will be devised by the Publication Committee, approved by the membership via accepted parliamentary procedures, and made available to the membership and/or potential authors as a Publications Policy or Guidelines statement.
The Society shall accept for consideration of publication any material submitted by a dues-paid
member. Further, the Society, by means of its Officers, Publication Committee, and/or Sponsor(s),
shall actively seek and promote publishable articles, reports, and materials from among the membership. However, consideration for publication shall not be limited to Society membership.
ARTICLE IX
Amendments
This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the members of the Society present and voting
at a regularly scheduled meeting provided that the membership of the Society has been notified in writing, by telephone, or by some form of electronic communication of the specific amendment not less
than 30 days prior to the meeting. “Member” is here and throughout this document used to refer to a
current dues-paid member. No other person will be accorded voting privileges or rights.

9

Any dues-paid member (includes Officers and Sponsor(s)) may suggest or recommend amendments, either
directly or indirectly. Write-in amendments must be signed and dated by the member submitting same.
ARTICLE X
Voting Rights/Privileges
Maximum effort must be made by the Society and/or its officers to ensure voting access to any duespaid member. Absentee or write-in votes must be accepted and duly counted; such votes must be signed and
dated by the voting member. Mechanisms for the assurance of voting rights/privileges and access may be determined by the Executive Committee or the membership at large by customary accepted procedures and
membership approval.
Qualifications and eligibility of those voting for any Society legislation or motion are subject to verification (i.e., dues-paid status) if challenged by a dues-paid member. Votes shown to be unqualified or ineligible shall simply be subtracted from appropriate vote tallies and need not necessitate a new vote.
Unless otherwise specified by due procedure and membership approval, a simple majority shall prevail
in all matters calling for membership approval via voting.
ARTICLE XI
Dissolution of Society
Upon dissolution of the Society, assets shall be distributed for one or more exempt purposes within the
meaning of sections501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, or corresponding section of any future federal tax
code, or shall be distributed to the federal government, or to a state or local government, for a public purpose.
ARTICLE XII
Nominations/Elections
No later than the September meeting the President shall appoint a chairperson of the Nomination Committee. The chairperson may select one or two other members to assist. The committee shall present a slate of
nominees consisting of: President*Vice-President*Secretary*Treasurer to the membership of the November
meeting. Nominations may also be made from the floor by the general membership. It has been traditional (in
the past) for the Vice-President to move to President. An election shall be held every two years and the new
officers shall take office at the Studer Banquet in December.
A vacancy in any elected office other than that of President may be filled by the Executive Committee
appointing a member in good standing. A vacancy in the office of President shall be filled by the VicePresident and the office of Vice-President may be filled by the Executive Committee.

Articles I-XI Approved 7th of August 1985: Meeks Etchieson, President; Donna K. Otto, VicePresident; Joseph H. Powell, Secretary; Barbara J. Williams, Treasurer. Note: The Constitution and Bylaws
adopted in May 1984 were amended on August 7 1985 to comply with IRS requested changes to acquire 501
(c) (3) status. Signature of officers was required with submission to IRS.

10

Article XII was presented in October 2009, after discussion it was also noted that the Society holds
elections every two year vs. yearly. The change was to be published in the November newsletter, however minutes and changes were not located, so the yellow highlighted words were added. The amendment was voted on and passed at the November 2009 meeting, minutes noting changes were published
in the October newsletter.

Updated/proposed bylaws published in the Feb. 2013 Newsletter

Current bylaws approved at _____________ regular meeting.

11

