The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

Volume 33 No. 6, September 2013

President
Donna Otto
Vice-President
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Stacy Brown
Treasurer
vacant
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Jerry Leatherman

“Blackwater Draw: The Adventures Continue”
PAS Field Trip, June 2013

Pages 8-12

Page 2

I ns i de …

Next PAS meeting:

Volume 33 No. 6, September 2013

Wednesday, September 18, 7 P.M.,

Wildcat Bluff Nature Center, 2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, TX .

Page 3

Guest Speaker will be Joe D. Rogers.

PAS field trip to Blackwater Draw site in New Mexico.

Pages 4-8
“To catch the reader's attention, place an interesting
sentence or quote from the story here.”

Page 9

Volume 33 No. 6, September 2013

Page 3

The September 18 meeting of the Panhandle Archeological
Society Guest Speaker will be Joe D. Rogers presenting:

“The 2013 Annual Texas Archeological Society
Field School at Hondo, Texas”
The Texas Archeological Society’s
52nd annual field school was once
again held near Hondo, Texas at
the Eagle Bluff site (41ME147).
The primary research goal of principal investigator Tom Hester was
to improve an occupational sequence for this site. The site measures about 200 x 150 meters and
contains occupations of native cultures spanning from 6500 BP to
the early 1700’s. Activities once
again included considerable numbers of excavation blocks, the kids’
units, ranch land surveys, and examination of a historic component
at Judge George Weldon Harper’s
historic “dog run” stone house
from the 1860’s. This presentation will provide a brief overview of some of the work conducted at the TAS Field School.
Joe D. Rogers is a retired public school teacher that works as a part-time instructor at West Texas A&M in
History and Archaeology. He is a past president of both PAS and TAS. Current Research projects include
burned daub from the Jack Allen site and the Texas Panhandle in World War II.

Shaller for
Volume 33 No. 6, September 2013

Page 4

Summary of the Field Trip to the Blackwater Draw Museum and Site
By Paul Katz

On Wednesday, June 12, 2013, 13 members and guests of the Panhandle Archeological Society
took a field trip to the Blackwater Draw Museum and Site near Portales, NM. Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1 is the type site for Clovis activities during the Early Paleoindian period.

Most of us met at the Wal-Mart in Canyon and caravanned to the museum. There we met up with
the rest of the participants and proceeded into the museum in full force. We were met by Mr. Matt
Hillsman, the Museum Curator, who provided an introduction to the museum and then stayed with
us throughout the tour in order to answer questions about the exhibits, the site, and New Mexico
prehistory. Matt was familiar to some of the PAS members because of his 1992 MA thesis from
ENMU which studied Alibates and other tool stones of the region.

Continued on page 7

Volume 33 No. 6, September 2013

Page 5

BLACKWATER DRAW…CONTINUED FROM PAGE 8
While the museum exhibits naturally focus on the Paleoindian period, they are arranged chronologically and continue through the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods as well. At the conclusion of
the museum tour, we viewed a short film about the archaeology of the Blackwater Draw site, produced as another ENMU MA ‘thesis’.
It is only a short ride from the
museum to the site, and again we
were expected and met at the Visitor Center by several ENMU field
school students. The field school
was spending three weeks working
at the site, and we timed our visit for
the middle of third week so that
most of what was planned had already been completed. One student
walked us from the Visitor Center to
the building that encloses one of the

bone beds, which has
been exposed and preserved for public viewing
and additional investigation. Here we met Mr.
George Crawford, the
Blackwater Draw site
manager, and he pointed
out the various stratigraphic levels and explained what the students
were doing in different
parts and on different levels of the excavation.
Blackwater Draw site building with stratigraphy area and building
over well to left.

Continued on page 8

Volume 33 No. 6, September 2013

Page 6

BLACKWATER DRAW…CONTINUED FROM PAGE 9
Other students were at
work just outside the museum, and there we met Dr.
David Kilby. Dr. Kilby is the
director of the field school, a
noted Paleoindian scholar,
and has been a speaker at a
PAS meeting. He and his students had spent the three
weeks cleaning the profile of
a previous excavation, to better identify and interpret the
stratigraphic units and to recover a series of samples for
analysis and dating. We were
able to see at a single glance
the progression from Clovis,

Inside Blackwater Draw site building with George Crawford on right.

through Folsom and Plano
Paleoindian occupations, to the Archaic period.
The original field trip itinerary
included a visit to the Clovis laboratory on the ENMU campus, in order
to see many of the artifacts that
have been recovered during decades of investigation at the site.
However, because the field school
had only two more days at the site
and things needed to be finished
by students and staff, George
Crawford promised to come to
Amarillo, bearing artifacts, and
speak at one of the PAS meetings.
Stratigraphic profile area outside of the site building.

Continued on page 9

Volume 33 No. 6, September 2013

Page 7

BLACKWATER DRAW…CONTINUED FROM PAGE 10
The field trip participants then proceeded to Oasis State Park, where we enjoyed a lunch together
before going our sepaDr. David Kilby explains the stratigraphic profile.

rate ways. We all agreed
that the trip was informative and enjoyable.
Participants with PAS
included Alvin Lynn,
Anne Schoen, Beryl
Hughes, Bill Webb,
Elaine Maples, Jerry
Foster, Joe Faulkenberry, Lisa Jackson,
Mike Dewey, Pat Foster,
Paul Katz, Richard Wiggin and Rolla Shaller.

More pictures on page 10

Volume 33 No. 6, September 2013

Page 8

Photos with this report are courtesy of
Paul Katz and Rolla Shaller.

Volume 33 No. 6, September 2013

Page 9

2013
Sept. 18 PAS Meeting 7:00 pm , Wild Cat Bluff Nature Center
Sept. 19-22 Material Culture of the Prairie, Plains and Plateau Larned, KS; For more
information www.mcppp.org or Ken Weidner 620-668-5249
Oct. 2-5 Plains Anthropological Conference, Loveland, CO.
Oct. 16 PAS Meeting, 7:00 pm Wild Cat Bluff Nature Center
Oct. 17-19 PaleoAmerican Odyssey, Santa Fe, NM.
Oct. 19 Fannin School History Fair
Oct. 25-27 Texas Archeological Society, Annual Meeting Del Rio, Texas
Nov. 20 PAS Meeting, 7:00 pm Wild Cat Bluff Nature Center
Dec. 14 PAS -Studer Lecture Series and Banquet, Panhandle Plains Historical Museum

2014
May 3 50th Annual Symposium of the Southwestern Federation of Archeological
Societies, Host: PAS @ Panhandle Plains Historical Museum

