PASTIMES
The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

President
Paul Katz

Vice-President
Jeff Indeck
Secretary
Stacy Brown
Treasurer
Lisa Jackson
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Scott Brosowske

Vol. 31, No. 8, November 2011

PASTIMES

Page 1

Vol. 31, No. 8, Nov. 2011

In this issue

Page 2

November Guest Speaker ,
PAS November Meeting Information

Page 3

PAS November Field Trip
November 12, 2011

Page 4-5

Perryton Family Archaeology Day 2011

Page 6-7

2011 Fannin Middle School History Festival

Page 8

Minutes from the last meeting

Page 9

Announcements, Updates, Upcoming Events

Page 10

Studer Banquet Registration Form
On the Cover: Jeff
Indeck at the float
station CAR FS 2010

Page 2

The Panhandle Archaeological Society will hold it's next meeting on Wednesday
November 16, 2011, at 7:00 pm, at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center Science Building,
2301 N. Soncy Road, in Amarillo,Texas. Our program will be presented by Donna Otto.

Passport in Time: Volunteer Archaeological Opportunities
Donna Otto
Abstract
Passport in Time (PIT) is a volunteer archaeology and historic preservation program of the USDA Forest
Service (FS). PIT volunteers work with professional FS archaeologists and historians on national forests
throughout the U.S. on such diverse activities as archaeological survey and excavation, rock art restoration,
archival research, historic structure restoration, oral history gathering, and analysis and curation of artifacts.
The FS professional staff of archaeologists and historians will be your hosts, guides, and co-workers.
Over the years, volunteers have helped us stabilize ancient cliff dwellings in New Mexico, excavate a
10,000-year-old village site in Minnesota, restore a historic lookout tower in Oregon, clean vandalized rock
art in Colorado, survey for sites in a rugged Montana wilderness, and excavate a 19th-century Chinese
mining site in Hell's Canyon in Idaho.
Many PIT projects involve backcountry camping where you are responsible for your own food and gear.
Others include meals prepared by a "camp cook," often for a small fee. Still others provide hookups for RVs,
or volunteers may stay at local hotels and travel to the site each day. The projects vary in length from two
days to two weeks or longer. While there is no fee to participate, you must get yourself to the project, and
accommodations and amenities may vary. No project provides travel, per diem, or monetary allotments for
lodging and associated expenses. This presentation provides an overview of my experiences in Passport in
Time programs.
Biography
Donna Otto is a West Texas A&M University graduate, with major hours in anthropology and history. She
was a student of Jack Hughes and Fred Rathjen, who stimulated her interest in archeology and Texas history.
She has worked on archaeology projects with the Panhandle Archaeological Society, the Texas Archaeological
Society, and Oklahoma Anthropological Society. She was employed with the National Park Service to oversee
the cataloging of their archaeological collections, and the Bureau of Reclamation to work on the salvage
project at Chicken Creek. She also did contract work on the Palo Duro Creek Project. She has served as
past officer(s) of the PAS and has assisted in preparing publications for printing, including Southwest
Federation papers and the report Archaeological Salvage in the Sanford Reservoir Area by F. E. Green.
Donna is retired and is doing volunteer work on Forest Service archaeology projects through their Passport in
Time program.

Page 3

PAS November Field Trip
November 12, 2011
The

Panhandle Archaeological Society (PAS) is
pleased to announce another weekend field trip to
visit several impressive prehistoric and historic period
archaeological sites. On November 12, 2011 we will
visit two private ranches in the Borger-Stinnett area
that are closed to the public. We would like to thank
Bob Smith and his daughter Deidre Hood who met the
landowners and obtained permission for PAS
members to participate in this tour. The properties
that we will visit are on the north side of the Canadian
River and have several south-flowing tributaries that
were once perennial streams.
Sites that will be visited as a part of the tour include
Black Dog Village, Zollars, Tres Casas Grandes, and
Holden, all Antelope Creek phase settlements that
contain remains of residential structures and
abundant artifacts. Additional sites include Archaic
and Early Ceramic period campsites, a Pastore
sheepherders camp with corrals, and an early AngloAmerican dugout. The tour will also visit a few sites
that sadly, have been destroyed by vandals. Nearly all
of the sites to be visited are accessible by vehicle.

Southern Group of Features at Black Dog Village,
Reproduced From Keller (1975: Figure 3)

This should be another excellent field trip
to several very impressive and important
sites. Once again, this tour is free and is
open to all PAS members. If you would like
to attend you must register in advance to
reserve a spot. The registration deadline is
November 10th. For more information
contact Scott D. Brosowske at (806) 4340157.

The Big House at Black Dog Village, Reproduced From Keller (1975: Figure 2)

Page 4

PERRYTON FAMILY ARCHAEOLOGY DAY 2011

Stacy Brown

Courson Archaeological Research (CAR) and the

Museum of the Plains (MOTP) hosted the 3rd
Annual Family Archaeology Day on October 22,
2011. The event was located at the Museum of the
Plains in Perryton, Texas. This event is designed to
increase the knowledge and appreciation of the
prehistoric and historic cultures that occupied our
region prior to settlement through "hands on"
activities and games geared toward families with
children ages 6 and up. Approximately 80 children,
parents, and volunteers attended this year's event.
Starting at noon, on an absolutely gorgeous fall
day, a hamburger lunch was provided by MOTP
volunteers and staff. Following lunch, participants
were split up into six groups and escorted to one of
seven different educational stations. This year's
stations included spear throwing with atlatls, rabbit
sticks, pumpkin carving, orienteering, jewelry
making, ring and pin game, and native foods.
The first station is consistently one of the most
popular; atlatl spear throwing. Shorter practice
throws were made by targeting a large round hay
bale.
Once their technique was honed, the
participants began targeting Beulah, a life-sized
papier-mâché buffalo. Many of the participants
proved to be very adept at using this ancient
weapon as was evident by Beulah's new scars.

Next up was learning to throw rabbit sticks. This
is one of the earliest forms of hunting and while it
required little technology, stealth and accuracy are
a must. Participants had a variety of targets to
engage, ranging from an armadillo, jackrabbit, and
the ever elusive jack-a-lope. The jack rabbit had a
tough day, losing his hind quarters and his lucky
rabbit foot before the day was done.

Carving Pumpkins with Flint Tools

Page 5
While most of the participants have carved
the traditional Halloween pumpkin, none had
ever had the opportunity to carve one with
obsidian tools. A wide range of traditional and
unique decorations emmerged as the day
progressed. Instruction, as well as pumpkin
fun and facts were provided to the kids, many
of whom did not realize that pumpkins are
native to the America's and that they are an
excellent food source.
Halfway through the event, everyone took a
much needed cookie break. Everyone enjoyed
handmade buffalo shaped cookies, lemonade,
and discussed all of the activities that they had
participated in so far. Refreshed, everyone
continued on with the event.
This year's orienteering course evolved from
last fall to include a treasure hunt.
Participants learned basic compass skills and
how to measure distance.
After several
courses that took participants to various points
around the MOTP grounds, the children then
searched designated buildings to find their
treasure chest. The excitement was palpable
as the adventurers divided up replica spear
points, gold presidential dollars, and prayer
coins.

Learning about Native Foods and How to
Process them

The Kids are Learning how to Master the Ring and
Pin Game
A new game was introduced this year; the ring and
pin game. A version of this game can be found in
some form among most North American tribes. The
game is very similar to the European ball and cup
game. A slender pin is attached to several rings by a
piece of sinew. The objective is to swing the rings
and catch as many on the pin as you can. A new
competitive sport may be in the making if the
participant's enthusiasm is any indicator.
Finally, a new station was added this year; utilizing
local native foods. Participants were shown an
informative power-point presentation and then
learned hands on how to grind corn and mesquite
beans, crack nuts, and process chokecherries.
Wichita corn and squash, Arikara squash, metates,
manos, and a mortar and pestle made from mesquite
were on display as well. A few of the younger
participants could not resist and eagerly downed
some of the chokecherries. There was definitely a
new appreciation on how difficult processing food can
be.
Shortly after 5pm, all the CAR staff, MOTP
volunteers and participants gathered in the Brillhart
room where certificates of participation were handed
out to everyone. With the day wrapped up, a tired,
but happy bunch of children gathered their necklaces,
pumpkins, and treasure and headed home. It was
readily apparent that everyone, including
participants, parents, and volunteers really enjoyed
the day and cannot wait until next year's event.

2011
Fannin Middle School
History Festival

Page 6

Rolla Shaller

Dick Carter Supervises the Corn Grinding Station

Joe Faulkenberry Helps One of the Youngsters with
the Spear and Atlatl

The 15th Annual Fannin History Festival was
held on Saturday, October 15, 2011. The event
was first organized in 1996 to give students at
Fannin Middle School a better understanding of
world history through hands-on projects. Since
then, the festival has been opened to the public.
Many of the projects exhibited at the festival are
created by students as part of a competition for
special awards. As a result, students gain a wealth
of knowledge on various historical subjects that
they may not experience in the class room.
The history festival is also augmented by regional
organizations, clubs, re-enactors, and volunteers
who also participate. Through live and interactive
demonstrations of activities and tools used in the
past, these groups provide Fannin students and
festival visitors with a unique look back into history.
The Panhandle Archeological Society (PAS) has
had the privilege of being one of the few
organizations that has been invited back year after
year. Each year we host of a number of different
stations that enable participants to directly
experience an activity used in the past.

Page 7

Approximately 1400 visitors attended this years'
Fannin Middle School History Festival making it a
great success! Overall, we had a great time and
enjoyed the beautiful weather! We plan to participate
again next year and highly recommend that other
members join us for this amazing event.

Alvin Lynn Explains to a Student the Way to Hold
the Atlatl and Spear
The first station, led by PAS members Dick Carter, Lisa
Jackson, and Millie Vanover, demonstrated the process of
grinding corn using a mano and metate. The corn meal that
is ground by each participant is bagged for them to take
home and feed to birds or squirrels. Included in the bag is
a special note from the PAS thanking them for their
participation.
Meanwhile, out on the football field PAS members Joe
Faulkenberry, Alvin Lynn, and Rolla Shaller were giving
instructions on spear throwing with an atlatl. After some
practice, many of these young participants became worthy
hunters.
Also present at the festival were PAS members Joe D.
Rogers and his apprentice Jeff Indeck. Using a wide
assortment of tools from his personal collection, Joe
demonstrated carpentry and wheelwright skills to the
amusement of passing audiences.

Joe D. Rogers Lets the Students Try the
Pump Drill

Page 8

PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of the October 26, 2011 Meeting
-President Paul Katz called the meeting to order at 7:00 p.m. at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center. Twenty-three members and two
guests were in attendance.
-The next meeting of the PAS will be held on Wednesday, November 16, 2011. PAS member Donna Otto will be next month's
speaker.
PROGAM
-Paul introduced the evening speaker, Dr. David Battin, Eastern New Mexico University. His ongoing research focuses on
relationships among pueblo communities in central New Mexico and between plains and pueblo societies. He discussed the use of
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) as a tool to assist archaeologists in examining many different aspects of human behavior.
His presentation examined the use of GIS for predicting travel routes between communities and as a tool for examining potential
explanations for settlement and artifact distributions. He ended his lecture by discussing other uses of GIS for archaeology.
BUSINESS MEETING
-The business meeting began at the conclusion of David's lecture. The minutes of the September 22, 2011 meeting were
unanimously approved.
-Lisa gave the treasurer's report. The current operating balance is $1,640.33.
-Rolla submitted the Publication Committee report in writing. The current checking account balance $1, 473.36.
-Last month's expenditures included the following:
• $770.00 dollars for publishing the Canyon City Club Cave Report
• $375.00 dollars for CD publishing of the Canyon City Club Cave Report
• $12.99 dollars for Cracked Corn for Fannin Family History Fair
• $5.67 dollars for postage of Canyon City Club Cave Report to Austin
-The Amarillo National Bank certificate of deposit balance is $5,310.37.
-The Canyon City Club Cave report is now available in either hardcopy or CD form for $15.00 each.
-The next proposed publication will be a collection of articles that examine the use of Alibates in the Texas panhandle and/or the
Alibates quarries.
Old Business
Alvin Lynn reported on the nomination for 2012 officers. Jeff Indeck is nominated for Vice-President, Lisa Jackson as Treasurer,
Stacy Brown as Secretary, and Rolla Shaller for Publications. Nominations for President are still needed.
-Fannin Fair was again a great success. An article detailing the event will be coming out in next month's PASTIMES.
-Alvin proposed using the September 2012 meeting to repair the atlatls used at the Fannin History Fair.
-The Pollyanna Hughes manuscript was forwarded to Panhandle Plains Historical Review for possible publication.
-Registration forms for the Studer Banquet will be published in next month's PASTIMES. The event will be held at the Panhandle
Plains Historical Museum and the main course will be a pot roast catered by the Stockyards.
-Discussion about the state of the PAS website was raised. It was agreed that considerable updates and changes should be made
to the website in the upcoming months. Several proposals were made about the feasibility of changing the content, webhosting,
and increasing site exposure. It was agreed that we should hire a company to make these changes and maintain the website
instead of having to rely on volunteers who can only work on it in their spare time.
New Business
-A new field trip opportunity may be in the works for a site in Wheeler County near the Salt Fork of the Red River southwest of
Samnorwood, Texas. A recently graded road has revealed a possible hearth and other features. The land owner is very interested
in having the area surveyed. A tentative date is set for sometime this December.
-The next PAS field trip will be November 12, 2012 and will focus on sites in the Borger/Stinnett area. Some sites will include Black
Dog Village, Holden site, and a pastore site. Most of the sites can be driven to, so access will be good for those who cannot walk
long distances. Details about the field trip, including how to sign-up, can be found in the November newsletter
-Courson Archaeological Research (CAR) was approached to conduct a survey on Antelope Creek southeast of Sanford, Texas. It
was proposed that PAS might be interested in conducting the survey as a PAS activity. CAR has also gained access to conduct a
survey on the Boy's Ranch Property. This would also be an ideal opportunity for PAS to conduct field trips and help gain interest in
our organization. Students and guests will be encouraged to come participate in these events as long as they are accompanied by
a PAS member or guest of the landowner.
-Alvin brought up the possibility of presenting the Studer Award at this year's banquet. Members are encouraged to contact Alvin
with possible nominations.
-The meeting was adjourned at 9:45p.m.

Anouncements, Updates, and Upcoming Events
Washita Battlefield NHS 15th Anniversary Symposium Event

Page 9

Friday November 11, 2011 2:00pm to 5;00pm Washita Battlefield NHS Cheyenne, Oklahoma
Saturday November 12, 2011 8:30am to 4:00pm Cheyenne High School Auditorium
Cheyenne, Oklahoma
For more information visit the WBNHS website at
http://www.nps.gov/waba/
or call (580) 497-2742

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
November 16th, 2011 at 7:00 pm
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

Panhandle Archaeological Society Annual Studer Banquet
Decenber 17, 2011 from 6:00 - 10:00 pm
Hazelwood Hall; Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
January 18, 2012 at 7:00 pm
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

SPECIAL NOTICE: This is a reminder for all members of PAS to
begin looking for some items to be used for the silent auction
at the Studer Banquet in December.

