The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

Volume 34 No. 4, April 2014

President
Donna Otto

Vice-President
Scott Brosowske

Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter

Treasurer
Pamela Allison

Publications
Rolla Shaller

Newsletter Editor
Jerry Leatherman
Forensic Sculptor Amanda Danning will present “Written in Bone” at the
Panhandle Plains Historical Museum, Wednesday Evening, April 16th.

Page 2

Inside…

Volume 34 No. 4, April 2014

Panhandle Archeological Society meeting for April 16th will follow

Next PAS
Meeting

the special presentation “Written in Bone”, which begins at 6:00 p.m.

Page 3

Veronica M. Arias, Ph.D. is the new Curator of Archeology
at PPHM.

Page 4
“To catch the reader's attention, place
an interesting sentence or quote from
the story here.”

Page 5

at the Hazelwood Lecture Hall at Panhandle Plains Historical Museum
in Canyon, TX. See Page 4 for more information.

“Written in Stone” presentation coming April 16th to
PPHM.

Invitation to Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies
50th Symposium Saturday, May 3, 2014 from 9:00 - 4:30

Minutes of the March meeting of the Panhandle Archeological Society.

Page 6

Page 7

News & Notes:
I have a fairly complete set of back issues of a journal called “The Biblical Archaeology Review”, with issues from about 1979 through 2005.

50th Annual Symposium of the Southwestern Federation of

Page 8

Page 9

Archeological Societies staffing assignments sign-up information.

Volume 34 No. 4, April 2014

Page 3

New PPHM Curator of Archaeology Returns to Her Roots
It is refreshing to see Texas panhandle people return to live and work in our area after pursuing their careers
in other states or countries. That is the case with Veronica Arias, PhD, who is the new curator of archaeology
at Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum.
After her graduation from Amarillo High School, Arias attended Boston University, double majoring in history and international relations. “But it was in undergraduate that I
realized that I wanted to become an archaeologist,” she said. Arias
had enough credits for her two majors and then added additional
classes in archaeology and anthropology before receiving her undergraduate degree.
Bitten by the travel bug, Arias expanded her horizons. “I wanted
to explore the archaeology idea. I have roots in Argentina. My family
is originally from Argentina, so I moved to Buenos Aires and lived
there for just short of two years,” she said. She took classes at the
University of Buenos Aires in prehistory and archaeology in order to
give her the background she needed for graduate school.

Veronica Arias , PhD.

Arias chose the University of New Mexico for its archaeology program. She found that theory rather than
actual field work was more the focus there. “They just sort of assume that you’re going to get that on the side,”
she said. She did get that experience while attending there.
Arias credits her years spent in Amarillo growing up with nurturing her attraction to PPHM. “I grew up in
Amarillo, not here (Canyon), and I would have even less of a reason to come out here if the schools hadn’t introduced me to the museum,” she said.
Arias’ strong history of field work should prove to be advantageous to her duties at PPHM. “I started my
academic career as an Andean archaeologist in the Andes. So I have worked in Peru and Bolivia. In Peru I
worked a number of seasons. In Bolivia I spent one season. In Argentina I spent one season. While in Peru I
worked at some monumental archaeological sites. I worked at a site with two huge pyramids. Part of my job
was to help excavate at the base of one of those pyramids. It was not fun, because it was made out of adobe.
Imagine excavating adobe under the walls,” she said.
Arias explained that they wanted to know if the pyramid was built all at one once or in stages. She said,
“They were made all at once. It was beautiful, because we got to the bottom and there were actually carbon
samples we could take and have dated.”
Her background in archaeological field work seems to have influenced her ideas for the future at PPHM. “I
would love to offer more archaeology and anthropology classes here. If I can take out students, a work crew,
that I can train well, even if it’s just for a month in the field and the other two months in the classroom. You
can do a lot in that time period,” she said.

Volume 34 No. 4, April 2014

Page 4

“Written in Bone” coming to PPHM April 16
By Stephanie Price
Have you ever looked at bones in a museum and wondered what the person or animal looked like during its life? Forensic sculptor Amanda Danning will present a program showcasing facial reconstruction and the interesting stories
surrounding her profession.
Danning will present “Written in Bone” at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum in Canyon, Texas, on April 16 at
6 p.m. She will focus on “Sam”, whose 10,000 plus year old remains, along with those of a juvenile girl, were found in a
sediment filled shelter along the Brazos River in Central Texas. Danning was commissioned to do the facial reconstruction on the skull with collaboration from Dr. Doug Owsley, head of the physical anthropology department of the Smithsonian’s Museum of Natural History. It was determined that “Sam did not resemble any of the Native Americans known
to have resided in North America.
Join PPHM for a fascinating look at Danning’s methodology of forensic sculpting. The event will take place in the
Hazelwood Lecture hall of PPHM from 6 p.m. until 8 p.m. Light refreshments will be provided. Museum members,
West Texas A&M faculty, staff and students are free of charge and all other guests will be charged $5 at the door.
Reservations must be made by April 14. You may make reservations by contacting Amy Mitchell at
amitchell@pphm.wtamu.edu or 806-651-2242.

Volume 34 No. 4, April 2014

Page 5

You are invited to attend the
Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies 50th Symposium
Saturday, May 3, 2014 from 9:00 - 4:30
[Friday evening social, informal Saturday dinner, Sunday tours to Alibates Ruin 28 or Adobe Walls]

Hosted by the Panhandle Archeological Society
at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum in Canyon, TX
Hotels in Canyon, Texas
1. Buffalo Inn—300 23rd St., 806-655-2124; 800-526-9968; $45/night; must mention
archeology meeting to get rate.

2. Knights Inn & Suites– 24270 S. US Hwy. 87; 806-655-1132; $45/night.
3. Holiday Inn Express– 2901 4th Ave.; 806-655-4445; 800-465-4329; pet friendly;
$112/night; 2 people.
4. Best Western Palo Duro Canyon Inn & Suites– 2801 4th Ave.; 806-655-1818.

I- 27

PPHM

Volume 34 No. 4, April 2014

Page 6

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY Minutes March 19, 2014
The meeting was called to order by President Donna Otto shortly after 7:00 p.m. at the Downtown Amarillo Library
second floor Board Room. Guests and members were greeted. There were 23 in attendance: 21 members and 2
guests. The new PPHM Curator of Archeology, Veronica Arias, PhD., was introduced to those who had not met her last
month.
The following upcoming meetings and events were announced.
NOTE: the PAS April meeting will be in Canyon at the PPHM in the Hazelwood Room an hour early at 6 PM
. Apr. 26 Stone Age Fair, Museum of the Plains, 10 a.m. Perryton, TX (Contact Scott Brosowske, 806-434,0157)
. May 3 50th Annual Symposium of the SWFAS, PAS Host, PPHM
Program: Todd Smith, Chief Investigator of the Lubbock District Attorney’s office presented a report of his and Mike
Mitchell, also an investigator of the same office on their efforts to locate the site of the 1870‘s grave of Leander Gregg,
US Army in the Blanco Canyon area, using techniques of modern criminal investigation and historic documents.
MINUTES: Minutes from the previous meeting were published in the PAS Newsletter. Minutes were approved as
printed.
TREASURER’S REPORT: Treasurer Pam Allison reported a balance of $3,299.70. The report was approved.
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported a balance of $1,147.40 in the money market account
and $5,017.29 in the CD. The report was approved. Publication of a report from Chris Linz is in the works.
OLD BUSINESS: SWFAS Meeting. Paul Katz reported that the program is full with ten papers to be presented. He and
Rolla Shaller are working on the program schedule which will be printed in the April newsletter and on the PAS Web
Site. The Fifty Year Anniversary of the Federation will be kicked off by the same person who opened the first meeting. There will be a registration fee of $10.00 which includes break refreshments.
Committee Reports:
Pam Allison is working on a Friday evening social hour and a listing of lunch sites.
Bill Webb is working on suggested lodging.
Elaine Maples and Audrey Taylor are in charge of welcome bags.
Dick Carter and Careyn Henslee are in charge of registration.
Dick Carter will be the timekeeper for the presentations.
NEW BUSINESS: Next month’s program will be “Written in Bone” by Amanda Danning, who has worked with Doug
Owsley of the Smithsonian, showcasing facial reconstruction and interesting stories from her profession. The program
will be in conjunction with PPHM and will be at the Museum. The program will begin at 6 PM in the Hazelwood
Room. Reservations must be made by April 14; contact Amy Mitchell at amitchell@pphmwtamu.edu or 6512242. Light refreshments will be served. A $5.00 fee will be charged nonmembers.
Jerry Leatherman will retire as Newsletter editor with the May issue. Donna asked a for volunteer to fill the position.
MEETING ADJOURNED: There being no further business or announcements, the meeting was adjourned by Donna
Otto at 8:45 p.m.

Volume 34 No. 4, April 2014

Page 7

News & Notes:
I have a fairly complete set of back issues of a journal called “The Biblical Archaeology Review”, with issues from about
1979 through 2005. This is a high class journal with glossy pages and many color photographs. There are a number of
articles on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, Masada, the Dead Sea Scrolls among the Israeli and Palestinian sites I can
remember. I want them to go to a good home where they will be read and appreciated.
Bill Webb 806-355-6098 wwebbbb@suddenlink.net

Volume 34 No. 4, April 2014

Page 8

On Saturday, May 3, the PAS will be hosting the 50th Annual Symposium of the Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies. It is a milestone event for the Federation, and we want it to be a memorable one for the participants and the attendees.
You can make this happen by helping with one (or more) of the many tasks that must be done beforehand. Most of these tasks
are listed in the accompanying table, grouped into committees. The names already in the table are members who signed up at the
last meeting.
If there is something that you are good at doing and you would like to participate, please send an email to or call President
Donna Otto, who will be coordinating the committee activities: Ottotomfarm@aol.com or (806) 681-4181. Please provide both
your email address and a telephone number so that we can contact you with more information about your committee’s activities.
Thank you for your cooperation.

COMMITTEE

TASKS

STAFFING

Book sales

PAS and SWFAS publications

Donations and
funding

identify potential donors; solicit funds;

Friday social

find location; make arrangements

Lunch

prepare list of restaurant options with
map; take orders and deliver Board
lunch

Lodging

prepare list of lodging options and
map.

Photography

pictures of speakers; pictures of field
trip(s)

Joe Cepeda

Program

solicit participants; get abstracts;

Rolla Shaller

schedule presentations; prepare and

Pam Allison

Bill Webb

Paul Katz

Publicity

write press releases; submit to media

Registration

prepare name badges; register attendees; collect registration money

Careyn Henslee

Timekeeper; introduction of speakers

Dick Carter

Sessions

Dick Carter

Alvin Lynn
Sunday tour(s)

decide on venue(s); find guide(s);
prepare map(s)

Welcome
bags,
door prizes,
silent auction

solicit items; prepare bags; door prize
tickets; display auction items

Audrey Taylor
Elaine Maples

Volume 34 No. 4, April 2014

Page 9

April 16 - There will be an informal PAS meeting following the lecture to work on
any final details of the SWFAS Symposium. All interested members
should plan on staying for this.
April 26 - Perryton Stone Age Fair, Museum of the Plains, Perryton, TX.
10 A.M.—5 P.M. Contact Scott Brosowske (806) 434-0157.
May 3 - 50th Annual Symposium of the Southwestern Federation of Archeological
Societies at PPHM. See details on Page 12.

May 21 -Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM. Last meeting before summer
break.
Sept. 17- Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.
Oct. 15- Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.
Nov. 18- Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.
Dec. 16- Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.

