The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

President
Donna Otto

Vice-President
Scott Brosowske

Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter

Treasurer
Pamela Allison

Publications
Rolla Shaller

Newsletter Editor
Jerry Leatherman

Volume 34 No. 6, Sept. 2014

Page 2

Inside…

Next PAS
Meeting

Page 3

Page 4

Volume 34 No. 6, Sept.2014

September 21 - 7 P.M. Panhandle Archeological
Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library, 413
Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor. Dempsey Malaney will
be our guest speaker. Abstract and biography on
Page 7.

Minutes of PAS May 21st meeting.

“Kit Carson and the First Battle of Adobe Walls” by
PAS member Alvin Lynn has recently been released.

“To catch the reader's attention, place
an interesting sentence or quote from
the story here.”

Buttons, Buttons, who lost the buttons?

Page 5

News & Notes :

Page 6

Molly Goodnight Day at PPHM in Canyon.

West Texas Trails in Quitaque.

Page 7

Page 8

Dempsey Malaney abstract and biography .

Volume 34 No. 6, Sept. 2014

Page 3
PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Minutes May 21, 2014
The meeting was called to order by Vice-President Scott Brosowske in the absence of President Donna Otto
shortly after 7:00 p.m. at the Downtown Amarillo Library second floor Board Room.
There were 16 members in attendance.
The following upcoming meetings and events were announced:
. Regular meetings are the 3rd Wednesday of the month. (The next regular
meeting will be September 15 at the Amarillo Library.)
. TAS Field School, June 14-21, Columbus
PROGRAM: “New Insights into the Antelope Creek Phase of the Southern High Plains,” presented by Scott
Brosowske. Scott compared the findings of Chris Lintz’s publication from 1986 with the recent work at
Archie King Sites 1 and 2, Chill Hill, Killer and Little Killer, and Eastview. Study of residential structures,
hunting patterns, utilization of cultivated vs. native plants, and intersocietal exchange were considered.
MINUTES: Minutes of the April meeting were approved as printed in the May Newsletter.
TREASURER’S REPORT: As the treasurer was absent, there was no report.
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported a balance of $1,261.00 in the money market account and $5,025.95 in the CD. The report was approved.
OLD BUSINESS: The SWFAS Meeting was a success. Rolla read communications from three presenters
complimenting the PAS for hosting a well-run conference.
NEW BUSINESS: A new editor for the Newsletter is needed as Jerry Leatherman has retired.
The Centennial of Adobe Walls will be October 4.
MEETING ADJOURNED: There being no further business or announcements, the meeting was adjourned by
Scott Brosowske at 8:20 p.m.
Respectfully submitted,
Mary Ruthe Carter, Secretary

Volume 34 No. 6, Sept. 2014

Page 4

Alvin Lynn’s Book now on Sale
Panhandle Archaeological Society valued member and noted historian
Alvin Lynn has authored a new book that has been published by Texas
Tech University Press.
Kit Carson and the First Battle of Adobe Walls is now on sale and Alvin
is busy signing copies among his other chores.
Below is a brief account of Colonel Kit Carson’s adventures in the Texas
panhandle, during 1864.
On November 12, 1864 Colonel Kit Carson left Fort Bascom, New Mexico, with 335 soldiers and seventy-five Ute and Jicarilla Apache scouts.
They marched down the north side of the Canadian River toward Fort
Adobe -Bent's old trading post.
Early on the morning of November 25, the taunting calls of Indians reached them from across the Canadian
River, "Come over here." Carson's cavalry obliged as they laid chase down river, through the Indian village,
and on to Adobe Walls. Carson and a few troopers followed with two howitzers, which saved their skins.
At the first firing of the howitzers, the Indians fled down river but soon returned with several hundred additional Indians. By mid-afternoon, with ammunition running low and having separated from the supply wagons
the day before, the situation was bleak. Carson thought it prudent to move back up river, burn the Kiowa village, and locate his supplies.
After setting the village afire, the troops marched west for about four miles and located their wagons on a protected ridge. After a day's recuperation, the column marched back toward New Mexico arriving at Fort Bascom on December 10.
Many authors have written about Carson as mountain man, adventurer with Fremont, soldier in the Mexican
War, government liaison at Indian peace councils, and leader in the Navajo and
Apache campaigns, but history books contain almost nothing on Carson's battle
at Adobe Walls.
Alvin Lynn has filled that void. Beginning his research in the 1990s, he located
and walked the 200-mile long wagon road from Fort Bascom to Adobe Walls
and collected 1800 metal artifacts from 15 historic camps including the burned
Kiowa village. Alvin has written an account of this forgotten phase of Kit Carson's adventures, published by Texas Tech University Press.
Alvin Lynn

Volume 34 No. 6, Sept. 2014

Page 5

Buttons, Buttons, Who Lost the Buttons?
Jerry Leatherman, editor

Frequently when researching or surveying a historic site
unexpected information and/or out of the ordinary artifacts
turn up. The latter was the case for Ronnie Carpenter of Quitaque, TX. While conducting a metal detecting survey of a
historic Indian site near the Rock Creek drainage in Briscoe
County, he had an unusual hit.
Upon further investigation he uncovered a spoon, similar
in design to many in the mid 1800’s through the early parts
of the 1900’s. But that wasn’t all that was in the hole. A total
of 46 cast, presumably copper, or perhaps brass, 1/2 inch diameter buttons were eventually removed from the small hole. They were contained within
an area with an approximate eight inch diameter and
discovered at depths of three to six inches.
Flat loop back buttons are fairly common at Indian
sites but these appear to be
slightly concave with a drilled
eye on the shank. The décor is
perhaps patterned after a
child’s spinning wheel, or
something similar, and doesn’t
fit any of the various commonly found military button designs that have been recovered in the panhandle area. There are no backmarks.
If you have any thoughts or comparable pictures please send them to me
at: acerenewablesables@midplains.coop
Ronnie Carpenter

Volume 34 No. 6, Sept. 2014

Page 6

News & Notes:
September 13th- 2014 marks the 175th birthday of
Mary Ann Dyer “Molly” Goodnight, savior of the American
Bison. PPHM is partnering with Caprock Canyons State Park,
home of the Texas State Bison Herd, to celebrate this incredible Woman of the West.
Join in the celebration at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum Saturday, September 13th from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.
Guests will enjoy fun family activities, sample a bison burger
for lunch (while supplies last), and get your photo taken with
WT’s own Thunder XI who will be located near the T Anchor
Ranch cabin on PPHM’s grounds! Lunch and activities are
free with regular admission. Lunch will be available while
supplies last. Cupcakes have been generously donated by the
Cake Company of Canyon. For more information contact Amy
Mitchell at 806.651.2242 at amitchell@pphm.wtamu.edu.

October 25th- “West Texas Trails" will take center stage as co-hosts Comanchero Canyons Museum
and West Texas Historical Association sponsor a one-day seminar at the Hope Center, Quitaque, Texas, on
October 25, 9:30 a.m.-4 p.m.
Author of El Llano Estacado, Dr. John Miller Morris of UT-San Antonio, will give an overview of the West
Texas Trails and grass roots historians will give short presentations on trails they know best. Following lunch
at the Tri-County Center and a tour of
the Comanchero Canyons Museum, the conference will resume with talks and panels relating to trails of the Comanchero and Comanche, Ciboleros and buffalo hunters, Pastores and cattlemen, among others. Maps
will be on display. On Friday evening, Oct.
24, a reception for Dr. Morris will be held at
Hotel Matador in Matador at 6:30
p.m. Advance registration is required by Oct.
10. Registration and lunch is $27 and the reception is $15. For more information, contact

Marisue Potts, 806 269 -1098
or marisuepotts@hotmail.com or WTHA
at wthayb@ttu.edu.

Map Courtesy Hall County Museum-Memphis, Texas

Volume 34 No. 6, Sept. 2014

Page 7

An Introduction to the Use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in Archaeology
Dempsey L. Malaney
Abstract
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV's) are defined as power-driven aerial vehicles sustained in flight by
aerodynamic lift over most of their flight path and flown without an onboard crew. Over the last several
months UAV’s have received substantial coverage in the media. From a 60 Minutes story on the use of UAV’s
by Amazon to deliver packages to the recent story of a UAV capturing video of visitors on the observation deck
of Seattle’s famed Space Needle. The recent media attention on UAV’s, often called “Drones”, has usually
been presented in a negative light. These tools, however, can have beneficial uses for many fields, including
archaeology. This presentation examines a single type of UAV, quadcopters, and how they have been employed in local archaeological projects. Their potential for acquiring aerial images for historic period trails,
identification of archaeological features, images of excavations, and other uses will be examined.
Biography
Dempsey Malaney was born and raised in the Perryton, Texas area. He graduated from West Texas A & M
with a Bachelor of Arts degree in industrial arts and secondary education. He later obtained a Master of Arts
Degree in psychology from the University of Northern Colorado. Dempsey spent 27 years in U.S. Army retiring in 1991 at the rank of Colonel. Later, he was employed in the private industry working for SIGCOM, Anteon, Inc., and Security Solutions, Inc. In 2003 Dempsey returned to the family ranch on Wolf Creek. Since
then he has been a regular volunteer on Courson Archaeological Research (CAR) projects. He served as camp
boss for the TAS archaeological field schools in 2008 and 2009 and the 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013 CAR field
schools. He received the Francis Stickney Award from the TAS in 2009. Dempsey has been married to his
high school sweetheart, former Kara Bess Apple, for over 50 years. Together they have three children and
seven grandchildren. Dempsey is currently an Ochiltree County commissioner.

Volume 34 No. 6, Sept. 2014

Page 8

Sept. 13, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. at Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, The 175th birthday of Mary
Ann Dyer “Molly” Goodnight. See Page 7 “News and Notes” for more details.
Sept. 17- Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library, downtown,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.
Oct. 15- Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library, downtown,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.
Oct. 24-26- Texas Archaeological Society Annual Meeting, October 24 – 26, 2014, San Marcos.
For more information: http://www.txarch.org/Activities/AnnualMeeting/am2014/

Oct. 25- The West Texas Trails meeting will be at the Hope Center at Quitaque, Texas. See
Page 7 “News and Notes” for more details.
Oct. 29– Nov. 1- Plains Anthropological Society Conference, Fayetteville, Arkansas. For more
information: http://www.plainsanthroconf.com/
Nov. 18- Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library, downtown,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.
Jan. 6 – 11, 2015- Society for Historical Archaeology Annual Meeting, Seattle, Washington.
For more information: http://www.sha.org/index.php/view/page/annual_meetings

