PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society

April Vol. 31, No. 4

The Panhandle Archeological Society will hold it's next meeting on Wednesday April 20,
2011, at 7:00pm, at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center Science Building, 2301 N. Soncy
Road, in Amarillo, Texas. Our program will be presented by Joseph Cepeda.

President:
Paul Katz
Vice-President:
Jeff Indeck
Secretary:
Vacant

Treasurer:
Lisa Jackson
Publications:
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor:
Scott Brosowske

Joseph Cepeda received his Bachelor of Science and Ph.D. in Geology
from the University of Texas at Austin. In the time between those two
degrees he earned a Master of Science in Geology from the New Mexico
Institute of Mining and Technology. He has been teaching geology at West
Texas A&M University since 1977. His research interests early in his
tenure at WTAMU were in field mapping and igneous and metamorphic
rocks. More recently, his research interests have included the erosional and
depositional histories of the Dry Cimarron River in New Mexico and
Oklahoma and the Playa lakes of the Texas Panhandle.

Dr Joseph Cepeda

Rocks and Geologic History of the Texas Panhandle and Surrounding Area
Joseph Cepeda

The present-day landscape of the Texas Panhandle is the result of a long period of geologic
history. Although the oldest rocks in the Panhandle area are more than 600 million years old,
rocks exposed at the surface are no more than about 250 million years old (late Permian). The
most extensive rock formations widely exposed at the surface date from the following geologic
periods: Permian, Triassic, Tertiary, and Quaternary. These rocks provide four windows into the
geologic history of the last 250 million years. Additional clues to the geologic history of our area
are provided by rocks that are found outside the Panhandle.
Taken together the evidence in the rocks reveals that the area has been inundated by marine
waters during at least portions of the Permian and Cretaceous periods. In the time period between
marine transgressions, this area was part of a great river system, the details of which are just now
beginning to be revealed. Some of the data suggest that the Panhandle area was near the
headwaters of this major Triassic and Jurassic river system-other data suggest the river system
originated in the American Midwest. All the evidence indicates that the river flowed from east to
west and eventually into the ocean that is today called the Pacific.
Beginning about 15 million years ago during the mid- to late-Tertiary, the front ranges of the
Rocky Mountains were uplifted and the response was a vast blanket of erosional debris that was
spread across the Texas Panhandle. In places this debris (sand, silt, and gravel) accumulated to a
thickness of more than 500 feet. About 100 years ago geologists
formally designated this blanket of erosional debris as the Ogallala
Inside this issue
Formation. Above the Ogallala Formation are numerous deposits of
Page 2: Minutes from
Quaternary age - lake beds, sand dunes, and alluvium as well as a
last month's meeting
near continuous deposit of windblown silt that has now been
designated as the Blackwater Draw Formation.
Page 3: "A Little Daub'll
Geologists have devised a number of chemical, physical, and
Do Ya," But More Is
Better
conceptual tools to interpret the cryptic clues in the geologic record.
A number of these tools (with examples) as to how they can be
Page 4: Announcements
applied to archeological investigations will also be discussed.

Page 2
Panhandle Archeological Society
Minutes of the March 16, 2011 Meeting
President Paul Katz called the meeting to order at 7:04 p.m. at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center. 16 members and
one guest were in attendance. The guest was Rozanna Pfeiffer, Chief of Interpretation at Lake Meredith and
Alibates.
The next meeting of the PAS will be held on Wednesday, April 20 at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center, beginning
at 7:00 p.m. Joe Cepeda will speak on the geology of the Texas Panhandle. On May 18, Gerry Schultz will speak
on the paleontology of the Texas Panhandle.
Jeff introduced the evening speaker, Dr. Paul Katz. He spoke about Irish archaeology and archaeoastronomy.
The business meeting began at 8:05. The minutes of the February 16, 2010 meeting were approved unanimously;
motion by Scott, second by Jeff.
Lisa gave the Treasurer's report. The current operating balance is $1,868.20.
Rolla gave the Publication Committee report. The current checking account balance is $2,620.34, plus $5,000 in
a CD. Jeff has scanned the two Pollyanna Hughes manuscripts for Scott and Joe D. to evaluate for possible
publication.
There was a discussion about the upcoming Science Day at Lamar Elementary School in Amarillo, scheduled for
Friday, April 15. Opinions were expressed as to whether the activities should be a series of demonstrations (e.g.,
tool making, corn grinding, pottery making) or just one activity that the students would participate in and then be
able to take something away with them. The consensus was to focus on artistic expressions, such as rock art,
beadwork, and ledger drawing. Both prehistoric and historic examples of techniques and designs would be shown
to the students by a PowerPoint presentation for a few minutes, and then they would be given a blank paper plate
and a marker so that they could make their own drawing or designs based on what they had just seen. PAS
members would be in the classroom to assist and encourage. Anyone wishing to participate between 8:30 and 2:00
should contact Paul at: Katzes-PRIAM@msn.com He will make up a schedule and coordinate the PAS
participation.
Our website is growing, largely due to submissions from Courson Archaeological Research. To access it, it is
necessary to use the complete URL:
http://www.txpanhandlearchaeology.org It is recommended that this be bookmarked.
Rolla reported on the status of the 2011 Southwestern Federation of Archaeological Societies annual symposium,
hosted by the Concho Valley Archaeological Society on Saturday, April 9 at Fort Concho. Joe. D. represents the
PAS with his paper. At least four other PAS members are planning to attend. There is no registration fee this year,
and no evening banquet. The featured speaker, Dr. Bruce Dickson from TAMU, will speak in the afternoon. There
will be Sunday field trips.
Scott provided an update on the 2011 CAR Field School, which will be held from May 23 - June 10. The first
two weeks will investigate prehistoric sites, including Eastview, Spider Peak, and Chill Hill. The third week will
be devoted to metal detecting at historic sites. Registration is free to PAS members, and a catered meal plan is
available. The enrollment will be limited to 50, and it is filling rapidly. Many of the enrollees are students, who
will be able to earn college credit.
Scott also updated the Stone Age Fair at the museum in Perryton on Saturday, April 23rd from 10:00 - 5:00.
There is no charge for table space for those wishing to display collections. Security will be provided.
The meeting adjourned at 8:35 p.m.

Page 3
"A Little Daub'll Do Ya," But More Is Better
Daub: A material used around the world in the construction of buildings for at least 6000 years. Usually the
mixture consists of locally acquired clays or other sediments, mixed with water….yeah….mud. The daub is
applied by hand to some kind of frame or latticework and allowed to dry, forming a plaster that aids in repelling
the elements. Some cultures used grass, straw or other fibrous materials to improve cohesion. The material may
be used on floors, walls, and roofing or around hearths.
When a house burns the varying temperatures involved may alter the daub by a "firing" process that mimics
that of making pottery. The varying proportions of fuel and oxygen affect the daub through oxidation or
reduction and produces "burned daub." Through this process some of the daub may really become "potterylike," and will be impervious to water, while other daub will not. The structure will now be exposed to the
elements and site formation processes that will partially deteriorate some of the daub and cover and protect
other sections.
What all this means to archaeology is what the daub can tell us about the structure. The layers of the different
daub types may serve to protect the underlying surfaces, structural elements, artifacts and ecofacts. The pieces
which were "fired" can act as negative molds and reveal details about structural materials such as size,
orientation, species and possibly even seasonality. The impressions made by sticks, reeds, grass or even hand
prints may be preserved. Other impressions may contain evidence of lashings that reveal more structural
information. The daub itself may have inclusions or voids that tell if the material was procured locally or
brought in as an "exotic" for specific reasons. Coloration of the daub can tell of the different temperatures
involved in the destruction of the structure and provide some elements of event sequence. The amount of daub
and its melted residue may be a clue to the size and arrangement of the structure and the labor involved in its
construction.
In time the daub may find its way to the surface to alert the archaeologist to the presence of the structure. The
structure then tells us about those who lived there. Which is the ultimate goal of playing in the mud in the first
place, isn't it?
Joe D. Rogers

Page 4
Common Artifacts of the Southern High Plains: Quartzite Boiling Stones
One of the more typical artifacts recovered at prehistoric sites of the Southern High Plains are quartzite
boiling stones. These artifacts are most commonly recovered at Archaic and Ceramic period residential sites
and hunting camps of the region. Boiling stones were typically about fist-sized and had water worn surfaces.
Suitable pebbles were often procured from the Ogallala Formation and other secondary gravel sources. With
repeated heating and cooling events the pebbles would fracture and were discarded. Exterior colors of these
pebbles are often gray, pinkish red or maroon and often retain some discoloration from heating. Fractured
interiors display quartz crystals and mica flecks that give them a "sparkly" appearance. Boiling stones are
easily distinguished from hammerstones used for flintknapping or fracturing bison bone by the absence of
battering along their edges.
The process of stone boiling involved directly heating fist-sized stones in an open fire until they were
thoroughly heated, usually about 30 to 45 minutes. These stones were then transferred to a vessel containing
water until the boiling point was reached. Additional stones were added to maintain a boil. Vessels used
included stomach paunches suspended from a tripod or quadpod and shallow, basin shaped pits dug into the
ground and lined with a green bison hide. A variety of foods, including tongue, heart, kidneys, soups, and
many others, were prepared using this method. Bone grease, a key ingredient in making pemmican, was also
obtained by boiling bison bone fragments in water.
Additional sources containing information on early cooking techniques and recipes used by inhabitants of
the Great Plains include "Buffalo Bird Woman's Garden" by Gilbert L. Wilson, "The Indian Tipi: Its History,
Construction, and Use" by Reginald and Gladys Laubin, and "Feasting and Fasting with Lewis &Clark: A
Food and Social History of the Early 1800's" by Leandra Zim Holland.
Scott D. Brosowske

Page 5
PAS Member Highlight
5. What would be your vision for PAS in
the next ten years? I would like to see
PAS return to it's roots and become a
vibrant, outgoing organization with a vast
array of year round educational programs
and activities for all ages, families, students,
etc.

1. How long have you been a member of
PAS? 6 Months
2. What first sparked your interest in
archaeology? Finding stone artifacts at
oilfield locations around Midland, Texas
when I was a kid. A later trip to Mesa
Verde sealed the deal.
3. What is your best find or most
interesting moment with PAS or with
archaeology in general? Finding a broken
knife blade and two coscojos near Wolf
Creek. I'm still easily amused.

6. What is your favorite archaeological
site or topic? Any pre-history or history of
Stacy L. Brown the Texas Panhandle.
7. Tell us a little bit about yourself: I was
born in Perryton, raised in Midland, recently
retired from the United States Coast Guard,
and moved back to the family farm in
Perryton.

4. If you could have any choice, what
would be your dream find, site, or
location? Hard to say, everything is still
pretty exciting. It's highly unlikely, but it
would be really cool if I could find my
great-grand dads dugout somewhere in
Beaver County.

PAS Website
Type in the complete URL as shown
http://www.txpanhandlearchaeology.org

CAR 2011 Field School
Courson Archaeological Research will be conducting it's
2011 Field School from May 23rd to June 10th. The first
two weeks will be field excavations at two Antelope Creek
phase sites and a defensive late Archaic encampment near
the Canadian River. The third week will consist of metal
detecting historic period sites. PAS members may attend
at no cost, other than catered meals if desired. For more
information, check our website:

www.coursonarchresearch.com

Upcoming Events, and Announcements

.

.
.

Southwest Federation Of Archaeological
Societies, April 9th, 2011,
San Angelo, Tx.
Lamar Elementary Science Day, Friday
15, 2011 8:30 am to 2:00 pm
Amarillo, TX.
Perryton Stone Age Fair. Museum of
the Plains, Perryton, Texas. April 23,2011
10:00 am - 5:00 pm

