Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

Volume 35 # 1 January 2015

President
Donna Otto
Vice President
Scott Brosowske

Secretary
Mary Ruthe
Carter

Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor

Beryl C. Hughes

In this issue, we honor

Floyd V. Studer

Table of Contents
Page 2a

Notes From the Editor’s Desk

Page 3

Speaker for January

Page

3a -4 Studer Banquet

Page

5-7

Floyd V. Studer

NO MINUTES
The Studer Banquet takes the place of the regular meeting in December, so there are no minutes this month.

Notes from the Editor’s Desk
Thanks for all the kind comments on our Curmudgeon edition.
Most found it “amusing” and some even said they learned something from it!
Letter to the Editor

Guys:
Just got the latest issue of PAS. I’m struggling on how to enter the “cache of curmudgeons” into my lithic cache
database. The newsletter says the organization has no rolls, but the picture proves this to not be a true statement. Several are piled on the table and in people’s hands.
The picture also suggests that several are crusty, but are they flakey, or cherty? Just not sure how to classify this
odd group of eccentrics.
Any/all suggestions are appreciated.
Chris
Reply

Flakey, Chris. Definitely flakey.
As to the rolls, if this continues to be a problem for you, here’s a suggestion.

Paul Katz started December off for us
with a party at his home in Panhandle,
to which all of PAS was invited.
Of course the highlight of December,
from the point of view of PAS, is the
annual Studer Banquet. Some of our
newcomers may not know exactly who
Floyd Studer was, and why we continue to honor him every year.
With this in mind, the January issue of
the Newsletter is devoted to him and
his contributions to Panhandle Archaeology.

Selfie

Next Meeting: Wednesday , January 21, 2015, 7:00 p.m.
Amarillo Downtown Library, 2nd floor Board Room.
Please join us for dinner at 5:30, Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor.

Our speaker will be Dallas Ward.

Abstract
In 1903, JF Maxey and his family moved to Garza County, Texas to establish a new homestead – taking advantage of the 1895 “four section act.”
The Maxey family spent 11 years at the homestead where they farmed and
raised stock. In 1914, Maxey sold his holdings to a local rancher and moved
5 1/2 miles away establishing a new residence near Graham. Maxey moved
his house onto the new property were it now resides. Maxey later covered the
structure in rocks he collected, most likely at the new location.

Dallas Ward

As part of the Lubbock Lake Landmark regional research program, the original
homestead was surveyed and several historic trash features were excavated. In addition, multi-image photogrammetry was used to document the rock house and interviews of Maxey’s three granddaughters that reside in the Post
community were conducted. The importance of this research is that it provides an example of early homesteading in
western Texas.
Digital aspects are incorporated to enhance site interpretation.

Biography
I have lived in Lubbock, Texas my whole life and graduated in 2009 from Texas Tech University with a double
major in History and Anthropology. I am currently a candidate for a Master of Sciences in Heritage Management
with a minor in Museum Sciences pending the completion of my thesis work on ranching heritage. I am the staff
historic archaeologist for the Lubbock Lake Landmark regional research program.
My research interests are late 19th and early 20th century American and Texas history, historical archaeology, early
settlement, and West Texas Ranching History

The 37th Annual Floyd V. Studer Banquet was held December 13, 2014.
It seems most fitting that the banquet honoring Studer was held at P-PHM, given his part in the founding of that institution.
Our thanks and congratulations to Veronica and Rolla and their helpers for a successful evening. Also, if you’ll forgive me, we need to extend a word of thanks to those who attended, those who brought their donations for the auction, and those who purchased the various items. This event is after all our major fund-raiser for the year, and without funds — well, you know.
In past years we have sometimes honored individuals for their contributions to Panhandle archaeology. The first
such acknowledgment went to Jack T. Hughes; some of the recent honorees have been Jeff Indeck, Roberta Speer
and Joe D. Rogers.
[Quick! Somebody do something memorable so we can honor you next year!]

Studer Banquet

— December 13, 2014

Photos by Rolla Shaller
Our speaker was Regge N. Wiseman, N.M. Office of Archaeological Studies

Excavations at a Late Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Pithouse Village in the Roswell Oasis
and their Bearing on Southeastern New Mexico Prehistory

Floyd V. Studer 18921966

This picture was taken in 1907. Studer was 15 years old and a student of T.L.
Eyerly at Canadian Academy, when Eyerly decided to take one of his classes
to visit the Buried City, a ruin along Wolf Creek in Ochiltree County. Was it
before or after this that Studer, roaming the hills around his father’s farm,
picked up the tooth of a mastadon?

No matter. It is from these small things, these little non-occurrences, that great
things grow.
As he would later write, “ I have made of it a lifetime relief occupation. … For
45 years, whenever possible, I worked on those ruins—surveying, mapping,
photographing, digging. … While engaged in commercial activities in Amarillo, this was my relaxation on weekends and holidays. Every means of transportation made available in those years was used—shanks’ mare, horseback,
buckboard, motorcycle, Model T, later models—until finally the airplane
solved a lot of the problems.”
In his daily working life he was an insurance man. This gave him the time and
the excuse to travel the Panhandle. As he visited with farmers and ranchers, he
had a chance to gain their confidence so they would allow him to walk their
land. In his “relief occupation,” he located and mapped more than 200 sites.
1907

PANHANDLE-PLAINS HISTORICAL SOCIETY. The Panhandle-Plains Historical Society was organized at
Canyon in February 1921 by Joseph A. Hill, then president of West Texas State Teachers' College, Lester F.
Sheffy, chairman of the history department, Hattie M. Anderson, a member of the history faculty, and thirty-six
other faculty members and students. Sheffy was elected the society's first president for 1921–22 and served many
years thereafter as field secretary. The society shared some members and purposes with the Panhandle Old Settlers
Association and was incorporated on April 21, 1923. Its purpose was to collect and preserve source materials and
relics dealing with the natural history, pioneer life, and development of the Panhandle and High Plains region of
Texas and to encourage the study of the area. In 1928 the society published the first issue of its annual journal,
the Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, with J. Evetts Haley as editor. The following year the organization
launched its campaign to raise money for a museum building, which was completed on the West Texas campus in
August 1932 and opened to the public on April 14, 1933.
"PANHANDLE-PLAINS HISTORICAL SOCIETY," Handbook of Texas Online(http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/
articles/vtp02), accessed December 19, 2014. Uploaded on June 15, 2010. Published by the Texas State Historical Association.

By 1931, things were coming together. The Panhandle-Plains Historical Society was ten years old and had begun publishing the Panhandle-Plains Historical Review. They had begun raising money for a building. This was to be the first
historical museum in the State of Texas, so there was no one who could guide them to an answer of the fundamental
question: What are you going to put in this building, and where are you going to get it? Relics of Pioneer Life abounded, but what about Natural History?
Enter Floyd V. Studer.
He had stacks of scientific leases, gathered during his 45 years of “relaxation.” He offered them to the Society for the
Museum in return for an appointment as Director of Archaeology and Paleontology. He remained in this non-paid position until 1952, when Jack T. Hughes was hired. By 1934 Studer had persuaded West State Teachers College to install
classes for Paleontology and Anthropology. When Hughes came, he was to teach those classes while working half-time

at the Museum. He soon learned that, as he would put it in later years, there is no such thing as half-time work.
There’s only half-time pay.

EXCLUSIVE PRIVILEGE to
INVESTIGATE this LOCATION
and other Archaeological and Paleontological Sites on this ranch

HAS BEEN LEGALLY GRANTED

Trespassers will be prosecuted under the law

Panhandle Plains Historical Society

—sign posted by Floyd Studer
As the result of its research, and donations by Studer and others, the Museum soon gathered an impressive collection
of stone tools. Then as now, observers marveled at the beauty of the flint.

This hill is the source of the wonderful flint that has
held man spellbound for thousands of years. It holds
countless pits where men dug for the magical stone
and spent hour after hour working it into projectile
points, knives and other tools.

It is often said that Floyd Studer had a secret, which he
kept for 35 years. That “secret” was the source of Alibates flint. According to the Texas State Historical Association, “Floyd V. Studer has been credited with the
discovery of the quarries in modern times.” On the contrary, Bob Wishoff wrote that,

.

Studer remained an active member of the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society, served on its
board and held its highest elect“First mentioned by Lt. J. W. Abert in 1845, it remained
ed offices in the mid to late
for Charles N. Gould in 1907 to name the white dolo1950s
mite ‘Alibates’ after nearby Alibates Creek (Carroll
1941:64-69; Gould 1907:9). However, in a speech dedicating an official Texas State Historical Marker in honor of Gould, H. E. Hertner claimed that
the name of Alibates flint was a corruption of the name of ‘Allen Bates’, a local rancher’s son on whose land Alibates
Creek is located (Banks 1990:91; Bowers 1975:5). “
It would seem then that the source of the flint had been known since 1845. Studer’s ”secret” had to be something else. In
the opinion of this writer, Studer’s “secret” was not a hill that had been identified long ago. His secret was a plan he had
developed for the preservation of the site.
By the 1950s, Studer having been born in 1892, was in his 60s. Jack Hughes had arrived to take over many of his duties at
the Museum, freeing a large part of Studer’s time. He couldn’t risk letting his great project die with him. It was clear that
after 35 years of lonely pondering, the only way he could preserve his secret was to share it. Not with a handful of friends,
but with the whole world.
No one can say that Studer didn’t know how to select the best people to promote his project. He drew in Henry Hertner,
photographer, civic leader, member of the Potter County Historical Survey Committee.
Together they began gathering local support, and finally reached out to Stewart Udall. Udall was Secretary of the Interior from 1961 to 1969 under presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson. During those eight years, Udall oversaw
the addition of four national parks, six national monuments, eight national seashores and lakeshores, nine national recreation areas, twenty national historic sites, and fifty-six national wildlife refuges, including Canyonlands National Park in
Utah, North Cascades National Park in Washington, Redwood National Park in California, the Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge in New Jersey, and the Appalachian National Scenic Trail stretching from Georgia to Maine.
Because of its peculiar history, Texas had not a single National Monument. Studer and Hertner approached Udall with their
plan, which he agreed was a sound one..

On March 10, 1965, Congress passed a bill making the site into a monument, explaining the reasons for
national monument status:
"For 12,000 years or more the Alibates Flint Quarries were worked by Indians living in the Panhandle
area of Texas. From these quarries came the multicolored flint arrowheads and tools which were both
used by the inhabitants of the locality and traded by them for goods supplied from far-distant sources.
Flints from these quarries have been found as far north as Minnesota and Wisconsin, as far west as the
Pacific coast, and as far south as the Gulf of Mexico. Professional archaeologists regard the quarries as
one of the outstanding remains of the prehistoric cultures of North America."
On August 31, 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the bill into law,
creating the first (and so far, only) national monument in Texas.

Studer was 73 years old. He had devoted nearly 60 years to Panhandle Archaeology. 200 sites located and
mapped. The first historical museum in Texas, the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum. Classes in archaeology
and related subjects at now-West Texas A&M University. And finally, the only National Monument in Texas.

Only six months after President Johnson signed the bill, almost a year to the day from the time Congress passed it,
Floyd V. Studer’s heart beat for the last time.
His work was finished; the Alibates Flint Quarries were preserved.

