PASTIMES
The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

President
Donna Otto
Vice-President
Jeff Indeck
Secretary
Stacy Brown
Treasurer
Lisa Jackson
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Scott Brosowske

Vol. 32, No. 2, February 2012

PASTIMES

Page 1

Vol. 32, No. 2, Feb. 2012

In this issue

Page 2

February Meeting Guest Speaker,
February Meeting Information

Page 3-5

Rocky Dell: PAS Field Trip Reveiw
by Stacy L. Brown

Page 6-8

Identifying Archaic Period Projectile Points of the
Texas Panhandle
by Scott D. Brosowske

Page 9

Minutes from the last meeting

Page 10

Announcements, Updates, Upcoming Events
On the front cover: A large clay
cordmarked vessel is uncovered
during the CAR 2011 field
school. Photo by Ashley Newton

Page 2

The Panhandle Archaeological Society will hold it's next meeting on Wednesday
February 15, 2012, at 7:00 pm, at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center Science Building,
2301 N. Soncy Road, in Amarillo, Texas. Our program will be presented by Teddy Lou
Stickney.

Teddy Lou Stickney

Panhandle Rock Art Sites
Teddy Stickney
Texas Rock Art Foundation
Abstract
Rock art sites of the Texas panhandle represent a collection of records left behind by the various bison
hunting cultures that inhabited the Llano Estacado. Sites in the western portion of the region are found
at springs on the various tributaries to the Canadian River. Here, water has eroded out the canvas (rocks)
that they used for their artwork. Each site represents a collection of images that tell a story of what was
important to the individual artists that visited that site.

Biography
I have been involved with recording rock art in Texas since the 1989 Texas Archaeological Society field
school at Dolan Springs. The rock art recording group has recorded over 144 sites in the western half of
Texas since that field school. The sites have varied from Fate Bell Shelter in Seminole Canyon, which took
over 80 hours to record, to a small site which took less than an hour to document. I have also been involved
in recording sites in New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, and Colorado. Being born and raised in the Four Corners
area, I was introduced to archeology early in life. Living in this region also provided the opportunity to
become familiar with the various Indian cultures that inhabit this area. The last couple of years I have been
researching rock art images and trying to identify the artwork of individual artists.

Rocky Dell: PAS Field Trip Review

Page 3

Stacy L. Brown

G

iven the nature of the geology and topography of
the Texas Panhandle, the region is not widely known for
prehistoric and historic native rock art. Fortunately for
members of the Panhandle Archaeological Society, they
were recently privileged to visit the Rocky Dell site in
western Oldham County, Texas; one of the true gems of
rock art in the Panhandle. This site contains a remarkable record of rock art from a number of different
cultural groups, including prehistoric and historic period
Native Americans, Spanish explorers, cowboys, and
early settlers.
Saturday, January 18th began bright and early with
everyone meeting at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center at
9:00 am. Everyone piled into four-wheel drive vehicles
and headed toward Adrian, Texas. After traveling
approximately 40 miles west, we then headed north to
the first site to be visited that day: a low water crossing
on the Fort Smith to Santa Fe Trail. Long used by Native
Americans, military expeditions, and early settlers,
grooves worn into the bedrock by wagon wheels are still
plainly visible today. Here, PAS member Alvin Lynn read
excerpts from reports of several 19th century expeditions that passed here and described the flora, fauna,
topography, streams, and rock art of the area. The vast
majority of accounts portray a flat, dry countryside that
was less than flattering! As with all of the sites that PAS

visited on this day long tour, we found exhausted
chipped stone cores, burned rock, resharpening flakes,
and other debitage scattered everywhere.
Overlooking a small tributary of the Canadian River,
members gathered near an area of exposed bedrock
that had a path worn deep into the bedrock. This path
was created over the centuries by countless herds of
bison drawn to this location by spring fed water
contained near the head of this tributary canyon (or was
it the hunting magic conducted by the native peoples
who frequented Rocky Dell?). Also present near the trail
were dozens of round and oval bedrock mortars pecked
into the surrounding bedrock and boulders.

The briefing
before the
PAS
members
and guest
are turned
loose to
veiw
the site.

Page 4
The wagon tracks
are still clearly
visible

Moving down
into the canyon,
and onto the highlight of the day,
was a group of
rock art panels
known as Rocky
Dell
(41OL4).
Located on a
southern tributary
of the Canadian
River, this site has
a long history of visitation by peoples dating from
prehistoric times to recent inhabitants and curious
explorers. Members began filtering down to the rock
art panels contained under a rock overhang adjacent
to what had once been a vibrant spring fed tributary of
the Canadian River prior to pump irrigation. Here,
members viewed abundant images painted or etched
onto the panel surface, including bison and cattle, a
wolf or bear, numerous tick or tally marks, several
anthropomorphic figures that may represent hunters
and/or dancers, and numerous other designs or
figures whose meanings remain unclear. It has been
speculated that some of the early native art present,
including the potential dancers and a 13 foot long
serpent, were created by distant Puebloan peoples
that may have visited the area. These interpretations,
as with most rock art, are open to debate.
The rock art and
the
effects of
visitors
through the
years

Unfortunately, Floyd Studer chalked over many of the
early rock art figures represented at Rocky Dell over a

thirty year period beginning in the late 1930’s. Teddy
Stickney of the Texas Rock Art Foundation has been
documenting the rock art of west Texas, including
Rocky Dell, over the last twenty years, and has speculated that some of the chalk outlines may not accurately depict some of the original art that was once
present. Indeed, as the rock art faded and the site was
revisited, some of the original figures may have been
misremembered or embellished by Studer.
Mortar holes

In addition to native artists, Hispanic and Anglo travelers, and cowboys, more recent visitors have also
been attracted to the area by the inviting, cool spring
waters and the shade trees that once marked this
isolated tributary canyon. Following the long tradition
preserved in stone at Rocky Dell, these individuals
also inscribed their names or initials into the soft rock
and provide a nearly continuous history of the inhabitants and travelers that have visited this corner of the
Texas panhandle since the late 1800’s. Regrettably,
these latter activities have also destroyed some of the
original rock art that was once present at this incredible site.
After a short break in which members enjoyed a
leisurely lunch, participants enjoyed the early afternoon hours by taking hundreds of pictures of the
artwork at Rocky Dell and exploring the surrounding
area. Many more ephemeral camp sites containing
artifact scatters and what may be tipi rings were
discovered throughout the course of the afternoon.
Some of these prehistoric sites may be associated with
regular or annual treks to this traditional sacred site by
inhabitants of the region. Overall, all of the members
present were very appreciative of Alvin Lynn and the
current land owners for working together to allow us
the unique opportunity to visit this fantastic site!

Page 5

Some photos from the PAS
tour at Rocky Dell

PAS explores
the Rocky Dell
site

Photos by Stacy L. Brown

The Bison Trail

Rock art

Texas cattle maybe?

Bill Webb checking
out the Rocky Dell
site

Page 6

Identifying Archaic Period Projectile Points
of the Texas Panhandle
Scott D. Brosowske

Previous archaeological fieldwork in the Texas panhandle and adjoining areas of Oklahoma, New Mexico, and

west Texas have concentrated largely on either early (i.e., Paleoindian) or late (i.e., Middle or Late Ceramic) period
sites. As a result, the chipped stone assemblages of these cultural periods are fairly well known, especially the
types of projectile points used. In contrast, except for some Late Archaic period bison kills, Archaic period sites have
garnered little research attention. Consequently, the chipped stone tool assemblages for this time period, including
the types of projectile points used, are not as well known. Despite the lack of basic typological and chronological
information, stemmed Archaic period dart points recovered from the region are frequently assigned to “Types”
defined for other parts of Texas, particularly central Texas. This brief discussion questions the utility of this practice,
largely because it may imply that chipped stone technological traditions of the Texas panhandle developed from or
were closely related to areas southeast of the High Plains. Based on patterns that developed during the preceding
Paleoindian period, it is suggested here that numerous Early, Middle, and probably even some Late Archaic period
projectile point forms of the region are more likely related to cultural traditions of the Central and Northwest Plains.
As noted above, previous archaeological investigations of the region have focused largely on either Paleoindian
or Ceramic period sites. Paleoindian sites examined in or near the panhandle include Miami, Blackwater Draw,
Lubbock Lake, Jake Bluff, Lipscomb, Cooper, Lake Theo, Plainview, Nall, San Jon, Rex Rodgers, Milnesand, Ted
Williamson, Perry Ranch, and Horace Rivers. Projectile point types recovered from these sites are well defined and
include Clovis, Folsom, Midland, Plainview, Agate Basin, Hell Gap, Scottsbluff, Eden, Frederick, and Allen. Of these
point types, the latter six are best known from sites on the Central or Northwest Plains. It is also worth noting that
in terms of geographical distributions, the Oklahoma and Texas panhandles represent the southernmost expressions for these same point types.

Page 7
The appearance of Agate Basin, Hell Gap, Scottsbluff, Eden, Frederick, and Allen projectile point forms in the
Oklahoma and Texas panhandles during the Paleoindian period appear to represent expansions of lithic technological traditions into the region from the Central Plains. While this observation may not be new or original, the
idea that this trend continued well into the Archaic period seems to be less well acknowledged. Indeed, private
surface collections from the region often contain abundant examples of Archaic period projectile point types
typically associated with the Central and Northwest Plains and Foothills regions. Most often these point types
include Hawkins, Duncan, Hanna, Mallory, Yonkee, Pelican Lake, and Besant. A similar observation has been
noted by Ballenger (1999) for projectile points recovered from the Goff Creek Drainage in the Oklahoma panhandle and from the Palo Duro Creek drainage in the northern Texas panhandle.
Many avocational archaeologists in the Texas panhandle use A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of
Texas Indians (Turner and Hester 1999) for the
identification of projectile points recovered in the
region. However, while certainly an excellent book
and useful for identifying some Paleoindian and
Middle and Late Ceramic period points, it is not as
helpful for identifying Archaic period projectile
points from the Texas panhandle. The primary
reason for this is that this guide does not include
any Archaic period projectile points from the Texas
panhandle; all of the projectile points illustrated have geographical distributions from other parts of the state. In
addition, none of the points noted above as commonly occurring in the region (i.e., Hawkins, Duncan, Hanna,
Mallory, Yonkee, Pelican Lake, and Besant) are included in this publication. It is also worth noting that several
Paleoindian point types that commonly occur in the region are also not included in this book (e.g., Agate Basin,
Frederick, Allen, and Pryor).
As a result, avocationalists and archaeologists working in the Texas panhandle and
adjoining areas have to use other guides in
order to identify many of the Archaic period
projectile points recovered in the region. Perhaps most helpful is the four part special
bulletin series published by the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society (Bell 1958, 1960;
Perino 1968, 1971). These guides are useful
in that they include all of the projectile points
mentioned above that are absent from A Field
Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
However, these guides can be somewhat
confusing because they also include large
numbers of projectiles found elsewhere and they lack maps depicting geographical distributions of the projectile
points included. In some cases, individuals have begun using various “Identification and Price Guide” books for
identifying projectile points of the region. Unfortunately, use of these guides invariably ends up in the misidentification of points as projectiles that do not occur in the region.
In 2006 Jeb Taylor published Projectile Points of the High Plains (Taylor 2006). This is an excellent guide
designed for the identification of projectile points from the Central, Northwest, and Northern Plains. However, for
the reason mentioned above, it is also very helpful for identifying points from the Oklahoma and Texas panhandles.
This lengthy volume (i.e., 455 pgs.) includes color photographs of projectile points and other tool forms found on
the High Plains and provides an excellent discussion of a wide variety of toolstone used by plains societies. Perhaps the only drawbacks to this book are the absence of technical drawings showing the flaking patterns on
artifacts and its hefty price tag (i.e., $140.00). Nonetheless, it is an excellent and well researched identification
guide.

Page 8

In closing, it is clear is that Archaic projectile points of the Texas and Oklahoma panhandles are generally quite
unique from other parts of Texas. As a result, for the reasons discussed here it may not be appropriate or useful
in many instances to assign projectile points found in the region to types formally defined for other areas of Texas
until additional work is completed. With this being said, it is certainly reasonable to note that a given point is morphologically “similar” or “like” a certain point type found elsewhere. As additional fieldwork is completed on
Archaic period sites of the region, it is likely that other relationships between the Central and Southern High Plains
witl be recognized.

REFERENCES CITED
Ballenger, Jesse A.M.
1999 Goff Creek: Artifact Collection Strategy and Occupation Prehistory on the Southern High Plains,
Texas County, Oklahoma. Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History, University of Oklahoma and
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Memior 8. Norman, Oklahoma.
Bell, Robert E.
1958 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points. Special Bulletin No. 1, Oklahoma Anthropological Society. Norman, Oklahoma.
Bell, Robert E.
1960 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points. Special Bulletin No. 2, Oklahoma Anthropological Society. Norman, Oklahoma.
Perino, Gregory
1968 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points. Special Bulletin No. 3, Oklahoma Anthropological Society. Norman, Oklahoma.
Perino, Gregory
1971 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points. Special Bulletin No. 4, Oklahoma Anthropological Society. Norman, Oklahoma.
Taylor, Jeb
2006 Projectile Points of the High Plains. Jeb Taylor Artifacts Inc., Buffalo, Wyoming.
Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1999 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Taylor Trade Publishing, Lanham, Maryland.

Page 9

PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of the January 18, 2012 Meeting

-President Donna Otto called the meeting at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center to order at 7:10 p.m. Twentyseven members and guests were in attendance.
-The next meeting of the PAS will be February 15, 2012 at 7:00 p.m. at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center.
PROGRAM
-Donna introduced the evening speaker, Jerry Leatherman. Jerry’s program focused on General Mackenzie’s
Rock Creek Skirmish in Briscoe County, Texas. He presented a very informative program on the history of the
area and events leading up to the battle. His PowerPoint presentation included maps, artifacts, and pictures
of the site.
BUSINESS MEETING
-The business meeting began at the conclusion of Jerry’s lecture.
-The minutes of the November 16, 2011 meeting were approved.
-Lisa gave the treasurer’s report. The current operating balance is $2,661.49. The treasurer’s report was
accepted.
-Rolla submitted the Publication Committee report. The current balance is $1,841.89. Two filing cabinets
were purchased for $57.00 to house both the publication and treasurer’s reports and other PAS publications.
The publication report was accepted.
NEW BUSINESS
-Alvin Lynn notified the members that a field trip to the Rocky Dell rock art site had been arranged for January
18. Members need to meet at Wildcat Bluff Nature Center at 9:00 am to convoy to the site.
-A motion was made to hold the 2013 Studer Banquet at Panhandle Plains Historical Museum. The motion
was approved.
-A motion was made to transfer moneys from the general account to the publications account. The motion
was not approved. It was suggested that any extra moneys be used to bring in out of area speakers.
-Donna will be updating the PAS constitution and by-laws.
-Donna requested ideas for future speakers and programs for PAS.
-Jeff suggested that PAS sponsor a mediated discussion to inform teachers and instructors to determine what
should be included when discussing local prehistory.
-Alvin asked who had not visited Box Canyon, and suggested that he could arrange a trip this spring.
-Joe Rogers received a contact email from the TAS web link concerning a possible mammoth find in Oklahoma. It was suggested that Don Wyckoff be contacted.
-The meeting was adjourned at 8:51p.m.

Page 10

Anouncements, Updates, and Upcoming Events
Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
February 15, 2012 at 7:00 pm
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

2012 Flint Hills Conference

Hosted by Emporia State University, Emporia, Kansas
April 6 -7, 2012
For more information check
http://www.emporia.edu/socanth/announcements/flint-hills-conference-2012.html

48th Annual Meeting of the Southwest Federation of Archeological Societies
Iran, Texas
April 14th, 2012
To submit Papers or for more Information, Contact: Evans Turpin at: evansturpin@yahoo.com

Society for American Archaeology Annual Meeting

Memphis, Tennessee April 18 - 22, 2012
http://www.saa.org/aboutthesociety/annualmeeting/tabid/138/default.aspx

The 2nd Annual Perryton Stone Age Fair

April 28, 2012 10:00 am - 5:00 pm
at the Museum of the Plains in Perryton,Texas
for additional information please visit the CAR website:
http://www.coursonarchresearch.com/

