PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society

Vol. 32,
No. 931,
January
Vol.
No.2010
1

The Panhandle Archeological Society will hold it's next meeting on
Wednesday January 19, 2011, at 7:00pm, at the Wildcat Bluff Nature
Center Science Building, 2301 N. Soncy Road, in Amarillo, Texas.
Our program will be presented by Ann Coberley.

President:
Paul Katz
Vice-President:
Jeff Indeck
Secretary:

Treasure:
Lisa Jackson
Publications:
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor:
Scott Brosowske

Cultural Anthropology and Archaeology: Cousins
In Search Of Culture
Cultural Anthropology is the least known sub-field of
the four sub-fields of anthropology, and yet it is the
sub-field most related to archaeology in terms of
research questions and goals. While both cultural
anthropologists and archaeologists have developed
theories which define their work as scientific, the
question remains if the study of human culture, past or
present, is an appropriate topic for scientific method.
Ann was born in Pampa, TX but lived in New York
City for 30 years. She did her undergraduate work at
Fordham University in New York and graduated with
degrees in both history and anthropology. She holds an
MA from Hunter College in anthropology and a Ph.D in
anthropology from the City University of New York
Graduate Center. She also holds an honorary doctorate
from the University of Ferrara in Ferrara, Italy. She was
on the staff of the Wenner-Gren Foundation for
Anthropological Research in NYC for over 20 years,
where she analyzed grant proposals for research in
Europe - her area of expertise. She also taught cultural
anthropology part time at Pace University. She returned
to the Texas Panhandle in 2002, where she married
Chance Coberley, retired detective from the APD. Ann
teaches 3 classes in anthropology at Amarillo College,
volunteers in the archaeology department at PPHM, and
serves on the boards of Partners in Palo Duro Canyon
Foundation and Amarillo Little Theatre. Since returning
to Texas, she has developed a strong interest in the
history and archaeology of the peoples of the southwest.

Ann and Chance
Coberley
Inside this issue
Page 2. Studer Banquet
Lecture: Updating the
Calf Creek Horizon
Page 3. Studer Banquet
Wrap-up
Page 4. A Native
American Arrow Shaft
Debarking Tool
Page 5. PAS Member
Highlight, Announcements, and Upcoming
Events
Please note the volume
and issue numbers have
been revised. This is to
insure the correct
sequence for the year.

Page 2
Studer Banquet Lecture: Updating the Calf Creek Horizon
At the 2010 Panhandle Archaeological Society Annual Studer Banquet our guest speaker was Dr. Don G.
Wyckoff. Don holds a dual position at the University of Oklahoma as Associate Curator of Archaeology for the
Oklahoma Museum of Natural History and Associate Professor with the Department of Anthropology. Don's
lecture was entitled "Updating Calf Creek". The Calf Creek horizon is a poorly understood Middle Holocene
foraging adaptation on the Southern Plains. This lecture provided a much needed overview of additional
information that has come to light since the publication of two important volumes on the Calf Creek horizon by
the Oklahoma Anthropological Society in the mid-1990's (i.e., Wyckoff and Shockey 1994, 1995; see also
Thurmond and Wyckoff 1999)
The primary diagnostic artifact of the horizon is the distinctive Calf Creek projectile
point (Figure 1). Similar, and presumably related, dart points from central and south
Texas are the Andice and Bell types. The distribution of these projectile points is
shown in Figure 2. Radiocarbon dates and geoarchaeological studies suggest that
the Calf Creek horizon dates from about 5500 B.P. to 4900 B.P. This time period
corresponds to a brief interlude of climatic amelioration on the Southern Plains.
Increases in rainfall, and presumably bison populations, likely led to the
development of this unique cultural complex.
One trend recognized by researchers is a very distinctive patterning in lithic raw
material use by Calf Creek societies (see Wyckoff 1995). Within the distribution of
the complex are numerous raw materials suitable for chipped stone tool production,
including Frisco and Edwards chert, Ozark and Florence flint, Alibates silicified
dolomite, and Ogallala quartzite. Throughout this distribution are several individual
clusters of Calf Creek sites characterized by lithic assemblages dominated by one of
these raw materials. For instance, in central and southern Oklahoma assemblages
are comprised primarily of Frisco chert. In eastern Oklahoma chipped stone items
are almost entirely produced from Ozark flint. In north-central Oklahoma and
southern Kansas Calf Creek assemblages are dominated by Florence flint. Western
Oklahoma and Texas panhandle assemblages are composed of a combination of
Alibates and Ogallala quartzite. These patterns suggest several contemporaneous
Calf Creek groups occupying geographically distinctive territories.
The Calf Creek horizon is also well-known for incorporating multiple heattreating events into their biface reduction process (see Wyckoff et al. 1994).
Initially, very large flakes and early stage bifaces produced by soft hammer
reduction are subjected to heat-treating. Later, bifaces are heat-treated one or
more times throughout the reduction process. These multiple heat-treating
events are identifiable by differences in the color and sheen of flake scars and
have been replicated through experimental studies.
Overall, the Calf Creek horizon is primarily known through the analysis of
surface collections. Buried and intact sites containing Calf Creek components
are rare. However, as this lecture demonstrated, recent multidisciplinary
studies are beginning to yield important information regarding locations on the
landscape where these elusive sites may be preserved. In particular, these
studies have demonstrated that Calf Creek sites are often deeply buried in
alluvial settings. Nonetheless, the excavation of these sites will be crucial for
compiling a more detailed reconstruction of Calf Creek horizon lifeways.
Scott D. Brosowske

Figure 1 Calf Creek Projectile Point

Figure 2 Geographic Distribution of
Calf Creek and other Related
Horizons

References Cited
Thurmond, Peter J. and Don G. Wyckoff
1999 The Calf Creek Horizon in Northwestern
Oklahoma. Plains Anthropologist 44: 231-250.
Wyckoff, Don G.
1995 A Summary of the Calf Creek Horizon in
Oklahoma.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society 43:179-210.
Wyckoff, Don G., William L. Neal, and Marjorie
Duncan
1994 The Primrose Site, 34MR65, Murray County,
Oklahoma.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society 40:11-67.
Wyckoff, Don G. and Don Shockey (editors)
1994 Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological
Society Volume 40 for 1991. Transcript Press,
Norman, Oklahoma.
Wyckoff, Don G. and Don Shockey (editors)
1995 Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological
Society Volume 43 for 1993. Transcript Press,
Norman, Oklahoma.

Page
Page 3
Studer Banquet Wrap-up
The 33rd Annual Studer Banquet was held December 15th at the Country Barn Steakhouse in Amarillo.
This has become the highlight event for the Panhandle Archaeological Society that is eagerly anticipated
throughout the year. The entire evening was a rousing success enjoyed by everyone in attendance, providing
food, fun, and fellowship recapping the previous year's endeavors while looking forward to next year's
adventures.
A lively social hour and early bidding on items available through a silent auction kicked off the evening
activities. Members mingled and browsed the many items donated for this year's fund raising auction. Later,
Alvin Lynn offered a blessing and the evening meal was served. The staff at the Country Barn provided a
choice of chicken fried steak or grilled chicken for the entre, with vegetables and cobbler rounding out the
meal.
Dr. Jeff Indeck was surprised to discover that he was this year's Panhandle Archaeological Society's
Honoree. Paul Katz presented Jeff with a plaque in recognition of all his contributions and dedication to the
field of archaeology and history in the Texas panhandle. Jeff was quite taken back and surprised by the
recognition from his fellow PAS members, who throughout the evening had managed to keep Jeff from
reading the program with his name and picture in it!
The guest speaker for the evening was Dr. Don Wyckoff from the University of Oklahoma who was
accompanied by his wife, Ruth. Dr. Wyckoff has dedicated the vast majority of his professional career to the
study of archaeology on the Great Plains. His topic of discussion for this evening was Updating Calf Creek, a
Middle Holocene hunter-gatherer group. The lecture and accompanying power point presentation was
extremely informative as well as enjoyable.
The final event of the evening was the completion of the silent auction. Members had been bidding on
donated items throughout the evening, ranging from new and used books, archaeological tools, knick knacks,
and handmade items. While a grand total is not yet available, it appears over $300 dollars was raised this
year.
S. L. Brown

Dr. Jeff Indeck mingles.

PAS members enjoying a meal.

Page44
Page
A Native American Arrow Shaft Debarking Tool

The arrow shaft debarking tool, occasionally referred to as an arrow rasp, is frequently found in historic
period Indian encampments. This native made tool has often been mistaken for an object that is used by
Euro-Americans in food preparation. The debarking tool was used specifically in removing the bark from
saplings or shoots that would later be crafted into arrows.
It was a simple tool made by cutting out a rectangular shaped piece of tin from a discarded can. First
the longer sides of the rectangle would be folded over flat along the edge. This strengthened the tool and
ensured that the user did not cut themself on a sharp edge. Then a nail, awl, or some other pointed object
was used to pierce a series of holes in the tin. In doing this three areas are created on the surface. Two
areas will have jagged holes from being punctured separated by a non-punctured area down the middle of
the tool where it will be folded. The many jagged holes give this tool the look of a modern food grater
except that the working surface is on the interior of the tool. The sharp edges of the holes create a rough
area that is very abrasive and excellent for rasping off bark.
In the process of making an arrow a shoot or sapling was selected for size and straightness and then
cured with the bark on to keep the wood from splitting. To remove the bark the shoot was placed
lengthwise into the debarking tool and the working surfaces of the tool were squeezed together. Then the
wood was pulled through the tool with just enough pressure to remove the outer and inner bark and any
small imperfections in the wood. The arrow shaft would be slowly rotated until all bark is removed.
The debarking tool was used by historic period native craftsmen to easily accomplish the task of
removing the tough bark from a sapling or shoot of wood that was destined to be used in hunting or
warfare. Native Americans were able to take a trade item such as a tin can and adapt it into a tool once
it's orginal intended use had come to an end. A debarking tool is another example of native technology.
James Coverdale

Rectangular piece of tin
with the edges folded.

Holes punched by a hammer
and a square nail.

The rough interior working
surface of the debarking tool.

Debarking tool being used to
remove bark from sapling.

Examples from the Smithsonian
Institution (Greene 1997:fig. 138)

Fragments recovered from
archaeological contexts.

Page 5
PAS Member Highlight

1. Member's Name: Rolla H. Shaller
2. How long have you been a member of PAS?
40 years, Charter member, also was present at
the first organizational meeting. Not many of us
are still around.
3. What first sparked your interest in
archaeology? It was not finding an arrowhead in
a plowed field, but rather a visit to the Mesa
Verde Ruins as a youngster.
4. What is your best find or most interesting
moment with PAS or with archaeology in
general? Found a basal fragment of a Folsom
point at the Lipscomb Bison Kill Site. Donated
it to the Panhandle Plains Historical Museum.
Jack Hofman has used illustrations of it in one
of his reports.
5. If you could have any choice, what would be
your dream find, site, or location? Finding the
trash dump at Col. A. W. Evans 1868 Supply
Depot.
6. What would be your vision for PAS in the next
ten years? If they are still around in 10 years, I
hope the membership has grown and includes
more of the younger generation. That the PAS
membership becomes more involved within the
society, making sure that its mission to protect and
preserve our archeological resources through
education and other means is fullfilled.

7. What is your favorite archaeological site or
topic? The 1907 Excavations at the Buried City in
Ochiltree County. This has been a topic of interest
for a long time. Probably due to the connection of
the Expedition to Canadian's Baptist Academy and
Professor T. L. Eyerly
8. Tell us a little bit about yourself: Born and raised
in Canadian, Texas to a pioneer family. Joined the
Army after high School served in Germany during
the Cold War. After Military service returned to
Canadian and on to college at West Texas State
University. Here I met Dr. Jack T. Hughes and
Billy R. Harrison, who became my mentors.
Received my degree in Biology and a minor in
Anthropology from WTSU. Worked as Curator of
Exhibits at the Panhandle Plains Historical
Museum for a short period of time. Worked for a
general building contractor, before returning to the
Panhandle Plains Historical Museum in the
Exhibits Department and later transferring to the
Archeological Department as Assistant Curator of
Archeology. Retired in March 2008. Still volunteer
part-time at the museum. Served as PAS President
in 1987, Last time the PAS hosted the TAS Annual
meeting. My wife, Sidney and I met at the
museum we have one daughter, Amanda, a
registered nurse at BSA.
My vocation is my
hobby and my hobby is my vocation. It doesn't get
any better.
9. What is a fun fact or something most people
don't know about you?
I was on the two man Browning Automatic Rifle
Team that won the Post Championship at Fort
Carson Colorado while I was stationed there.

.
.
.

Upcoming Events, and Announcements

Society for Historical Archaeology SHA 2011
Conference. Austin, Tx. Jan, 5-9, 2011
Panhandle Plains Historical Museum
Archeology Day, Canyon, Tx. Jan. 20th 2011
Society For American Archaeology SAA 76th
Annual Meeting. Sacramento, California
March 30th - April 3rd, 2011

