The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

Volume 34 No. 5, May2014

President
Donna Otto

Vice-President
Scott Brosowske

Secretary
Mary Ruthe Carter

Treasurer
Pamela Allison

Publications
Rolla Shaller

Newsletter Editor
Jerry Leatherman
2014 Stone Age Fair exhibitors displayed collections at the
educational event. See Page 6 for details.

Page 2

Inside…

Next PAS
Meeting

Volume 34 No. 5, May 2014

May 21st - 7 P.M. Panhandle Archeological Society meeting
at Amarillo Public Library, 413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor.
Scott Brosowske will be our guest speaker. Abstract and
biography on Page 8.
This will be the last meeting until September.

SWFAS 50th Symposium Hosted by PAS at PPHM May 3rd

Pages 3 - 5

“To catch the reader's attention, place
an interesting sentence or quote from
the story here.”

THE 2014 PERRYTON STONE AGE FAIR

Page 6

Page 7

News & Notes :
Martha Crabbe obituary.

Page 8

Page 9

Abstract and biography on Scott Brosowske for May 21st PAS meeting.

Volume 34 No. 5, May 2014

Page 3

SWFAS 50th Symposium Hosted by PAS at PPHM May 3rd
By all accounts, the 50th Symposium of the Southwestern Federation of Archaeological Societies was a great success! We received congratulations for a
job well done from the speakers, from repMeeting room at PPHM
resentatives of the SWFAS member societies and from the audience.
Plans for the Symposium began
eleven months ago at the 2013 SWFAS
Board meeting in Midland, when the PAS
offered to host the 2014 Symposium. Member societies rotate hosting the annual
Symposium, and 2014 was our turn. Because 2014 was the milestone 50 th year,
we knew we had to put on an especially memorable event.
We began work in earnest in January, sending out invitations to attend and
a call for papers to be presented at the Symposium. SWFAS member societies,
academic departments, museums, archaeological organizations, and interested
individuals all received these communications. We were able to put together a
day-long program of 10 papers in a very short time.
PAS members worked hard during the following months planning and preparing the details of the program, social activities, lodging information, and postSymposium tours. The month of April was particularly busy. A detailed program
was prepared, printed, and bound. PAS members gathered material from Amarillo and Canyon organizations for a registration bag, and several ‘filling’ parties
were held to put everything together. Ten door prizes were donated, to be
awarded at the conclusion of each of the 10 papers.

Thundering Buffalos Grill meet and Greet

Everything came together on Friday, May 2,
when PAS members set up the meeting room in
the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum and
then adjourned to the Thundering Buffalos Grill in

Volume 34 No. 5, May 2014

Page 4

Canyon to meet and greet out of town early arrivals. Table after table were
pulled together until the entire patio was filled with archaeological conversation.
The Symposium began on Saturday. PAS members began registration at
8:00. The papers were presented from 9:00 to 4:00, with breaks for conversation, refreshments, and lunch. The 10 papers were grouped into cave and shelter studies (3), Paleo-Indian studies (2), Ceramic period studies (2), and Historic
period studies (2), concluding with a paper on recent research in Alibates Flint
Quarries National Monument. All of the papers were well researched, well prepared, and well presented. We were particularly pleased with the geographical
distribution of the speakers, which is a measure of the interest in and reputation
of the SWFAS Symposium series. Speakers came from Murfreesboro, TN;
Pueblo, CO; El Paso, Dallas, Austin (2), San Angelo, and Iraan, TX; and there
were two PAS members. The meeting room was comfortably filled with an audience of about 60 people.
There was another opportunity for socializing on Saturday evening, designed for those attendees who planned to stay overnight. About 20 people attended an informal dinner at the Thundering Buffalos.
On Sunday morning, several PAS members led a tour to Alibates Flint
Quarries National Monument to
view Alibates Ruin 28 and 30
and the petroglyphs. Seventeen people from the previous
day’s Symposium participated,
joined by several NPS staff
members.
The 51st SWFAS Sympotrip to Alibates Ruin 28 and 30 and the petroglyphs
sium will be held in Hobbs, NM Field
in Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument.
in April, 2015. At that time the
Transactions of the 50th Symposium, edited and published by the PAS, will be
available.
Continued on Page 5

Volume 34 No. 5, May 2014

Page 5

Guest Presenters for the event.

Tom Ashmore

Joe D. Rogers

Evans Turpin

Chris Lintz

Calvin Smith

Doug Heffington

PRESENTATIONS

Alan Skinner

Dale Frost

Alvin Lynn

Mark Willis

Volume 34 No. 5, May 2014

Page 6

THE 2014 PERRYTON STONE AGE FAIR
Scott D. Brosowske
The 2014 Perryton Stone Age Fair was held at the Museum of the Plains on Saturday April 26 th. This
event, which is in its fourth year, drew record crowds and exhibitors. Over 300 people attended the fair to
view nearly 80 tables of prehistoric and historic period collections. Collections from Kansas, Nebraska, Colorado, Oklahoma, and Texas were represented.
In a few short years the Perryton Stone Age Fair
has quickly become the largest non-commercial artifact
show in the country; meaning that the buying, selling, and
trading of artifacts is strictly prohibited. Exhibitors enjoyed
meeting visitors, which included families and other collectors, and talking about their collections, responsible artifact
collecting, site documentation, and the importance of working with professional archaeologists to further our knowledge about the past.
Visitors were encouraged to bring artifacts for identification by the experts. Shawn Barbaree of the television
station PTSI from Guymon was also on hand to film another documentary about the important contributions of
avocational archaeologists to the field. Following the show a free catered meal was served for exhibitors, and
later, door prizes were given away.
Overall, this educational event was a huge success and Courson Archaeological Research is proud to
host this annual event that provides an opportunity for the public to meet with professional and avocational
archaeologists.

Kimmie Karber, Balko,
OK, included pottery
with his other exhibits.

Recent PAS guest speaker Todd
Smith, right, discusses with C.A.R.
archaeologist James Coverdale, the
artifacts he and his team of other
avocational archaeologists recovered from a Crosby County where in
1871 a skirmish between the 4th Cavalry and Comanche warriors occurred.

Choise Smith, Floydada,
shows one of his projectile points displays.

Volume 34 No. 5, May 2014

Page 7

News & Notes:
Martha Louise Crabb – October 12, 1928—April 14, 2014

Martha Louise Crabb, 85, of Dumas, died Monday, April 14, 2014.
Graveside services will be at 11:00 a.m., Tuesday, April 22, 2014, in Dumas Cemetery with Darrell Wait, pastor of
First Christian Church officiating. Arrangements are by Boxwell Brothers Funeral Directors of Dumas, 500 N.
Maddox.
Martha was born Oct. 12, 1928, in Pampa, to Henry and Cora Lewis. She was active in the Texas Panhandle Heritage Foundation, The Texas Historical Society and the Texas Archaeological Society.
Martha wrote a detailed, but easy to read book, “Over the Mountain”, a detailed history of the Lewis and Willis families from their arrival in the new world up to today. And, she also wrote the first and only history, as of this date,
“All Affire to Fight”, a history of our family’s two Civil War 2nd Uncles in the 9th Texas Cavalry of Volunteers.
She was instrumental in starting the Window on the Plains Museum in Moore County, Dumas, and spent years
making it a success.
She was preceded in death by her husband, James Clarence “Jimmy” Crabb on Jan. 20, 2008.
Survivors include a son, “Chuck” James C. Crabb and his wife Janet; a grandson, James Aaron Crabb; and a
brother, Delbert Lewis and wife Wanda; and many treasured nieces, nephews and cousins.

Volume 34 No. 5, May 2014

Page 8

New Insights into the Antelope Creek Phase of the Southern High Plains
Scott D. Brosowske
Courson Archaeological Research
Abstract
Research on Antelope Creek phase (A.D. 1200-1500) sites of the Texas panhandle began nearly 100
years ago. The results of this work culminated in the publication of “Architectural and Community Variability
within the Antelope Creek Phase of the Texas Panhandle” by Christopher Lintz in 1986. In this study, information from a large number of sites were pulled together and summarized. Here, sites were tentatively divided
into two temporally distinct subphases. The early subphase (A.D. 1200-1350) was characterized by the occurrence of large contiguous room residential structures. The late subphase (A.D. 1350-1500) saw a shift from
large multi-room structures to isolated, free-standing residential structures. Coinciding with these changes
were shifts in settlement location, increases in long-distance exchange, and possibly food sharing among settlements. These changes were proposed to represent cultural responses to an environment that was becoming
increasing arid. Since 2000, considerable research has been conducted at Antelope Creek phase sites on the
eastern margins of the phase. The majority of these sites were occupied after A.D. 1300 and provide significant information regarding the nature of culture change that occurred during the transition from the early to
late subphases. This presentation builds on Lintz’s earlier study and examines some of the more notable trends
that have been recently documented.

Biography
Scott Brosowske is
currently employed by
Courson Archaeological
Research of Perryton,
Texas. His research interests include human adaptations to the Central and
Southern Plains prior to
p e r m an e nt s et t l e me n t
around 1880.

Volume 34 No. 5, May 2014

Page 9

May 21 -Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM. Last meeting before summer
break.
Sept. 17- Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.
Oct. 15- Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.
Nov. 18- Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.
Dec. 16- Panhandle Archeological Society meeting at Amarillo Public Library,
413 Southeast 4th St., 2nd Floor, 7:00 PM.

PAS Minutes April 16, 2014

Panhandle Archeological Society joined Panhandle-Plains Historical Society members at 6 P.M. in the Hazelwood Lecture Hall at the Museum to hear Amanda Danning speak on “Written in Bone.” Danning spoke about her work in facial
reconstruction of prehistoric remains: Most notably Sam from the Horn Shelter in Texas and Kennewick Man from
Columbia, WA. Although no formal role was taken, approximately 16 PAS members were in attendance.
The regular business meeting was omitted. Officers had determined that committees have the Southwest Federation
meeting well in hand.
Remember the following dates:
. Apr. 26 Stone Age Fair, Museum of the Plains, 10 a.m. Perryton, TX
. May 3 50th Annual Symposium of SWFAS, PAS hosting at the PPHM
. May 21 7 p.m., Downtown Amarillo Public Library LAST MEETING BEFORE SUMMER BREAK
Respectfully submitted,
Mary Ruthe Carter, Secretary

