The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

Volume 33, No. 1, January 2013

President
Donna Otto
Vice-President
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Stacy Brown
Treasurer
Lisa Jackson
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Jerry Leatherman

Decorated Rim Sherd from the Dee Phelps Collection
Photo Courtesy of Scott Brosowske

Page 2

I ns i de …

V ol u m e 3 3 , N o. 1 , D e ce mb er 2 0 1 2

Happy Trails to Jeff Indeck as he departs PPHM
for his new undertaking in Washington D.C..

Page 3
The 2012 Studer Banquet Featured Richard and Shirley

Page 4

Flint as the guest presenters on December 15th, at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum in Canyon, Texas.

Next PAS meeting: Wednesday, January 16th,

Page 5
“To catch the reader's attention, place an interesting

7 P.M.

At Wildcat Bluff Nature Center, 2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, TX.
Guest Speaker will be PAS member Paul Katz presenting another take on the
Coronado expedition.

sentence or quote from the story here.”

Pages 6-9

Pages 10- 11

Page 12

“The Dee Phelps Collection: An Odessa
Phase Assemblage from the Canadian
River Drainage” By Scott D. Brosowske.

Hiding in Plain Sight… Some things are not
readily apparent while others are down right
mystifying.

Upcoming Events...

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 1 , J an u ar y 2 0 1 3

Page 3

Jeff Indeck Departs the Panhandle of Texas for a
Daunting Task in Washington D.C.
Jeff Indeck has retired as Chief Curator at Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum (PPHM) and now has a daunting task before him
– the organization of the collections of the 2,000 + sub-agencies of the Department of the Interior into one central database. He will
be moving to Washington, D. C. this month.
Jeff has been a member of the Panhandle Archeological Society since 1997. He served on the PAS board for numerous years as
Treasurer and most recently as Vice President. At the 33 rd Annual Studer Banquet in 2010, he was honored for his contribution to
archeology in the Texas Panhandle by the Panhandle Archeological Society. As a member of the Texas Archeological Society, he
served as lab manager for the 2008-2009 TAS Field Schools near Perryton. In 2010, he also served for the Courson Archeological
Research Field School.
In 1976, Jeff began working as a Cultural Resource Management (CRM) archeologist in various regions throughout the Southwest and Midwest. He did contract work all through graduate school and even formed his own company in 1993. This was eventually closed when he came to curate the collections at PPHM in 1997. Those collections included natural history, ethnology, archeology, paleontology, and geology. While here, Jeff also taught anthropology for TAMU. With his background in both archaeology and
paleontology, Jeff has been a great asset to PPHM and PAS. We wish him the best, but will certainly miss him.

Above: Jeff Indeck, left, on PAS field trip to
Box Canyon in November 2012.
Photo by Jerry Leatherman
At right: Indeck observing rock art at JA Ranch,
February 2012.
Photo by Lisa Jackson

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 1 , J an u ar y 2 0 1 3

Page 4

2012 Studer Banquet Featured Speakers
Richard and Shirley Flint

Where on Earth Was the Coronado Expedition Going?
Richard and Shirley Flint discussed some of the geographical misconceptions that motivated the Coronado Expedition, especially the notion that what we know as North
America was still thought by most Europeans in the late 1530s to be a part of Asia.
Literally, most members of the Coronado Expedition thought they would reach China
when they left Mexico City in late fall 1539. The Panhandle Archeological Society appreciates the Flints’ presentation to the 2012 Studer Banquet.

Page 5

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 1 , J an u ar y 2 0 1 3

PAS Guest Speaker January 16th will be Dr. Paul Katz
Abstract: “Coronado Slept Here”
During this season of political activity and its accompanying partisan divides, the Panhandle Archeological Society will provide equal time for an alternative view of the famed and fabled Coronado Expedition. Attendees at the annual Studer Banquet were treated to a very scholarly and exceptionally wellpresented account of this expedition by Richard and Shirley Flint. On January 16, PAS member Paul
Katz will present another take on the expedition, “much less scholarly and haltingly presented…” according to Dr. Katz. Unlike the Studer Banquet, however, there will be no food and also no cost.

Dr. Paul Katz has a bachelor's degree in Art History from Swarthmore College and three graduate degrees in Anthropology from the
University of Kansas. His background and experience is in both prehistoric archaeology and museums. He has conducted fieldwork,
taught at the college level, curated collections, and directed museums in Kansas, Washington, Illinois, and Texas. He has participated in two projects outside of the United States, one in Ireland and the other in Mexico. A large part of Dr. Katz’s archaeological
fieldwork has been conducted in the northern Chihuahuan Desert region of western Texas and southeastern New Mexico.
Before moving to the Texas Panhandle in 1991, Dr. Katz was Director of the Kampsville Archaeological Museum, a component of the
Center for American Archaeology in Kampsville, Illinois for five years (1986–1991). More recently he was Director of the Carson
County Square House Museum in Panhandle, Texas, a position he held for eight years (1991–1999). This nationally-recognized museum focuses on the history, natural history, and art of the Texas Panhandle. From 2000–2011, Dr. Katz was the Curator of the
Texas Pharmacy Museum, a part of the Texas Tech School of Pharmacy in Amarillo, and an Associate Professor in the Department
of Pharmacy Practice.
He is a past president of the Panhandle Archaeological Society and is currently President of the Friends of Alibates Flint Quarries
National Monument, where he is a Volunteer-in-Park (VIP). Dr. Katz is the Principal Investigator of PRIAM, a cultural and natural
resources consulting firm based in Panhandle, Texas started by his late wife Dr. Susana Katz. He conducts small archaeological
surveys for federal and state agencies, private companies, and non-profit organizations, and he consults with small museums on a
variety of topics.

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 1 , J an u ar y 2 0 1 3

Page 6

The Dee Phelps Collection:
An Odessa Phase Assemblage from the Canadian River Drainage
By Scott D. Brosowske
Courson Archaeological Research
staff recently visited the Wolf Creek Valley Heritage Museum in Lipscomb, Texas
to document the Dee Phelps artifact collection. The collection consisted of chipped
stone and ceramic artifacts in six Riker
style display cases and a few groundstone
artifacts. This discussion concentrates on
the artifacts contained in the six Riker display cases. While several prehistoric time
periods are represented by the collection, a
large number of artifacts are clearly diagnostic of the Middle Ceramic period.
Lithic raw materials used and decorations
on ceramic vessel rims suggest that some
of the sites collected by Phelps are likely
attributable to the Odessa phase (Figure 1).
A single Riker case contains a total
of 67 chipped stone artifacts (Figure 2).
The majority of these items represent complete or fragmentary projectile points

Figure 1

Figure 2

(N=55), although several bifacial or unifacial tool fragments are also present
(N=12). Projectile point types
represented include Middle to
Late Archaic period (ca. 2000
B.C. to A.D. 400) side and
corner notched dart points
(N=11), Early Ceramic period
(ca. A.D. 400-1250) corner
notched arrow points (N=8),
and Washita (N=8), Harrell
(N=2), Fresno (N=12), and
Lott (N=1) arrow points indicative of the Middle (A.D.
1250-1500), and possibly Late
Ceramic periods (A.D. 15001700). A single arrow point
preform was also present.
Continued on Page 7

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 1 , J an u ar y 2 0 1 3

Page 7

The Dee Phelps Collection… continued from Page 6
The remaining items represent
arrow point fragments too incomplete to identify (N=12).
Raw Material types represented include Alibates silicified
dolomite,
Ogallala
quartzite, Florence A and B
cherts, and Edwards chert.
A second Riker case,
labeled “Flake Knives” contains 21 utilized flakes between 40 mm and 90 mm in
maximum length. All of these
items are tertiary flakes and
are generally worked along
the lateral margins. Raw materials represented include
Alibates (N=19), unheated
Florence A (N=1), and Florence B (N=1). The third
Riker case contains 37 distal

Figure 3

Figure 4

end
scrapers,
two
utilized
flakes, and one
blade
(Figure
3). Most of the
end scrapers are
of the size and
thickness that
are typical of
the Middle Ceramic
period.
Raw materials
represented in
this case included Alibates
(N=35), Florence B (N=2),
Smoky Hill jasper (N=1), Edwards
(N=1),
and
Ogallala
quartzite (N=1).
Continued Page 8

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 1 , J an u ar y 2 0 1 3

Page 8

The Dee Phelps Collection… (Continued from Page 7)
A fourth case, labeled “Knives” contained 11 beveled or Harahey knife fragments and 11 utilized
flakes (Figure 4). The latter are similar to those previously described above. The Harahey fragments were
produced from Alibates (N=5), Florence B (N=4), Smoky Hill (N=1), and Tecovas (N=1). The utilized flakes
were made of Alibates (N=5), Florence B (N=2), Smoky Hill (N=1), Ogallala quartzite (N=1), and Edwards
(N=2). The fifth case contained 11 utilized flakes and three distal end scrapers. The latter are made of heattreated Florence A, Edwards, and a high quality variety of silicified caliche. The utilized flakes are made of
primarily from Alibates (N=8), although heat-treated Florence A, Ogallala quartzite, and Tecovas are also represented by one specimen
each.
The sixth case contained 22 rim, neck, or
shoulder sherds from ceramic vessels (Figure 5).
All of the rim sherds
(N=16) exhibited at least
some type of decoration.
The latter included finger
pinching (N=11), circular
to oval punctates (N=4),
and crenulated lips (N=1).
One of the punctated rims
also exhibited a large lip
tab decorated with parallel,
oblique stick impressions.
The necks of nearly all of
the rim sherds were very
well smoothed, almost burFigure 5
nished. In side view, it is
apparent that several rims
were thickened to the point that they almost appear to be collared. Decorations are usually located just below
the lip or on the lip itself. The remaining sherds include a lip tab, a strap handle fragment, three shoulder fragments, including two with parallel, incised lines, and one unknown item. The majority of these items are sand
tempered (N=19), although a few contain a combination of sand and calcium carbonate (N=3).
According to Lance Bussard, all of the artifacts in the Phelps collection were collected from sites along
Commission Creek south of Higgins, Texas. A review of the Texas Archaeological Site Atlas indicates that
none of these sites have been formally recorded. Judging from diagnostic artifacts in the collection, sites dating from the Middle Archaic until the Middle Ceramic period appear to be represented. With this being said,
many of the artifacts, including the triangular arrow points, Harahey knives, distal end scrapers, and ceramics,
are diagnostic of the Middle Ceramic period.
The frequency and types of decorations present on the ceramic rim sherds are nearly identical to those
documented for the Odessa phase (Brosowske 2005; Brosowske and Bevitt 2006; Hughes and Hughes 1987).
Likewise, the frequent use of Florence B and Smoky Hill jasper combined with Alibates for chipped stone tool
production is also documented for Odessa phase sites, particularly those along Wolf and Kiowa Creeks in
Lipscomb County (Brosowske 2005; Brosowske and Bevitt 2006).
Continued on Page 9

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 1 , J an u ar y 2 0 1 3

Page 9

The Dee Phelps Collection… (Continued from Page 8)
These similarities are not too surprising considering that Commission Creek is only about 25 to 30 km
southeast of other known Odessa phase sites. In contrast, sites attributed to the Antelope Creek phase west of
Commission Creek are characterized by ceramics with little or no decoration and chipped stone assemblages
dominated by Alibates silicified dolomite (Brosowske 2005; Drass 1998).
In sum, the Phelps Collection contains a variety of prehistoric artifacts from the Commission Creek
area of southeastern Lipscomb County, Texas from sites that have yet to be formally documented. As such,
this collection is typical of many found throughout the region in that it was undocumented and yet provided a
great deal of previously unknown information. In this case, a brief analysis of the collection provided somewhat surprising results that will likely lead to the documentation of the first Odessa Phase site or sites south of
the Wolf Creek valley.
References Cited
Brosowske, Scott D.
2005 The Evolution of Exchange in Small-Scale Societies of the Southern High Plains. Unpublished PhD
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma, Norman.
Brosowske, Scott D. and Tod C. Bevitt
2006

Looking South: The Middle Ceramic Period in Southern Kansas and Beyond. In Kansas Archaeology,
edited by Robert J. Hoard and William E. Banks, pp. 180-205. University of Kansas Press, Lawrence.

Drass, Richard R.
1998

The Southern Plains Villagers. In Archaeology of the Great Plains, edited by W. Raymond Wood, pp.
415-455. University of Kansas Press, Lawrence.

Hughes, David, T., and A. Alicia Hughes-Jones
1987

The Courson Archeological Projects: Final 1985 and Preliminary 1986. Innovative Publishing, Perryton, Texas.

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 1 , J an u ar y 2 0 1 3

Page 10

Trails Grown Dim
by Jerry Leatherman
As a youngster I had a number of heroes I admired and emulated with improvised props as I re-enacted their mighty exploits.
Some might be obscure to many of you such as Lash LaRue, the Range Rider (although I liked his teen side-kick, Dick West,
better), Mighty Mouse, Mickey Mantle, Audie Murphy, etc., etc.
As an adult I have very few well-known heroes,
but a large number of lesser known modern day
people I admire and appreciate. Those in archaeology are few, due to my limited experiences over the past few years, but among them
are Alvin Lynn, Rolla Shaller, Scott Brosowske,
and James Coverdale (aka Pago Doti). I have
used these gentlemen to assist me with artifacts
I have discovered or that have been brought to
me for identification by friends.
James Coverdale has become a treasured friend
of mine for his persistence in helping uncover
possible sources for identifying puzzling artifacts.
In 2011 I discovered the brass artifact in Figure 1
(approximately three centimeters diameter)
while working on the site we believe is where
Colonel Mackenzie and the 4th Cavalry was encamped in Briscoe County near Tule Canyon the
night of September 26-27, 1874. About 10 p.m.
that night Kiowa, Comanche and Cheyenne warriors attacked the camp in an apparent attempt

Figure 1

to steal horses and put Mackenzie’s men afoot as
they had previously done in another campaign in 1872. This time Mackenzie was ready for them. He had the horses cross lined
(front feet tied to opposite rear feet), hobbled and tied to the ground with picket pins, with sleeping parties of troopers inside
and around the horse herd as well as the normal sentries and night guards. Despite a lot of war whoops, waving blankets, firearms blasting, and general mayhem, the horses didn’t (or couldn’t) run away. The two sides sporadically exchanged gunfire
throughout the night until shortly after dawn when the Indians departed with a portion of Mackenzie’s command on their
heels. The end result was that Mackenzie was able to turn the tables on his prey the following night in Palo Duro Canyon and
captured their herd of about 1,500 horses which he eventually slaughtered once he brought them back on top of the Caprock
near the head of Tule Canyon in Swisher County.
This site also has yielded artifacts that appear to be left by buffalo hunters, a portion of a Clovis point, and a few other things
that may predate Mackenzie. We know that in 1808 an expedition of 200 Spanish Soldiers traveling from San Antonio to Santa
Fe to put down an Indian revolt probably used the old Comanchero Trail (a portion of which is known as the Mackenzie Trail)
that passed by this site. Hugh McLeod’s column of the Texan-Santa Fe Expedition of 1841 also probably used the same trail.
I sent a picture of the artifact to James and, like most everyone else I showed it to, he was not sure what it was. Recently, he
discovered what it could be its origin and sent me the following explanation and picture (Figure 2).
Continued on Page 11

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 1 , J an u ar y 2 0 1 3

Page 11

Trails Grown Dim… (continued from Page 10)
Hi Jerry,
While looking at a website that Scott had sent me a link to I noticed in a photo of a Spanish Colonial firearm that
there was something that looked like something I had seen before. I then did a search and I found the artifact photo. It
was a photo you sent of some things you had found and in the photo was a piece of decorated brass. I think I earlier
identified it as a firearm patch-box piece that goes on a gunstock. Now it looks like I was really close but as you can
see in the attached photo it does go on a gunstock but it is just a decorative piece of brass. The firearm is a Spanish
Colonial Escopeta with a Miquelet style lock and a Catalan style stock. These firearms were carried by Spanish soldiers
who served on the border. The Escopeta in the attached photo was found in a crevice under a cliff in 1940. These firearms were used from the mid 1700's to somewhere around 1830's or 40's by the Mexican soldiers. You have what appears to be a small piece of the gunstock decoration that has been removed and probably cut apart by Indians.
The photo shows two animal decorative brass pieces recovered at archaeological sites in Arizona. The photo also
shows the left and right sides of the Escopeta gunstock that was found in New Mexico.
James

V o lu me 3 3 , N o. 1 , J an u ar y 2 0 1 3

Page 12

January 16: Next PAS meeting: Wednesday, January 16, 7 P.M.
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center, 2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, TX. Paul Katz speaker

March 22-23: 35th Annual Flint Hills Conference, Manhattan, Kansas
April 3-7: 78th Annual Society for American Archaeology Meeting, Honolulu, Hawaii
http:www.saa.org/about the society/annualmeeting/tabid/138/default.aspx
April 13: 3rd Annual Perryton Stone Age Fair, Perryton, TX. 806-434-0157
May 26-June 7: Courson Archaeological Research Summer Field School
http/www.coursonarchresearch.com/2013 field school/index.html
June 15-21: Texas Archaeological Summer Field School, Medina County, TX

