PASTIMES

PASTIMES

Newsletter of the PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGY SOCIETY

Vol. 35 #3 March 2015

President
Donna Otto

Collecting

Vice President
Scott Broskowski
Secretary

Mary Ruthe Carter
Treasurer

Conserving

Pam Allison
Publications

Looting

Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

1

Table of Contents
2a

Upcoming Events

2b

Notes Fom the Editor’s Desk

3

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3b

Program for March 18

4

Collecting

5-6

Conserving

7-8

Looting

Upcoming Events

Flint Hills Conference White Cloud KS, March 21-22, 2015. deshaver@yahoo.com

SWFAS Hobbs NM, April 25, 2015.

legacymuseumcrm09@gmail.com

5th Annual Perryton Stone Age Fair, Museum of the Plains, Perryton TX, April 25, 10-5.
sbrosowske@pphm.wtamu.edu 806-434-0157

Notes From the Editor’s Desk
Summer is just around the corner, and it’s time for the Field Season to begin. You’ll be writing reports on the sites you’ll
dig and the ones you’ll visit.
Now Consider this:
As of this writing, we have no formal program for the March meeting. This means the Program Chairman would love to
hear from you! (So would the Newsletter Editor).
When you work or visit a dig, when you write up your impressions, consider sharing with the membership.

“It is nothing for one to know something
unless another knows you know it."
Persian Proverb

2

Minutes of the Last Meeting, February 18, 2015
The meeting was called to order by President Donna Otto at 7 p.m. at the Downtown Amarillo Library second floor
Board Room.

There were 16 members and two guests in attendance.
The following upcoming meetings and events were announced.:


Flint Hills Conference March 21-22, 2015, White Cloud KS :deshaver@yahoo.com



SWFAS April 25, 2015, Hobbs. NM



Fifth Annual Perryton Stone Age Fair, April 25, 2015, 10-5. Museum of the Plains, Perryton TX.
sbrosowske@pphm.wtamu.edu (806) 434-0157

PROGRAM: “Pursuing Spatiality in Archeological Research” presented by Veronica Arias PhD., Curator of Archeology, P-PHM, was in three parts. Part One related her archeological background in Argentina, Peru and Bolivia in South
America; and in the American Southwest, Chaco Canyon, Albuquerque cemeteries, New Mexico missions, and Ft. Wingate, which was the case study for her dissertation. Part Two dealt with her dissertation topic: Geographic Information
Systems: a) development of GIS over the past 25 years, and b) feasibility of GIS-based methodology in archeological
exploration and discovery. Part Three described her aims for the Museum: conservation of collections, increased public
outreach, and research.
MINUTES: Due to the weather the January meeting was by only two members and a few guests (employees of the library.). Dallas Ward of Lubbock braved the storm and presented the program. No minutes were taken.
TREASURER’S REPORT: Treasuer Pam Allison reported a balance of $4310.15 with some outstanding expenses
from the Studer Banquet.
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported a balance of $1,466.53 in the money market account
and $5,034.62 in the CD. The report was approved.

OLD BUSINESS: Rolla reported on the progress of the 50th SWFAS publication with seven papers received.
NEW BUSINESS: Rolla gave the Call for Papers for the 51st SWFAS Symposium: deadline March 16, 2015. The
meeting will be in Hobbs NM, April 25, 2015.
The meeting adjourned early to take advantage of the opportunity to visit the Bush-Fitsimmons Collection at the invitation of Library personnel.
Respectfully Submitted,
Mary Ruthe Carter, Secretary
********************************

Program March 18, 2015
TBA
Please join us for dinner at Napoli’s, 700 S. Taylor, at 5:30.

3

Collecting
Collecting on Private Property

It is a common misconception that collecting from or otherwise damaging any archeological site on private property is
illegal. Actually, no laws protecting all archeological sites on privately owned property presently exist in Texas. With
the vast majority of Texas land in private ownership, most cultural resources are located on private property. These
sites remain under the stewardship of individual landowners.
The presence of one or more archeological sites does not restrict the property rights of the landowner. In fact, these sites
and their contents belong to property owners to manage as they choose. Property owners may elect to procure legal protection for significant sites through State Archeological Landmark designations and conservation easements. Several
landowners have taken steps to preserve important sites in this manner with the assistance of the Texas Historical Commission. The artifacts found on private property rightfully belong to the landowner, and they alone can determine their
ultimate disposition. It is important to remember, though, uncontrolled artifact collecting destroys information. Also,
the presence or discovery of a cemetery or human grave is subject to the provisions of Chapter 711 of the Health and
Safety Code. Looters, also known as pothunters or vandals, trespass onto private (and public) properties to collect or
dig for artifacts to add to their personal collections or to sell or trade. Some of these individuals attempt to elude detection by conducting their activities after dark. Unethical antiquities dealers and collectors hire laborers to dig in sites
they believe are likely to contain marketable artifacts. Unauthorized and uncontrolled actions such as these not only
destroy opportunities for reconstructing the lifeways of past peoples, they damage property, frequently leaving gaping
holes and uprooted trees. In contrast, careful artifact collection and preservation by archeologists results in welldocumented collections that can reveal useful information. Artifact collectors can and have worked legally on private
property if they are granted permission from the owner.
Texas Historical Commission

Everyone who lives or travels in the Southwest
develops a collection of Indian jewelry, pots
and rugs or blankets, more-or-less authentic,
purchased from reputable dealers.
Native tribes of the American Southwest had no
history of working metal before the arrival of Europeans. They fashioned their most prized personal
adornments from stone – especially turquoise- and
seashells, both of which were acquired through
intertribal trade. When the Spanish introduced
silver ornaments, (as well as copper, brass, bronze Photo of Geronimo’s headand iron) these exotic items became highly prized dress, recovered through the
in Native communities.
FBI’s Art Theft Program

Both these items
are described as
“Anasazi.”

4

Conserving
Each item found goes from the dig to
the laboratory, where it is cleaned,
weighed and assigned a number.
From there it goes to the appropriate
conservation center, usually a museum. There are about 50 in the 26county area.
“Conservation” includes wildlife and plant life as well as artifacts.

Controlled Burn

5

Nothing is more important than the conservation of water.

For as long as man has lived

in the Panhandle . . .

. . . he has looked for ways to get and
control the water he needs to survive.

6

Collecting and Conserving’s Ugly Sibling: Looting
How can we advance the argument that the past material remnants
of humanity are not cultural “property” to be exchanged, invested,
capitalized on, and dealt with like any other commodity, but a public
entity that should be free and accessible for all?
Silberman, Neil Asher, Chief ed. “Oxford Companion to Archaeology” second edition, Oxford University Press (2012) vol.2 p 92.

Native American cultural heritage is a precious, non-renewable resource for historical, spiritual, and creative experiences and knowledge. Many priorities tug at our time and treasury, but it is important to all that we protect the
past and provide the proper respect to those whose creations and remains are seen by some as simple retail commodities.
(1) People & Events: The Centennial Exposition of 1876]
(2) Pub. L. No. 96-95, § 2, 93 Stat. 721 (1979).
(3) C. Timothy McKeown & Sherry Hutt, In the Smaller Scope of Conscience: The Native American Graves Protection &
Repatriation Act Twelve Years Later, 21 UCLA J. Envtl. L. & Pol'y 153 (2002- 2003) (detailing the history of the passage
of the Native American Graves Protection & Repatriation Act).
(4) 18
U.S.C. §
1170(a),
(b)
(2009).

When Europeans arrived in the New World, they saw the Indian as strange and dangerous;
to be avoided or commercialized in advertising. (Above: Looted artifacts.)

7

From the Arizona Republic:
Using a paid informant identified only as "the Source," agents of the FBI and Bureau of Land Management purchased sacred Hopi
kachina masks, Navajo pendants, Pueblo pottery and other artifacts from more than two dozen figures in the Four Corners states of
Utah, Colorado, New Mexico and Arizona. Court records say the civilian operative spent $335,000 buying more than 250 apparently
illicit objects. Federal investigators estimate that four-fifths of the nation's archaeological sites have been plundered by amateur collectors and professional thieves.
Federal laws ban the removal of artifacts from federal lands, Indian reservations or burial grounds, and prohibit the possession or
sale of illicit objects.
Enforcement is sketchy, however, because many items may be legitimately owned and sold if they were acquired before passage of
prohibition laws or if they were found on private property.
And ads found on the NET:
How to Search a Creek Bed for Indian Arrowheads How to Get an Indian Arrowhead or Artifact Valued
Ancient Indian Arrowheads, Native Indian Artifacts, Relics, Tools Authentic Indian artifacts, Indian arrowheads for sale. Eerie cache
of rare Ice-Age American Indian art, artifacts. Free shipping offer.*
Guaranteed authentic, affordable and colorful Native American Indian arrowheads and arrowhead frame collection sale. Free shipping offer.
Authentic Texas Arrowheads For Sale or Trade Hello, and Welcome to the "Arrowheads of Texas" Please enjoy viewing the Authentic Indian Artifacts in our collection by
Arrowheads and Indian Artifacts. POTTERY LIQUIDATION SALE - 20% OFF -Arrowheads: Axes & Celts Posters Pottery ...
I’ve spent thousands of hours on research, covered 125000 miles scouting sites, and $50k in travel expenses to narrow my search
over the last 9 years. I tend to slice the "locality pie" amongst a handful of family and like minded friends, most heavily in the son
and girlfriend dept, with few enough slices to keep it fun and worthwhile. If your diggers have any questions on id, prep or stratigraphy feel free to forward me their questions via email. or if they've found a mammoth graveyard and need you and me to assess the
situation, i think we can come to terms!
Welcome to Texas Cache!
Howdy! Texas Cache has been around since 1993. After teaching for more than 30
years, I was in search of more information on Texas Indians and their culture. Having
taught Texas history for many years and having found it lacking, I pursued further
information online and I found Bob, who taught me a wealth of knowledge. Texas
Cache has been under my operation since 2003.
Texas Cache has evolved from just photos of artifacts to the history behind them, as well as, some behind the scene local folklore
and historical facts. Texas Cache was originally about people and their personal artifact finds, as it still is today. As in the past, our
goal today is to continue to bring you the best Texas can offer. Texas artifacts, Texas history, and, of course, Texas vistas at their
very best!

Rather than give any of these people free advertising I have omitted addresses .

8

