The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

President
Donna Otto
Vice-President
Jeff Indeck
Secretary
Stacy Brown
Treasurer
Lisa Jackson

Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Jerry Leatherman

z

Volume 32, No. 6,

September 2012

Page 2

I ns i de …

V ol u m e 3 2 , N o. 6 ,

S ep t emb e r 2 0 1 2

Next PAS meeting: Wednesday, September 19, 7 P.M.
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center, 2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, TX

Page 3

Paul Katz and Joe D. Rogers will present information from the Texas
Archaeological Society Field School held at Devil’s River.

Paul Katz

Page 4-6
“To catch the reader's attention, place an interesting
sentence or quote from the story here.”

Joe D. Rogers

Scott Browsowske article on documenting private collections...

What archaeological value is there to artifacts
hidden away without any public knowledge of
their content or area of discovery and what can
we do about it?

Page 7

Whatzits & Howdits...
How did it get to where it was found and/or what is it? A new
monthly page of puzzling discoveries in the Texas panhandle. Submit entries or answers to the editor.

Upcoming Events...

Page 8

Plan your work and work your plan. Many thanks to Rolla Shaller for
keeping up with things of interest to PAS members.
Cover photo by Jerry Leatherman:
Courson Archaeological Research May 2012 Field
School work uncovers a non-typical antler, a metate,
small pieces of flint, and a bison 3rd Phalanx at Chill Hill
site.

V o lu me 3 2 , N o. 6 ,

Sep t em b er 2 0 1 2

Page 3

Speakers at PAS Meeting Wednesday, Sept. 19, 7 P.M., Wildcat Bluff…
Dr. Paul Katz’s portion of the
2012 TAS Field School program
will consist of two parts. Prior to
the field school, he visited three
sites being excavated by Texas
State University students. Located directly across the Devils
River from the TAS field school
area, these sites provided a preview of the archaeology that the
TAS would encounter.
During the field school itself, he
was part of a crew assigned to
survey the lower reaches of the
Little Satan drainage, a major
tributary of the Devils River.
Paul Katz has a bachelor's degree in Art History from Swarthmore College and three graduate degrees in Anthropology from the University of Kansas. His background and experience is in both prehistoric archaeology
and museums. He has conducted fieldwork, taught at the college level, curated collections, and directed museums in Kansas, Washington, Illinois, and Texas. He has participated in two projects outside of the United
States, one in Ireland and the other in Mexico.

Joe D. Rogers’ part of the
program on Devil's River will highlight one of the test units at
41VV837. The site combines historic ranching, historic native
American, and some archaic elements. Information will be used to
help stabilize nearby roadways
and river access points.
Joe D. Rogers is a retired public
school teacher that works as a
Part Time Instructor at WTA&MU
in History and Archaeology. He is
a Past President of both PAS and
TAS. Current research projects
include Burnt Daub in all its verities, and the Texas Panhandle in
World War II.

The Devil’s
River is in the
Lower Pecos
Region.

Volume 32, No. 6, September 2012

Page 4

Documenting Private Artifact Collections
Typically, many
For a number of dif-collections of the region
primarily
ferent reasons, the Texascontain
panhandle has attracted littlechipped stone tools and
sustained interest from pro-debitage and possibly
fessional archaeologists. Assome groundstone tools,
a result, the archaeology ofsuch as manos and
Ideally,
the valleys, wide openmetates.
places, and canyons of thechipped stone artifacts
region remain some of theshould be sorted and
more poorly understood ar-analyzed by tool type
eas of Texas. As avoca-(e.g., projectile points,
tional archaeologists therescrapers, bifaces, drills,
are many things that can beutilized flakes, debitage,
done to help amend thisetc.). Projectile points
situation. One of the mostshould be identified ushelpful is by documentinging type names docufor thecollections
region. exist throughout the panhandle region. Generally, peoprivate artifact collections. mented
Undocumented
The
raw
material
typesheld in private hands, however, equally large numbers of
ple envision collections as largely limited to those
forlocal
chipped
stone This
arti-brief article discusses some of the basic types of informacollections are also present in
museums.
By Scott D. Brosowske

tion that can be recorded with private collections.
From experience, most families and museums are usually very open to having their artifact collections
recorded. Generally, the non-archaeological community is unaware of the types of valuable information that
can be gleaned from the analysis of collections. For example, most individuals are often very surprised to
learn that the results of analysis by a trained archaeologist or avocational archaeologist can often: 1) provide
information as to the age of sites based on the artifacts represented, 2) identify the types of daily activities represented by individual artifacts, such as hunting, butchery, tool production, and plant processing, and 3) document evidence for exchange in the form of nonlocal items. With this understanding, non-archaeologists start
to realize the importance of collections. Other key issues that can be addressed are the importance of context/
provenience and the harm caused by unscrupulous collecting or worse yet, pot hunting. Documenting private
collections is becoming more and more important as older generations of collectors are passing away before
their collections are recorded. As many are aware, this results in a loss of valuable information.
So, what types of information should be recorded when documenting artifact collections? This varies
considerably depending on the type of collection and how much time the recorder is willing to commit to the
project. Oftentimes, the first order of business should be to determine if the artifacts came from a single site or
multiple sites. If the latter, the artifacts should be sorted by site and analyzed accordingly. Ideally, if the individual is agreeable, have him or her plot the site location and its boundaries on a topographic map. Any specific information, such as areas of the site that contain concentrations of artifacts or certain types of artifacts
should also be documented if possible. Fairly good topographic maps for the state can be found in the Texas
Atlas & Gazetteer and the Roads of Texas. Both of these atlases are available at many local stores. Online
options for obtaining maps include MSR Maps (http://msrmaps.com/default.aspx) or Google maps (http://
maps.google.com/maps?hl=en&tab=wl). With the location known, the recorder can contact a professional archaeologist or the Texas Historical Commission (THC) to determine if the site has been documented or if it
needs to be recorded.

Volume 32, No. 6, September 2012

Page 5

Documenting Private Artifact Collections (continued from page 4)
Typically, many collections
Society ofannual
the region
bulletin.
contain primarily chipped stone tools and debitage and possibly some groundstone tools,Ifsuch
one
as manos
has questions
and metates. Ideally, chipped stone artifacts should be sorted and
analyzed by tool type (e.g., projectile
about howpoints,
to publish
scrapers,
an bifaces, drills, utilized flakes, debitage, etc.). Projectile
points should be identified using
articletype
fornames
a specific
documented for the region. The raw material types for chipped
stone artifacts are important venue,
and should
you be
should
identified
con-if possible. If the recorder has the time, the length, width,
and and thickness (in millimeters)
tact theand
editor
weight
for further
(in grams) of individual artifacts can also be documented. Metric calipers and digital scales
information.
can be purchased through sources such as Forestry Suppliers, Inc. (http://
www.forestry-suppliers.com/) and Ben
Meadows
(http://www.benmeadows.com). If metric measurements are
Artifact
collecrecorded, a simple form containing a table with rows and columns can be produced in a number of computer
programs to help keep your data
and neat.
tionsorganized
are extremely
comOther types of artifacts, such as ceramics, bone, charcoal, burned rock, shell, pipes, and beads also occur in the region, but are either
commonthe
or not
monless
throughout
pan-frequently collected. These should also be analyzed using
techniques appropriate for each item. If you lack the experience necessary for recording these artifacts or are
not sure how to go about analyzing
them, and
you many
can either consult an archaeological report to see how others
handle region
have dealt with these artifacts or contact a professional archaeologist for additional information.
With the wide availability
digital cameras, recorders should be sure to take plenty of photoremainof quality
undocumented.
graphs. In fact, it is advisable to take multiple shots of each artifact or small groups of artifacts to ensure that
your photographs turn out. The
If taking
group
process
of photos,
docu- keep the number of artifacts fairly low to ensure better
resolution. Try to avoid photographing artifacts under glass if possible to avoid a reflection from the flash. Be
sure to include a photographic
scalethese
in all of your pictures. Scales can either be printed off from online
menting
sources (e.g., http://jasonquinlan.com/2009/04/11/artifact-photo-scales/) or purchased at a reasonable price
from numerous sources (e.g., http://www.crime-scene.com/index.shtml).
So, what does one do once the analysis of the collection is complete? First, it is very important to
thank the collector or museum for the opportunity to work with the collection and to provide them with copies
of all analysis forms, paperwork, maps, and photographs. Be sure to stress that this information should remain
with the collection as it provides important information about the materials. Also, it is recommended that you
provide a short summary about the collection. It is likely that the individual will want to share the information
that you have documented with friends, family, and relatives. A short report, perhaps a page or two in length,
that provides basic information that will enable them to provide accurate information about the collection
would be very useful. Basic information should include: 1) an overview of the collection, 2) the ages of diagnostic artifacts, 3) lithic raw materials present and their source areas, 4) types of activities represented by tool
types, 5) the presence of any nonlocal trade items, and 6) anything unusual about individual items or the collection as a whole. Lastly, if you are interested in publishing something about the collection or if you would
like to pass the information on to another individual or institution, be sure to obtain permission to do so.
So, now that you have collected this information, what do you with it? Is there someone that might be
interested in the information that you have collected? First and foremost, you should contact the PanhandlePlains Historical Museum (PPHM) at West Texas A&M University and let them know about the collection
and the work you conducted. PPHM is the central repository for archaeological information related to the region and will likely be interested in obtaining copy of the information that you have collected for their files. If
one is available in your area, you may also want to contact a local THC steward to make them aware of the
collection.
Finally, one of best ways to report your findings is to publish your results. There are a number of different outlets for publishing studies such as these. Short articles about individual artifacts or summaries of collections can be published in the PAS monthly newsletter. These articles are usually only a page or two in
length and contain a few pictures. Longer, more in depth studies can be published in Texas Archaeological

Volume 32, No. 6, September 2012

Page 6

Documenting Private Artifact Collections (continued from page 5)
Society annual bulletin. If one has questions about how to publish an article for a specific venue, you should
contact the editor for further information.
Artifact collections are extremely common throughout the panhandle region and many remain undocumented. The process of documenting these collections can be as straightforward as simply recording the quantity and type of artifacts in the collection to thoroughly analyzing and photographing each and every item represented. Whatever the level of analysis, recording private collections provides crucial information about the
people who lived in our region. As such, they represent sources of information that may be lost forever without documentation. Lastly, working with private collections provides an excellent opportunity for public outreach by professional and avocational archaeologists. This work serves to educate individuals and communities about the importance of archaeological sites and that these sites and their associated features and artifacts
represent finite resources that are rapidly disappearing.

Volume 32, No. 6, September 2012

Page 7

Surely we have all come across items in the field we can’t identify (what zit?) or figure out what
it is doing here (howd’ it get here?). We’ll dedicate this page to some of those oddities and ask
our readers to assist whenever possible. These first two are mine. Please respond to me at:
acerenewables@midplains.coop (preferred) or at 806-823-2217. Thanks, Jerry Leatherman
Submit pictures and comments for future issues to my e-mail or snail mail at
PO Box 137, Silverton, TX 79257

A rancher that has wandered over the Quitaque Creek area for
the last 40 years gathering artifacts thought this was a shot-put
she found in her garden spot along with a number of ax heads.
Closer investigation leads me to believe it is a 13 pound cannonball . I’ve ruled out Colonels Mackenzie and Miles in
1874, Captain Marcy in 1851, Colonel McLeod’s Texan-Santa
Fe Expedition in 1841 and Captain Francisco Amangual in
1808. Do you know of a military force that had a 12 Pounder

A rancher southwest of Quitaque in Briscoe County rediscovered this in an
old barn. About 50 years ago he had purchased the place from an early
pioneer family and saw this wheel and the other three with it in the old
barn. They are not badly weathered so they may have been housed for a
long time. He forgot about them until recently when he was moving some
things out of the barn. Each wheel is 18.5 inches in diameter, with an axle
sleeve insert of 2 inches diameter, and iron tires 3.75 inches wide.

cannon in the NE Floyd, NW Motley or SE Briscoe Counties?

James Coverdale has the best guess up to this point suggesting they are

area?

very similar to the wheels used on cannons on ships for 100s of years.

Volume 32, No. 6, September 2012

Page 8

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
September 19, 2012 at 7:00 pm
The Adobe Walls Trek. Lectures and Tours
September 30, 2012
Joint program sponsored by Hutchinson County Museum and the Panhandle Plains Historical Museum
9:00 a.m. programs by Dr. Paul Carlson and Dr. Holle Humphries Borger City Hall, 600 N. Main
Approx.45 minute Trek to Adobe Walls by private vehicle via FM 207- 12 miles N. of Stinnett turn Rt. (East) at sign,15.5 miles on a blacktop road
turns south on to gravel continue southward to sites.
12:00 p.m. Mr. Alvin Lynn will speak on Kit Carson’s 1864 Battle at Adobe Walls. Immediately following Dr. Jeff Indeck will lead site tour of the
1874 Adobe Walls Battle Site. Contact Lynn Hopkins, Hutchinson County Museum (806)-273-0130
2012 FlintFest Knap-In at Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument
September 29, 2012 from 9:00am - 5:00 pm
September 30, 2012 from 1:00 – 5:00 pm
2012 Texas Archaeology Month; Village and Petroglyph Tours at Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument
Saturdays and Sundays in October at 11:00 am.
For Additional Information on these events Call NPS HQ at 806-857-3151
Mogollon Archaeological Conference
October 4-6th, 2012, Silver City, NM
Museum of the Plains – Perryton
October 15, 2012, 7:45 p.m.
Book Signing: S. C. Gwynne, author of Empire of the Summer
Moon

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
October 17, 2012 at 7:00 pm
83rd Annual Meeting of the Texas Archaeological Society
October 26th-28th, 2012 at the University of Texas at Tyler, Tyler Texas
For more information visit the Conference website at:
http://www.txarch.org/Activities/AnnualMeeting/am2012
Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
November 14, 2012 at 7:00 pm
Panhandle Archaeological Society Annual Studer Lecture, Banquet
and Silent Auction
December 15, 2012 from 6:00-10:00pm
Hazlewood Lecture Hall, Panhandle Plains Historical Museum Canyon, Texas.
Contact Lisa Jackson, 806-651-5232\

