PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society

May Vol. 31, No. 5

The Panhandle Archeological Society will hold it's next meeting on Wednesday May 18,
2011, at 7:00pm, at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center Science Building, 2301 N. Soncy
Road, in Amarillo, Texas. Our program will be presented by Dr Gerald Schultz

President:
Paul Katz
Vice-President:
Jeff Indeck
Secretary:
Vacant

Treasurer:
Lisa Jackson
Publications:
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor:
Scott Brosowske

Dr. Gerald Schultz received his Bachelor of Science and Master of
Science degrees in geology at the University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, and his Ph. D. in geology with a minor in zoology at
the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. He has been teaching
geology at West Texas A&M University since 1964. His research
interests include Late Tertiary and Quaternary mammalian
paleontology, biostratigraphy, and paleoecology of the Southern
High Plains. His Ph. D. dissertation was on an area in southwestern
Kansas and he has focused most of his career on research in the
Texas and Oklahoma Panhandles. Dr. Schultz is the author of
numerous scientific papers and guidebooks and is co-author of a
book entitled Ice Age Mammals of Northwestern Texas.

Dr. Schultz

VERTEBRATE PALEONTOLOGY OF THE TEXAS PANHANDLE AND
SURROUNDING AREA
The Texas Panhandle is world famous for its Triassic, Late Tertiary, and Quaternary
vertebrate fossils. Many institutions including the Frick Laboratory of the American
Museum of Natural History in New York, West Texas A&M University, and the
Universities of California, Michigan, and Texas (Austin) have collected fossils in the area.
The Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum in Canyon made extensive collections in the
1930's using digging crews funded by the Works Progress Administration. Fossils of the
Triassic age date back 230 million years and include flat-headed metoposaur amphibians
and crocodile-like reptiles called phytosaurs that lived in swamps and rivers and whose
remains have been found in the Trujillo and Tecovas formations. Late Tertiary mammals
dating back 10 to 12 million years have been found in the Ogallala
Formation near Clarendon, Miami, Canadian, and Higgins and in
Inside this issue
the Blanco Formation near Crosbyton. Remains of 3-toed horses, Page 2: Minutes from
camels, deer, rhinoceroses, mastodons, saber-tooth cats, and bone- last month's meeting
crushing dogs have been assigned to the Clarendonian,
Hemphillian, and Blancan North American Land Mammal Ages Page 3: Perryton Stone
based on type localities and faunas in the region. Quaternary Age Fair
mammals that lived here during the past two million years include Page 4: Lamar
mammoths, horses, camels, bison, and ground sloth. Numerous Elementary Science
rodents and shrews recovered by screen-washing techniques have Day
aided immensely in establishing a sound biochronologic and
Page 5: Announcments
evolutionary framework for this chapter in North American
paleontology.

Page 2
Panhandle Archeological Society
Minutes of the April 20, 2011 Meeting
President Paul Katz called the meeting to order at 7:10 p.m. at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center. 20 members
and four guests were in attendance. The guests included Rozanna Pfeiffer, Nancy Seewald and her son Jake,
and Pam Allison.
The next meeting of the PAS will be held on Wednesday, May 18 at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center,
beginning at 7:00 p.m. Dr. Gerry Schultz will speak on the paleontology of the Texas Panhandle.
Paul introduced the evening speaker, Dr. Joe Cepeda. He spoke about the geology of the Texas Panhandle.
The business meeting began at 8:20. The minutes of the March 16, 2010 meeting were approved
unanimously; motion by Jeff, second by Lisa.
Lisa gave the Treasurer's report. The current operating balance is $1,829.08.
Rolla gave the Publication Committee report. The current checking account balance is $2,620.67, less
$190.00 paid to the SWFAS for dues and copies of the Transactions of the 46th Symposium, held in Hobbs,
New Mexico in 2010. The volume is spiral bound, has color plates, and will sell for $15.00.
Discussion about ways to spend some of our money, especially to encourage college students to attend
meetings or other archaeological activities.
Rolla reported on the 47th SWFAS Symposium, hosted by the Concho Valley Archaeological Society in San
Angelo. Eighty people attended and PAS members Joe Rogers and Chris Lintz presented papers. Rolla
Shaller and Paul Katz represented the PAS at the business meeting.
Paul reported on the PAS participation in Lamar Elementary School Science Day. Six PAS members
presented a program on rock art to over 100 students, ranging in age from kindergarten through fifth grade.
We will be invited back next year.
Discussion about the current dues structure and an inconsistency on the website. The members voted to set
the dues structure at $20 for families, $15 for individuals, and $10 for students; motion by Gerry, second by
Dick. This will be added to the Bylaws when they are revised. Institutions and organizations will receive
Pastimes electronically and cannot vote, so they are not members and will pay no dues.
Scott reported on the final details of the Perryton Stone Age Fair. A PAS publication list will be provided,
and a draft of the new PAS brochure will be available.
The meeting adjourned at 9:00 p.m.

Page 3
2011 Perryton Stone Age Fair
The first annual Perryton Stone Age Fair (PSAF) was held at the Museum of the Plains in Perryton, Texas on
April 23, 2011. This event was sponsored by Courson Archaeological Research to provide an opportunity for
both private collectors and museums to showcase their collections. Some of these collections have been shown
at different venues in the U.S., while others are rarely seen outside their respective repositories. An unusual
aspect of the Perryton Stone Age Fair was the inclusion of historic Indian, military, and buffalo hunter artifacts
that was well received by both exhibitors and visitors. The PSAF was attended by well over 200 people, many
from Texas and Oklahoma, as well as others from New Mexico, Colorado, Missouri, Kansas, and as far away as
Idaho. The buying, selling, or trading of artifacts was not permitted at this event.
Some of the local collections were brought in by Harold Kachel of Beaver, Ok. Kimmie Karber, of Balko, Ok.
and Toni Good of Perryton, Tx. who displayed a variety of prehistoric and historic period artifacts. Several
beautiful paleoindian collections from the Great Plains were brought in by Jim Cox, Tom and Myra Westfall,
Rick Miller and Choise Smith. Some of the finest examples of Clovis, Folsom, Agate Basin, Hell Gap, Allen,
Eden, and Scottsbluff points in existence were shown. In particular, Richard Rose of Midland, Tx. displayed
many finely crafted Midland and Folsom points, as well as associated tools from the Shifting Sands Site.
George Cromwell and Choise Smith displayed outstanding samples of historic Indian and military artifacts,
including silver headstalls, bridle bits, butcher knives, metal arrow points, ornaments, and other tools.
Two public museums, the River Valley Pioneer Museum in Canadian, Texas and the No Man's Land Museum
in Goodwell, Oklahoma also brought some excellent artifacts from two noted collections, the Horace Rivers
Collection and the Billy Baker Collection. The "Uncle" Billy Baker Collection was collected by its namesake,
Bill Baker, who worked as an extension agent in the Oklahoma Panhandle from the 1920's to the 1950's. An
exquisite sampling of the over 5,000 points he discovered during his life were shown to a very appreciative
crowd.
From the time the doors opened at 10 am, until closing at 5 pm, there was a steady stream of people viewing
the collections, talking with avocational archaeologists, learning about both items on display, as well as those
they had brought in for identification.
The evening drew to a close with a catered meal consisting of smoked salmon appetizers, smoked ribs, pulled
pork, and all the fixings prepared by local cook extraordinaire Bill Dudley. This allowed all of the exhibitors and
volunteers to relax, view each other's collections, and reflect on the day's events. Drawings for door prizes
rounded out the evening; a small token of appreciation to the exhibitors for participating in the event. Some of
the items included a hand-crafted reproduction arrow compete with Washita point knapped by James Coverdale.
Another item donated was the highly coveted book "Projectile Points of the High Plains" by Jeb Taylor.
The event was deemed a success by everyone involved, with many participants and visitors alike already
making plans to attend the second annual PSAF next year.
Stacy L. Brown

Some of the many vistors to the Stone Age Fair

Part of Jim Cox collection from New Castle Ok.

Page 4

Lamar Elementary Science Day
The Panhandle Archeological Society was well represented during "Science Day" at Lamar Elementary School
last month. PAS members, Paul Katz, Frank Willmon, Jeff Indeck, Dick Carter, Rolla Shaller, and Lisa Jackson
spent the day with a total of 178 students, encouraging them to "tell us their story" using simply a paper plate and a
magic marker.
PAS President Paul Katz prepared a nice PowerPoint presentation to introduce the field of archeology to the
students. Since Paul had just been to Paint Rock pictograph site near Paint Rock, Texas during the annual SWFAS
meeting, he was particularly inspired for this "Science Day" project. His images demonstrated various ways in
which prehistoric and historic Indians expressed themselves and documented important events. The various
examples illustrated differences in expression between the various native tribes. As Paul explained how these items
showed a cultural identity, the other members showed the physical objects to the children. These included pottery,
moccasins, casts of petroglyphs, basketry, and even a large painted parfleche that was created by PAS member,
James Coverdale.
Throughout the day, groups of students between kindergarten and the fifth grade came every 30 minutes to hear
Paul's presentation. The Lamar Cowbell loudly sounded off over the public address system as a way to move the
children to their next learning station. Paul was literally wired as evidenced in the photograph. Not only did he
wear a microphone for the whole class, there were individuals students who had hearing aid devices that would
interface with yet another microphone. As each group came in, interpreters followed in order to sign for these
students.
Lamar is the only elementary school in the Texas Panhandle that is specifically prepared for working with hearing
challenged students. Children come in from all over the Panhandle for this very reason.
After every presentation, each child was provided with a plate and marker to document their own story. There were
obviously some budding artists at Lamar! While many of the drawings were humorous or were of pets and
vehicles, there were a few poignant stories told that elicited emotion. At the end of the day, I believe that we all
walked away with a renewed appreciation for grade school teachers!
Lisa Jackson

Page 5
PAS Member Highlight
1. What first sparked your interest in
archaeology?
I've been interested in
archaeology as long as I can remember. It
probably started with reading National
Geographic and watching PBS specials as a
child.
2. What is your best find or most
interesting moment with PAS or with
archaeology in general? In light of the
recent events in England, I would have to say
my most interesting moment in archaeology
was being on a dig in Wroxeter, England with
Prince Edward, youngest brother of Prince
Charles.

Rozanna Pfeiffer

3. What would be your vision for PAS in
the next ten years? Speaking as a new
"member," I don't know a lot about PAS's
history, but I would say recruiting new
members (especially younger ones who can
carry the society forward for the next 10-20
years), preserving and documenting
archeological sites (especially those that are
in danger), and getting the word out about
the importance of preserving sites and
artifacts "in situ."

4. What topics would you most like to
learn more about or participate in?
Since my "other" hobby is genealogy, I
would like to combine archaeology,
genealogy, and history to find out more
about the people of the Texas panhandle who they were, why they came, what
happened to them, do they have any living
descendants? I'd like to have a big
Panhandle Family Reunion and invite all
the living descendants of the folks who
were so important to the history of this
area.
5.Tell us a little bit about yourself: I've
been in the National Park Service for 15
years and have worked in 10 different
parks. I came to Lake Meredith from the
Statue of Liberty, and it was quite a
cultural revelation moving from New York
City to Fritch, Texas! I live in Borger with
my 3 cats: Peyton, Eli, and Sarah Palin
(that should tell you everything you need
to know about me!)

PAS Website
Type in the complete URL as shown
http://www.txpanhandlearchaeology.org

CAR 2011 Field School
Courson Archaeological Research will be conducting it's
2011 Field School from May 23rd to June 10th. The first
two weeks will be field excavations at two Antelope Creek
phase sites and a defensive late Archaic encampment near
the Canadian River. The third week will consist of metal
detecting historic period sites. PAS members may attend
at no cost, other than catered meals if desired. For more
information, check our website:

www.coursonarchresearch.com

Upcoming Events, and Announcements

.

TAS Field School
June 11 - 18
Medina, Co. Texas

