PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Eight, Number One January 2018

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott Broskowski
Secretary
Andy Burcham
Treasurer

Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Read Any Good Books Lately?

3a

Program Information:

4

From the Editor’s Desk
Several years ago I was at a banquet seated next to a historian from New Mexico. I happened to mention that pastores,
ciboleros, and comancheros were all the same people; that is the same man could be all those things. The fellow was
aghast. They were all different, he said. Different activities, different economic base, on and on.
I wondered whether this man had ever talked to a real live person, one whose not-so-distant ancestors had actually engaged in these pursuits, or if he just read about them. I reminded him that schoolteachers often worked in the coal mines
in the summers, when school was out. Different activities, different economic base, on and on. He was probably not impressed!
I was deep in my investigations of Trementina, a New Mexico ghost town. The old-time residents gathered there for a
reunion every year, and were kind enough to welcome me among them. Several were old enough to remember the early
1900s. Happily, they shared lots of stories, handed down from fathers and grandfathers, not in anybody’s archives.
It seems that there were ricos, those men, mainly from LasVegas, who owned the sheep and hired others to take their
herds down the Canadian every year to the rich pastures of the Plains. The rico would furnish carretas and wagons, with
minimal provisions for the trip. They cared for the sheep; they were pastores. They had to hunt and kill the bison along
the way, first to feed themselves, and then to load the hides into the wagons for the return trip to Las Vegas. This helped
to repay the rico for the expense he incurred in financing the expedition. So they were ciboleros.
As they walked (yes, walked) along they were sure to encounter Plains Indians, generally Commanches and Kiowa. They
exchanged whatever goods they had managed to accumulate before they left home for the Indians’ belongings. Thus they
were comancheros as well, though not as Hollywood portrays them. They were just plain and simple men trying to make
the best of their situation.
If somebody managed to pick up a few Texas cattle along the way, he would leave the group and herd the animals back to
New Mexico, where he could sell them to Anglo ranchers. No self-respecting sheepherder wanted to rob anybody, not
even Texans. But then as now, people are people, and every group has somebody who is willing to take advantage of the
situation.

“The Observer,”
by a favorite Southwest artist:
Ettore “Ted” DeGrazia

2

MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
Last month (last year??) we had the Studer Banquet, so no minutes were kept.
We had a great program about LaBelle and her discovery. Most of us knew Curt Tunnel, so the subject was not entirely
foreign to us, but as always, there was a lot of new and fascinating formation presented.
A new slate of officers has taken the reins: President Veronica Arias and the new Vice President, Scott Brosowske, traded
places. The post of secretary has been set up with alternates, so that in case one can’t attend, we’ll always have somebody
there who is prepared to take the minutes. Pam Allison, Rolla Shaller, and Beryl Hughes will continue in their previous
spots.

NEXT MEETING
Wednesday January 17, Wildcat Bluff, 7:00 p.m.
Pre-meeting dinner, Hofbrau, 5:15.
See following page for program information.
*****
READ ANY GOOD BOOKS LATELY?
From Rolla:
I like to recommend interesting reading for the list on subjects that might be of mutual interest. One book that I had previously recommended is Killers of the Flower Moon by David Grann. It was nominated for the National Book Award, the
American literary prize, and just missed winning. Some on the list responded and read it. I also have to mention Carolyn
Boyd’s White Shaman Mural, An Enduring Curation in the Rock Art of the Lower Pecos that received the Society for
American Archaeology book
award.
Another great little book that I recently purchased and read is Climate and Culture Change in North American AD9001600 by the late William C. Foster published in 2011. This book has been around for a while and once discovered I
could not put it down. Some on the list probably read it, but if not, I highly recommend it.
Also, Neil DeGreese Tyson’s little book Astrophysics for People in a Hurry takes you out of this world. Another fun
read that I have previously mentioned is The Hidden Life of Trees by Peter Wohlleben. This book gives you some insight
on what goes on underground and certainly gave me pause in accepting the results of organic residue tests of ancient
stone tools. Soils are NOT sterile environments that preserve organics; microbes feed on them.
I just saw a post on Facebook that Americans generally don’t read. Most don’t read books after graduation and some
70 percent of Americans do not read books. I cant imagine not. I hope others on the list have book suggestions.
HJS

From Beryl: As a Librarian and occasional writer, I find the thought of people not reading absolutely terrifying. People
occasionally “inform” me that there are no books being published now, and thus there is no more use for libraries. Google
has taken their place. This will come as a shock to the Library of Congress, library schools and publishers everywhere. In
fact reliable statistics show that some 2.2 MILLION books are still being published worldwide each year. This doesn’t include the KJV Bible—they are measured in tons, not copies.
When I met Jack T. Hughes, the first question he asked me was whether I had read Gods, Graves and Scholars. I had, so
he followed up with The Silent Language by Edward T. Hall. Lucky for me, it was on my bookshelf, and still is.
It would probably be safe to skip Gods Graves and Scholars today, but your education is not complete if you haven’t read
The Silent Language.

3

PROGRAM INFORMATION
Bio
Alvin Lynn has served as a steward for the Texas Historical Commission (THC) since 1998. He is
a member of the Panhandle Archeology Society, Texas Archeology Society, Santa Fe Trail Organization, West Texas Historical Association, and Wild West Historical Association.
Archeology and history have been a lifelong interest to Alvin. He has been involved in many archeology projects through-out the Texas Panhandle, prehistoric and historic.
During 1998,1999,2000 and 2003, he did field work for the THC on the Red River War Project and
continues to do field work and research in that area. He also located
Major Evans’ 1868 military depot on
the north side of the Canadian River
in Roberts County. In the fall of
2003 he served as field supervisor
for metal detecting at the first battle
of The Revolutionary War, the Battle
of Lexington and Concord in Massachusetts. He spent 15 years doing
field work and researching for a
book on Kit Carson’s route to and
battle of Adobe Walls.
Texas Tech Press published Alvin’s
book “Kit Carson and the First Battle of Adobe Walls; A Tale of Two
Journeys” August 15, 2014. Texas
Tech University Press named it the
inaugural recipient of the Judith
Keeling Book.
Topic-Pastores on the Canadian
River
In the mid to late 1870s Pastores (sheepherders) followed Comanchero and Cibolero trails out of
New Mexico into the Texas Panhandle-mostly along the Canadian River with a few along other
creeks. Many of the Pastores were previously Comancheros or Ciboleros so they knew the country well and where the best grass was. Some of the settlements consisted of only one or two families but a few became large plazas with stores and saloons.
Some of the known plazas were Trujillo. Salinas, Chavez, Borrego, Atascosa, Pescado, Sandoval,
and many other smaller ones. With the exception of Tascosa, most of the sheepherder residences
were deserted by the mid1880s.
Tonight we are going to look at a power point of the condition of some of the Pastore villages today.

4

