PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Eight, Number Four, April 2018

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott D. Brosowske
Secretary
Andy Burcham
Treasurer

Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

Ishi

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Upcoming Events

3a

Program Information:

4

SWFAS

5
From the Editor’s Desk

Ishi, the “last wild Indian” in California, is the subject of the film we’ll be viewing at the
April meeting. His life makes an interesting story, but that’s not the half of it!
First of all, it would appear that not only was he not the last surviving member of the Yahi,
but he may have been only part-Yahi, and not an authentic representative of the Yahi at all.
He made arrowpoints and other stone tools while living in a sort of benevolent captivity,
which are apparently quite different from Yahi products.
An expert in stone tool technology, [Steven] Shackley found that the hundreds of
projectile points Ishi made after he left the wilderness had long blades with concave bases and side
notches. In contrast, arrowheads in the museum from historic Yahi sites are short and squat, with contracting stems and basal notches.
Although Ishi was culturally Yahi, said Shackley, "it appears he was not the last purely Yahi Indian. He
learned to produce arrowpoints not from Yahi relatives, but very possibly from a Nomlaki or Wintu
male relative. https://www.berkeley.edu/news/media/releases/96legacy/releases.96/14310.html
Shackley heard evidence at an in Ishi conference that “physical anthropology suggests Ishi was not completely Yana.”
The Nomlaki and Wintu were hereditary enemies of the Yana. Some believe that the desperation of the Yana situation
drove them to intermarry with the Nomlaki and Wintu simply to survive.
In 1916, while Kroeber was in New York, Ishi died, and arrangements were made for cremation. “Shut it down,” he
[Kroeber] wrote. “We stand by our friends. If there is any talk about the interests of science, then science can go to hell.”
Too late. Ishi had already been autopsied and cremated, his ashes placed in a black Pueblo jar and placed in a niche in the
columbarium at Olivet Memorial Cemetery, south of San Francisco.
But not all of him. His brain was saved and sent to the Smithsonian, where it was preserved in ethyl alcohol and stored in the “Division of Collections” of the Physical Anthropology Labs, then moved about from time to time. In 1998 the Director of the
American Indian Program declares that the brain is folklore and doesn’t exist, but further research by Orin Starn and others turns up proof that Kroeber shipped the brain in
1917.
In February 1999, the Butte county Native American Cultural Committee announces
that, “It is important to remember that the Native Americans feel that a complete body
is necessary to proper burial and release of the spirit. … in this discovery of the missing
body part, we now can proceed with the repatriation of our red brother.”
After more than a year, April 12, 2000, the California state attorney general’s office
gets a court order that allows Ishi’s remains to be turned over to the designated people
for reburial in accordance with their customs. May 12 and 13, 2000 a conference is held
in Oroville to memorialize him.
http://history.library.ucsf.edu/ishi.html

2

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of March 21, 2018
The meeting was called to order by President Veronica Arias at 7 p.m. at Amarillo Downtown Library.
There were 20 persons in attendance.
PROGRAM: Jerry Foster made a presentation entitled, “Preliminary Report on a Proposed Archaeoastronomical Site in
the Texas Panhandle”. He first discussed observable astronomical events which were of interest to the ancients: lunar cycles,
equinoxes and solstices, wondering stars (planets), and cardinal directions. Next, Jerry showed several world famous Archaeoastronomical sites including the Pyramids in Egypt, Stonehenge, Medicine Wheels on the North Plains in North America, and the Sun Dagger site in the US Southwest.

Jerry then showed several photos of a grouping of cupules he has observed in the Blue West area near Lake Meredith. This
location is very near adjacent sites 41MO35 and 41MO37. The cupules are neatly spaced in a “V” shaped pattern. When
observed at the Spring Equinox, the “V” seems to point directly at the rising sun. Jerry invites further research to investigate
whether this can be confirmed as an Archaeoastronomical site.
MINUTES: Scott Brosowske moved that the February Minutes be approved as published in PASTIMES. This was seconded by Joe Rogers and the Minutes were accepted.
TREASURER’S REPORT: Pam Allison reported a balance of $3839.63 in the checking account. The donation to Friends
of the TCH has been made in appreciation for Brad Jones speaking at the Studer Banquet.
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported an ending February balance of $1,382.70 in the Money Market Account, and $5,122.16 in the Certificate of Deposit.

OLD BUSINESS: Regarding efforts towards the 2019 TAS Annual Meeting being held in Amarillo, Scott Brosowske reported that a proposed budget has been submitted to the TAS Meeting Committee.
James Coverdale reported that the PAS Brochure revisions are complete, and it is ready to be emailed.
As previously announced, the Stone Age Fair in Perryton will be on Saturday, April 21. This is the same date as the upcoming Southwest Federation meeting in Iraan, Texas.
NEW BUSINESS: Paul Katz announced the upcoming Lamar Science Day will be on Thursday, May 17 (a later email
from Rolla confirmed that the Lamar date is on the Thursday, not Friday). Paul mentioned that 5 or 6 volunteers would be
needed for PAS to successfully do program sessions at the Science Day event. Interested Members should email Veronica if
they wish to participate.

Neither Veronica nor Scott will be able to attend the April 18 PAS Meeting. Paul Katz will chair this meeting, and it will
likely be a working session to plan for the Lamar Science Day.
The meeting adjourned at 8:35 p.m.
Respectfully submitted,
Andy Burcham, Secretary

UPCOMING EVENTS
March 18
April 21

7:00 p.m.

PAS, Amarillo Public Library, Downtown Branch.

5:30 p.m.

Pre-Meeting Dinner, Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor.
SWFAS —Iraan. See page 5.
Stone Age Fair — Perryton

June 9-16

TAS Field School, Camp Wood. Work on Mission San Lorenzo de la
Santa Cruz, Spanish Colonial Mission Site. Information and Registration:
WWW.TXARCH.ORG

3

PROGRAM INFORMATION
In the absence of both our President, Veronica Arias, and Vice-President Scott Brosowske, Paul Katz will provide us with
a film on the life of Ishi, the “last wild Indian” of America.
The Yana-speaking people were divided into four groups: North, Central, South, and the Yahi. They lived on the west
side of the Sierra Nevada, around the Feather and Yuba Rivers. The Yahi were the southernmost group, and apparently
lived pretty much to themselves. A.L. Krober estimated that there were about 400 Yahi before the discovery of gold at
Sutter’s Mill and the influx of perhaps 300,000 fortune-seekers.
The newcomers considered the Indians to be little more than animals, occupying the land where miners and their families
wanted to build houses and schools and churches. The whites killed off the game animals the Indians had been eating,
dammed up the rivers and creeks where the salmon had previously abounded. Who was going to consider the needs of a
bunch of wild Indians when there was gold to be had for the taking?
California judiciary sided with the whites, and turned a deaf ear to tales of slaughter and starvation. From the Yreka Herald, 1853:
We hope that the Government will render such aid as will enable the citizens of the north to carry on a
war of extermination until the last redskin of these tribes has been killed. Extermination is no longer a
question of time -- the time has arrived, the work has commenced, and let the first man that says treaty
or peace be regarded as a traitor.
He was found at a slaughterhouse at Oroville in 1911, starving and trying to steal some meat. His tribal customs forbade
him to speak his name, so the white men called him Ishi, the Yana word for “Man.” A.L. Krober took him to Parnassus,
where he and others cared for him until his death in 1916, from tuberculosis.

Yahi translator Sam Batwai, Alfred L. Kroeber,
and Ishi, photographed at Parnassus in1911. Image courtesy of UC Berkeley, Phoebe Hearst Museum of Anthropology.

4

“In the early 1900s, Ishi, the last of the Yahi Indian
tribe, is discovered nearly 20 years after the Yahi
tribe was thought to be wiped out. The curators of a
museum agree to look after him, hoping to learn
more about him, his tribe, and their beliefs, and to
teach him to survive in the modern world. “

Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies 54th Symposium
Saturday, April 21, 2018
Iraan, Texas
“Schedule of Events”
8:00-9:00

Registration

9:00-9:15

Welcome and Introduction by Jeff Peters, President IAS

9:15-9:45

Seventeen Draw Archeological Complex. Evans Turpin Iraan A.S.

9:50-10:20

Where The West Begins: Fort Lancaster. Wilson White, Fort Lancaster

10:20-10:40

Break, Refreshments

10:40-11:10

Protohistoric and Historic Potters of the Big Bend: The Ongoing La Junta Ceramic Study. Richard Walter: Cen
ter of the Big Bend Studies

11:15 – 11:45

A Texas Ranger Shooting in Toyah, Texas. Sandy Powers Iraan A.S.

11:50 – 1:00

Break for Lunch: Catering to Civic Center. Business Meeting.

1:05 – 1:20

SWFAS Business Report

1:25 -1:55

Aerial Mapping, Ceramic Studies and Preliminary Assessment of Cultural Affiliations of the Connellee Peak,
Site (41MY5). Christopher Lintz: Texas State University, Sam Cason: (Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross
State University).

2:00 – 2:30

Enamel Hypoplasia and Longevity as seen in the Antelope and Wolf Creek Skeletal Sample at the Panhandle
Plains Historical Museum. Erin C. Frigo: Texas Tech University (Panhandle Plains Historical Museum ).

2:35

Closing Comments and Acknowledgments

3:00

Guided Tour: (15minute drive) Pontoon Crossing Site Trip: Site includes Dugouts, Cooks Quarters, and Rem
nants of old Corral
For those that would like to visit Fort Lancaster a Guide will be provided to make a 30minute drive to Fort Lancaster
For those wanting to remain in Iraan the rest of the day the Alley OOP Museum will be open.
Sunday Morning Tour of the pontoon crossing will be available if anyone is interested as well as Fort Lancaster

Lunch Menu: Brisket, Chicken, Sausage, Green Beans, Corn, Rolls, Tea, Water. $10:00 Pay at the time of registration. Please
RSVP so we can let The Old House Café Know how many to prepare for by Email to: Peters5204@abcglobal.net

5

