PASTIMES
The Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society

President
Donna Otto
Vice-President
Jeff Indeck
Secretary
Stacy Brown
Treasurer
Lisa Jackson
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Scott Brosowske

Vol. 32, No. 4, April 2012

PASTIMES

Page 1

Vol. 32, No. 4, April 2012

In this issue

Page 2

April Meeting Guest Speaker,
April Meeting Information

Page 3-4

A Colt’s .44 Caliber Bullet Mold
From A Historic Indian Campsite
by James Coverdale

Page 5-6

Minutes from the last meeting

Page 7

Announcements, Updates, Upcoming Events

Page 8

PAS Member Fieldwork Opportunity
On the Cover: Mike Gilger of
Perryton using the water screens
at the Eastveiw site during the
2011 CAR field school

Page 2

The Panhandle Archaeological Society will hold it's next meeting on Wednesday
April 18, 2012, at 7:00 pm, at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center Science Building,
2301 N. Soncy Road, in Amarillo, Texas. Our program will be presented by Joe D.
Rogers.

Joe D. Rogers

A New Look at an Old Building Material: Examining Burned Daub for Clues
to Architectural Methods and Materials.
Joe D. Rogers
Abstract
Burned daub is found in many archaeological sites and is often discarded, disregarded or ground through a
screen. A significant amount of information is being lost by these actions. Using material curated from previous
excavations along with that of recent discoveries, this seemingly benign material is revealing some extraordinary
information about the architecture of various prehistoric structures. Understanding daub’s base materials and
formation processes along with its relation to the mechanics of site formation, is allowing a new look at one of the
oldest building materials. Using some of the information that was gathered in the beginning of this study, methods
for classification, excavation, and recording are being developed and continue to reveal even more complete
pictures of several prehistoric structures of the Texas panhandle. By examining closely the remains of the daub
and associated materials, a significant glimpse of what was above the surface as well as what was in or on the
ground is being
revealed.

Biography

Joe D. Rogers graduated from Hereford High School, and after serving the U.S. Air Force, received a BS in Occupational Education from Wayland Baptist University, and a BS in History and a MA in History from West Texas State
University. His thesis was entitled “The Italian POW Camp at Hereford during World War II.” Joe has taught at
Hereford ISD, Amarillo College, and West Texas A&M for a long, long time. Throughout his distinguished career he
has received numerous honors and awards at the local and state level for his outstanding teaching. Joe is a
member of several local, regional, state, and national historical societies and associations and provides living
history programs for schools, museums and civic organizations. He has served as a Regional Director and Past
President of the Texas Archaeological Society and President of the Panhandle Archaeological Society. Joe continues to serve as an Archaeological Steward for the Texas Historical Commission, a position he has held since 2000.
Along with wife Cindy and daughter Joscelyn, he has made a concerted effort to visit each state in the Union
during their summer vacations. Focusing on the cultural, historical, geographical, and literary sites within each
state, this project was completed in 2004. During this same period they also visited Great Britain, France, Belgium,
Romania, Canada, Mexico, Australia, and New Zealand. Joe lives in a 100 year old home in Hereford that he and
his family have restored and maintained with a reverence for the families and history that the property represents.
He collects and restores woodworking tools and other historic technologies with an emphasis on the 18th and 19th
centuries and uses these items in the classroom and other venues. Joe has been active in archaeology for 10
years, with a concentration on sites of the Texas panhandle and continues to work cooperatively with members of
the Panhandle Plains Historical Museum, Texas Historical Commission, Texas Archaeological Society, and the Panhandle Archaeological Society.

A Colt’s .44 Caliber
Bullet Mold From
A Historic Indian
Campsite

Page 3

by James Coverdale

I

n 2006 a systematic metal detecting survey was
conducted at the Juree (41OC97) site, a probable
Native American winter campsite along Wolf Creek in
eastern Ochiltree County, Texas. Near the southern end
of the site, a cluster of three targets buried about 15
cm to 20 cm below the ground surface was indicated.
The first object was a large brass button that was
stamped with an ornate floral design. The button was
partially bent and missing the attachment eye. The
second target, which was about 25 cm away from the
button, was a bullet mold for a firearm. Just centimeters away, the third object was a single jointed mouthpiece from a twisted wire snaffle bit. The mouthpiece is
missing the two end rings where the headstall and
reins attach. This cluster of three artifacts may be
related in that the brass button could have been used
to close a bag or pouch of some type that contained
the bullet mold and snaffle bit. When the eye pulled
loose from the button the contents fell to the ground
where they were recovered during the metal detecting
survey.
The mold was in good condition and the information
stamped into the sprue cutter could clearly be read as
"Colt's Patent". Research and mold measurements
determined that this bullet mold was for a Colt's .44
caliber New Model Holster Pistol. This pistol was later

known as the Colt's Army Model 1860. The only
damage to the mold was that the head of the sprue
cutter retaining screw had been twisted off. This Colt
bullet mold is designed to cast two different types of
soft lead projectiles. One is the standard round ball
bullet ( 0.464" dia.) and the other a conical lead bullet
(0.46" dia. x 0.702" length).

The bullet
mold, snaffle
bit mouthpiece, and
brass button.

Page 4
Ammunition improvements in the 1850's produced
pointed or conical lead bullets that were found to be
superior to round ball projectiles. The conical bullet
increased the range and accuracy of the lead projectile
by improving the ballistic performance. Increased accuracy and range of the conical bullet was later proven on
the battlefields of the Civil War.

The round ball and conical mold cavities

While combustible paper pistol cartridges using
nitrated paper and a conical lead bullet were available
during and after the American Civil War, it was a
common practice to pay the additional cost for a bullet
mold when buying a new pistol. The bullet mold would
either be purchased separately or included in a cased
pistol set along with powder flask, combination
screwdriver/nipple wrench, a tin of percussion caps,
and the pistol.
During the Civil War, and later Indian War period, the
military used combustible paper cartridges to fill
military pistol ammunition requirements. Civilians and
Native Americans usually relied on the bullet mold and
powder horn or flask for loading their revolver. To cast
bullets, soft lead, either in bar form or from salvaged
bullets, is needed. The lead is placed into a cast iron
pot or skillet to melt over an open campfire. Once the
lead melted to a liquid state, a ladle was used to pour
molten lead into two small holes on top of the sprue
cutter. The sprue cutter is a flat steel plate fastened to
the mold by the hinge pin and the sprue cutter retaining
screw. The sprue cutter has pour holes that align over
the mold cavities. The lead was allowed to cool for
about a minute and then the sprue cutter is tapped
sideways pivoting over the mold cavity holes. This
would slice off the sprue of lead that flowed out of the
top of the mold cavity. The mold was then opened and
the newly cast projectiles allowed to fall from the mold.
The mold is then closed and the sprue cutter repositioned for the next casting.
Following the Civil War, many civilians purchased
newer Colt metallic cartridge firing revolvers, such as
the Richards conversion of the Colt Army model 1860,
the Mason and Richards 1871-72 "Open Top", and the
now legendary Colt Model 1873 Single Action Army.

However, many Native Americans warriors still
preferred the "Cap and Ball" Colt Army Model 1860
pistol because they did not have to rely on or obtain
fixed ammunition. Warriors found they could take any
size metallic cartridge and disassemble the cartridge
for the lead and powder. They would melt the lead and
cast the proper caliber bullet they required. The
gunpowder would be saved in a powder horn or flask
for later use. That this strategy was practiced is demonstrated by the recovery of unfired empty metallic
cartridges at numerous historic period Native campsites of the region.
Historical accounts of how Southern Plains warriors
acquired bullet molds are scarce. The sale or trade of
firearms to indians was restricted, but a bullet mold fell
outside of such rules, and thus, could have been
obtained through a number of different sources. One of
the more likely sources would have been licensed
indian traders who frequented the indian camps. These
businessmen would have known that there was a ready
market for these valuable firearm accoutrements. In
fact, by the mid 1800's there were several rifles and
revolvers that fired bullets like the ones cast by this
mold. Archaeological evidence from the Red River war
battle sites indicate that several types of .44 caliber
firearms were used by the warriors of Southern Plains
tribes. A good usable bullet mold most likely would
never have been discarded and so it can be surmised
that it was lost along with the snaffle bit mouthpiece
and the brass button. The recovery of this .44 caliber
Colt's bullet mold provides a small glimpse of one of the
many items that a well equipped warrior would have
carried in the 1860's to 1880's period.

Side veiw of the mold.

PANHANDLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of the March, 21, 2012 Meeting

Page 5

-President Donna Otto called the meeting to order at 7:00 p.m. at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center. Twenty-two members and three guests were in attendance.
-The next meeting of the PAS will be April 18, 2012 at 7:00 p.m. at the Wildcat Bluff Nature Center.
PROGRAM
-Donna introduced the evening speaker, Dr. Robert A. Wright, West Texas A&M University. Dr. Wright’s program
focused on dendrochronology and the history of tree ring dating in the American Southwest.
BUSINESS MEETING
-The business meeting began at the conclusion of Dr. Wright’s lecture.
-The minutes of February 15, 2012, as published in the March, 2012 issue of the PASTIMES, were accepted.
-Lisa gave the treasurer’s report. The current operating balance is $2571.80. Approximately $120.00 had been spent
the previous month. The treasurer’s report was accepted.
-Rolla submitted the Publication Committee report. The current balance is $1930.20. The publication report was
accepted.
OLD BUSINESS
-Paul Katz was nominated as the PAS voting delegate at the Southwest Federation of Archaeological Societies Symposium in Iraan, Texas in April. The motion passed.
-A table was requested for the Perryton Stone Age Fair to display information about the society and provide publications for sale on April 28th. A table will be provided and Rolla and others will attend.
-It was agreed that PAS will again conduct a rock art program for the Lamar Elementary School Science Day on May
11th. The program will focus on Rocky Dell art and use supplies from last year’s presentation.
-A card was signed by attending members for Alvin Lynn sending best wishes and hopes for a speedy recovery.
-Scott again requested articles and/or suggestions for the PAS newsletter from the membership.
-Tiffany Osborne was contacted in reference to organizing a trip with PAS members to record a prehistoric site
(exposed in a county road) in Wheeler County. She stated she will not be able to come up for the trip, but encouraged
PAS to visit and record the site. Jeff has the property owner contact information and Scott will contact the property
owner and set-up a field trip for the society.
-The Box Canyon field trip is still pending. Bob Smith stated he has 35mm slides of the area from earlier site visits if
needed.
-Donna is continuing to work on updating the PAS constitution and bylaws. Currently, she has gathered information
and changes up to 1989. Once the remaining changes are gathered, a report will be sent to the executive committee
for review, and then, published for member comments.
NEW BUSINESS
-Donna will be contacting the PAS website manager to get updates on pending changes and site visit counts.
-Alibates National Park will be participating in National Park Week beginning April 21st. They will be hosting a
Junior Ranger Day at the park on the 21st featuring multiple hands-on activities for children. Rozanna welcomed any
ideas for activities and requested help from volunteers to help with the daylong event. Several suggestions were
made, including making cordmarked pottery, making rope, corn grinding, and using archaeological tools. In the past,
approximately 15-20 children have attended this event. Also of note, any day use fees for any National Park are
waived during this week, including boat launching fees at Lake Meredith. Book store purchases will be 15% off as
well during this period.
-Alibates NP will again be hosting a Flint Fest later in the summer.
-Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum will be opening Pioneer Town on the 29-30th of June.
-Jeff is waiting to hear from Jeff Campbell to organize next month’s speaker.
-Rolla received a letter from Chris Lintz requesting financial assistance in conducting AMS carbon dating on corn
recovered from the Jack Allen Site (41HC219). The costs of the test will be $800.00. Some of the monies have
already been donated. He is requesting $195.00 from PAS. Scott offered that Courson Archaeological Research

Page 6
(CAR) receives a lower price for AMS dating by sending in bulk samples. He offered to contact Chris to see if he
would like to send in his material with CAR’s for a better price. A motion was made to provide Chris with $200.00 to
fund the testing from the publication funds due to the fact that PAS will be publishing the completed report. The
motion was passed.
-The meeting was adjourned at 9:15 p.m.

Page 7

Anouncements, Updates, and Upcoming Events
2012 Flint Hills Conference

Hosted by Emporia State University, Emporia, Kansas
April 6 -7, 2012
For more information check
http://www.emporia.edu/socanth/announcements/flint-hills-conference-2012.html

48th Annual Meeting of the Southwest Federation of Archeological Societies
Iraan, Texas
April 14th, 2012
To submit Papers or for more Information, Contact: Evans Turpin at: evansturpin@yahoo.com

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
April 18, 2012 at 7:00 pm
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

Society for American Archaeology Annual Meeting

Memphis, Tennessee April 18 - 22, 2012
http://www.saa.org/aboutthesociety/annualmeeting/tabid/138/default.aspx

The 2nd Annual Perryton Stone Age Fair

April 28, 2012 10:00 am - 5:00 pm
at the Museum of the Plains in Perryton,Texas
for additional information please visit the CAR website:
http://www.coursonarchresearch.com/

Panhandle Archaeological Society Monthly Meeting
Wildcat Bluff Nature Center
2301 N. Soncy, Amarillo, Texas
May 16, 2012 at 7:00 pm
For more information visit the PAS website at:
http://txpanhandlearchaeology.org/

Prehistoric Site Recording:
PAS Member Field Trip
to Collingsworth County, Texas

O

Page 8

n Wednesday April 11th a limited number of PAS members have been invited to Collingsworth County to
record a Ceramic period site. This previously undocumented site covers approximately ten to fifteen acres and is near
the Salt Fork of the Red River. The site is bisected by an unimproved county road. As the road is maintained with a road
grader, prehistoric site features, including hearths and trash filled pits are being exposed. The goals of this field trip are
to formally record the site, document the location of exposed features with a GPS, and assess the need for additional
work.
A background study of previously recorded sites in the county indicates the presence of Ceramic period sites similar to the one that we will record, as well as Late Archaic bison kills and Paleoindian period camps. We will be meeting
with the landowner, and potentially, local collectors and landowners aware of additional sites in the area. We will meet
south of Shamrock, Texas at 10:00 am and travel to the site. The field trip should take several hours to complete. Given
the nature of this project (i.e., a working event as opposed to a tour), the field trip will be limited to ten participants. If
you are interested in participating, please contact Scott Brosowske at 806-434-0157 to sign-up. If you cannot attend,
look for a summary of the event in the May issue of Pastimes!

