Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

December 11, 2015
Subject: Final Letter Report #2015-5: A Cultural Resources Survey of the 1.17-Mile Pear to Peeler
Natural Gas Line, Atascosa County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our cultural resources survey of the Pear to Peeler Natural Gas
Line right-of-way (Figures 1-3).
The right-of-way (ROW) was examined by two archaeologists on December 7, 2015. Our
observations of the Project Area revealed that virtually the entire length of the pipeline has been
disturbed in historic times, and at the time of our survey the ROW was covered in secondary low
mesquite brush, other thorny brush, and prickly pear and tasajillo cacti, or otherwise coursed through
a recently cultivated field (Figures 4 and 5).
A thorough pedestrian survey of revealed no evidence of cultural material, and the intermittent
drainage crossed on the southwestern portion of the right-of-way is broad and ephemeral, with no
evidence of terrace building. Accordingly, Tierras Antiguas recommends that construction of the
Pear to Peeler Natural Gas Line as it is currently planned be allowed to proceed with no further
archaeological investigations. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommends that if any
undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development along the pipeline, such finds
should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

Figure 1. Pear to Peeler Natural Gas Line on large topographic map.

Figure 2. Pear to Peeler Natural Gas Line on Christine West (1968) and Christine East
(1984) 7.5' USGS topographic maps.

Figure 3. Soils map of the Project Area.

Figure 4. Surveying the right-of-way on the eastern edge of the ephemeral
drainage; facing west.

Figure 5. Surveying the right-of-way that courses through a cultivated field north
of FM 3387; facing north.

