Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

April 15, 2015
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2015-2: A Cultural Resources Background Review of the 450-Meter
Prince G Pipeline in Northwestern McMullen County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during a background review of the Prince G
Pipeline right-of-way (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Location of the Prince G Pipeline on large topographic map.

Figure 2. Prince G Pipeline on Zella (1968) 7.5' USGS topographic map.

Background Review
McMullen County Prehistory and History
Indian artifacts found in McMullen County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable.
Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes, and
a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness of their
spears (Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery and to hunt
with bows and arrows. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians
native to McMullen County were squeezed out by other Indian who were migrating into the area and
by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San
Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in to take their place (Leffler 1996).
“In the earliest of written accounts, no permanent Spanish settlements seem to have been established
in the area now known as McMullen County. In 1828, the land was assigned to John McMullen and
James McGloin, who contracted to settle the area with 200 Catholic immigrants. By 1835 the
Mexican government had issued perhaps fifteen grants of land in the area of present McMullen
County to colonists associated with the McMullen-McGloin project. None of these grantees actually
settled on the land assigned to them, however. By 1836, when Texas seceded from Mexico, the area

remained populated almost entirely by the Indian bands that roamed through the area.
When William Bollaert, an English land speculator, traveled through the area between the Nueces
and Frio rivers in 1844, for example, the only people he encountered were convicts who had escaped
from a prison in Laredo. Even after the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo definitively assigned the
Nueces Strip to Texas, outlaws and unfriendly Indians delayed development of the area for years.
By 1860, there were perhaps 100 settlers in the county. By the late 1860s and early 1870s, a number
of ranches had been established, mostly in the northern part of the county. For protection, ranchers
often grouped their dwellings together” (Leffler 1996).
Archaeological Atlas and Historic Maps Research
As of January 15, 2015 there were 666 documented archaeological sites in McMullen County. Of
those, 450 are prehistoric open campsites with evidence that as a whole, open campsites in the
county have been occupied from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods. As with most of the
region, many campsites are situated on stream terraces, but there are also some in the uplands. Towhundred-fifteen sites are classified as lithic scatters, and generally these are located in the uplands
and along stream cutbanks where gravels outcrop. They also exhibit evidence of being used for the
past 11,000 years. Twenty-four lithic procurement sites have been recorded in the county, as has a
single sandstone burned rock midden. Three prehistoric human burials have been documented.
Historic sites consist of local family cemeteries with just a few burials in each, house sites and
farmsteads from as early as the 1850s, and trash scatters (Atlas 2015).
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say
what bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of McMullen County before then.
Only cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and apparent
lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods. Archaeologists have
documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites, including large open campsites that are
most commonly located along stream or river terraces with numerous campfires, where a wide
variety of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal remains are found.
Where gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient
gravels are sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or
prehistoric quarries
Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the lack
of cultural resource surveys near the PA that would have located sites, rather than the probable nonexistence of sites. In fact, the Project Area lies to the west of a large archaeological survey conducted
in anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al. 1981).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both Live
Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000 years
ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and gathering
natural food resources available in the area. In addition, archaeologists from the Center for
Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted archaeological
investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir. A number of different types of
structures were investigated, the purpose being to extract as much information as possible about
architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns during the last half of the 19th century within the
reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met

the challenges of living in a frontier area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming
of law and order, railroads, and modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
A review of the Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites indicated that there had been no archaeological
surveys conducted within one mile of the Prince G Pipeline. However, as shown in Figure 2, Tierras
Antiguas has conducted three privately funded pipeline surveys within one mile; Prince F Pipeline,
Prince Lateral, and Prince MCM Pipeline. In addition, four archaeological sites have been recorded
within one mile; they are briefly described as follows:
41MC507 – This site appears to have been a relatively large upland campsite situated on a broad
ridge and sideslope where prolific quantities of high quality chert gravels exposed to the surface were
exploited for the manufacture of stone tools from early through late stages of reduction. The
discovery of a Frio point suggests at least a Transitional Archaic occupation. Tierras Antiguas’
assessment was that the portion of the site that will be impacted by construction of the Prince F
Pipeline is generally mechanically disturbed, and otherwise has shallow and eroded soils. In view
of this, Tierras Antiguas recommended that construction of the Prince F Pipeline as currently
planned be allowed to proceed through the site, with no further archaeological investigations
(Nickels 2013).
41MC744 – This site appears to have been a relatively large open campsite tethered to Maguey
Creek, which although only flows in modern times during periods of heavy rainfall, was likely
spring-fed during one or more periods in prehistory. Its location would have afforded fresh water and
its riverine resources, as well as easy access to upland plants and game animals for subsistence. Finegrained chert gravels exposed across the surface were exploited for the manufacture of stone tools
from early through late stages of reduction. Tierras Antiguas assessed that the portion of the site that
would be impacted by construction of the Prince F Pipeline was generally mechanically disturbed,
and otherwise has shallow and eroded soils. In view of this, Tierras Antiguas recommended that
construction of the Prince F Pipeline as currently planned be allowed to proceed through the site,
with no further archaeological investigations (Nickels 2013).
41MC745 – This site appears to have been a relatively small open campsite tethered to Maguey
Creek, which at various times in prehistory was likely spring-fed and flowing, thus offering a source
of fresh water, as well as the riverine subsistence resources seasonally available, such as fish,
mussels, turtles, and possibly fruits and nuts. Likewise, the site lies on the edge of an expansive
upland area where occupants could have easily exploited game animals and plant resources. High
quality chert exposed across the surface in the immediate area were obviously used in the
manufacture of bifacial stone tools. Tierras Antiguas’ assessment was that the portion of the site that
was to be impacted by construction of the Prince F Pipeline was generally mechanically disturbed,
and otherwise has shallow and eroded soils. In view of this, Tierras Antiguas recommended that
construction of the Prince F Pipeline as currently planned be allowed to proceed through the site,
with no further archaeological investigations (Nickels 2013).
41MC757 – This site is described as a large site with consistent lithics across a vast upland south
and southeast of Maguey Creek. In addition to lithics, clusters of FCR were observed along the
southern creek bank, indicating the potential for burned rock features. This assessment of the site
was limited to a narrow portion along the north-south running dirt road (the current western
boundary of the site), but it likely extends eastward across the landform as the dense scatter of lithics
appear to continue across the upland. The finding of a Tortugas point along the Maguey Creek bank

edge dates this encampment to Middle Archaic times. The impacts to the site in conjunction with
the current project will be minimal given the location of the proposed electricity line along an
existing dirt road. However, should further development occur beyond the previously disturbed areas
along the road and high fence, a site revisit would be warranted for a more complete assessment of
its eligibility status (Atlas 2015).
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the Prince G Pipeline passes
through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. A standard source of review is
the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs available at the Perry Castañeda
Library at the University of Texas at Austin. This source would normally prove invaluable for
researching the possibility of, and potential for, historic sites and structures to exist within one mile
of a project area. In this case, the Prince G Pipeline appears to be in a rural area of McMullen County
that either warranted little attention, or the area was void of historic structures. The only historic map
located was a 1942 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 1:62,500' topographic map of the Franklin
Settlement (Cross) area (Perry Castañeda Library 2015), which shows no structures within in or near
the proposed Prince G Pipeline.
Nevertheless, the lack of comprehensive historic map and aerial information, coupled with the
paucity of cultural resources surveys within the area is possibly, and perhaps probably, why no
information is available regarding the presence of historic structures, ranching or industrial activities,
or persons of historic significance to the immediate area. Technically, any structures old than 45
years are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be
considered when the pipeline right-of-way is excavated. Historic sites recorded in McMullen County
consist of local family cemeteries with just a few burials in each, house sites and farmsteads from
as early as the 1850s, and trash scatters.

Soils
The Prince G Pipeline crosses through an area of McMullen County that is to be officially mapped
by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. Nevertheless, as shown in Figure 4, it is highly probable that
the Prince G Pipeline will impact Cotulla-Maverick Complex (CVB) soils. These are shallow clay
loam soils that exist on convex uplands and slopes. As such, the potential for intact and potentially
significant archaeological deposits to be extant is minimal to about 17 inches below the surface
(Websoil Survey 2015).

Figure 3. Soils to be dissected by the Prince G Pipeline.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Based upon the findings of known archaeological sites within the immediate area, as well as the
shallow soils, and our personal observation of the general terrain during three previous surveys in
the immediate area, and an at best minimal potential for significant archaeological deposits to exist
in the upland soils in the area, we recommend that construction of the Prince G Pipeline as currently
aligned be allowed to proceed as planned, with no further archaeological investigations. However,
we further advise that if any previously undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during
development of the pipeline, such finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or
by any qualified archaeological consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas 2015

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
April 15, 2015].

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.
Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon
Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hester, T. R., L. D. White, and J. White
1969 Archeological Materials from the Oulline Site (41LS3) and Other Sites in La Salle
County, Southwest Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. XXI, No. 2.
Leffler, J.
1996

McMullen County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 4, pp. 437-440.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Map
2015

Cross, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Map, 1942. Perry Castañeda Library Map
Collection (Http://www.lib.utexas.edu) [Accessed April 15, 2015].

Nickels, D. L.
2013 A Cultural Resources Survey of the 1.2-Mile Prince F Pipeline in McMullen
County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report #230. Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations. Martindale, Texas.

Perry Castañeda Library
2015 Perry Castañeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed April 15, 2015].
Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2015 McMullen County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed April 14,
2015].

