Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

November 8, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2012-59: A Cultural Resources Survey of the 677-Meter Quintanilla
C Pipeline in Northeastern McMullen County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during an archaeological survey of the
Quintanilla C Pipeline right-of-way on October 30, 2012 (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Quintanilla C Pipeline location on large topographic map.

Background
Review
“In the earliest of
written accounts, no
permanent Spanish
settlements seem to
h a v e
b ee n
established in the
area now known as
McMullen County.
In 1828, the land
was assigned to
John McMullen and
James McGloin,
who contracted to
settle the area with
200 Catholic
immigrants. By
1835 the Mexican Figure 2. Quintanilla C Pipeline on Cross (1969) 7.5' USGS
government had topographic map.
issued perhaps
fifteen grants of land in the area of present McMullen County to colonists associated with the
McMullen-McGloin project. None of these grantees actually settled on the land assigned to them,
however. By 1836, when Texas seceded from Mexico, the area remained populated almost entirely
by the Indian bands that roamed through the area.
When William Bollaert, an English land speculator, traveled through the area between the Nueces
and Frio rivers in 1844, for example, the only people he encountered were convicts who had escaped
from a prison in Laredo. Even after the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo definitively assigned the
Nueces Strip to Texas, outlaws and unfriendly Indians delayed development of the area for years.
By 1860, there were perhaps 100 settlers in the county. By the late 1860s and early 1870s, a number
of ranches had been established, mostly in the northern part of the county. For protection, ranchers
often grouped their dwellings together” (Leffler 1996:437-440).
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
There are 225 documented archaeological sites in McMullen County. Of those, 147 are prehistoric
open campsites with evidence that as a whole, open campsites in the county have been occupied
from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods. As with most of the region, many campsites are
situated on stream terraces, but there are also some in the uplands. Fifty-nine sites are classified as
lithic scatters, and generally these are located in the uplands and along stream cutbanks where
gravels outcrop. They also exhibit evidence of being used for the past 11,000 years. One quarry site
has been recorded in the county, as has a single sandstone burned rock midden. The only prehistoric
burial noted was found at one of the open campsites. Historic sites consist of local family cemeteries

with just a few burials in each, house sites and farmsteads from as early as the 1850s, and trash
scatters (Atlas 2012).
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say
what bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of McMullen County before then.
Only cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and apparent
lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods. Archaeologists have
documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites, including large open campsites that are
most commonly located along stream or river terraces with numerous campfires, where a wide
variety of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal remains are found.
Where gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient
gravels are sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or
prehistoric quarries.
Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the lack
of cultural resource surveys near the PA that would have located sites, rather than the probable nonexistence of sites. In fact, the Project Area lies to the west of a large archaeological survey conducted
in anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al. 1981).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both Live
Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000 years
ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and gathering
natural food resources available in the area. In addition, archaeologists from the Center for
Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted archaeological
investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir. A number of different types of
structures were investigated, the purpose being to extract as much information as possible about
architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns during the last half of the 19th century within the
reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met
the challenges of living in a frontier area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming
of law and order, railroads, and modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicated that
no professional archaeological surveys had been conducted within one mile (1,609 meters), but five
archaeological sites have been recorded within one mile of the current project area. As shown in
Figure 2, Tierras Antiguas has conducted a professional survey of the Teal A Pipeline, resulting in
the discovery of no archaeological sites (Nickels 2012). Otherwise, the five archaeological sites
shown in Figure 2 are briefly described below (Atlas 2012).
41MC431 - This prehistoric open campsite was recorded in August 2006 by David Calame, Sr., an
archaeological steward. It is described as being located adjacent to Highway 97 on a slope near an
unnamed tributary. Cultural material observed at the time consisted of biface fragments, scattered
fire-cracked rocks, and Rabdotus shells. However, the site had been heavily disturbed by highway
construction.
41MC432 - This another prehistoric open campsite recorded in August 2006 by David Calame, Sr.,

and revisited in August 2012 in advance of the construction of a well pad. It is situated on an upland
ridge and sideslope north of Salt Branch. A deflated hearth was observed near the center of the site,
and other cultural material included a utilized flake, and lithic debitage. It was noted that the site has
been heavily disturbed.
41MC433 - David Calame, Sr. Recorded this prehistoric open campsite in August 2006. It is located
on a gently sloping upland area, with scattered fire-cracked rocks, biface fragments, cores, flakes,
mussels shells, bone, and turtle shell. Its research potential is unknown.
41MC541 - Turpin and Sons archaeologists documented this prehistoric open campsite in March
2011 during a pipeline survey. It is described as surficial in nature and is located in a floodplain. At
the time, they observed fire-cracked rocks, a uniface, core, unmodified flakes, and mussel shells.
41MC639 - This is another prehistoric open campsite recorded by Turpin and Sons archaeologists
in April 2012 during a pipeline survey. It is located on a gentle slope near Cottonwood Creek.
Cultural materials observed include scattered fire-cracked rocks, bifaces, a core, flake. However, the
results of shovel testing revealed the artifacts were surficial in nature only.

Historic Maps and Aerial Photographs
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the Quintanilla C Pipeline passes
through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. A standard source of review is
the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs available at the Perry Castañeda
Library at the University of Texas at Austin. A second standard research source consulted is a very
comprehensive and large collection of old maps and aerial photographs compiled by the Texas
Department of Transportation from dozens of historic archives throughout the state of Texas. In this
case, no maps older than 1969 were found. No structures were shown on this map in the vicinity of
the current project. However, these maps are many times incomplete, or not to scale by today’s
standards, and that should be considered when the pipeline is constructed. Technically, any structures
older than 45 years are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this
should be considered when the lateral is constructed.
Soils
The Quintanilla C Pipeline crosses two soil types. However they offer varying depths, sedimentation
and deposition rates, and a small, broad, and ephemeral drainage courses through the northern area.
As such, the soils and their proximity to these streams likewise imply the potential for the
preservation of intact cultural resources to exist. Figure 3 shows the soils that are to be intersected
by the pipeline (Web Soil Survey 2012). Table 1 then presents a brief description of each type, and
their potential to contain buried and intact cultural deposits.

Figure 3. Soils to be dissected by the Quintanilla C Pipeline.
Table 1. Soils to be Dissected by the Quintanilla C Pipeline.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact Archaeological
Potential

Caid sandy loam (CaB)

Deep loamy soils on gently sloping

Moderate to about 46 inches below

uplands

the surface

Coy clay loam, 1-3% slopes

Deep, well drained loamy soils on

Moderate to about 28 inches below

(CoB, CyB)

uplands

the surface

Field Survey Results
A thorough 100-percent pedestrian survey of the surface was conducted along the right-of-way.
Although surface visibility ranged from 70 to 90-percent, no prehistoric or historic cultural materials
were observed. The upland soils in this area are shallow, deflated and eroded, exposing clay hardpan

in several areas; and
although the drainage in this
area appears t o be
substantial on a topographic
map, in reality, it is
generally a broad and
ephemeral swale, with no
terraces (Figure 4). Animal
burrow backdirt piles were
frequent, but a thorough
examination of those again
revealed no evidence of
cultural material. Machinepushed brush piles were
also common along the
proposed right-of-way.

Figure 4. Drainage crossing at N3152765 E547462 (NAD83); facing
south.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Based upon the negative findings during this survey, and the at best moderate potential for
significant archaeological deposits to exist in the upland soils in the area, we recommend that
construction of the Quintanilla C Pipeline as it is currently aligned be allowed to proceed as planned,
with no further archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that if any previously
undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development of the pipelines, such finds
should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological
consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited

Atlas

2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
October 25, 2012].

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.
Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon
Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hester, T. R., L. D. White, and J. White
1969 Archeological Materials from the Oulline Site (41LS3) and Other Sites in La Salle
County, Southwest Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. XXI, No. 2.
Leffler, J.
1996

McMullen County. The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 4, pp. 437-440. Texas
State Historical Association, Austin.

Nickels, D. L.
2012 A Cultural Resources Survey of the Re-Routed 1-Mile Teal A Pipeline in
Northeastern McMullen County, Texas. Final Letter Report #2012-54. Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.
Perry Castañeda Library
2012 Perry Castañeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed October 29, 2012].

Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2012 McMullen County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed October 29,
2012].

