Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

March 15, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2012-3: A Cultural Resources Survey of the 2.1-Mile Ralph
Edwards L 1H Pipeline in Northwestern McMullen County, Texas
Mr. David Black
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Mr. Black,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during an archaeological survey of the Ralph
Edwards L 1H Pipeline right-of-way on March 14, 2012 (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Ralph Edwards L 1H Pipeline on county-wide topographic map.

Figure 2. Ralph Edwards L 1H Pipeline on Pertle Creek (1969) topographic map.

Background Review
Old Maps, Aerial Photographs, Historic Research
“In the earliest of written accounts, no permanent Spanish settlements seem to have been established
in the area now known as McMullen County. In 1828, the land was assigned to John McMullen and
James McGloin, who contracted to settle the area with 200 Catholic immigrants. By 1835 the
Mexican government had issued perhaps fifteen grants of land in the area of present McMullen
County to colonists associated with the McMullen-McGloin project. None of these grantees actually
settled on the land assigned to them, however. By 1836, when Texas seceded from Mexico, the area
remained populated almost entirely by the Indian bands that roamed through the area.
When William Bollaert, an English land speculator, traveled through the area between the Nueces
and Frio rivers in 1844, for example, the only people he encountered were convicts who had escaped
from a prison in Laredo. Even after the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo definitively assigned the
Nueces Strip to Texas, outlaws and unfriendly Indians delayed development of the area for years.
By 1860, there were perhaps 100 settlers in the county. By the late 1860s and early 1870s, a number
of ranches had been established, mostly in the northern part of the county. For protection, ranchers

often grouped their dwellings together” (Leffler 1996:437-440).
A standard source of review is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs
available at the Perry Casteñada Library at the University of Texas at Austin (Perry Casteñeda
Library 2012). Although this source would normally prove invaluable for researching the possibility
of, and potential for, historic sites and structures to exist within one mile of a project area, in this
case the Ralph Edwards L 1H Pipeline route is in such a rural area that no old maps or aerial
photographs were available. A second standard research source consulted for old maps and aerial
photographs was a very comprehensive and large compilation of old maps and aerial photographs
compiled by the Texas Department of Transportation from dozens of historic archives throughout
the state of Texas. Once again, the Ralph Edwards L 1H Pipeline route appears to be in a rural area
of McMullen County that either warranted little attention, or the area was void of historic structures.
Nevertheless, the lack of comprehensive historic map and aerial information, coupled with the
paucity of cultural resources surveys within the area is possibly, and perhaps probably, why no
information is available regarding the presence of historic structures, ranching or industrial activities,
or persons of historic significance to the immediate area. Technically, any structures old than 45
years are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be
considered when the pipeline right-of-way is excavated. Historic sites recorded in McMullen County
consist of local family cemeteries with just a few burials in each, house sites and farmsteads from
as early as the 1850s, and trash scatters..
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
There are 225 documented archaeological sites in McMullen County. Of those, 147 are prehistoric
open campsites with evidence that as a whole, open campsites in the county have been occupied
from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods. As with most of the region, many campsites are
situated on stream terraces, but there are also some in the uplands. Fifty-nine sites are classified as
lithic scatters, and generally these are located in the uplands and along stream cutbanks where
gravels outcrop. They also exhibit evidence of being used for the past 11,000 years. One quarry site
has been recorded in the county, as has a single sandstone burned rock midden. The only prehistoric
burial noted was found at one of the open campsites. Historic sites consist of local family cemeteries
with just a few burials in each, house sites and farmsteads from as early as the 1850s, and trash
scatters (Atlas 2012).
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say
what bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of McMullen County before then.
Only cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and apparent
lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods. Archaeologists have
documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites, including large open campsites that are
most commonly located along stream or river terraces with numerous campfires, where a wide
variety of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal remains are found.
Where gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient
gravels are sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or
prehistoric quarries.
Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the lack

of cultural resource surveys near the PA that would have located sites, rather than the probable nonexistence of sites. In fact, the PA lies to the west of a large archaeological survey conducted in
anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al. 1981).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both Live
Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000 years
ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and gathering
natural food resources available in the area. In addition, archaeologists from the Center for
Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted archaeological
investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir. A number of different types of
structures were investigated, the purpose being to extract as much information as possible about
architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns during the last half of the 19th century within the
reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met
the challenges of living in a frontier area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming
of law and order, railroads, and modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archaeological sites indicates that
no professional documented archaeological surveys have been conducted one mile of the Project
Area (PA), and no archaeological sites have been recorded. However, as shown in Figure 2, TAAI
either conducted a field survey or cultural resources background review of the Countiss Trunkline,
the Three Rivers Oil Pipeline, the Choke Canyon Pipeline, and the Regency Cheyenne Pipeline. In
all cases, no archaeological site is known to exist within one mile of the Ralph Edwards L 1H.

Soils Map
The Ralph Edwards L 1H Pipeline crosses four soil types that offer varying depths, sedimentation
and deposition rates, and broad, shallow streams course through the area. As such, the soils and their
proximity to streams likewise imply the potential for the preservation of intact cultural resources to
exist. Figure 3 shows the soils that there are are to be intersected by the Ralph Edwards L 1H
Pipeline, as well as surrounding soil types (Web Soil Survey 2012). Table 1 then presents a brief
description of each type, and their potential to contain buried and intact cultural deposits.
Table 1. Soils Dissected by the ralph Edwards L 1H Pipeline.
Buried and Intact Archaeological
Potential

Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Esseville clay (EvC)

Deep clay on convex interfluves

Minimal to about 15 inches below
the surface

Hindes very gravelly loam
(HnC)

Shallow gravelly clayey loam on
convex uplands

Minimal to about 9 inches below
the surface

La Salle clay (LAB)

Deep, gently undulating clayey soil on
smooth plains

Minimal to about 24 inches below
the surface

Montell clay (MtB)

Clayey alluvium on valley floors and
slopes

Minimal to about 17 inches below
the surface

Figure 3. Soils to be dissected by the Ralph Edwards L 1H Pipeline.

Field Survey Results
A thorough. pedestrian survey of the surface was conducted along 75 percent of the right-of-way.
Although surface visibility ranged from 95 to 100-percent, no prehistoric or historic cultural
materials were observed. The upland soils in this area are shallow, deflated and eroded, exposing
clay hardpan in several areas (see for example, Figures 4 and 5). Animal burrow backdirt piles were
frequent, but a thorough examination of those again revealed no evidence of cultural material.
Machine-pushed brush piles were extremely common along the eastern half of proposed right-ofway. No evidence of either prehistoric or historic cultural resources was observed during the survey.

Figure 4. Photo of south end of Ralph
Edwards L 1H right-of-way; facing northnorthwest.

Figure 5. Photo of northern portion of rightof-way; facingwest-southwest.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Based upon the negative findings during this survey, and the at best minimal potential for significant
archaeological deposits to exist in the upland soils in the area, we recommend that construction of
the Ralph Edwards L 1H Pipeline as currently aligned be allowed to proceed as planned, with no
further archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that if any previously
undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development of the pipeline, such finds
should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological
consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
March 11, 2012].

Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke
Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series:
Volume 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Leffler, J.
1996

McMullen County. The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 4, pp. 437-440.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Perry Casteñeda Library
2012 Perry Cesteñeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed March 11, 2012].
Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2012 McMullen County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed March 1,
2012].

