Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

September 1, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2012-49: A Cultural Resources Survey of the 655-Meter Red Earth
Lateral in Northwestern La Salle County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during an archaeological survey of the Red Earth
Lateral right-of-way on February 6, 2012 (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Red Earth Lateral on large topographic map.

Background
Review
La Salle County
History
Indian artifacts
found in La Salle
County indicate that
the area has been
occupied for about
11,000 years.
Plentiful food
sources such as wild
game, fruits, seeds,
and roots made the
land hospitable.
Early technology
included tools from
wood and stone,
woven basketry,
sewed rabbitskin Figure 2. Red Earth Lateral on Harris Lake (1974) topographic map.
robes, and a very
effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness of their spears
(Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery and to hunt with
bows and arrows. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians native
to La Salle County were squeezed out by other Indian who were migrating into the area and by the
Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan
Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in to take their place (Leffler 1996).
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the La Salle County
area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts
of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the huntergatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his experiences in
1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves to the easily
exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer, occasionally sending a hunting
party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each other in the
semiarid environs of south Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents (Campbell and
Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced Native American groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. Beginning in the late
1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio Road, a camino real, to
and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are documented accounts

of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to establish any sort of
permanent bases in present-day La Salle County (Chipman 1992)
After the Mexican War of Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its
citizens to settle in Texas. Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that
included territory now in La Salle County. None of the recipients seem to have made use of the land,
however. By 1836, when Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated
almost solely by Indians (Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of La Salle County lay in the
disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for desperate
characters until about 1865. New settlers who lived in jacals or dugouts were frequently being
harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part to being pursued by the Texas Rangers, and
being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave La Salle County by 1877. By 1880,
cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also an important part of
the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators combined to make
sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
As with rest of the nation, during the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced
to cut back their once-lucrative vegetable production, and they fell back on raising poultry, hogs, and
dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county in the 1950s
certainly bolstered La Salle County’s economy, and although large ranches lay claim to most of the
land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively increasing part of the
county’s development (Leffler 1996).
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Very few, and sparsely scattered archaeological surveys have been conducted in La Salle County.
There are only 99 archaeological sites recorded within the county, and a large number of those were
found on pipeline surveys. Nevertheless, the time-diagnostic artifacts discovered in La Salle County
provide evidence that the landscape was occupied as early as 11,000 years before the present.
The site types are as varied as the landscape. Large open campsites with numerous hearths, or
campfires, a wide assortment of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal
remains are most commonly located along stream or river terraces. Where gravels outcrop, either
along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are sometimes exposed
in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric quarries (Atlas 2012).
Of the 99 sites, 54 are prehistoric open campsites, and 45 are prehistoric lithic scatters. The more
significant and deeply buried open campsites with archaeological research potential lie close to
streams. Historic components on these same prehistoric sites include historic windmills and areas
of scattered glass and ceramic sherds, or in some cases there are large trash dumps. One unique
historic site is Fort Ewell (41LS19), an adobe structure located on the old Laredo to San Antonio
Road, and that served the U.S. Army from 1852-1854. The only State Archaeological Landmark
(SAL) recorded in La Salle County is the County Courthouse in Cotulla (Leffler 1996; Atlas 2012).
Finally, one of the more potentially significant archaeological sites in the South Texas archaeological
region is located in La Salle County; this being the Oulline Site (41LS3). The Oulline Site covers

approximately 40 acres, about eight miles north of Cotulla. Diagnostic artifacts recovered from this
large open campsite range in age from Paleoindian through the Late Prehistoric periods, and
demonstrate the potential for other significant archaeological sites to exist in the area (Hester et al.
1969).
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicated that
no professional archaeological surveys had been conducted within one mile (1,609 meters), and no
archaeological sites had been recorded within one mile of the current project area. However, as
shown in Figure 2, Tierras Antiguas has conducted surveys of the Red Earth Trunkline and the Tierra
Roja Lateral. Although one prehistoric lithic scatter was documented along the Red Earth Trunkline,
it was not within one mile of the proposed Red Earth Lateral (Nickels 2012a). One historic trash
scatter was documented along the Tierra Roja Lateral, roughly 1,400 meters north of the proposed
Red Earth Lateral (Nickels 2012b).
Historic Maps and Aerial Photographs
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the Red Earth Lateral passes
through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. A standard source of review is
the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs available at the Perry Castañeda
Library at the University of Texas at Austin. In this case, one historic topographic map was found.
It is a 1940, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (1:62,500) topographic map of the Artesia Wells area
(Map 2012). This map shows a water tower (windmill) and two water tanks either along, or in close
proximity to the proposed Red Earth Lateral. However, the map is not to scale by today’s standards,
and that should be considered when the pipeline is constructed. Technically, any structures older than
45 years are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be also
be considered when the lateral is constructed.
Soils
The Red Earth Lateral crosses through Duval loamy fine sand (DsC), shallow soils on 0-5% slopes
in the uplands (Web Soil Survey 2012), with a minimal potential to contain intact and potentially
significant archaeological deposits to about 14 inches below the surface

Field Survey Results
A thorough 100-percent pedestrian survey of the surface was conducted along the right-of-way.
Although surface visibility ranged from 95 to 100-percent, no prehistoric or historic cultural
materials were observed. The upland soils in this area are shallow, deflated and eroded, exposing
clay hardpan in several areas. Animal burrow backdirt piles were frequent, but a thorough
examination of those again revealed no evidence of cultural material. Machine-pushed brush piles
were also common along the proposed right-of-way.
As discussed above, a 1940 topographic map of the area showed a water tower (windmill) and two
probable concrete stock tanks in the immediate area. During our field survey, we observed wooden
corrals and concrete stock tanks off the eastern end of the pipeline right-of-way, but they will not be
impacted by the proposed pipeline installation.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations

Based upon the negative findings during this survey, and the at best moderate potential for
significant archaeological deposits to exist in the upland soils in the area, we recommend that
construction of the Red Earth Lateral as it is currently aligned be allowed to proceed as planned, with
no further archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that if any previously
undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development of the pipeline, such finds
should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological
consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
August 31, 2012].

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern Texas.
Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.
Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon
Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hester, T. R., L. D. White, and J. White
1969 Archeological Materials from the Oulline Site (41LS3) and Other Sites in La Salle
County, Southwest Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. XXI, No. 2.
Leffler, J.
1996

La Salle County. The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 4, pp. 83-86.Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.

Map
2012

Perry Castañeda Library Map Collection. Artesia Wells, 1940 USACE Topographic
Map. [Accessed August 31, 2012].

Nickels, D. L.
2012a A Cultural Resources Survey of the 9.7-Mile Red Earth Trunkline in Dimmit and La
Salle Counties, Texas. Archaeology Report #102. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations, Martindale, Texas.

2012b A Cultural Resources Survey of the Tierra Roja Lateral in Northwestern La Salle
County, Texas. Interim Letter Report submitted to Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd. by Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale,
Texas (February 9, 2012).
Perry Castañeda Library
2012 Perry Castañeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed August 10, 2012].
Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2012 La Salle County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed August
31, 2012].

