Journal of Island & Coastal Archaeology, 10:436–445, 2015
Copyright © 2015 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1556-4894 print / 1556-1828 online
DOI: 10.1080/15564894.2015.1008074

Cultural Heritage at Risk in the
Twenty-First Century: A Vulnerability
Assessment of Coastal Archaeological
Sites in the United States
Downloaded by [Smithsonian Institution Libraries] at 09:08 28 October 2015

Leslie A. Reeder-Myers
Program in Human Ecology and Archaeobiology, Department of
Anthropology, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, DC, USA
ABSTRACT
Twenty-first-century global warming poses a significant threat to the
cultural heritage of coastal regions, but the effects of sea-level rise
and changing weather patterns will not be evenly distributed. In
addition, continued urban, agricultural, and industrial development
concentrated in coastal areas contributes to the destruction of cultural
resources. Mitigation of these threats requires rapid action on the
part of archaeologists and public land managers. This study presents
a method for quickly evaluating relative resource vulnerability at
national, regional, and local scales, using data that is available for all
United States coastlines, as well as many other coastlines around the
world. Three regional case studies—the mountainous coast of California’s Santa Barbara Channel, the wetlands and sandy shores of Texas,
and the protected estuarine shores of Virginia’s Chesapeake Bay—are
compared to shoreline vulnerability for the United States as a whole.
In each of these regions, sites have already been submerged under
rising tides, lost to storm erosion, or destroyed by human activities.
Variability in coastal geomorphology, rates of relative sea-level rise,
and the structure of prehistoric settlement and subsistence systems,
however, produce different patterns of vulnerability.
Keywords climate change, coastal vulnerability analysis, erosion, sea-level rise

Received 14 October 2014; accepted 9 January 2015.
Address correspondence to Leslie A. Reeder-Myers, Program in Human Ecology and Archaeobiology,
Department of Anthropology, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington,
DC, 20013, USA. E-mail: reeder-myersL@si.edu
Color versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at
http://www.tandfonline.com/uica.

436

A Vulnerability Assessment of U.S. Coastal Sites

Downloaded by [Smithsonian Institution Libraries] at 09:08 28 October 2015

INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
As the effects of global climate change are
felt during the twenty-first century, cultural
heritage all over the world will be at risk,
including archaeological, historical, and religious sites, traditional knowledge, museums,
and archives (Cassar et al. 2006). The coastal
archaeological record is particularly vulnerable to changing land use and climate patterns today (Erlandson 2008; Erlandson and
Fitzpatrick 2006), but it is also a valuable
resource for understanding these changes
in the past. Archaeological sites contain a
record of past climate change, and they also
tell the story of how people in the past responded to and influenced changes in marine
ecosystems (Erlandson and Rick 2010; Jackson et al. 2001; Rick and Lockwood 2013).
The complexity of the threats to these resources creates a challenge for archaeologists, historians, descendent communities,
land managers, and other stakeholders who
need to develop strategies to mitigate damage to coastal cultural heritage.
Although archaeologists have long been
concerned about the erosion of cultural
heritage sites in coastal areas (e.g., Bird
1992; Erlandson and Moss 1999; Lewis 2000;
Mourtzas and Marinos 1994), formal modeling of risk and vulnerability has recently
received considerable attention. Studies in
New Zealand (Bickler et al 2013), France
(Daire et al. 2012), Scotland (Dawson 2013),
and England (Flatman 2009; Murphy et al.
2009) have examined the impact of coastal
erosion at national scales. Other studies have
used targeted models to compare site vulnerability across hundreds or thousands of archaeological sites at regional scales (Reeder
et al. 2012; Westley et al. 2011). Still others have measured erosion and other vulnerability factors for specific archaeological
sites (Braje et al. 2011; Fitzpatrick et al. 2006;
Robinson et al. 2010; Shi et al. 2012).
Spatial modeling using geographic information systems can be used at national, regional, and local scales to identify the most
highly threatened sites and generate a manageable plan for collecting data from sites
that are likely to be lost. This study expands
on the methodology of Reeder et al. (2012) to

develop a technique that can rapidly evaluate
archaeological site vulnerability using data
available throughout the United States (Figure 1). Three areas are chosen as case studies:
the rocky coasts of California’s Santa Barbara
Channel, the wetlands and sandy beaches
of the Texas coast, and the wooded estuarine coasts of Virginia’s Chesapeake Bay. The
methods developed here are easily adapted
to any part of the world and can be modified to address specific vulnerability issues at
smaller scales. There is little certainty about
the precise nature, timing, or intensity of
the effects of climate change, which makes
preparation, beginning with broad vulnerability assessments, only more important.
DATA AND METHODS
In each region, the study area is defined as
the land within 5 km of the shoreline (Figure 1). In California, the study area along the
Santa Barbara Channel includes the coasts
of Santa Barbara County and the Northern
Channel Islands, comprising 1016 km2 of
land along 418 km of shoreline. Within this
space, there are 2,357 known archaeological sites. In Texas, the study area from Galveston Bay to Matagorda Bay includes the coasts
of Galveston, Brazoria, and Matagorda counties. There are only 259 known archaeological sites with 1632 km2 of land and 980 km of
shoreline in this region. The Virginia study
area includes the coastlines of five coastal
counties between the York River and the
Potomac River. There are 1007 known archaeological sites in this region, which encompasses 1695 km2 of land and 1500 km of
shoreline.
Cultural resource vulnerability (CRV )
was calculated for each archaeological site
according to its position on the landscape
(distance to shoreline and elevation), the degree of vulnerability of the nearest shoreline, and modern land use at the site (i.e., urban, agricultural, or industrial development)
using the following equation:
CRV =

2 (D + E ) + 3 (SV ) + 2 (LU) .
(1)
3

JOURNAL OF ISLAND & COASTAL ARCHAEOLOGY

437

Downloaded by [Smithsonian Institution Libraries] at 09:08 28 October 2015

Leslie A. Reeder-Myers

Figure 1. Map showing the locations of the three study regions in southern California (A), Texas (B),
and Virginia (C). The middle panel shows the specific study area delineated as the land
within 5 km of the coast, as well as the areas that are less than 0.5 m above MSL (darker
or red shading) and less than 1 m above MSL (lighter or orange shading). Note that these
areas are only just visible in southern California, but that substantial flooding can be
expected in both Texas and Virginia. The bottom panel shows typical shorelines from each
region: a rocky coast in southern California, a long, open coastal plain in Texas, and a
shallow but heavily wooded estuary in Virginia.

This equation places the most emphasis
on the position of the archaeological site on
the landscape, including the distance from
the shoreline to the archaeological site (D)
and the site’s elevation (E), followed by the
vulnerability of that shoreline (SV ), and finally the land use at the site (LU).

438

Thieler and Hammar-Klose (1999,
2000a, 2000b) produced a coastal vulnerability index for the continental United States.
Here, their equation is modified to calculate shoreline vulnerability variables according to their impact on coastal archaeological sites. Shoreline vulnerability was

VOLUME 10 • ISSUE 3 • 2015

A Vulnerability Assessment of U.S. Coastal Sites

Table 1. Categorical variables used in this study were given integer values from 1 to 5, so that
they are comparable to the continuous variables. Land use was determined from the
National Land Cover Dataset for 2011. Geomorphology was determined from the
USGS CVI datasets for each region, but modified based on smaller scale observations
from high resolution orthoimagery.

Downloaded by [Smithsonian Institution Libraries] at 09:08 28 October 2015

Value
1
2
3
4
5

Geomorphology

Land use

Rocky, cliffed coasts
Medium cliffs
Low cliffs, alluvial plains
Cobble beaches, estuary, lagoon
Barrier/sand beaches, marsh, mud flats

Protected public land
Private, wildland
Developed open space, agriculture
Developed, low intensity
Developed, medium to high intensity

calculated using a weighted average of six
variables: geomorphology (xgeo ), historic
sea-level rise (xslr ), coastal slope (xcs ), historical erosion rates (xerr ), average wave height
(xwh ), and tidal range (xtr ):
SV =

?
?
4 xgeo + xslr + xcs + 3 (xerr ) + 2 (xwh + xtr )
6
(2)

Most of these variables are continuous
and have a linear relationship to vulnerability, and they were transformed to a linear
scale from 1 to 5 to make them comparable
within a weighted average. In the case of distance to shoreline, the relationship between
vulnerability and distance is not linear—a
site that is 10 m from the shoreline is exponentially more threatened than a site that
is 5000 m from the shoreline, and so an exponential transformation was applied to the
data. The nominal variables, geomorphology
and land use, were given integer values from
1 to 5 (Table 1). These variables are applicable to site vulnerability across the US—for
regional or smaller scale studies, the weights
and variables should be modified to account
for local vulnerability factors.
Datasets were obtained from a variety of
federal and state agencies (Table 2). Some
of these datasets were intended for use at a
larger scale than this study requires and were
altered to accommodate small-scale measurements. For example, shorelines were traced
from 1 m resolution orthoimagery at a scale

of 1:4000, providing a minimum of 10 m accuracy. Similarly, the accuracy of geomorphological designations and land use designations were checked against orthoimagery
and altered where necessary. Archaeological site locations are the least accurate of
the datasets used for this study, since they
are dependent on the mapping technology
available to hundreds of different individual
archaeologists.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The shorelines of the three study areas have
distinctive vulnerability profiles that can be
compared to shoreline vulnerability for the
continental United States as a whole, which
was recalculated according to Equation 2
(Figure 2). Shorelines in the California study
area are generally more stable than the other
study areas or the national average, due to
long stretches of rocky cliffs and raised alluvial terraces. The Santa Barbara Channel
also has highly variable shorelines, with geomorphology and coastal slopes that span
the national distribution. Land use patterns
are favorable to archaeological site protection, since 58.14% of the land is within the
Channel Islands National Park or on land
owned by the Nature Conservancy. As a result, it also has the lowest overall CRV values
(Figure 3). The longest stretches of shallow sloping, sandy beaches in the SBC coincide with heavy urban and agricultural de-

JOURNAL OF ISLAND & COASTAL ARCHAEOLOGY

439

Leslie A. Reeder-Myers

Table 2. A list of variables used in the study, including the original sources from which they
were derived and the GIS dataset provider.

Downloaded by [Smithsonian Institution Libraries] at 09:08 28 October 2015

Variable

Definition

Original source(s)

GIS data source(s)
USGS CVI study (Thieler
and Hammar-Klose,
1999, 2000a, 2000b),
checked against NAIP
orthoimagery (Jin et al.
2013)
USGS CVI study

Geomorphology

Landform type and
erodability

State geological maps,
1:240,000 topological
maps

Coastal slope

Elevation change across
area 10 km landward
and seaward

Relative SLR

Historic rates of SLR

Historical erosion

Shoreline change
during twentieth
century

Wave height

Mean wave height,
1956–1975

Land use

Agricultural or
Developed Land
Federally Protected
Land

U.S. Navy ETOPO5,
subsampled to 3
minute (∼5 km)
resolution
Tide gauge data, National
Oceanic Services
Coastal Erosion
Information System;
aerial photographs and
historic maps
U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers Wave
Information Study;
NOAA National Data
Buoy Center
Landsat satellite data
Various agency surveys

Distance to shore

Shortest distance from
site center to the
shoreline

Individual archaeologists

Elevation

Elevation at center of
site

National Elevation
Dataset 1/3 arc second
DEMs

440

VOLUME 10 • ISSUE 3 • 2015

USGS CVI study
USGS CVI study

USGS CVI study

National Land Cover
Database
National Park Service, US
Fish and Wildlife
Service, US Forest
Service
California’s Central
Coast Information
Center, Texas
Archaeological
Research Library,
Virginia Cultural
Resource Information
System, NAIP
orthoimagery
NOAA, USGS

Downloaded by [Smithsonian Institution Libraries] at 09:08 28 October 2015

A Vulnerability Assessment of U.S. Coastal Sites

Figure 2. These graphs compare the frequency distribution for shoreline variables and CVI in each
of the three study areas against the national distribution (light gray shading). Frequency
on the y-axis refers to the percent of shoreline by length in each region.

velopment around the cities of Santa Barbara
and Ventura. Although these would represent highly vulnerable areas in terms of both
shoreline vulnerability and land use, there

may be few archaeological sites left to be
threatened (Figure 4).
The study area along the Texas coast has
extremely vulnerable shorelines, relative to

JOURNAL OF ISLAND & COASTAL ARCHAEOLOGY

441

Downloaded by [Smithsonian Institution Libraries] at 09:08 28 October 2015

Leslie A. Reeder-Myers

Figure 3. Comparison of site variables, including land use and distance from site to shore, and the
total CRV. Frequency on the y-axis refers to the percentage of archaeological sites in the
study area. Note high vulnerability spikes in both CRV and distance values are caused by
sites that are mapped as being already under water. This is considerably less pronounced
in the California study area, due to lower rates of recent sea level rise and steeper coastal
slopes. Distance from shore has undergone an exponential transformation to reflect the
non-linear relationship between distance and vulnerability, and has been re-scaled from
1-5.

Figure 4. Distribution of sites by CRVI in each of the study areas, and the location of cities mentioned
in the text.

442

VOLUME 10 • ISSUE 3 • 2015

Downloaded by [Smithsonian Institution Libraries] at 09:08 28 October 2015

A Vulnerability Assessment of U.S. Coastal Sites

the national distribution and the other study
areas (Figure 2). Low elevation and coastal
slope will leave this area open to considerable inundation (Figure 1). High rates of
historical relative sea-level rise suggest that
large areas are likely to be drowned. Shorelines dominated by sandy beaches, barrier
beaches, and marshes, along with microtidal conditions, will leave the Texas coastline highly vulnerable to twenty-first-century
climate change. Land use patterns, however, are relatively favorable for archaeological site protection. There is little urban development in the Texas study area,
except in the eastern part near the city
of Galveston. Unfortunately, almost a third
of archaeological sites in this study area
(n = 77, 29.73%) are mapped as being already under water. Although some of these
sites are shipwrecks, most are small prehistoric sites that are submerged close to the
modern shoreline.
The Chesapeake study area is characterized by shallow sloping coasts, but generally moderate vulnerability to all shoreline
variables. In fact, average values for most
shoreline variables in Virginia are very close
to the national average, and overall SV values are also moderate (Figure 2). A smaller
proportion of archaeological sites (n = 137,
13.60%) are already submerged than in the
Texas study area, but still a significant number. Although Texas coastlines are the most
vulnerable, archaeological sites in Virginia
have similar CRV values when all sites are
considered and higher CRV values when
submerged sites are excluded (Figure 3). This
is due in part to land use patterns—nonsubmerged sites in Virginia are more often
located in developed or agricultural areas
(Figure 3). It is also due to differences in the
distance to the shoreline (Figure 3 and Figure
4). Non-submerged sites in Virginia are more
likely to be located immediately adjacent to
the coast. In fact, higher shoreline vulnerability in Texas may contribute to the lower
overall CRV values, since sites located close
to the shoreline are more likely to have been
lost before they were identified. The Virginia
study area has, by far, the highest absolute
number of highly vulnerable sites with CRV
values above 4 (144 sites, compared with 95
in California and 82 in Texas).

The impact of twenty-first-century sealevel rise on submerged sites is unclear—
those that are deeply drowned may be relatively well preserved, but those in the intertidal zone may be heavily damaged or
destroyed by normal erosional processes
or stronger storms. Ocean acidification or
the spread of destructive organisms (e.g..,
Björdal et al. 2012) might be more damaging to submerged sites than inundation or
erosion. Even when submerged sites are relatively well preserved, data recovery is difficult and expensive. The factors that affect
underwater site preservation and destruction are highly localized, and models should
be altered to accommodate for regional factors as they are identified (see also Evans
et al. 2014 and papers therein; Gregory 2012;
Gusick and Faught 2011; Oxley 1998).
CONCLUSION
These three case studies represent three
different types of shorelines in the United
States. They also represent areas with different modern, historic, and prehistoric land
use patterns, all of which contribute to the
distribution of known archaeological sites
and their vulnerability to climate change and
coastal development. Although the model
presented here allows for a rapid assessment
of vulnerability using data that are readily
available within the United States, it is only a
first step. Identifying vulnerable archaeological sites does not provide protection.
The decentralized nature of coastal land
management in the United States creates a
particular challenge to archaeological site
preservation. Programs designed to mitigate
climate change damage to archaeological
sites at the national scale, such as SCAPE in
Scotland (Dawson 2013), ALERT in France
(Daire et al. 2012), and RCZAS in England
(Flatman 2009) are highly effective in their
native settings but cannot be easily translated
to the United States. According to the U.S.
Census Bureau, the U.S. has approximately
142,641 km of tidal shoreline in 24 states, presenting an enormous challenge for protecting cultural heritage. Using readily available
data and software, archaeologists working
in coastal areas in the United States can use

JOURNAL OF ISLAND & COASTAL ARCHAEOLOGY

443

Downloaded by [Smithsonian Institution Libraries] at 09:08 28 October 2015

Leslie A. Reeder-Myers

this method to identify areas that are under
particularly high threat from climate change
and modern development, and can prioritize
those areas for research.
Archaeologists are uniquely placed to
begin systematically evaluating and mitigating the threat to coastal archaeological sites
across the United States and around the
world. By advocating with land owners, land
managers, and those with political or economic interests in coastal areas, we can
ensure that cultural heritage resources are
considered among the many resources that
will need protection as the earth’s climate
changes. We can use simple methods such
as those presented here to identify highly
threatened areas, and we can choose to direct resources for research toward those areas. We must also develop creative research
strategies that collect meaningful data from
these sites before they are lost, including
coastal pedestrian, geophysical, and remote
sensing surveys, strategic radiocarbon dating, and targeted site sampling (e.g., Cannon 2000; Erlandson and Moss 1999; Rick
et al. 2013). We cannot fully prevent climate
change, nor can we know precisely when
or how it will damage cultural heritage. We
can, however, mitigate its effects on cultural
resources by focusing research on these fragile resources, which often provide clues to
how coastal ecosystems and people have responded to climate change in the past.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many people and agencies contributed to
the datasets used in this study. Particular
thanks are due to Amy Gusick and the Central Coast Information Center for archaeological data from California; to Michael
Aiuvalasit, Jonathan Jarvis, and the Texas
Archaeological Research Library for archaeological data from Texas; and to Jolene Smith, Dominic Bascone, and the Virginia Cultural Resource Information Center for archaeological data from Virginia.
The manuscript has benefited from the comments of two anonymous reviewers and
Scott Fitzpatrick, as well as discussions with
Catherine Marzin.

444

REFERENCES
Bickler, S., R. Clough, and S. Macready. 2013. The
Impact of Climate Change on the Archaeology of New Zealand’s Coastline: A Case Study
from the Whangarei District. Wellington: New
Zealand Department of Conservation, Science
for Conservation series 322.
Bird, M. K. 1992. The impact of tropical cyclones on the archaeological record: An Australian example. Archaeology in Oceania 27:
75–86.
Björdal, C. G., D. Gregory, M. Manders, Z. AlHamdani, C. Appelqvist, J. Haverhand, and
J. Dencker. 2012. Strategies for protection
of wooden underwater cultural heritage in
the Baltic Sea against marine borers: The EU
project “WreckProtect”. Conservation and
Management of Archaeological Sites 14:201–
214.
Braje, T. J., T. C. Rick, J. M. Erlandson, M. Anderson, and R. DeLong. 2011. Conflicts in natural
and cultural resource management: Archaeological site disturbances by seals and sea lions
on California’s Northern Channel Islands. Journal of Field Archaeology 36:312–321.
Cannon, A. 2000. Settlement and sea-levels on
the central coast of British Columbia: Evidence
from shell midden cores. American Antiquity
65:67–77.
Cassar, M., C. Young, T. Weighell, D. Sheppard,
B. Bomhard, and P. Rosabal. 2006. Predicting
and Managing the Effects of Climate Change
on World Heritage. A joint report from the
World Heritage Centre, its Advisory Bodies, and
a broad group of experts to the 30th session
of the World Heritage Committee, UNESCO
World Heritage Center, Paris, France.
Daire, M. Y., E. Lopez-Romero, J. N. Proust, H. Regnauld, S. Pian, and B. Shi. 2012. Coastal changes
and cultural heritage (1): Assessment of the vulnerability of the coastal heritage in Western
France. Journal of Island & Coastal Archaeology 7(2):168–182.
Dawson, T. 2013. Erosion and coastal archaeology: Evaluating the threat and prioritising action. In Ancient Maritime Communities and
the Relationship between People and Environment along the European Atlantic Coasts
(M. Y. Daire, C. Dupont, A. Baudry, C. Billard,
J. M. Large, L. Lespez, E. Normand, C. Scarre,
eds.):77–83. BAR International Series 2570. Oxford: Oxford University Archeopress.
Erlandson, J. M. 2008. Racing a rising tide: Global
warming, rising seas, and the erosion of human
history. Journal of Island & Coastal Archaeology 3:167–169.

VOLUME 10 • ISSUE 3 • 2015

Downloaded by [Smithsonian Institution Libraries] at 09:08 28 October 2015

A Vulnerability Assessment of U.S. Coastal Sites

Erlandson, J. M. and S. M. Fitzpatrick. 2006.
Oceans, islands, and coasts: Current perspectives on the role of the sea in human prehistory. Journal of Island & Coastal Archaeology
1(1):5–32.
Erlandson, J. M. and M. L. Moss. 1999. The systematic use of radiocarbon dating in archaeological
surveys in coastal and other erosional environments. American Antiquity 64(3):431–443.
Erlandson, J. M. and T. C. Rick. 2010. Archaeology meets marine ecology: The antiquity of
maritime cultures and human impacts on marine fisheries and ecosystems. Annual Review
of Marine Science 2:231–251.
Evans, A., J. Flatman, and N. Flemming (eds.).
2014. Prehistoric Archaeology on the Continental Shelf: A Global Review. New York:
Springer.
Fitzpatrick, S. M., M. Kappers, and Q. Kaye. 2006.
Coastal erosion and site destruction on Carriacou, West Indies. Journal of Field Archaeology
31(3):251–262.
Flatman, J. 2009. A climate of fear: Recent British
policy and management of coastal heritage.
Public Archaeology 8:3–19.
Gregory, D. J. 2012. Development of tools and
techniques to survey, assess, stabilise, monitor
and preserve underwater archaeological sites:
SASMAP. International Journal of Heritage in
the Digital Era 1:367–372.
Gusick, A. E. and M. K. Faught. 2011. Prehistoric
archaeology underwater: A nascent subdiscipline critical to understanding early coastal occupations and migration routes. In Trekking
the Shore (N. F. Bicho, J. A. Haws, and L. G.
Davis, eds.):27–50. New York: Springer.
Jackson, J. B. C., M. X. Kirby, W. H. Berger, K.
A. Bjorndal, L. W. Botsford, B. J. Bourque, R.
H. Bradbury, et al. 2001. Historical overfishing
and the recent collapse of coastal ecosystems.
Science 293:629–638.
Jin, S., L. Yang, P. Danielson, C. Homer, J, Fry,
and G. Xian. 2013. A comprehensive change detection method for updating the National Land
Cover Database to circa 2011. Remote Sensing
of Environment 132:159–175.
Lewis, R. B. 2000. Sea-level rise and subsidence
effects on Gulf Coast archaeological site distributions. American Antiquity 65:525–541.
Mourtzas, N. D. and P. G. Marinos. 1994. Upper
Holocene sea-level changes: Paleogeographic
evolution and its impact on coastal archaeological sites and monuments. Environmental
Geology 23(1):1–13.
Murphy, P., D. Thackray, and E. Wilson. 2009.
Coastal heritage and climate change in England: Assessing threats and priorities. Conser-

vation and Management of Archaeological
Sites 11:9–15.
Oxley, I. 1998. The investigation of the factors that
affect the preservation of underwater archaeological sites. In Maritime Archaeology (L. E.
Babits and H. van Tilburg, eds.):523–529. New
York: Springer.
Reeder, L. A., T. C. Rick, and J. M. Erlandson.
2012. Our disappearing past: A GIS analysis of
the vulnerability of coastal archaeological resources in California’s Santa Barbara Channel region. Journal of Coastal Conservation 16(2):
187–197.
Rick, T. C., J. M. Erlandson, N. P. Jew, and L.
A. Reeder-Myers. 2013. Archaeological survey,
paleogeography, and the search for Late Pleistocene Paleocoastal peoples of Santa Rosa Island, California. Journal of Field Archaeology
38(4):324–331.
Rick, T. C. and R. Lockwood. 2013. Integrating paleobiology, archaeology, and history to inform
biological conservation. Conservation Biology
27:45–54.
Robinson, M. H., C. R. Alexander, C. W. Jackson,
C. P. McCabe, and D. Crass. 2010. Threatened
archaeological, historic, and cultural resources
of the Georgia Coast: Identification, prioritization and management using GIS technology.
Geoarchaeology 25(3):312–326.
Shi, B., J. N. Proust, M. Y. Daire, E. Lopez-Romero,
H. Regnauld, and S. Pian. 2012. Coastal changes
and cultural heritage (2): An experiment in
the Vilaine Estuary (Brittany, France). Journal of Island & Coastal Archaeology 7(2):
183–199.
Thieler, E. R. and E. S. Hammar-Klose. 1999. National Assessment of Coastal Vulnerability to
Sea-Level Rise: Preliminary Results for the U.S.
Atlantic Coast. U.S. Woods Hole, MA: Geological Survey Open-File Report 99–593.
Thieler, E. R., and E. S. Hammar-Klose. 2000a. National Assessment of Coastal Vulnerability to
Sea-Level Rise: Preliminary Results for the U.S.
Pacific Coast. U.S. Woods Hole, MA: Geological
Survey Open-File Report 00-178.
Thieler, E. R. and E. S. Hammar-Klose. 2000b.
National Assessment of Coastal Vulnerability to Sea-Level Rise: Preliminary Results for
the U.S. Gulf of Mexico Coast. U.S. Woods
Hole, MA: Geological Survey Open-File Report
00-179.
Westley, K., T. Bell, M. A. P. Renouf, and L.
Tarasov. 2011. Impact assessment of current
and future sea-level change on coastal archaeological resources—illustrated examples from
northern Newfoundland. Journal of Island &
Coastal Archaeology 6(3):351–374.

JOURNAL OF ISLAND & COASTAL ARCHAEOLOGY

445

