No-Cultural Resources Finding Letter Report
Associated with the Intensive Pedestrian Survey of the
Planned Multipurpose Academic Center at the University of
Texas at Rio Grande Valley Campus, Fort Brown, Brownsville,
Cameron County, Texas
TAC Permit Nr: 7743

Prepared for:
The University of Texas, Rio Grande Valley
1 W. University Blvd.
Brownsville, TX 78520

NON-RESTRICTED
Prepared by:
Mark P. Luzmoor

ASF16-176-90

November 2016

1

TAC Permit Number: 7743

Project Background
The Office of Facilities Planning Construction Rio Grande Valley has proposed to
construct a new Multipurpose Academic Center on the Rio Grande Valley Campus of the
University of Texas. This project area (which will occupy approximately 18.6 acres) is
located just south of the Main Education and Business Complex (Figure 1). At the
present time only one of the planned five buildings is planned for future construction.
The project area lies just 0.5 km to the northeast of the Historic Fort Brown (41CF96)
which dates to 1846. Fort Brown was listed as a National Register District in 1966.

Figure 1. Overview of the new building blueprints on the UTRGV Brownsville Campus
UTRGV contracted with Raba Kistner Inc., to consult with the Texas Historical
Commission regarding the types and levels of effort that may be needed to comply with
the appropriate cultural resources clearance requirements associated with the planned
construction. Under a separate contract, Raba Kistner Inc. submitted a Texas Historical
Commission coordination request associated with the planned project. Given the close
vicinity of the project area to Fort Brown, the Texas Historical Commission requested a
1

pedestrian survey of the footprint of the planned building. To provide the necessary
archaeological services prior to the construction, the University System contracted Raba
Kistner Inc. during the summer of 2016.
The proposed Multipurpose Academic Center is located south of University Boulevard,
in an area largely covered by asphalted parking lots (Figure 2).

Figure 2. View of the parking lot just south of W. University Blvd.
The location of the Area of Potential Effect (APE) is shown on Figure 3. At a future date
and as funds are priorities and schedules allow, the additional four buildings also will be
constructed in the vicinity.

2

Figure 3. APE outlined in red on the East Brownsville 7.5-minute U.S.G.S. quadrangle
map.

Brief History of Fort Brown
Fort Brown was established by Zachary Taylor in 1846 to defend the newly declared
southern boundary of Texas. The fort played a significant role in the Mexican War and
Robert E. Lee was stationed at the fort in 1860. Both confederate and federal forces
occupied the fort at one time (Chapman 1992). Fort Brown is currently listed on the
National Register of Historic Places and is a designated Historic District. A number of
pedestrian surveys have been previously conducted on the UTRGV campus but none
included the current APE.
The project area lies just 0.5 km to the northeast of the Historic Fort Brown (41CF96)
which dates to 1846 (Figure 3). The fort was the first United States military post
constructed in Texas and was in service until its closing in 1944. The fort was originally
composed of 18 buildings, a cemetery, and a fortification which encompassed 358 acres
immediately east of the Rio Grande River. The fortification was hexagon in shape and
was made up of earthworks which encompassed an 800 yard perimeter, walls that were
9.5 feet high, a parapet that was 15 feet wide and a ditch that was 8.5 feet deep and 1520 feet wide. There were also 6 bastions, one on each corner. In 1869, after the Civil
3

War, seventy (70) more buildings were constructed.

Even though the fort was

continuously occupied until 1944, no effort was made to preserve the original
fortification and by the time Fort Brown was deactivated, only grass covered mounds
remained. Today, the remains of the fort lie at the northern end of the Fort Brown
Memorial Golf Course. Fort Brown was listed as a National Register District in 1966.

Review or Previous Archaeological Investigations in the Vicinity
A number of archaeological sites have been previously documented in the general
proximity of the Area of Potential Effect that will accommodate the five planned
buildings (Figure 4).

Figure 4. Aerial view of the larger APE for the five buildings and its proximity to Fort
Brown (41CF96).

4

However, only one archaeological survey has been conducted within close proximity to
the project area (Figure 5). In 2002, SWCA conducted a survey of 21.8 acres directly to
the north of the present 18.6 acre APE. No surface or subsurface cultural materials were
encountered during this survey. Approximately 6.4 acres of the current APE were
surveyed by SWCA. The remaining 12.2 acres have yet to be surveyed. While RKEI
initially recommended a pedestrian survey of the remaining 12.2-acres, a number of
circumstances conditioned project parameters and as a result the pedestrian survey was
limited only to the 2.5-acre proposed site of the Multipurpose Academic Center.
Therefore, as part of the current project, RKEI conducted a pedestrian survey of the 2.5
acres that have not been previously surveyed.

Figure 5. Close-up of the project area showing the overlap of the previous surveys with
the blueprints for the new buildings.

5

Field and Laboratory Methods
Survey Methods
As part of the intensive pedestrian survey of the APE, RKEI staff originally proposed to
utilize a combination of surface reconnaissance, shovel testing to search for shallowly
buried archaeological deposits, and limited backhoe trenching to identify cultural
deposits that may be buried below the reach of typical shovel testing (80-100 cmbs).
Unfortunately, the project area is, to a large extent, covered by asphalted parking
surfaces. In addition, utility maps provided by UTRGV also indicated that the APE is
riddled by a large number of electrical lines and other obstructions. Therefore, the level
of subsurface investigation originally outlined in the Scope of Work that accompanied
the survey permit application was not possible.

The alternative field approach

employed is described below.

Shovel Testing
Shovel tests were excavated within grass-covered beds between the patches of
asphalted parking spaces. The shovel tests were relatively evenly spaced across the
projected APE limits. If a given shovel test encountered historic or prehistoric cultural
deposits, additional units were to be excavated within 15 meters in either direction until
all shovel tests in the vicinity are negative. As per the THCs minimum requirements, at
least six (6) shovel tests were to be excavated to define site boundaries of small sites
while up to 10-12 may be required to adequately define the boundaries of large sites.
Shovel tests were excavated to a depth of 60 cm below surface. They ranged from 32 to
35 cm in maximum diameter and were excavated in 10 cm levels. A shovel test form
was completed for each excavated unit. The form contained information on the soils
encountered, the artifacts recovered, disturbances noted and references to samples
retained and photographs taken. Artifacts derived from each level of each shovel test
were noted on appropriate level forms and photo-documented. All artifacts from
shovel tests were to be collected by appropriate provenience and only temporally
diagnostic materials will be collected from surface.

6

Backhoe Trenching/Hand Auger Boring
Prior to arriving to the project area, we surmised that even though the APE contained
buried utility lines, we would be able to identify locations that were free of asphalt and
buried conduits. In particular, we anticipated that along the southern fence line of the
APE, sufficient buffer existed between the parking lot and the fence that the excavation
of trenches would be feasible. Unfortunately, upon arrival to the APE, it was evident
that the grass-covered surfaces that dotted the APE were very small and signs of buried
utility lines were present throughout the APE (Figure 6 and 7). In addition, the “One –
Call” utility location service declined to mark the buried utilities because the UTRGV
campus was considered private property and the agency does not trespass onto private
property. Therefore, we were left with pursuing a high-risk strategy of investigating the
APE using backhoe trenches and potentially damaging buried lines, or developing an
alternate strategy.

Figure 6. Shovel test in grassy-area near parking spaces. Note number of light poles in
vicinity.

7

Figure 7. Buried utilities near southern edge of APE where backhoe trenching was
planned.
To reduce the risk of damaging buried utilities, it was decided that a shift in investigative
strategy was needed.

Instead of utilizing backhoe trenching that tends to disturb a

larger area, to limit the potential that buried utilities would be damaged, the Principal
Investigator recommended to the crew to employ a hand-auger with a 3-inch diameter
auger bucket and a 1.5 meter extension to drill auger bores in the bottoms of the shovel
tests excavated within the APE. The shovel tests had already been excavated to a depth
of 60 cmbs. Therefore, upon the completion of a hand-excavated shovel tests, the
technician used the hand auger to bore to a depth of 1.6 meters below surface. Each
bucket of soil removed from the auger bore was dumped into a shaker- screen and
temporally diagnostic materials were to be collected from these auger excavations.

8

Results and Recommendations
Between August 7 and 9th, staff of Raba Kistner Environmental Inc., traveled to
Brownsville, Cameron County, Texas and conducted an intensive pedestrian survey of a
2.5-acre proposed site of the Multipurpose Academic Center at the University of Texas
at Rio Grande Valley Campus, in Brownsville, Cameron County, Texas. The survey was
conducted under Texas Antiquities Committee Pedestrian Survey Permit Number 7743
issued to Dr. Steve A. Tomka.
Five shovel tests, (STs 1-5), were excavated in the northern and central portion of the
APE (Figure 8). In the southern margin along the property fence line, crews excavated
four additional shovel tests and auger bored each of these to a depth of 140 to 160 cm
below surface (ABs 1-4).

Figure 8. Distribution of Shovel Test Units and STs with Auger Bores across the APE>

Table 1 provides the information related to the depths and materials encountered in the
units and

9

Table 1. Characteristics of the units excavated during the Confluence Park Project.
Excavation Unit

L-W/Diameter (cm)

Maximum

Depth Observations

(cmbs)
ST 1

33

60

ST 2

34

60

ST 3

32

60

ST 4

34

60

ST 5

35

62

AB 1

34 and 3.25

60 and 145

AB 2

35 and 3.25

60 and 158

AB 3

34 and 3.25

60 and 160

AB 4

33 and 3.25

60 and 160

Mottled dark gray
clay and silty loam
Silty loam with
caliche nodules
Silty
loam
and
pieces of plastic
rope at 47 cmbs
Clay loam with
caliche
Lens of natural rock
at 30 cmbs; silty
loam
Silty loam to bottom
of excavations
Clay loam to 60
cmbs, silty loam
below
Clay loam to 47
cmbs, silty loam
below
Clay loam to base

Figure 9 and Figure 10 depict an example of one of the shovel tests (ST 3) and auger
bored units (AB 2) excavated during the project.

10

Figure 9. Shovel Test 3 showing soils and plastic rope at 47 cmbs.

Figure 10. Auger Bore 1 showing soils and the bore hole in bottom of original shovel
test.
11

With the exception of the plastic rope fragments recovered from 47 cm below surface in
AST 3, no other cultural debris was identified in the excavation units. The soils ranged
from a silty loam to a clay loam across the project APE and pieces of caliche were
recovered in a number of units. These pieces were heavily weathered and seemed to be
encountered at a depth of 30-42 cm below surface. It is possible that this relatively
consistent encounter of caliche may have accumulated on the former ground surface
which was subsequently buried by graded soils and possible fill. Regardless, however,
no prehistoric or historic cultural debris, not even lenses of Rabdotus sp., snails were
identified during the investigations.

Having identified no undisturbed cultural deposits and/or features within shallow and
deeper depositional contexts in the Area of Potential Effect, RKEI staff anticipates that
the planned construction of the multi-purpose Academic Center will not adversely
impact significant cultural deposits.

Therefore, we propose that the planned

construction may proceed without the need for additional archaeological investigations
or monitoring during the planned improvement activities. This recommendation applies
only to the footprint of the planned construction and does not include the larger area
that will eventually be the site of four additional buildings south of West University Blvd.
The Staff of the Texas Historical Commission reviewed and accepted these
recommendations, as per the attached stamped concurrence page (Attachment A).

12

Attachment A

13

