2theadvocate > News

NEWS
Comet hit like an atomic blast

Click Image to Enlarge

ADVOCATE STAFF PHOTOS BY BILL FEIG
Paul Heinrich, the geologist who has been studying the likelihood that an ancient meteor formed an impact crater in what is now St. Helena
Parish, shows an image of the crater’s center portion made by using lasers from a plane.





By FAIMON A. ROBERTS
Advocate Florida parishes bureau
Published: Mar 28, 2011 - Page: 1A

An ancient explosion similar to a small nuclear weapon likely killed any wildlife and people within miles
and left a lasting impression on St. Helena Parish, a geologist says.
One of the gentle hills a few miles southwest of Greensburg is actually the rim of a 1.2-mile wide crater
formed when a meteor or comet crashed into the site thousands of years ago, said Paul Heinrich, a
scientist with the Louisiana Geological Survey.

Known as the Brushy Creek Formation, the crater has a unique circular shape in an area of “narrow,
closely spaced ridges and deeply cut valleys,” Heinrich said.
La. 37 crosses the crater’s northern rim a few miles southwest of Greensburg, Heinrich said.
To make a crater with a 1-mile diameter, a meteor or comet could have been as much as 164 feet in
diameter, Heinrich said, and composed of stone, iron or ice.
“It would have been like a small nuclear weapon,” he said. “People and animals within 10 miles would
have been killed or badly injured by the blast.”
The impact would have also produced hurricane-force winds up to 20 miles from the site, Heinrich
said.
While Baton Rouge is about 35 miles from the site, someone standing in the city would have felt the
equivalent of a 5.0 magnitude earthquake 11 seconds after impact, said Heinrich, adding that the Earth
Impact Effects Program website provided the calculations.
The resulting fireball would have appeared slightly larger than the sun, the website says.
The crater was first noticed by Heinrich, along with colleagues John Snead and Richard P. McCulloh, in
the 1990s while the three studied topographical maps of the area, Heinrich said.
They noticed a circular feature in the hills that seemed to be out of place.
“Our reaction was that it was just weird,” Heinrich said. “You just don’t see roughly circular features
anywhere in Louisiana unless you have some sort of salt dome and there were none in the area.
“And when you see weird circular features, one of the first things that you think about is impact crater,”
he said.
But then the research hit a snag. The geologists couldn’t get access to the property where most of the
crater lies, Heinrich said, because the landowners were embroiled in a dispute.
“They weren’t letting anybody onto the land,” he said.
Eventually, the land was sold, and the new owners permitted Heinrich to carry out some preliminary
investigations, he said.
Through the process of elimination, Heinrich said, he concluded that a meteorite impact would be the
most likely explanation of how St. Helena’s circular formation was created.
One crucial piece of evidence still eludes him: pieces of the actual meteor or comet itself, he said.
Technical problems slowed his attempts to take core samples of the crater’s center, Heinrich said.

Click Image to Enlarge

ADVOCATE PHOTO BY CASEY ANDERSON
Shattered citronelle formations, which give the earth a mottled look, are evidence of the impact of a meteor, said Paul Heinrich, a scientist with
the Louisiana Geological Survey. The formations run along La. 37 and were created when a meteor or comet crashed into St. Helena Parish
as long as 11,000 years ago, Heinrich said.

“Although pieces of the impactor might have survived, I have not found any around the Brushy Creek
Crater,” Heinrich wrote in an email.
The lack of physical evidence of the celestial object itself has prevented Heinrich from finding out
exactly what kind of meteor it was that struck Louisiana.
Meteors are usually one of two types: iron or stone, Heinrich said.
“Iron is denser,” Heinrich said. “A stony meteor might have been 164 feet in diameter, an iron meteor
smaller, maybe 110 feet in diameter.”
A comet would have probably been about the same size and composed mainly of ice, Heinrich said.
Meteor impacts of this magnitude happen somewhere on the earth about once every four or five
centuries, according to the Earth Impacts Effects Program website.
For a comet, the impacts are even more rare, about once every 900 years, the website says.

The largest in the world, the Vredefort crater in South Africa, is 186 miles in diameter, according to the
Planetary and Space Science Centre in Canada.
The largest such crater in the United States is the Chesapeake Bay impact crater, which is 55 miles in
diameter, the website says.
There are currently 178 impact craters on earth and 28 in the United States, according to the Planetary
and Space Science Centre.
Though the date of the strike is uncertain, Heinrich estimated the comet or meteor dove into St. Helena
Parish 2,000 to 11,000 years ago.
North America was just coming out of its most recent ice age 11,000 years ago, said Rob Mann, an
archaeologist who specializes in Louisiana.
There may have been people in Louisiana at that time who were probably on the move, Mann said.
“The people were fairly nomadic with some base camps,” Mann said. “The traditional understanding is
that these people were following the herds.”
Several large herding animals would have lived in Louisiana, including mastodon, giant ground sloth,
bison, and a primitive strain of horses, Mann said.
During the next few thousand years, the climate and species grew increasingly similar to what it is
today, Mann said.
Human population density increased dramatically as well, he said.
Later, Native Americans in the area would have been aware of celestial occurrences, Mann said.
“I have been looking for things in oral history that might indicate an impact, but I haven’t found
anything yet,” Heinrich said.
Heinrich’s next step, he said, is to present his evidence at the Lunar and Planetary Science Conference
held annually in Houston.
If scientists agree with his conclusions, the Brushy Creek Crater would be placed on Planetary and
Space Science Centre’s official registry.
Then, Heinrich might be able to get a marker put up on La. 37, so that the site of the ancient impact
could finally take its place in history.

