REPORT OF ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ON THE
"MAYBERRY COMMUNITY
II

oy Jack M. Jackson

Refer Work Order No. 14
Contract DACA63-80-C-0163

Submitted for Fi.nal Review to;
Science Applications, Inc.
by

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin

August 1982

REPORT OF ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ON THE
IIMAYBERRY COMMUNITY II
Work Order No. 14, Task 1
INTRODUCTION
This report addresses the results of archival research undertaken
to assess the significance and occupational history of the Mayberry Park
Site (41BL165) located on the Fort Hood Military Reservation in Bell County,
Texas. This research was undertaken to answer specific questions about
the site which were posed by the Contracting Officer's representative.
This report constitutes Task 3 of Work Order 14 and, in accordance with
the provisions of paragraph 4.0 of that Work Order, is written so that
each subsection refers specifically to a que.stion posed in subparagraphs
2.1 through 2.8 of the Work Order. To improve readability, the questions
from each of those subparagraphs will be repeated above the section of
this report that addresses the question.
2.1 Is site 41BL165~ or any component therein, considered significant in
terms of NationaZ Registry criteria?
In order to clearly answer this question, we must first separate
) and
various features that have been mapped as part of this site (Fig.
classify them as part of specific chronological components of the site.
For this purpose, four somewhat arbitrary components are defined.
1. The cemetery. This component has a quite different legal status
than other portions of the site. Cemeteries are ordinarily excluded from
the National Register under Section 60.6, 36 CRF, Part 60, with the specific
exceptions noted in subparagraph (d):
A cemetery which derives its primary significance from graves
of persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinc­
tive design features, or from association with historic events.
(King, Hickman and Berg 1977:223)
The only remaini~J readable gravestone is that of James Moses Cowan
who died in 1888. Mr. Cowan is not listed in the Handbook of Texas and is
thus not clearly a historic figure of transcendent importance. The date
of the cemetery must also be derived from thi s si ng1 e headstone, and from
the general settlement pattern of the area which does not suggest antiquity

- - - - - - - .....

-~.-

...

-­

such as a Spanish or prehistorlc aboriginal cemetery. The current cond;­
tion of the gravestones precludes any evaluation of design features and
no evidence suggests that the cemetery was associated with any significant
historical event. For these two expl ieit reasons this cO'mponent of 41BL165
is excluded from the National Register of Historic Places.
Regardless of its ineligibility for such designation, the laws of
the State of Texas and Department of Defense policy dictate that actual
areas of interments be protected and held in trust in perpetuity.
2. Camp Moonraker. This component of the site is represented by
several concrete tent pads, some other poured concrete foundations, a
metal flagpole and a complex of electric power poles and wiring. These
are the remains of a Boy Scouts of America fadl ity that was active from the
middle 1950s through the middle 1960s and perhaps later. An effort was made
to obtai.n exact dates of use from the headquarters of the Heart of Texas
Council, Boy Scouts of America t in Waco. No records of the camp were kept.
The only record of this camp beyond vague verbal tradition is a 1966 Bell
County atlas held in the Texas Collection, Baylor University Library
(Commercial Photography, Inc. 1966:8) which shows two access roads leading
off the Maxdale road on opposite sides of Reese Creek. One access road led
to Mulberry tslc] Park and the other to Camp Moonraker. The roadway that
now leads northeast toward Gray Army Air Fiel d is not depicted on this 1966
map.
It seems clear that the Camp Moonraker component of 41BL165 is less
that fifty years old, dating no earlier than 1947, and thus fails to meet
basic criteria for inclusion on the National Register. The sale exception
to the fifty-year rule is provided by subparagraph (g) of Section 60.6,
36 CRF, Part 60, which allows for sites of exceptional importance that have
achieved Significance within the last fifty years. There seems to be no
justification whatever for claiming exceptional significance for this portion
of the site.
3. Mayberry Park. This component of the site is comprised of a
number of stone picnic tables, outdoor fireplaces and similarly constructed
small buildings, mostly on the south side of Reese Creek. These, too,
postdate 1943. Mrs. Tom Mayberry, widow of a long-term Fort Hood civil
service employee, was interviewed about the origin of the name UMayberry"

-~---

-~~-~~--

for this park.

She could not offer any information

except that the popular

story that the park had been named for her husband was untrue.

Mr. Mayberry

came to work for the Fort in 1947 or 1948 after the park was built and so
named.
Conversely, such a facility is not mentfoned in the land acquisition
and real estate records of ca. 1943. Thus, it would appear that these factl i­
ties were constructed between 1943 and 1947 by the U.S. Army Air Corps, as
a recreational facility.

Again, this date and the original function fail

both the fifty-year and the "exceptiona1 importance!' criteria.
4.

The Hicks-Graves Rand..

The oldest component of 41BL165 is the

sca ttered remains of a sheep ranch founded in 1878 oy A"I bert F. Hicks and
sold to Elisha E. Graves in 1903. Graves owned th~ ranch until his death
in 1912. Figure 1 illustrates the extent of the ranch in 1912, largely the
same as in 1903.

Figure 2 is a 1938 aerial photograph of the ranch head­

quarters buil di ngs, the rema ins of which constitute the Hicks-Graves Ranch
component of the site.
The mound of earth and stone just east of the water tower or eleva­
ted cistern and about one-third the distance between that feature and the
cemetery appears to be the ruins of the oldest feature on the site, perhaps
a fairly substantial stone foundaUon and the collapsed walls of a stone
house. Nails, ceramic sherds and glass also suggest a dwelling. Little
detail can be deduced from the present surface without excavation, The
hypothesis is Offered, however, that this feature is the ruin of a stone
house erected Defore 1880 by Al bert F. Hicks, an Engl ish sheep rancher who
purchased the land in 1878 (Oeed Book 49, p. 226).
of occupation dating before 1878 are indicated.
of these aspects are offered below.

No SUbstantial remains

More detailed explanations

Based on the 1878 building date and the ruined condition of the
proposed structure, plus the other extant features such as the pressed
brick steps. the dam on Reeses Creek, the well. the watering tank, the eleva­
ted cistern and other ranch-rel ated features, coul d ttli s component of the
site be considered to meet National Register criteria?

Certainly the case

here is more judgemental and 1ess cl ear-cut than that of the other three
components. It is clear, however, that these features constitute an archeo­
logical site and not a standing structure.

~~.~

---

..

Thus, the operative criterion

- -..- -....- - -....

~~-------

..- -....

is subparagraph (d} of Section 60.6, 36 eRF, Part 60: R • • • that have
yielded, or may be likely to yield, "information important in prehistory
or history.1I (King, Hickman and Berg 1977:222).
In the writer's judgement it is not likely that the excavation of
this component could contribute important historical information. First,
the importance of one sheep ranch to the history of the area is question­
able. Secondly, the extensive disturbance of the site by its later use as
a Boy Scout summer camp and puBlic park would cast doubt on the integrity
of any deposit that was unearthed. Even a collection of Archaic projectile
points found here would be more likely the cache of a forgotten scout who
collected them elsewhere than an indication of prehistoric occupation.

Summarl
For the reasons detailed above it is the writer's opinion that no
component of. nor the entire district containing, 41BL165 meets minimal
criteria for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.
2.2 On the basis Of existing available
history of site 41BL165?

infoTImation~

what is the oooupational

The site is located on the 160-acre Alexander Walters (abstract 916)
grant which was patented to the grantee on August 13, 1863 (G.L.O. files).
However, the patent on thi s parcel was not fil ed for record with the Bell
County clerk for over twenty years; it was finally recorded in Deed Book 49,
page 225. on August 21, 1884. An examination of the tax rolls of Bell County
revealed that Walters paid taxes on another grant in his name, located on
North Nolan Creek, but not on the grant on Reese CreeK.
On January 19, 1871, Alexander Walters deeded the land in question
to Drury J. Smith (Bell County Deed Book P, p. 166). The tax records (T.S.A.
microfilm, State Comptrollers Office Roll 47 and 48) show that Smith ~aid
taxes on no other land in the county and on never more than sixteen head of
cattle and five horses.
1873
1874
1875
1871
1872
Drurl Smith1s Tax Record
$370
$250
$800
$500
value of 160 acres
$800
12
16
6
10
cattle
7
horses and mules
1
3
5
2
3

On July 31, 1878, Smith sold about ten acres of the southern part
of the Walters grant to O. M. Hood for $25, a market price of $2.50 per
acre. Based on this estimate, the market value of the entire 160-acre
tract woul d be $400, therefore, one must assume that some improvements
were assessed and that a house may have been present. It is unlikely,
however, that the ruin showing some dressed limestone remains was a part
of this house. The modest nature of Smith's holdings in cattle and horses
make a log structure or a board-and-batten house a more likely dwelling.
That no trace of such a dwelling has been located at 41BL165 does not
demonstrate that one never existed.
On the same date as the sale to Hood, D. J. Smith sold the remaining
150-acre portion of the Walters grant to Albert F. Hicks for $800 (Deed
Book 49, p. 226). Again this selling price, slightly above assessed value
but twice the per-acre price given to O. M. Hood. suggests improvements.
Albert F. Hicks was born in England in 1841. His son, Henry, was
born on Vancouver Island. British Columbia, in 1868 and his daughter,
Elizabeth, in Texas in 1874. This information was gleaned from the age
and birthplace data given to the Federal census worker on the 12th or 14th
of June, 1880. Mary E. Hicks, Albert's 32-year-old wife, was born in Iowa
of Ameri.can parents CU.S. Bureau of the Census, Bell County popUlation
schedules, p. 18, Supervisors District #4, Ennumeration District 8).
The Hicks household also included an eleven-year-old boy, Henry M.
Crane, employed as a sheepherder and an 01 der Engl ish coupl e, Simon and
Anne Harris Caged 54 and 49}, who also worked for the Hicks family.
The rather substantial size of the Hicks household, and the fact
that he paid taxes on 350 head of sheep in 1879, supports the hypothesis
offered earlier that the stone foundation at Mayberry represents a house
built by Hicks rather than Drury J. Smith. The assessed value of $500 in
1875, the last year Smith could be located in the tax records, prevailed in
1879 but the 1880 assessed value of the 150-acre Walters grant sinks to
$400 where it remains through 1882. In 1883, the value rises again to $600,
in 1884 to $800, and in 1885 to $1000. Because land prices were rather
stable, this indicates that the Smith improvements deteriorated or were
destroyed by 1880 and that a new house and other improvements were constructed
between 1882 and 1885.
II

ll

,

After 1883 Hicks began to acquire more land around the central
Walters grant, slowly building the parcel illustrated in Figure 1. The
360-acre Rooert Moore grant and the two J. E. Roy parcels were purchased
in 1882 or 1883, the 640-acre Gulf Coast and Santa Fe Railroad Survey in
1884. The Paul Varga 160-acre survey was first declared by Hicks for
taxes in 1889. In 1890 A. F. Hicks disappears from the resident tax rolls
of Bell County and appears as a resident of the town of Marble Falls in
Burnet County.
He continued to own the rather large ranch property for another
thirteen years. It is supposed that the house there was then occupied by
a resident ranch manager or tenant. The ranch, as it stood in 1889,
remained intact during these years although there are some years it does
not appear to have been rendered for taxes (T.S.A. microfilm, Comptrollers
Office Roll 56, Bell County 1896), perhaps more a symptom of sharp business
practice than hard times.
On January 1, 1903, A. F. Hicks and his two children, Henry and
Elizabeth Lacy, sold the entire ranch property to Elisha E. Graves for
$4,700. It is evident that Mary Hicks had died and the children listed on
the deed represent their interest in her estate. The price of about $2.15
an acre does not represent a great profit and is less than the 1889 assessed
value of the same property, $3390. If we recall the $25 price O. M. Hood
paid for ten acres of the southern end of the Walters grant in 1878, it
illustrates the remarkable price stability that prevailed during the last
quarter of the nineteenth century.
E. E. Graves was already a wealthy man with fairly extensive land
holdings when he bought the ranch. When he died in 1912, Graves owned a
house in the town of Belton worth almost half as much as the ranch and
another property of about half the size of the ranch but worth twice as much.
One presumes the latter was farmland. The value of the ranch in 1912 was
estimated at $9,906 by the appraisers of the Graves estate (Bell Cou"nty
Probate Record G-933). The estate also included an interest in Reese and
Company in Belton, thirty horses and thirty~nine head of cattle. Graves
evidently lived in town and owned no sheep. We must conclude that the
ranch headquarters continued to be in the charge of a resident ranch manager
or foreman during Gravels ownership .

..... - - _ . _...... - - ­

January I, 1915, Mattie A. Graves, widow of Elisha, sold the
ranch to Ed Knight (Deed Book 265, p. 29ff). Knight resold the property to
J. L. Whitsett on May 18th the same year (Deed Book 263, p. 89ff). Whitsett.
in turn, sold the land to W. S. Calloway for a total of $22,000 - $10,000 nn
cash and Calloway's assumption of the notes that Whitsett had given the
previous owners. There is nothing to s~ggest that any of these men except
Calloway actually lived on the ranch.
Ten years after this purchase, W. S. Calloway executed a deed in
favor of P. T. Calloway stating that taxes for 1923 and 1924 had not been
paid and that a debt of $11,558 was still outstanding. P. T. Calloway did
not assume this obligation. This deed, dated 21 February 1925 (Deed Book
359, p. 558), was evidently a ruse to avoid foreclosure by Ed Knight who still
held the notes executed by Calloway in 1915.
The ruse failed the following year. Two deeds were executed, one by
W. S. Calloway and another by P. T. Calloway, returning ownership to Ed Knight
(Deed Book 374, p. 600, 27 November 1926; Deed Book 374, p. 283, 17 September
1926). It is presumed that the Calloways had attempted to operate the ranch
and had lived on the property for those ten years, but had never been able to
make much of a profit.
Ed Knight continued as landowner through the crash of 1929 and into
the Depression years. His widow, Louise, paid the taxes for 1934 and 1935
(Bell County Tax Assessors Abstract book). The taxes for 1937 through 1940
were paid by John Waddell who sold the raneh to the Swope brothers in 1941.
The Alex Walters grant was part of 1989.19 acres sold to the U. S.
Government by J. L. Swope in 1942 for $12 per acre, or $24,250. This property
was substantially the same as that assembled by Albert Hicks in the 18805.
About 190 acres of the original land had been sold by the Calloways during
the 1920s and was not rejoined in Knight s foreel osure.
O~

I

Summary
The house, barn and stable campl ex shown on the 1938 aerial photo­
graphs of the area (Fig. 2) was the headquarters of a ranch of roughly 2000
acres assembl ed by Al bert F. Hicks between 1878 and 1889. Evidence indicates
that Hicks became an absentee owner after that date. Ownership passed to
E. E. Graves in 1903, Graves and/or -his wtfe £ontinued as absentee owners
through 1915. After several transactions, the ill--fated W. S. Calloway

acquired the ranch and operated it for ten years, finally losing to debt and
taxes. Ed Knight and his widow, who regained title from the Calloways, were
most likely absentee owners through the Depression years. The brief owner­
ship by John Waddel cannot be characterized but the 1938 aerials taken during
his ownership shows a neatly kept and fairly elaborate complex of facilities.
The Swope brothers, who bought the ranch from Waddel in 1941. appear quite
often in the Bell Coundy deed index and could be classified as land traders
rather than ranchers. This, then, is the occupational history of the land
around Mayberry up to the time it became government property.
2.3 What is the

ear~iest

reZiabZe doaumented evidenae pertaining to this site?

Clearly, the earliest evidence pertaining to the site is the field
notes and patent on the 160-acre tract granting ownership to Alexander Walters
on August 13, 1863 (G.l.O. files). Alexander Walters was born in Tennessee
in 1816. His father, Tilman, was born in Georgia in 1790 and his grandfather,
Moses, in Virginia in 1770. All three men were listed as residents of
Nacogdoches County in 1840 (White 1966:134) along with a number of other rela­
tives. The family had migrated as a group from Franklyn County, Georgia
(Jackson 1976:117), sometime after 1830. Alexander Walters served in the
Army of the Republic of Texas from July 8 to October 8, 1836, and received
a bounty land warrant for 320 acres from the Secretary of War on December 14,
1837 (Miller 1966:662). Using this warrant, he patented 320 acres of land in
Smith County on February 21, 1848.
Alexander Walters, his father Tilman, and brother Anthony were living
in Milam County by 1850, the same year that Bell County was formed from Milam.
Tillman W., Alexander's fifteen-year-old son, is shown as born in Mississippi
on the way to Texas. The Fort Hood Real Estate Map Sheet 15 clearly shows
the 320-acre Alexander Walters claim on which taxes were paid through the
1860s and 1870s. The 160-acre grant along Reese Creek was unfiled, indicating
that the Walters family lived on lands located along North Nolan Creek just
southwest of Sparta Mountain.
Tillman W. Wa Hers, who was still 1iving close to his father (Al ex­
ander) along North Nolan Creek, had three sons: Alexander (born 1866L
Washington (born 1869) and Francis (born 1870}, No landowners with the Walters
surname are listed as having sold land to the government in either the 1943

~-----

-~-

--

~~--

-~----

or the 1954 acquisitions. There is no evidence whatever that the Walters
family occupied the Reese Creek tract.
The earliest owner/occupant seems to have been Drury J. Smith
who bought the land in 1871.
2.4 What are the major

~hanges

in the use of the site throughout its history?

As detailed above, Drury J. Smith, the first owner/occupant, had a
few cattle and may have done some subsistence farming on the small alluvial
terraces south of the Mayberry Cemetery. A. F. Hicks was a sheep rancher
who expanded the operation from a nucleus of 150 acres of the Walters grant.
The headquarters of the ranch he buil t remained at the Mayberry location.
Sheep ranching prevailed through at least 1889. Sometime before 1903, cattle
ranching was reinstituted and remained the chief use of the land until 1942.
The Mayberry Park and the Boy Scout Camp called Camp Moonraker were
built on either side of the small pond retained by a dam built by Hicks to
water his sheep. The lush growth of willows and other trees that grew
around the pond were the chief attraction for these recreational facilities.
No definite record for the construction of either the camp or the park could
be found, but 1947-48 represents a reasonable estimate. The picnic area
called Mayberry Park, for some now-obscure reason, has lent its name to the
old cemetery and other remains in the vicinity.
2.5 With

whi~h ~ommunity

or

~ommunities

was the site

asso~iated

throughout

its history?

The ranch was not directly accessible from the Okay community area.
The 1936 Texas Highway Department map of the western portion of Bell County
does not show a house or cemetery at the subject location, or an access
road to the area. The bend in the Maxdale road as it crossed Reese Creek is,
however, accurately mapped. Until the bridge across the Lampasas River was
constructed at the foot of the Maxdale Road, access to that small community
would have been somewhat limited.
In the Fort Hood real estate office fil es of. corresp.ondence rel ating
to private cemeteries, a letter. written' by Burnice ·W. Cowan of West Columrn":a,
Texas, to"the Comf!landing (Jeneral contends that there was once a Reesets
Creek community. As has been noted by Oscar Lewis C1948:42-43}, the folk in

this area were likely to identify a sometimes very large and sparsely
peopled common school district as a community. A Reese's Creek church
was once located near the junction of the Maxdale road and Reese Creek
road in Quad 36/17. It seems logical that a community cemetery could have
been informally arranged with Drury Smith or Albert F. Hicks. We know
that the cemetery at Okay was donated to the community by S.M. Brown and
formally deeded for that use. No such deed was located for the Mayberry
cemetery.
Summary
The Reese's Creek community seems to be the best answer to the
question with the understanding that this must have been an extreme case
of dispersal with widely separate community structures.
2.6 What historieaZ evidence is there for reeonst.Pueting the eeonomie
aetivities that oeeurred through time at the site?
The 1880 census of Agriculture (TSA microfilm, roll SeEN 14, Bell
County pg. 13 of Supervisors dist. 4, ennumeration dist. 8) contains a

dual e.ntry for Al bert F. Hicks such that one can distinguish between the
agricultural activities on the 150 acres that then comprised the ranch and
the somewhat larger prairie farm that he owned. This farm was located about
midway between Temple and Pendelton, just west of the railroad. Neither
town nor the railroad, of course, existed at the time. In 1879, 1880 and
1881, Hicks owned 126 acres of the Henry Millard grant and 70 acres of the
J.B. Daniels grant. After 1882, he owned only the Walters grant and lands
1n the same vicinity. This lends additional weight to the hypothesis offered
earlier, based on assessed value of th,e Walters grant, that Hicks built a
house there around 1882.
The tax records submitted yearl y to the State Comptroll er offer an
annual listing of Hick's livestock holdings for most years up to 1889',
After the turn of the century, the available economic data is limited to
that gleaned from the probate inventory of the estate of E,L Graves (Bell
County Probate record G-933).
The essentials of this economic data are presented here in tabular
form and exclude data on other than the ranch property around the Walters

TABLE 2

Taxable Livestock of Albert F. Hicks in Bell County.

LIVESTOCK
Sheep
Horses/Mules
Cattle
Goats
Swine
Donkey
Wagons
Misc. Property (tool

1879

1880

1881

1882

1883

1884,

1885

1886

1887

1888

350
4

300
4
5

300
4
5

300
2
4

3877

500
7
10

600
7
12

650
8
12

600
7
12

w

5

5

6

10

2
$75

2
75

1
50

1
50

2

6

1
1
55

1

a

~

«
u

Value of livestock
Horses/mules
Milch cows
Other cattle
Calves dropped
Cattle sold live
Cattle slaughtered
Cattle died
Pounds of butter 1879
Sheep on hand (June 1880)
Lambs dropped
Sheep purchased
Sheep sold live
Sheep slaughtered
Sheep killed by dogs
Sheep died of disease
Sheep died of weather
Flee~s sheared
Pounds of wool
Swine
Poultry

2000
8
4
9

...J

~

2

2

2

2

131

185

45

50

Tax Roll

4
5 total

3

1
1

4

200
600
140

2
30
1
20
25
75
430
1800

4
23

650
4
9
60

0

a

2

grant. Table 2 was compiled from the microfilm tax record archives of the
Comptrollers office.
The 1880 census entry somewhat contradicts the tax records.
According to the census, Hicks was running 600 sheep on 460 acres of land
rather than 300 on 150 acres. He also reported more of all oth.er livestock.
The figures are presented below with the larger census figures on the left.

Census

1889

300

2
35

:1.

In addition, Hicks reported 45 acres under cultivation with the
following field crops:
45 bushels
15 acres
Indian corn
95 bushel s
12 ares
wheat
60 bushel s
15 acres
oats
2 acres
120 trees
peaches
It would appear that Hicks was creatively accounting to either the
census taker or the tax assessor. Given the general rule in such matters,
it seems that Hicks was about twice as well off as he was prepared to
report to the county tax assessor. After 1889 Hicks disappears from the
Bell County tax rolls and begins filing with the Burnet County authorities
as a resident of Marble Falls.
2.7 What historia evidence is there for aonstruating a soaial history of
the site?
As mentioned in other contexts above. there is ample census data
and geneological material on several generations of the pioneer Walters
family. However. their connection with the site itself is rather vague.
The 1880 census entries relating to the Albert F. Hicks family, their
employees and their neighbors are available and include a wealth of detail
on westward displacement of southern families after tile Civfl War. Again,
the connection with the site itself is spatial only. The Hood and Cowan
families lived to the south. The James Moses Cowan land grant just south of
the area was actually patented to another man. but Cowan's grave is the only
one that can be identified in the cemetery. It seems quite probable that
the deceased of the O. M. Hood family are buffed there and, perhaps, other
neighbors.
In general, however, the site is too fine a focus to permit any
degree of true social history to be written.
2.8 What is the age of the aemetery, ~hat is its relationship to the rest
of the site?
The cemetery dates to at least 1888, the date of death given on the
headstone of James Moses Cowan. It seems to have been a community burial

place donated informally by either Drury J. Smith or Albert F. Hicks. A
search of the county deed records failed to find a formal legal document
making such a dedication.
The letter written in 1975 by Burnice M. Cowan to the Commanding
General complaining about the condition of the Mayberry Cemetery avers that
there were once 100 graves here. This seems quite unlikely since the Maxdale
Cemetery just across the river is of about that size and has been in use
by a larger community over a longer period of time. A reply to Cowants
letter drafted by B. C. Peters suggests that the cemetery has been in its
present state of "disarray" with broken headstones since at least 1954.
Although no evidence can be offered making a positive link. the construction
of the Boy Scout summer camp where the largest grove of shade trees shelters
a long-disused cemetery would seem to invite the sort of desecration that
occurred.

3.0 Sources consulted and evaluation
The foregoing answers to specific research questions omit all
material not related to the question. A short section is required, there­
fore, to report on two other matters. First, references to various
landowners of 41BL165 that did not relate directly to the questions should
be reported. Secondly, the sources, fi1 es, and records consulted in th.e
course of the study are briefly listed with a short evaluation of their
value to future undertakings of this type. This is offered as a way of
making future studies more efficient by the possible elimination of some
of the least productive sources from routine studies in the future,
3.1 Published loaal historiaal sources
We were guided by the annotated copy of Craakerbarrel ChroniaZes
kept up to date by the 1i brarians of the Barker Texas History Center, the
University of Texas at Austin. This is the definitive bi b1 iography for
local and county histories in Texas. Books, magazine articles, newspaper
special editions and unpublished manuscripts are listed; 53 items are
1i sted for Bell County. Obviousl y a great many of these coul d be. el imin­
ated by title alone, the index of each general county history was exami.ned
for references to Mayberry, and of the landowners surnames and sheepranching.
The result was less than satisfactory considering the time expended,
In Darrell Debo's Burnet County History: A Story of Pioneer
Settlement, A. F. Hicks is mentioned on Pages 99, 160, 242 and 243 as a
realtor, member of the board of directors of Marble Falls University, share
holder in Citizens State Bank in 1906, and shareholder in the combined
Citizens and First National Bank. The merger took place in 1923 and the
combined bank failed the following year. The failure may throw some light
on local economic conditions that influenced the failure of the ranching
operations of W. S. Calloway who was unable to pay taxes for 1923 an~ 1924.
3.2 AvailabZe census records
Population schedules for 1870, 1880 and 1900 are available for
Bell County. The Agricultural census of 1880 is also available, as is the
industrial schedule for that decade. The 1890 census was, of course, almost

totally destroyed in a fire that left only a small percentage of the
returns, none of which pertain to Bell County.

Earlier census records

have now been indexed by computer so that is is often quite easy to locate
a family such as the Walters in the 1830 census before they came to Texas.
The Walters, the Hicks and the Graves families were all located
in the census records. As usual, this search is quite straightforward and
quite rich in detail.

Our best picture of the economic activity at the

ranch comes from the 1880 agricul tura 1 census.

The information reported

to the census taker was often far more accurate than that which appears in
the county tax assessor's records.
The details of the composition of the E. E. Graves family is not
given above, because there is no evidence that they ever actually occupied
site 41BL165. However, the family was located in the 1900 census, three
years before buying the property.
in Kentucky in 1850.
Texas.

Elisha E. Graves was 49 years old, born

His wife, Mattie, was 45, born in March 1855 in

They had four sons, Herbert, John, Olin and Walter, aged 20, 18,

14 and 12 in 1900.

The sons, as well as their three daughters, were

all born in Texas.

The daughters were Lillian, age 26, Minnie, age 16,

and Maudie, age 8.

The family resided in Precinct 1, Belton, but owned

nearly 1500 acres of land and over 500 cattle (TSA microfilm Comptrollers
Office roll 58, p. 48 Resident Tax Roll for Bell County, 19001.

The

evidence indicates that the family continued to 1ive in town after the
purchase of the ranch from Hicks. However, one of the older sons may
have been the resident ranch manager.
frome·the records.

Tftere is no way to establ iSh this

Summapy
The use of census records in conjunction with tax and deed records
continues to yield good and depe.nda5Je i:nformatton,

3,3 Newspapep files
Both the ephemera fil es at tile Texas Collection, Baylor Unlversity,
and the newspaper files at the Barker Texas History Center were consulted.
A. F. Hicks was mentioned in a brief story in the Dallas News (p, 2,
col. 4) for December 15, 1886, as having been appointed to the standing
committee on lodges at the annual convention of the Grand Lodge of Masons

- - -..... -~------~- ...... --.~--.--~~~---~

..

-.-----

.~---------------------

-------­

in Houston. An E. E. Graves was mentioned in the Dallas News June 11, 1886,
(p. 2, col. 5) as a volunteer in a search party organized "in Paris, Texas.
This mayor may not be the E. E. Graves mentioned above. No other entries
relative the the land or landowners at 41BL165 were found.
It would appear that the search of newspaper files should normally
be limited to references concerning communities or economic events. The
return for entries related to individuals was rather meager in this case.
3.4 Country real estate and legal rea.ords
Although the records at the Bell County Courthouse are often in
manuscript form and some of the early tax assessors records have been lost
in floods, these records are invaluable. It is only through the deed
records that a complete and unbroken chain of ownership can be establ ished.
These records were exploited fully in tne forgoing study and suppl ied the
framework with;.n which the other details were placed.
The county probate records and tax assessors abstract books were
also used. In short, in future studies of this kind the starting point
should be with. the land records kept 1n the courthouse.
3.5 Available maps and aerial photographs
A large number of old maps of Bell County held in the Barker Texas
History Center were examined without gleaning mucn information directly
related to the site. The 1966 county atlas located in th.e Texas Collection
of the Baylor University Library was helpful in showing separate access
roads for Camp Moonraker and Mayberry Park.
The real breakthrough in interpreting the site came with the loca . .
tion of a 1938 aerial photograph in the files of the Texas Natural Resources
Information System (JNRIS, P. O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711). This
photograph, reproduced above as Figure 2, allowed us to cleanly separate
the Camp Noonraker component of the site from the Hicks-Graves ranch com...­
ponent.
In short, the examination of the TNRIS ftl es and map fil es of
the Barker Texas History Center shaul d be a routine part of future stuMes
of this type.

3.6 Original land grant maps from the GeneraZ Land Office

These maps are essential to the research because they define the
original surveys to which all subsequent land and tax records refer. They
are, therefore, a must.
3.7 Fort Hood real estate records

The real estate acquisition maps and the files relating to private
cemeteries on post were used. The correspondence file provided some
essential clues to the community affiliation of the Mayberry Cemetery.
The writer of one 1975 letter was contacted by phone to confirm his infor­
mation about the Reese Creek community.
3.8 Fort Hood and Bell County cemetery records

The Bell County land records of plats and cemetery dedications
contained no reference to the Mayberry Cemetery. The files of the real
estate office proved to be the only source of direct references. Two
publications by Mrs. Mark J. Nash on Fort Hood cemeteries were located in
the Texas State Library. Although neither of these small papers refers
specifically to Mayberry , copies were made and furnished to the Contracting
Officer IS Representa tfve for use in future cemetery; nvestigations.
3.9

Original patent and surveyopts notes

These manuscript records held by the Texas General Land Office
are most often the earliest documents which relate directly to the land
parcel in question. They proved to be less useful than usual in this case
because the original grantee, Alexander Walters, chose to keep the patent
unfil ed for over twenty years, During thi s time, the 1and in the general
vicinity remained largely a part of the public domain, available for settle­
ment, but unclaimed.
The well-indexed and readlly available patent records should
continue to be examined because, although the information yield is often
rather low. the time required to look at the records is also small.
3.10 KnoufZedgeab le hiswrica l informants

Mr. B. M. Cowan of West Columbia, Texas, was helpful.

The grave

- - - ...........

--~~------

..

----

of his forbear, James Moses Cowan, is the only one that can still be
identified at Mayberry. Mr. Cowan's knowledge of a tradition relating
the cemetery to the Reeses Creek community was helpful.
Ms. Gradelle Duncan of the Killeen Daily Herald provided some
helpful input. It was she who first suggested that the Mayberry name was
of military origin.
Mrs. Tom Mayberry of Killeen put to rest a local rumor that the
park had been named for her late husband.
Several gracious ladies at the Heart of Texas Council of Boy Scouts
in Waco provided willing, if negative, assistance.
Mr. Ming, curator of manuscript materials at the Texas Collection,
Baylor University Library, who springs from a Sparta family himself,
provided several valuable clues and great assistance to the writer who was
in a new library.
Although locating and interviewing informants can be quite time
consuming, it often provioes leads to information that cannot otherwise be
obtained. Although the investigator must be very sparing of this sort of
research when on a limited budget, it can prove quite valuable.

4.0 Management Swnmary of rationale for not reoommending the Mayberry
ruins for nomination to the National Register of Historioal Plaoes.

The inclusion of this section in the final report was at the
specific request of the contracting officer's representative, Dr. Frederick
L. Briuer, expressed in a letter to SAl dated 21 October 1982:
In the final report we request that an additional section
be written concerning the rationale for stating that the
Mayberry ruins are not recommended for inclution [SIC] on
the National Register of Historic Places. We request
that this section cover reasons which are compatible with
the procedures already established to select a statistically
representative sampl e of prehi storic sites for protection
and preservation.
The objective here, as Dr. Briuer states, is to develop compatible criteria
for selecting historic and prehistoric sites for protection.
4.1

The National Register of Histori 0 Plaoes.

The National Register lists properties significant in "American
history, architecture, archaeology and culture ... (N.H.P.A. sec. 101(a)(1)).
The criteria are further defined by 30CFR 60.6 which is quoted in its
entirety below for easy reference to this discussion.
Section 60.6 Criteria for Evaluation
The criteria applied to evaluate properties for possible
inclusion in the National Register are H$ited below. These
criteria are worded in a manner to provide for the diversity
of resources. The following criteria shall be used in
evaluating properties for nomination to the National Register,
by the National Park Service in reviewing nominations, and
for evaluating National Register elibigility of properties
affected by Federal agency undertakings.
National Register oriteria fop evaluation. The quality of,
significance in American history, architecture, archaeology,
and culture is present in districts, sites, Duildings, struc­
tures, and objects of State and 10ca1 importance that possess
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association, and
(a) That are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or
(b) That are associated with the lives of persons significant
in our past; or
11

(c) That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period, or method of construction, or that represent the
work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or
that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or
(d) That have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information
important in prehistory or history.
Criteria considerations. Ordinarily cemeteries, birthplaces, or
graves of historical figures, properties owned by religious
institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that
have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed
historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature,
and properties that have achieved significance within the past
50 years shall not be considered eligible for the National
Register. However, such properties will qual ify if they are
integral parts of districts that do meet the criteria or if
they fall within the following categories:
(a) A religious property deriving primary significance from
architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance.
(b) A building or structure removed from its original location
but which is significant primarily for architectural value. or
which is the surviving structure most importantly associated
with a historic person or event.
(c) A birthplace or grave of a historical figure of outstanding
importance if there is no appropriate site or building directly
associated with his productive life.
(d) A cemetery which derives its primary significance from
graves of pers.ons of transcendent importance, from age, from
distinctive design features, or from association with historic
events.
(e) A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a
suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner as
part of a restoration master plan, and when no other building
or structure with the same association has survived.
(f) A property primarily commemorative in intent if design.
age, tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its
own historical significance.
(g) A property achieving significance within the past 50 years
if it is of exceptional importance.
The general rule of age stated in (g) of the foregoing is
appl icab 1e to two components of Mayberry, Camp Moonraker of the .Boy Scouts
of America and Mayberry Park. These two, which account for most of the ruins
at Mayberry, are both post-1943. Indeed, most of these ruins will not meet
the minimum 50 year criteria until after the turn of the next century. Since
these components cannot possibly be considered sites of "exceptional im­
portance they are ruled out by th_eir age alone.
ll

,

The two other components are the cemetery and the remains of the
Hicks-Graves Ranch. As stated in 36CFR 60.0 (above), "ordinarily ceme­
teries . . .shall not be considered eligible for the National Register".
The exception paragraph allows for graves of persons of "transcendent
importance" or cemeteries which derive special significance from age ,
from distinctive design features or from association with historic event"
to be considered. The Mayberry cemetery cannot be much older than per­
haps 100 years. The only notabl e grave, that of James Moses Cowan,
is from 1888.
Mr. Cowan is mentioned in reports to Governor Runnels in 1858
as a lieutenant in a temporary company of Texas Rangers raised to pursue
a Commanche raiding party and recover two white children who had been
captured (\1infrey 1959: v.3). Other than that incident. which might
merit the placement of a historical marker at the grave. no historically
significant association of the cemetery could be established. Therefore,
only one component of the site might not be explicitly excluded by the
stated criteria - this is the remains of the Hicks-Graves Ranch.
As stated above in section 2.14, the Hicks-Graves Ranch remains
are the oldest ruins present. A mound with cut stone and other debris
appears to be the collapsed walls of a stone house. We have presumed from
rather sparse surface indications that this ruin is the stone house erected
by Mr. Hicks sometime after 1878. The aerial photograph displayed in
Figure 2 of this report shows that house, or some structure, still standing
in 1938. Thus the archeological deposit sealed within the collapsed walls
is not representative of 1878 or even the 19th century, but of the second
quarter of the twentieth century. In fact it seems most likely that the
building was still standing at the time of acquisition by the Army Air
Force in 1943 and collapsed or was razed after that time.
The potential exists for buried trash deposits within outh~use
and trash pits once associated with the nineteenth century occupation, but
the existence of such features is purely conjectural. This potential
cannot be used to demonstrate research value.
lI

4.2

Compatibility with established Fort Hood procedures.

The criteria for National Register properties are defined by
Federal law and are not subject to modification to fit local interpretation.
However, it is possible to nominate properties that would not be individually
eligible for National Register status as part of an archeological district
set aside for research purposes. The nature of this research must, of
course, be stated in fairly explicit terms.
The natural dichotomy which develops in designating prehistoric
and historic archeological sites for research-oriented preservation and
exploitation lies in the absence of alternative information resources.
Normally we have no choice but to dig for prehistoric information because
there is no alternative. Therefore, a selection of prehistoric sites should
be preserved undisturbed against the time when techniques will have been
improved and research designs more refined.
Historic archeological sites often represent the most expensive
and least imformative source of data relevant to a given era or industry.
The alternative information sources - land records, tax archives, census
records and the like - the traditional written sources of the historian ­
may often more efficiently answer research questions than the often re­
dundant information buried in the ground. Therefore, while it may be desir­
able to record and protect historic sites from unnecessary destruction, a
somewhat more stri ngent sel ection criterion shoul d be appl i ed toward hi stor; c
sites with only an archeological component remaining, than is generally
applicable to prehistoric sites where no research alternative exists.
4.3 A possible Reeses Creek Archeological District.

This section is added at the specific request of the COR to clarify
the rationale for not nominating the Mayberry ruins to the National Register
of Historic Places. While it is clear that the site is not eligibl~ on an
individual basis, it could be included as a part of a historic district
nomination. Such a district could encompass a number of sites and structures
that were part of the former Reeses Creek community. The dogtrot cabin
located off the Fort Hood reservation on property owned by the Texas Youth
Council (see Jackson 1982 Fig. 5, page 68) would logically be the leading

--~

------

----

site in such a district. This structure is still standing and was very
likely the home of Charles K. Reese, veteran of the Texas Revolution. The
land on which the house sits was patented to Reese by the Republic and
the house probably dates from that era as well.
By age and association alone, the Reese cabin would meet National
Register criteria. If it were the centerpiece of a historic district, other
sites, such as the cemetery and ranch ruins at Mayberry, could be included
within the district. This represents something of an administrative
challenge because a portion of the potential district is state owned,
another federal property, and some structures and sites for potential in­
clusion are privately owned.
4 .4

SWnmaY'y

While the Mayberry ruins clearly do not meet the criteria for
nom'ination to the National Register of Historic Places as an archeological
site, they may be eligible asa portion of a historic district based on
the early Reeses Creek community.

---------------....

---------~-~

~~--

REFERENCES

Bell County Clerk
Manuscript Deed Books, Probate r11 es.
Belton, Texas

Bell County Courthouse,

Commercial Photography, Inc.
1966
BeU County., Texas, Road AtZas . Savannah, Tennessee. Copy held
in vertical file, Bell County. Texas Collection, Baylor Un1ver­
sity Library.
Debo, Darrell
1980
Burnet County Histopy:
2 vols. Eakins Press

A stoPy of Pioneer Settlement 1879-1979.
Burnet, Texas.

Fort Hood Facilities Engineer Real Estate Office
Files relating to private cemeteries on post
Jackson , Ronal d V., editor
1976
Geopgia 1830 Census Index.
Salt Lake City.
I

Genealogical Publishing Company,

King, Thomas, r., Patricia P. Hickman and Gary Berg
1977
Anthropology in Historic Preservation., Caring fop Cultures Clutter.
Academic Press, New York. Standard reference with CRF 36 as
appendix.
Lewis, Oscar
1948
On the Edge of the Black Waxy, a Cultural Survey of Bell County,
Texas. Washington University Press, St. Louis.
Miller, Thomas Lloyd
1966
Bounty and Donation Land Grants of Texas, 1835-1888.
of Texas Press, Austin.

University

Nash, Mrs. Mark Joseph
1978a Cemeteries Located on the Fort Hood Reservation, Texas; Tombstone
Inscriptions.
1978b

Bodies Removed from the Camp Hood Area and Reinterred in Gatesville,
Killeen and Copperas Cove Cemetepies.

Texas General Land Office
Bell County Land Grant Map. Manuscript fil es of original patents
and field notes, Bell County.
Texas State Archives Microfilm
Records of the Texas State Comptrollers Office, Tax Returns, Be11
County 1850-1900.

Tyler, George W.
1936

The History of BeZZ County.

Naylor Printing Co., San Antonio.

U. S. Army Corps of Engineers
Real Estate Acquisition Maps of Fort Hood.

Blue line, 25 sheets.

U. S. Bureau of the Census
1850
Manuscript Returns of Population and Agricultural Schedules
1880
for Bell County, Texas.
(National Archives Microfilm). Avail­
1900
able Geneology Room, Texas State Library.
White, Gifford
1966

The 1840 Census of the RepubZic of Texas.

Austin.

The Pemberton Press,

