PALEOFAUNAL & ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
ON MIOCENE FOSSIL SITES TVOR SE AND TVOR S
ON FORT POLK, LOUISIANA,
WITH CONTINUED SURVEY, COLLECTION,
PROCESSING, AND DOCUMENTATION
OF OTHER MIOCENE LOCALITIES
by

Judith A. Schiebout, Suyin Ting, Michael Williams, Grant Boardman,
Wulf Gose *, Ray Wilhite, Paul D. White, and Brandon Kilbourne
Museum of Natural Science
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
"'Department of Geological Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712

US Army Corps
of Engineers
Fort Worth District
I'

Best Aifattab1~ Cop!

0040419 070

DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT B:
DISTRIBUTION AUTHORIZED TO U.S. GOVERNMENT AGENCIES ONLY;
(Indicate Reason and Date Below). OTHER REQUESTS FOR THIS DOCUMENT SHALL BE REFERRED
TO (Indicate Controlling DoD Office Below).
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT C:
DISTRIBUTION AUTHORIZED TO U.S. GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND THEIR CONTRACTORS;
(Indicate Reason andDate Below). OTHER REQUESTS FOR THIS DOCUMENT SHALL BE REFERRED
TO (Indicate ContrOlling DoD Office Below).
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT D:
DISTRIBUTION AUTHORIZED TO DOD AND U.S. DOD CONTRACTORS ONLY; (Indicate Reason
and Date Below). OTHER REQUESTS SHALL BE REFERRED TO (Indicate Controlling DoD Office Below).
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT E:
DISTRIBUTION AUTHORIZED TO DOD COMPONENTS ONLY; (Indicate Reason and Date Below).
OTHER REQUESTS SHALL BE REFERRED TO (Indicate Controlling DoD Office Below).
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT F:
FURTHER DISSEMINATION ONLY AS DIRECTED BY (Indicate Controlling DoD Office and Date
Below) or HIGHER DOD AUTHORITY.
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT X:
DISTRIBUTION AUTHORIZED TO U.S. GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS
OR ENTERPRISES ELIGIBLE TO OBTAIN EXPORT-CONTROLLED TECHNICAL DATA IN ACCORDANCE
WITH DOD DIRECTIVE 5230.25, WITHHOLDING OF UNCLASSIFIED TECHNICAL DATA FROM PUBLIC
DISCLOSURE, 6 Nov.1984 (Indicate date of determination). CONTROLLING DOD OFFICE IS (Indicate
ContrOlling DoD Office).
The cited documents has been reviewed by competent authority and the following distribution statement is
hereby authorized.
..
C~ W f f!. - f!3 C-

ftE.

f+.

p,c;1. 'O}t

i73 C ()

WoUH Pt'fll-tC+- GOt=.
f+-I wo/lA+l. t'X· 'l&IOJ-

(Statement)

/JON ---

(Controlling

Dod Office Name)

5W){ ··hvlS

(N f-O
(Controlling DoD Office Address,
City, State Zip)

(Reason)

::lA'f R.

Nf.,WtVll\-rJ

(Assigning Office)

(Dat

.8est Available Co

030p

Form ff'!roved
OMB o. 0704-0188

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions. searching existing data
sources.~athennfe and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden eSllmate or any other
aspect 0 this col ection of information, includin~ sugzstions for rCducin~ this burnen, to Washington Headquarters Services Directorate for Information Operations and
Reports. 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1 04, lington, V A 2220 -4302. and to the Office of Management and Budget. Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188),
Washington, DC 20503.

I. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank)

2. REPORTDATE

April i, 2004

3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED

Final Report, 7/15/2002-4/20/2004

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE

5. FUNDING NUMBERS

Paleofaunal & Environmental Research on Miocene Fossil Sites TVOR SE and TVOR S
on Fort Polk, Louisiana, with Continued Survey, Collection, Processing,
and Documentation of other Miocene localities

Contract No. DACA63-00-D-006
Delivery Order 0015

6. AUTHOR(S)

Judith A. Schiebout, Suyin Ting, Michael Williams, Grant Boardman, Wulf Gose,
Ray Wilhite, Paul D. White, and Brandon Kilbourne

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

LSU Museum of Natural Science
119 Foster Hall, Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER

Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
·2105 Donley Drive, Suite 400
Austin, Texas 78758-4513

9. SPONSORlNGIMONlTORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

Fort Polk Miocene- 4
10. SPONSORINGIMONlTORlNG
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District
POBox 17300
Fort Worth, Texas 76102-0300
Name of Federal Technical Responsible Individual: Dr. Jay R. Newman
Organization: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort. Worth District, CESWF-PER-EC
Phone #: (817) 886-1721 Gay.r.newman@swID2.usace.arrny.mil)
II. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
12a. DISTRIBUTION AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE

Approved for public release
ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)
Focus of paleontological research on the Miocene of Fort Polk is currently the marine locality TVOR SE, which also has yielded
large and small terrestrial Miocene vertebrates, and a single Creta~eous dinosaur tooth, reworked from older beds outside the local
area. Other sites have continued to be productive. The two beautifully preserved tortoises from DISC have been identified as
Hesperotudo.The first venomous snake from the Fort Polk Miocene is from TVOR. Sample sizes from screening have risen to levels
which permit examination of variation. Copemys from Stonehenge form a single size cluster and the TVOR SE Copemys fall well
within the range, so only one species can be recognized. New emphases or"this phase of research has included more work on lower
vertebrates, reevaluation of paleomagnetic dating with study of additional samples, production of short videos on the ancient animals,
and a revision of the educational booklet for youngsters.
14. SUBJECT TERMS

15. NUMBEROFPAGES

Fort Polk, Vertebrate Paleontology in the Miocene, Copemys, Snakes, Paleomagnetic Correlation,
Paleoecology, Reworked fossils, Cretaceous, Louisiana's First Dinosaur

56
16. PRICE CODE

17. SECURITY
CLASSIFICATION OF REPORT

Unclassified

14.

SECURITY
CLASSIFICATION OF THIS
PAGE Unclassified

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF ABSTRACT

20. UMITATION OF
ABSTRACT

Unclassified
:stanoaro orm :l~!s

~Kev. :l-!s~) ~J:.li)

Paleofaunal & Environmental Research on Miocene Fossil Sites TVOR SE and
TVOR S on Fort Polk, Louisiana, with Continued Survey, Collection,
Processing and Documentation of other Miocene localities
By
JudithA. Schiebout, Suyin Ting,
Michael Williams, Grant Boardman, Wulf Gose,
Ray Wilhite, Paul D. White, and Brandon Kilbourne
Museum of Natural Science, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
Prepared for
US Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District
Contract No. DACA63-00-D-006
Delivery Order 0015
And

Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Cultural Resources Services
Austin, Texas

Submitted by
Judith A. Schiebout
Principal Investigator
Museum of Natural Science, Louisiana State University
Apri12004

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT

n

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

x

I. INTRODUCTION

1

Background

1

. General geologic history, regional correlation, and depositional environment

1

II. METHODS

2

III. SITE DESCRiPTIONS

4

IV. SYSTEMATIC PALEONTOLOGY

4

PALEOBOTANY

4

INVERTEBRATE ANIMALS

4

Foraminifera

4

Mollusca

5

VERTEBRATES

5

Class CHONDRICHTHYES

5

Order BATOIDEA

5

MYLiOBATIS sp.

5

Class OSTEICHTHYES

5

Order LEPISOSTEIFORMES

5

LEPISOSTEUS sp.

5

Order AMIIFORMES

6

?AMIAsp.

6

Order SILURIFORMES

6

c/ ICTALURUS PUNCTATUS
i

6

6

Order PERCIFORMES
LARG E PERCIFORM FISH

6

. Family SCIAENIDAE

6
6

APLODINOTUS sp.

6

Class REPTILIA

6

Order CROCODYLIA
Genus ALLIGATOR

6

ALLIGATOR sp.

6
6

Order CHELONIA

6

Suborder CRYPTODIRA

6

Superfamily TESTUDINOIDEA

6

·Family TESTUDINIDAE

6

HESPEROTESTUDO sp.

6

Order SQUAMATA

6

Suborder SERPENTES
Family NATRICIDAE

6

Family COLUBRIDAE

9

Family VIPERIDAE

9

10

Indetermiriant squamate.

10

Class MAMMALIA

10

Order INSECTIVORA

LIMNOECUS NIOBRARENSIS

10
11

Order CETE

ii

11

. Parvorder MYSTICETI

11

Order ARTIODACTYLA

11

Family TAYASSUIDAE

11

_CYNORCA or JJYSEOHYUS

11

Order PERISSODACTYLA

11

Family RHINOCEROTIDAE

11

, ?APHELOPS

15

Order PROBOSCIDEA

15

Family GOMPHOTHERIIJJAE

16

Order RODENTIA
Family CASTORIDAE

16

Family GEOMYIDAE

16
16

TEXOMYS RICHEI

16

Family CRICETIDAE

COPEMYS

16

Family SCIURIDA

17

Subfamily SCIURINAE

17

Genus NOTOTAMIAS

17

NOTOTAMIAS sp.

17
17

. ?AMMOSPERMOPHILUS
V. REVISED PALEOMAGNETIC CORRELATION AND

17

DISCUSSION OF SITE AGES
VI. PALEOBIOLOGY AND PALEOECOLOGY

iii

19

How many species of the small rodent Copemys...

19

Rodent distributions

23
24

VII. TAPHONOMY OF TVOR SE
Reworked fossils

25

Louisiana's first dinosaur

25

VIII CONCLUSIONS

25

VIV. RECOMMENDATIONS

26
26

Sites
TVORSE

27

TVORS

29

TVOR site Cluster

29

DISC Site Cluster

29

Stonehenge

29

Gully

30

Discovery (DISC)

30
30

Outreach
REFERENCES

32

APPENDICES

34

A. Abbreviations

34

B. Curation list

36

C. New paleomagnetic samples

37

D. Copemys measurement data

38

E. Scientific publications, or presentations

41

F. Sample Videotape Shooting Script "Louisiana's First Dinosaur"

45

iv

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. East Texas and Louisiana Fleming Formation outcrops,
afterSchiebout and Ting (2001).

1

Figure 2. Fleming Formation vertebrate faunas in East Texas, age in millions of
years, and North American Land Mammal Ages with selected defining
taxa relevant to the Fort Polk Miocene Sites, after Schiebout and Ting (2001). 2
Figure 3. Main Miocene vertebrate sites within Fort Polk superimposed on a
geologic map, after Schiebout and Ting (2001).

3

Figure 4; James Grafton examines surface at north wall of
TVOR SE Site, April, 2003.

4

. Figure 5. Robert Hays holds bag while Michael Williams (in cap) and James
Grafton shovel in clay for screening. Dr. Ting to right. Bagging is at TVOR SE
north side of gully, with the southside of the TVOR SE gully in background,
· July, 2003. .
5
Figure 6. Vertebral centrum fragment (LSUMG 12342), possibly from a large
alligator. A. Anterior; B. Lateral.

7

Figure 7. A. Entire carapace of female tortoise from Discovery Site
(LSUMG 12223). Arrows point to octagonal-shaped neurals;
B.Close.up of neural numbers 2 and 4.

8

Figure 8. Scanning electron micrograph of natricine snake vertebra
· (LSUMG 12740) in lateral view. The arrow points to the broken
hypapophysis.

9

Figure 9. Scanning electron micrograph of a colubrid snake
vertebra (LSUMG 4478) in anterior view.

10

Figure 10. Photomicrograph of a viper vertebra in ventral view. The broken
hypapophysis is indicated with an arrow.

11

Figure 11. Scanning electron micrographs of a small, possibly lizard,
right dentary fragment (LSUMG 12774).A. Lingual viewof entire fragment.
B. Close-up of the labial view, showing dentition and foramina.

12

Figure 12. Sketch of a small baleen whale approximately the size of the one
· represented from Fort Polk by petrosals, compared to the larger
Eocene Basilosaurits from Montgomery Landing, Louisiana.

13

Figure 13. Peccary m3 (LSUMG 12741) from TVOR SE, A. Crown; B. Lateral;
C. Basal view.
14
v

Figure 14. Fragment of a tooth of a large.rhino (LSUMG 11775), possibly
· Aphelops showing handing in enamel which is characteristic of rhinoceri.
A. Lateral, B. Crown.
Figure 15. Scaphoid of a large rhinoceros, possibly Aphelops.

15
15

· Figure 16. Fragment of a gomphothere tooth. A. Crown view, B. Posterior view,
C. Lateral view.
16
Figure 17 A.Distribution of cricetid (C ), heteromyid (H) and geomyoid
(G) rodents at four Fort Polk sites as of December 2001. B. Distribution of
· cricetid (C), heteromyid(H) and geomyoid .(G) rodents at three Fort Polk sites
17
as of July 31,2003. Number after site name is total specimens.
Figure 18. Scanning electron micrograph of crown of 7exomys p4.

18

Figure 19. Correlation of polarity intervals between four cores at Fort Polk,
Louisiana. Modified from Figure 33 of Schiebout et al (2002) by the addition
of new samples processed by Dr. Wulf Gose.

19

Figure 20. A. Copemys M1 dental terminology; B. A sketch of Copemys
M1 LSUMG 9207.

20

Figure 21. Comparison of the area of the anterocone shape among size
ratios 3:2, 2:1, and 4:3 respectively in Copemys from Stonehenge Site.

21

Figure 22. Distribution of Copemys M1 samples for the Stonehenge Site
using width versus length.

21

Figure 23. Stonehenge Site Copemys M1 morphologic variation.

22

Figure 24. Distribution of Copemys morphological features of M1 samples
for the Stonehenge Site using width versus length.

23

Figure 25. Example of fused/connected roots; in this case the lingual roots
are strongly connected in LSUMG 10639.

24

Figure 26. Distribution of Copemys M1 samples for the TVOR SE Site using
width versus length.

24

Figure 27. Photomicrographs of small dromaeosaurid dinosaur tooth
(LSUMG 12329), A. Lateral, B. Basal, C Anterior) and scanning electron
micrographs (D. Lateral, E Lateral close-up.

26

vi

Figure 28. Drawing of a small Late Cretaceous dromaeosaurid dinosaur
probably similar to the animal that yielded LSUMG 12329. Modified by
Mary Lee Eggart from a sketch by Brandon Kilbourne. .

27

Figure 29. Late.Cretaceous (Maastrichtian, 70 million years ago) paleocoastline
28
modified from (Smith et ai, 1994).
Figure 30. Three late Cretaceous coastlines, produced from similar data,
.modified from (Smith et aI., 1994). The solid line is the one in Figure 20,
the dotted line is from E. C. Kauffman and D.A. Beeson (unpublished)
and the dashed line is from Funnell (1990).

29

Figure 31. Sketch of a giant camel (?Aep)'came/us) with the location of specimen
LSUMG 12235 (radius) from TVOR SE shown.
30
Figure 32. Sketch of a modern giant sea bass. An animal this size could
have ·yielded dorsal spines like those of LSUMG 10895:

vii

30

specimen from the Fort Polk Miocene is now
recognized from TVOR Site.
Sample sizes from screening have risen to
levels which permit examination of variation
within animals from a site and between sites
and to begin examination of questions of speciation. Copemys from Stonehenge has been
studied, and the small sample from TVOR SE
compared to the results. The Copemys first upper molar appeared to offer distinctive features
for differentiation of subgroups within the specimens, but these teeth still form a single size
cluster from Stonehenge, a consistent relationship of size and morphology cannot be determined, and the TVOR SE Copemys fall well
within the Stonehenge range.
New emphases of this phase of Fort Polk
Miocene research have included more work on
lower vertebrates, reevaluation of paleomagnetic dating with study of additional samples,
production of short videos on the fossils and
ancient animals, and a revision of the booklet
on the Fort Polk Miocene for youngsters.

ABSTRACT
Focus of paleontological research on the
Miocene of Fort Polk is currently emphasizing
the marine locality TVOR SE, which contains
both marine and large and small terrestrial
Miocene vertebrates, reworked Cretaceous
foraminifera, and a single reworked dinosaur
tooth from a small dromeosaur. It remains the
only site which has yielded a varied fauna to
quarrying. The lithified sandy marine shell
bank which has yielded terrestrial vertebrates
has been completely quarried and dissolved,
but mudstone at the site continues to yield fossils to quarrying. Since Schiebout et at. (2002),
a vertebral fragment, possibly from a large
crocodile and a fragmentary gomphothere tooth
recovered through surface search. A peccary
tooth has also been recovered from TVOR SE.
Small vertebrates were recovered from the
mudstone by wet screening, without acid treatment.
Catastrophes have generally not been involved in the Fort Polk Miocene record, but at
TVOR SE site, a storm seems to have played a
major role. Large camelid bones, rodent and
insectivore teeth, cetacean bones, and oysters
are physically mixed in less than a meter vertically, suggesting that materials from land and
sea, both shallow and open ocean, were dumped
together with little sorting. The site contains
fossils from a greater range of ages than the
other sites. A hurricane could have brought
waves to rework the nearshore, both marine
and terrestrial, and heavy rain to erode soils
in both river terrace dryer highlands and wet
coastal lowlands. Cretaceous foraminifera and
the dinosaur tooth, found for the first time in
the Fort Polk sites, could have been added by
a through going river in flood, reworked from
older beds outside the local area.
Other Fort Polk Miocene sites have continued to be productive. The two beautifully
preserved tortoises from DISC, found by James
Grafton and Robert Hays, remain the most
complete specimens recovered from the Fort
Polk Miocene. They have been identified as
Hesperotestudo. The first venomous snake

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank individuals at Fort Polk,
especially Director of Public Works Roy A.
Bethel and his environmental staff, including
Dr. Charles Stagg, James Grafton, Robert
Hays, and Ellen Ibert for their help and cooperation which made this research possible. We
greatly appreciate being allowed to study specimens in or on loan from other institutions.
Mary Lee Eggart of the LSU Department of
Geography & Anthropology drafted figures and
Kerry Lyle of the LSU Coastal Studies Institute took photographs. Zhong Geng Ling and
Kun Lian provided microphotography expertise
and took scanning electron micrographs. Discussions with many colleagues were very helpful. The U. S. Geological Survey, Ruston, Louisiana, office, drilled and cored three fifty-foot
holes for sedimentological, stratigraphic,
paleopedologic and other study. James Rogers,
a consultant retired from the U. S. Geological
Survey, logged the well coring on these three
cores. The U. S. Geological Survey shared core
material on the 100-foot well (Well 3) at Dis-

viii

covery (DISC) Site. 'Many LSU students have
assisted with field work on the Fort Polk Miocene. Michael Williams, Paul White and Ray
Wilhite helped in field work in 2002 and 2003.
JQhn Grubb assisted with report formatting.
Work has been and is currently supported
py the U. S. Army FORSCOM, on contracts
administered and managed by U. S. Army
Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District, issued
under contracts to Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Support has also been provided by the LSU
Museum of Natural Science and Judith A.
Schiebout.
, .

~.

ix

come from the vicinity of one of the sites currently under study ih this project,but precise
,locality information ori it was not available. The
previous lack of Louisiana Miocene fossil mammals results in "most genera recovered in the
research on the Fort Polk Miocene fauna being
new to the state.
In the following report, emphasis is on the
TVOR SE site andits fauna. Abbreviations are
given in Appendix A.

I. INTRODUCTION
Background

This is the fourth report for the Corps of
Engineers since 1994 to be prepared on a portion of the work supported by the U. S. Army
FORSCOM on'contracts with the Corps of Engineers via Prewitt and Associates. Publications,
in the scientific literature and presentations at
'. scientific meetings are given in Appendix E. The
fauna has grown appreciably, both in numbers
General Geologic History,
and in taxa recovered. The Fort Polk Miocene
Regional Correlation, and
fauna occupied 577 numbers in the Vertebrate
Paleontology collections of the LSU Museum
. Depositional Environments
of Natural Science at the completion oi'the first
The upper half of the Castor Creek Mem· report (Schiebout, 1997b), 3,991 numbers for
ber of the FlemingFormation (Figure 1) has
the second report (Schiebout and Ting, 2001),
. yielded the mammals discussed in this report.
4 389 numbers for the third report (Schiebout
The' C~stor Creek Member underlies the
e; aI., 2003). As of 7/31103,540 additional speciBlounts Creek Member, uppermost of the six
."
meris have been catalogued. .
members in the Fleming Formation, which outBefore the discovery of t4~ Fort Polk Mi.crop in a broad b~rid crossing Fort Polk. Fur· ocene sites, there was only a single report of
ther information on the extent, composition,
Miocene land animal remains from Louisiana.
and depositional environments of the Member
(Arata, 1966), the tips of the lower tusks ofa'
is found in Rogers andCallandro (1965), Jones
" gomphothere (Mammalia: Proboscidea). Arata' . etal. (1995), Hinds (1998,1999), and McCulloh
· (1966) estimated that the specimen was from
and Heinrich (2000). The Castor'Creek mamMi~cene beds of Fort Polk, arid it could have

LOUISIANA
TEXAS

o

'so

.

100

kilometers

Figure 1. East Texas and Louisiana Fleming Formation outcrops, after

Best Available Copy

Schiebout and Ting (2001).
1

1

2

~hRanch
L.F._ Lapara
Creek F. I~eRanch
L.F.

10

3

CLARENDON IAN

------------

Goodrich L.F.
I/
o·Eu.:
Sam
Houston
L.F.
I
uc.;
en Cold Spring L.F.
""':>Potamides
Burkeville L.F. ~~~
u.:
Zone
Q)
.s;
Trini~
Moscow !~
Q)
River LF.
L.F.
15
i!:
:::J
m
Point Blank F.
"00)

<-

z
«

-

>

0

a:

«

m

Oakville Fm.

~
}

.~

ctJ

C!:!

Cedar Run L.F.

~

0
u.
C!:!

....ns

(interior N.A.)

---

...... Proboscidean datum

Q)

NW&SE N.A.

ns

__ ......

f~t§!.uE~ojQ.'L

__

Blackia

-....

w

Q)

:::r:::

20

~

-z

:ilE

Aiken
Hill L.F.

__ -+ f~~~cl.d~al1.Q~u_m_

>- - - - ...... Copemys

-C

I I

early late

Q)

a:

u.: Garvin Farm L.F.
~

Q)

ns

en

c:(

"5
C!:!
c:

-

I-

z
Fleming Fm.

late late

----------

>.

ns

'--------------ARIKAREEAN

Fi~~re 2. Fleming Formation vertebrate faunas in East Texas (1), age in
mllh~ns of years (2), and North American Land Mammal Ages with selected
d~finmg taxa relevant to the Fort Polk Miocene Sites (3). after Schiebout and

Ting (2001). Illustration after Schiebout and Ting (2001). Shaded area
indicates intertonguing marine deposit. 1 and 2 modified from Schiebout
(1994), which was modified from Tedford et ai, (1987, Fig. 6.2), 3 modified
from Woodburne and Swisher (1995). After Schiebout and Ting (2001).
mal faunas of the DISC site have been correlated with the Cold Spring Local Fauna of east
Texas (Figure 2), younger than the
stratigraphically lower Burkeville Local Fauna
of Wilson (1956) in Schiebout et al. (1996),
Schiebout (1997a, 1997b); Schiebout et al. (1998;
Schiebout and Ting (1998); Schiebout and Ting
(2001); and Schiebout et al., (2002). The upper
Castor Creek Member was deposited during a
period of falling sea levels. TVOR SE (Figure 3,
4,5) is one of the stratigraphically lowest sites,
and remains the only site with an appreciable
marine component and an appreciable pre-Miocene reworked component. It contains a mixture of terrestrial and marine forms and was
probably deposited in a shallow marine environment.

II. METHODS
Field and laboratory methods of fossil recovery are given in detail in Schiebout (1997b),
Schiebout et al. (1998), Schiebout and Ting
(2001), and Schiebout et al. (2002). Most of the
screening for fossils from TVOR SE has been of
mudstone. Mudstone is soaked in water in plastic boxes and screened without chemical treatment. Sandstone from TVOR SE that is strongly
cemented with calcite is treated as the nodulerich Fort Polk fossiliferous conglomerates from
younger sites are. Treatment of the conglomerates involves soaking chunks in approximately
10% acetic acid to partially dissolve and break
up the rock, which releases the fossils and nodules as a residue, which is then sorted under
the microscope to pick out small fossils, mainly
2

=;=;'.. =.. ~==, Unimproved road
l~'

•

Stataroute

...~-~--~.:-~---. Intermittent stream
11 187

Bench maTte
Building

Figure 3. Main Miocene vertebrate sites within Fort Polk superimposed on a geologic
map, after Schiebout and Ting (2001). Modified from Hinds (1999). A DISC Site
cluster; B. TVOR Site and sites N of it; C. TVOR S; D. TVOR SE; E. Shamrock.

3

bone scrap and teeth. Material washed from
TVOR SE in the period of this report currently
totals 1532 pounds and is expected to reach
2000 pounds by the end of August.
TVOR SE and Shamrock are the only sites
where quarrying was a major collecting method
and TVOR SE is the only current active quarrying site, although surface finds continue at
DISC Site. The other quarry site, Shamrock
Site, has yielded parts of an individual rhinoceros.
Removal of calcium carbonate nodular
material, other mineral coatings, and clay from
large vertebrate specimens is accomplished mechanically, either with an engraving tool or with
mounted needles and dental tools.

gully striking E- W. Natural exposure is mainly
yellow and gray clay. The patchy, complex
masses of hard sandstone which contain both
oysters and bones of large marine fish and terrestrial and marine mammals have been quarried and dissolved for screening to recover fossils.

IV. SYSTEMATIC
PALEONTOLOGY
Descriptions of taxa which have already
been described in Schiebout (1997B), Schiebout
and Ting (2001), and Schiebout e/ af. (2002) are
abbreviated.

PALEOBOTANY
Clays at TVOR SE are rich in pieces of
charcoal. Wood is not identifiable. No additional
palynological work has been done in the period
of this report.

III. SITE DESCRIPTIONS
More detailed descriptions of sites worked
prior to 2002 are given in the three previous
reports on Fort Polk research. Locations are
given in Figure 3. Relative heights and stratigraphic relationships are given in Figure 19.
TVOR sites are named after the terminal
very-high frequency omni range radar tower,
off of Exchange Road. TVOR SE is an erosional

INVERTEBRATE ANIMALS
Foraminifera

No foraminifera other than the specimens
of Globorotalia meJlardii and? Wheelerella reported in Schiebout et af (2002) have been recovered.

Figure 4. James Grafton examines surface at north wall of TVOR SE Site,
April 18, 2003. View to the west.
4

\'

Figure 5. Rob~rt'Hays holds h~g whIle Michael Williams (in cap): and James
, Grafton shovel in clay for screening. Dr.Ting to left. Baggingis at TVOR SE
north side of gully, with the south side of the TVOR SEguliy in background,
July 29, 2003 .

. -",'

VERTEBRATES

Mollusca

. The ojiiinal patch of sandstone rich in
Systematic paleontology' below lists those
oysters and Em~il steinkerns at TVOR SE has
taxa for which there ~re new materials in the
been collected and processed and most material . period of this report orpew results of study and
currently being processed from TVOR SE is
does not cover every taxon re<::ognized from the
mudstori:e. It is locally rich in remains of partly
Fort 'Polk Mi6~Eme. ,Wheie'"riew material has
dissolved 'bivalves which weather to' a friable
been found,but it doe,S not change previous taxowhite ~Pdwder. '
nomic descriptions, numbers of additional speciNci 'additional identifiable mollusk taxa
mens are listed b~ site.
havebeerrfecoVered. Slabbing of hard sandstone
Class CHONDRICHTHYES
from TvOR' S; which at least superfici~lly resembles'the oyster-rich,mammal-beating roc~
,()rder BATOIDEA
from TVOR SE, 'did notr~veal oysters, but they'
MYLIOBATIS sp.
may have been dissolved more thoroughly than
the molluscan remains at TVOR SE. The wellTwo pavement teeth have been recovered
lithified rock at TVOR S may still be the source
from TVOR SE.
of some of the fossils recovered loose in the
Class OSTEICHTHYES
TVOR S ravine, and some of that rock is undergoing acid treatment now. It may represent an
Order LEPISOSTEIFORMES
ancient environment similar to the productive
LEPISOSTEUS sp.
layers at TVOR SE.

5

Gar scales continue to be found at every

Order SILURIFORMES

among the more common teeth found in the Fort
Polk Miocene and are recovered from TVOR SE.
A partial vertebral centrum (LSUMG
12342) from TVOR SE, 50-60 feet SE of the main
locality, was initially reported as possible whale
material (Schiebout et al. (2002) before cleaning revealed that it is probably a large crocodilIan.

cf. ICTALURUS PUNCTATUS

Order CHELONIA

Catfish spines continue to be common finds
in screening.

Suborder CRYPTODIRA

site.
Order AMIIFORMES

?AMIAsp.
One additional vertebra, LSUMG 12775,
has been recovered from TVOR SE.

Superfamily TESTUDINOIDEA

Order PERCIFORMES

Family TESTUDINIDAE

LARGE PERCIFORM FISH

HESPEROTESTUDO sp.

Referred specimens LSUMG 10895, 36 large
fish spines from TVOR SE. Three new spines
have been found, but no other material which
can be assigned to the big fish.

Figure 7 A, B
Referred specimens LSUMG 12224, male
tortoise carapace and plastron;
LSUMG 12223, female tortoise carapace and
plastron.
Locality Discovery
Description Two remarkably preserved tortoise shells both with an almost complete carapace and plastron. The 2 nd and 4th neural bones
of the carapace are octagonal-shaped.
Discussion According to Hay (1908),
Geochelone is distinguished from other tortoise
species, such as Stylemys and Hadl'ianus, by
having octagonal shaped 2 nd and 4th neural bones
of the carapace. Geochelonein North America is
called Hesperotestudo (Robert McCord, pel'S
comm., 2003).
Even though X-ray study has not revealed
any additional bones inside the shells, these
specimens remain the most complete individual
animals from the Fort Polk Miocene. It is hoped
that comparison of these animals with specimens from the Miocene of Florida and/or the
High Plains will allow for identification down
to species level.

Locality TVOR SE
Discussion All of the large fish spines from
TVOR SE are being catalogued with a single
number. The number of spines has passed the
number that a single individual would be expected to yield, but which spines belong together
and the total number of individuals cannot be
determined. These spines appear to be from a
fish as large or larger than modern giant sea
bass which are over 100 years old and 500
pounds in weight. Such a fish would have
heavily ossified elements other than the dorsal
spines, but nothing else referable has been recovered so far.
Family SCIAENIDEA

APLODINOTUS sp.
Over 350 drum teeth, described In
Schiebout and Ting (2001), have been recovered
from TVOR SE.
Class REPTILIA
Order CROCODYLIA
Genus ALLIGATOR

ORDER SQUAMATA

ALLIGATOR sp.

Suborder SERPENTES

Figure 6A, B

Family NATRICIDAE

Alligator teeth continue to be found both
in screening and surface search. They remain

Figure 8
Referred specimens LSUMG 12740

6

Figure 6. Vertebral ceIitrum fragment (LSUMG 12342), possibly from a
large alligator. A. Anterior; B. Lateral.

7

Figure 7. A. Dorsal view of entire carapace of female tortoise from Discovery
Site (LSUMG 12223). Arrows point to octagonal-shaped neurals; B. Close up
of neural numbers 2 and 4.

8

. :~
/'

. Figure 8.Sc~)1nirigelectron'micrograph of 'natridne snake v~rtebra
(LSID.IG 12740) i~ lateral View. The' ario~ points to the b~oken .
hypapophysis.

. R~ferred specimen LSUMG 4478
Locality Stonehenge
Locality Stonehenge
Description LSUMG 12740 is a small verteDescription LSUMG 4478 is a small snake
bra with a fractured hypapophysis that is short,
vertebra
withno hypapophysis present, but the
thin, and less thim 1/3 as wide as the condyle
hemal keel is thin and distinct and is more than
(Figure 8). The neural spine is present, but bro1/2 as wide as the cotyle. The broken neural
ken. The length ofthe centrum is 2.0 mril, and.
spine is thin and long (Figure 9). The centrum
the width is 1.4 mm.
length is 2.7mm and the width is 2.0mm.
Discussion Although this vertebra is probably
Discussion The vertebral characters of
assignable to the genus Nerodia because the
LSUMG 4478 are the same as those found on
centrum length is only slightly longer than the
the
Miocene genus Texasophis (Holman, 1979),
width (Holman, 1979), comparison of this verbut future comparison with Texasophis vertetebra to the vertebrae of several species of modbrae will determine the genus with more confiern Nerodia needs to be conducted before it can
dence.
confidently be identified to the generic level.
Modern natricine snakes include water and garFamily VIPERIDAE
ter snakes, both of which 'require nearby perFigure 10
manent water sources to seekout aquatic prey.
Referred specimens LSUMG 9643
Locality TVOR
Description LSUMG 9643 is a robust verte-

Family COLUBRIDAE
Figure 9

9

Figure 9. Scanning electron micrograph of a colubrid snake vertebra
(LSUMG 4478) in anterior view.

bra with a broken hypapophysis. The width of
the hypapophysis is over 113 the width of the
condyle (Figure 10). The length of the centrum
is 6.7 mm and the width is 5.8 mm.
Discussion This vertebra compares favorably
with the vertebrae of modern Agkistrodon,
which includes both cottonmouths and copperheads. Both species of Agkl:~trodon are common
throughout Louisiana today. Cottonmouths favor aquatic habitats like streams, bayous, and
lakes; whereas, copperheads are more common
in drier, upland forest habitats. LSUMG 9643
is the first venomous snake recovered from the
Fort Polk Miocene.

Locality Stonehenge
Description LSUMG 12774 is a small, toothy
fragment of a right dentary, with teeth that are
peg-like, terminating with a small bulbous
crown (Figure 11 B). The labial surface contains
many small foramina.
Discussion LSUMG 12774 is cUlTently under
study and must be compared with several species of frog, salamander, and lizard before its
taxonomic status can be determined.

Indeterminant squamate

LIMNOECUS NIOBRARENSIS

Figure 11 A, B

Eight teeth have been recovered from
Stonehenge.

Class MAMMALIA
Order INSECTIVORA

Referred specimen LSUMG 12774
10

Figure 10 Viper vertebra (LSUMG 9643), showing the condyle (rounded
portion) and the broken hypapophysis, indicated with an arrow.
Locality TVOR SE
Description m2 crown enamel cap, probably
from a deciduous tooth.
DiscussionAbundant, rounded, closely packed
cusps are consistent with referral to a peccary,
and the size is reasonable for a very small form
such as Cynorca or .Dyseohyus, both of which
have been reported from the Barstovian of east
Texas. (Woodburne, 1969). The specimen has
only the enamel cap indicating that it was a shed
tooth or was partly dissolved in the gut of an
alligator.

Order CETE
Parvorder MYSTICETI
Figure 12
LSUMG 11876, a petrosal from a small
baleen whale from TVOR SE (Schiebout et al,
2002), was compared to the petrosal of the
Eocene whale Basilosaurus from central Louisiana for a rough estimate of how "small" a small
baleen whale this was. Figure 12 is the result
of this estimate, which is definitely a rough estimate given the taxonomic and time difference
between the two whales.

Order PERISSODACTYLA

Order ARTIODACTYLA

Family RHINOCEROTIDAE
?APHELOPS sp .
Figure 14 A, B; 15 A, B

. Family TAYASSUIDAE

CYNORCAorDYSEOHYUS
. ,

Figure 13 A, B, C

Referred specimen LSUMG 12681, fragment
of a rhino tooth crown; LSUMG 12681, scaphoid
of a large rhino.

Referred specimen LSUMG 12741

11

Figure 11. Scanning electron micrographs of a small, possibly lizard, right
dentary fragment (LSUMG 12774). A. Lingual view of entire fragment. B.
Close-up of the labial view, showing dentition and foramina.

12

\:

d
I
I,.

"

J

il

Figure 12. Sketch of a small baleen whale approximately the size of the
one represented fro!ll Fort Polk by petrosals, compared to the larger
Eocene Basilosaurus from Montgomery Landing, Louisiana.

13

Figure 13. Peccary m2 (LSUMG 12741) from TVOR SE, A. Crown; B.
Lateral oblique; C. Basal view.

Locality TVOR SE
Description The bone is from a large perissodactyl and the only reasonable Fort Polk Miocene candidate so far is a large rhino. Horses
are too small and we do not have unequivocal
chalicothere material. The enamel chewing surface on LSUMG 12681 shows banding characteristic of rhinoceros teeth and has to have come
from a big tooth.
Discussion Aphelops sp. has been recognized

from DISC and TVOR SE, but Prothero and
Serreno (1980) have described four rhinos for
the Miocene Gulf Coast, two dwarf and two large
forms. There have been no Fort Polk Miocene
specimens clearly referable to Teleoceras, the
other big rhino, but it could well be present and
could have yielded large undiagnostic rhino
material. Until there is definitive evidence of
its presence, large rhino material will be referred to Aphelops.

14

probably a browser.

In Florida, the two big rhinos occur in the

Order PROBOSCIDEA

same deposits. MacFadden (1998) ~onsiders
Family GOMP!lOTHERIIDAE
Aphelops to be sim,ilar in life ~tyle to the mod-,
Figure 16 A, B, C
ern African black, rhino,~' browser, 'and
Jeteoceras to be similar
the Afri~an white , " R~ferred specimens LSUMG 12343, a piece
rhino, a Wazer. The white rhino is not white,
oflarge worn tooth.
but has a broader snout than the black one, and
Locality TVOR SE.
the Dutch/German word for "wide" sounds a , Description A well worn tooth fragment with
little like "white". Both grazing and browsing
root from the anterior of the tooth of a large
animais are present among the Fort Polk MigOri1phothere.
ocene herbivores, for example, our merychippine
Discussion This specim'en is the most complete
horses were grazers and Prosynthetoceras was
gomphothere material from the current Fort

to

Figure 14. Fragment of a tooth of a large rhino (LSUMG 11775), possibly
Aphelops, showing banding in ~mamel which is characteristic of rhinoceri.

Figure 15. Scaphoid of a large rhinoceros, possibly Aphelops. A. Proximal
view. B. Distal view.

15

Polk Miocene study. It appears to have been a
larger animal than TMM 40775-1,
Gomphotherium cimmaronis from Noble Farm
site in Grimes County, east Texas.
Order RODENTIA
The most common rodents are geomyoids,
heteromyids, and cricetids. New material has
not affected their identification. All three have
been recovered from TVOR SE. Figure 17 A
shows the distribution of numbers of these three
rodents from all sites from the start of the Fort
Polk Miocene project through December 2001
and Figure 17 B during 2002 and 2003 up to
July 31, 2003.
Family CASTORIDAE
Three taxa of castorids (beavers) are
present in the Fort Polk Miocene (Schiebout and
Ting, 2001). A relatively large form is represented, so far, only by a fragment of upper incisor enamel, probably from an animal more than
twice as large as the other two taxa. Two new
beaver teeth are from Stonehenge and do not
add any characters to previous descriptions of

beavers in Schiebout and Ting (2001). LSUMG
12345 is referred to Eucastor cf. E. panSlts,
which has been recovered from Stonehenge Site
before. LSUMG 12389 is referred to Eucastor
n. sp., a species which was not previously known
from Stonehenge.
FamilyGEOMYIDAE

TEXOMYS RICHEI
Figure 18
Characteristics of p4 are major determinants for recognizing the genus Texomys
(Slaughter, 1981) As material from Fort Polk
increases, more p4's, in differing wear stages,
have become available. The range of variation
in cusp arrangement in the trigonid of the teeth
and the differences seen in different wear stages,
are beginning to suggest synonymizing 'Texomys
out of existence as a genus.
Family CRICETIDAE

COPEMYS

Figure 16. Fragment of a gomphothere tooth. A. Crown view, B. Lateral view,
C. Posterior view.
16

A

DISC (52)

B

TVOR(1617)

. TVOR(I02)

Stonehenge (1072)

TVOR SE (Ill)

Stonehenge (197)

TVOR SE (134)

Figure 17~ A. Distribution of cricetid (C), heteromyid (H) and geomyoid (G)
rodents at four Fort Polk sites as of December 2001. B. Distribution of
cricetid (C), heteromyid (H) and geomyoid (G) rodents at three Fort Polk sites
added as of July 31,2003. Number after site name is total specimens.

Copemys is an example of a taxon in which a
relatively large number of speceimens are now
available, making possible a study of variability in size and morphology at a single site (p.
20 ).

V. REVISED
PALEOMAGNETIC
CORRELATION AND
DISCUSSION OF SITE AGES

Family SCIURIDA
Squirrel specimens are all from
Stonehenge and do not add any characters to
previous descriptions of squirrels ,in Schiebout
and Ting (2001).

Additional samples have been processed
at the laboratory of Dr. Wulf Gose at the University of Texas at Austin (Figure 19; Appendix
C). The main difference from previously presented versions is that the TVOR core correlation shows TVOR conglomerate (X) as in 5ABn
instead of 5AAn. The paleomagnetic data would
also fit if TVOR core was raised by one normal
zone, so the decision has been made on the ba. sis of vertebrate paleontology to place the DISC
main conglomerate and TVOR conglomerate in
the same zone andTVOR Sand TVOR SE in
the same zone as Stonehenge, the most marineinfluenced of the DISC sites. TVOR sites lie
up dip from the DISC cluster, which also makes
the higher correlation for TVOR core less appropriate.

Subfamily SCIURINAE
Genus NOTOTAMIAS

NOTOTAMIAS

sp ..

Referred specimens LSUMG 12604, Right
upper Ml or 2
Genus ?AMMOSPERMOPHILUS
Referred specimens LSUMG 12570, Right
upper Mi or 2, LSUMG i2646, Left lower ml
or 2.

17

Figure 18. Scanning electron micrograph of crown of Texomys p 4. Arrow
indicates posterior of tooth.
TVOR SE is older than 13.6 Ma if the correlation above is correct, and older than 13.2 if
TVOR core is to be moved up a zone. Palynological research (John Wrenn, pers. comm.) suggests an age for TVOR SE no older than 11 and
the foraminifera-based estimate is no older than
12 Ma (Peter McLaughlin, pers. comm.). At
present, placing the Fort Polk Miocene sites in
the late Late Barstovian or Clarendonian, when
no vertebrates characteristic of these levels in
east Texas have been recovered, seems contraindicated, leaving a contradiction which may be
resolved with further work.
Ahalf century ago, Dr. John A. Wilson and
others from the University of Texas at Austin
investigated east Texas Miocene terrestrial fossil sites and stratigraphy, and developed a system of successive vertebrate local faunas (Wilson, 1956). Newly recovered mammals from
TVOR SE do not contradict its association with
the Cold Spring Local Fauna of east Texas as
discussed in Schiebout and Ting (2001) and

Schiebout et al (2002)(Figure 2). Tvor SE is a
marine site, and the older and stratigraphically
lower Burkeville Local Fauna is from marine
sites and has been collected nearby in east
Texas, so efforts are underway to relocate these
sites. Small vertebrates are not available in the
Texas Memorial Museum collections from the
Burkeville vicinity, so relocation and screening
would make comparison of the Fort Polk sites
and the older east Texas ones much more precise. During the winter of 2002-2003, an attempt
was made by Michael Williams to relocate classic Burkeville sites in east Texas, but unfortunately to no avail. In the almost 50 years since
the area was last examined, large trees and extensive undergrowth could have grown in the
previously open location of the site and the water level of the creek in mid winter could have
been over the site. The space shuttle debris recovery efforts prevented spring 2003 field work
in the east Texas Burkeville area, but this effort is planned to resume in December 2003.

18

The Stonehenge Site rodent sample is comprised solely of isolated teeth so that data on
relative proportions and variation in size are
essential for identification of species. No associated dentitions of Copemys are known from
the Fort Polk area. The size of teeth (the upper
first molar, MI) is relatively stable and suitable
for evaluation, but this alone will not separate
species. When considered along with other morphologic characters for MIs, insight into whether
there is more than one species present in the
bulk sample should be possible.
Lindsay's (1972, p. 75) cusp terminology
for Copemys MIs is used (Figure 20) in the following discussion. Mter evaluation of molar
variation, MIs were chosen for additional study.
Data were collected from 103 Copemys MIs from
the Stonehenge Site. Broken, excessively worn,
or any speCimens on which identification to
Copemys was equivocal, were excluded.
Length to width ratios of MIs appear to
hold promise for identification of Copemys species. Clear ratio ranges in Stonehenge specimens

,VI. PALEOBIOLOGY
.AND PALEOECOLOGY
Screening has produced numbers of speci-.
~en's of sm~ll rodents high in comparison to
those from many 'Miocene vertebrate sites.
These samples offer an opportunity for study of
morphological and size variatiQrl. The rodent
Copemys, a relative the cotton mouse, is an
important animal in dating Miocene sites. Lindsay (1972) defines the H'emingfordian/
Bar~t~vian boundary. as solely determined by
the first appearance of Copemys (approximately
16 Ma). Ag~ of the Fort Polk sites is limited to
. after the i:mmigration of these creatures from
Eurasia. The following disc~ssion of Copemys
is drawn from a study by Grant Boardman.

of

How many species of the small
rodent Copemys occur at a single
prolific screening site,
Stonehenge?

Feet
A

260
250
240
230
220

.TVOR Cluster Sites

X TVOR conglomerate
y TVOR S conglomerate
ZTVORSE
.

DISC Cluster Sites

-60 -30 0

30 60 90
Inclination

.

A Persimmon Barrow horse
B DISC Proboscidean
I C DISC Prosynthetoceras
D DISC conglomerate
E Stonehenge

Figure 19. Corr~la'tion ~f polarity intervals between four cores at Fort P~l~,
Louisiana. Modified from Figure 33 of Schiebout et a1. (2002) by the addItion
of new samples processed by Dr. Wulf Gose.
19

include 2:1,3:2, and 4:3. The outline of the tooth
is perhaps most affected by this ratio. Buccal
and lingual cusps remain relatively the same
in morphology throughout the span of ratios; it
is, in fact, the area of the anterocone of the Ml ,
whose shape is almost defined by these ratios
(Figure 21). For teeth that are 2:1, the area of
the anterocone is more narrow and pointed. For
the other ratios, the anterocone shape is blunted,

with width being very often equal to or greater
than length (Figure 24). Among teeth of ratios
3:2 and 4:3 the area of the metacone of the Ml is
often pronounced, though it does not appear diagnostic for Copemys and may simply suggest
its early development in relation to the other
cones. The connection between general area of
the anterocone shape and other morphological
characters is not yet clear.

buccal

--+---------antenor
lingual

Figure 20A. Copemys M1 dental terminology: An.Cng. =Anterior Cingulum, Prt. =Protocone, Hyp. =Hypocone, Pst.Cng. =Posterior Cingulum, Met. =Metacone, Mes. =
Mesostyle, Mel. =Mesoloph, Pare. =Paracone, Prt.l. =Protolophule I, Par. =Paralophule,
Ant. =Anterocone. Sketch is of M1 of LSUMG 9207.

Figure 20B. Sketch ofM1 LSUMG 9207.

20

,·firstobservation to share a number of diagnostic features (Figure 23), the presence of all five
cones described by Lindsay (1972), a characteristically large anterocone; a furrow between the
anterocone arid the protocone, and between the
anterocone and the paracone, a medially narrowing posterior cingulum, and the seemingly
complete absence of the mesostyle and
mesoloph. The shape of the anterocone and its
orientation is highly variable, from medially
sym~etric to asyomietrical'with buccal orientation (anterior to the paracone). The high rate
of variability' makes this feature of Copemys a
bad choice for recognizing species. Instead there
are two variable features that seemed a better

As is noted from the plot oflength to width
in millimeters, there is only one cluster of points
(Figure 22). This suggests that ratio of length
to width of 1f1s cannot be used to distinguish
species in this case. Had the measurements plotted up showing more than one distinguishable
cluster, perhaps size could be used to separate
and identify more than a single species at the
site. The plot is similar to those observed by
Mein (1971) for similar Eurasian cricetids of
Hemingfordian age. Other morphological characters would have to be used to help determine
if there is more than one species of Copemys at'
Stonehenge.
The MIs from Stonehenge seemed upon

ODD
Figure 21. Comparison of the area of the anterocone shape
size ratios 3:2, 2:1, and 4:3 respec~ively.

a~ong

1.

• •

1.4
1.2

E'1.0
E

;S0.8
:2

$: 0.6

Length (mm)

Figure 22. Distribution of Upper M1 samples for the Stonehenge site
using width versus length.

21

tion between the hypocone and the paracone.
When cones are worn down evenly to the
baseline of the tooth, features, such as cones,
connules, and the connections between them are
destroyed. Particular wear patterns have been
made by this process but have yet to be well
documented.
Deciduous teeth appear to not be recognizable by any particular morphology, size ratio,
or amount and style of preservation. Splayed
roots and or the absence thereof alert us to the
deciduous nature of these teeth. In the measured
sample, a sizeable number of teeth (approximately 20) exhibit fused roots, generally the two
buccal or the two lingual roots appear as one
large root, or as two separate roots connected
strongly (Figure 25). The cause of this feature
is unknown, though similar fusing is exhibited
in other mammalian teeth when material from
an unformed tooth is incorporated into the roots
of neighboring teeth. which more often than not
causes fusing (Butler, 1978).
The average length and width of
Stonehenge Copemys MIs are 1.55 and 0.99 millimeters respectively. These numbers are comparatively smaller than those for C. page; and
C. tentlls, the two smallest Copemys species
measured and reported by Lindsay (1972) being 1.55 and 1.05 and 1.90 and 1.30 respectively.

choice. 1) In unworn specimens, the connection
between the hypocone and paracone was
discernable at least weakly in all specimens, 2)
The presence or absence of a fused protolophule
II paralophule (connule). The presence and absence of aforementioned features were noted for
all measured specimens. When these features
are taken into consideration with length and
width data, no size correlation to the features
was noted (Figure 24).
The likelihood of a feature being absent
seems equally as likely to be caused by wear as
it to be caused by genetics. For example, sample
LSUMG 11361, is well worn and smoothly
weathered. Upon further examination, the determination of the absence of the notable features is problematical at best, as the connule
could have been worn down and weathered or
simply not present at all. It should be noted,
however. that MIs with a deep continuous furrow (from the anterior cingulum) between the
anterocone and the other anterior cones, always
lack the fused connule. T~is being so, the determination of the presence or absence of the fused
connule is made clearer when looking at worn
teeth, being that all that must be taken into
account is whether or not the furrow is continuous and relatively deep. A small amount of wear
is all that is needed to wear away the connec-

Figure 23. Stonehenge site. Copemys MI Morphologic variation
Character combinations

Number of specimens with character
combinations.

1,3

4

1,4

5

2.3

26

2,4

41

5

27

Characters:
1 fused protolophule I/paralophule (connule)
2 connule absent
3 strong connection between paracone and hypocone
4 weak or no connection between paracone and hypocone
5 neither feature present or hard to distinguish (due to wear and or preservation)
22

The relatively small size of Stonehenge's . has been observed for the Fort Polk Copem),s.
Copemys may be accounted for by the difference
(Schiebout at al, 2002).
of the environment in whi~h this population
Based on size alone there is no way to
lived. According to Lindsay (1972) the Barstow. distinguish more than one species of Copem)'s
, Copemys lived in arid localities, mtich as this, from MIs at Stonehenge. The small sample
from TVOR SE falls within the range of the
region of California is today, with little to no
permanent bodies of water and sparse vegetaStonehenge population and does not show
any morphology distinctive from it (Figure
tion. The Stonehenge site was wet and forested.
26).
This difference in environment is perhaps not
in and of itself enough to account for the small
Rodent distributions.
size of Stonehenge's Copemjs, but it does begin
In Schiebout (1997a, b), Schiebout and
to point towards an environmental causation.
Ting
(2001),
and Schiebout et at. (2002), percentThe possibility of Copem)'s living in a microenages of the three' most abundant rodent types
vironmentat Stonehenge could lead to their diwere used for estimation of relative amounts of
minutive size, as there would likely be a denser
population competing for less living space. This '. forest and open areas at Fort Polk sites. Modern heteromyid rodents prefer open areas, and
reduction in size when living in a micro environ ment is well documented in other mammals and . cricetid rodents prefer wooded areas (Dorse)~
1977). Palynological work by John Wrenn, reshould be a rational line of thought for Copemys
ported in Schiebout and Ting (2001), indicated
as well.
that the TVOR SE region included a mixed hardThere is a general trend of reduction in
wood forest with pines. Phytoliths indicate a
size of cricetid rodents from the Barstovian to
grassy savanna habitat associated with all sites
the Hemphillian Age: from the relatively
(Schiebout and Ting, 2001, p. 28), but it must
large Copemys to its smaller descendant
be kept in mind that 40% of them were unidenPeromysclts (Lindsay, 1972). Neither trend
tifiable and that the phyt?liths were affected by

1.6.---..,..--..-----.....-----.------..------.
1.41------------,--:---'~-----,.,-.--~--I

o

,1.2t------------.,-~:___:_tT=lIolY_---__I

E1.0t-------·~------:l

g

.5 O . 8 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - ' - -.....~-=.-ii'--------f
"C

~ O.6t----------------~------__I
O.41--------------~----'-'------__I
O.2t----.,---:---------'--'---'---'--~-~---I

°O!-----::OI.:::.5----:1:'-::.O:-----:1:-L::.5~---:2::1.:.0:----~2.5 '

Length (mm)

Figure 24. Distribution of morphological features of Upper M1 samples for the Stonehenge
site'using width versus length. Squares = fused protolophule I/paralophule (connule) and
weak or no connection between paracone and hypocone, Open circles = connule absent and
strong conn~ction between paracone and hypocone, Triangles' =connule absent and weak or
no connection 'between paracone and hypocone, Inverted triangles connule present and
strong connection between paracone and hypocone, Solid circles = neither feature present or
hard to distinguish (due to wear and or preservation).

=

23

Figure 25. Example of fused/connected roots; in this case the
lingual roots are strongly connected in sample number 10639.
DISC (Schiebout and Ting, 2001) The TVOR SE
pattern does not seem to be an artifact of low
screening results for TVOR SE, as it is remaining steady with increased work (Figure 17).

diagenesis. Figure 17 contrasts the 2002 results
with the distributions of specimens collected
within the span of this report. TVOR SE rodents
have doubled in number, but the pattern of
geomyoids being strongly most common with
heteromyids least, remains.
DISC and TVOR SE have similar percentages of geomyoids and remain the sites with the
highest percentage of geomyoids. TVOR SE has
approximately twice as many cricetids as
heteromyids. Results prior to work at TVOR SE
had the site with the highest percentage of
geomyoids also the lowest in cricetids. High percentages of geomyoids and low percentages of
cricetids had been interpreted to indicate a relatively more open and possibly drier situation at

VII. TAPHONOMY OF
TVORSE
In Schiebout et af. (2002), it was postulated that the shallow marine TVOR SE Site
incorporated mammals from a mix of terrestrial
environments, perhaps with a river in flood adding material eroded from both recent soils and
older terraces. A mix of deep water and shallow
water marine dwellers also occurred, perhaps
as a storm brought deep water marine animals

1.2

•
--• •
_A

1.0

0.8

E
E
;S 0.6

~

0.4

0.2

.

0.5

1.0

1.5

Length (mm)

Figure 26. COPEMYS Upper M1 Length versus Width for TVOR SE.

24

2.0

into the nearshore. The continuing· finds at
TVOR SE oflarge mammal bones and fragments
such as the rhino scaphoid (Figure 15), and
gomphothere molar piece (Figure 16), suggest
components from the bedload of a through going river.
The presence of Cretaceous fossils at TVOR
SE and their absence so far from other heavily
screened Fort Polk Miocene sites, may be evidence that a river with a relatively large watershed contributed material to TVOR SE. Reworking of soils to concentrate nodules and animal
remains at sites such as DISC involved streams
with more local drainage. Specimens from large
mammals such as rhino and gomphothere at
TVOR SE may have undergone considerable
transport.
Sites like DISC yield small vertebrate reo.
mains to screening of soil nodule concentrates
and some bones which have not been trimsported far, if at all, from the site of the animal's
death, such as the Prosynthetoc.eras francisi
mandible from DISC, which is one of the fossils
key to assigning it to the Cold Spring Local
Fauna, and the tibia, astragalu~, and calcaneum
collectedori 7/29/03 at DISC: These bones are
from a medium to large ~rtiodactyl, and may be
from the same individual. They were not articu:
lated, but were associated.
Reworked Fossils
The presence of reworked Cretaceous fossils is also indicative of the contributionto TVOR'
. .SE of a through going river. A formaniferan,
? Wheefereffa was reported from TVOR SE in
Schiebout et al(2002). Barun Sen Gupta (pers.
comm.) considered it to be probably from the
Cretaceous, and perhaps originally from as far
away as the Appalachians. The only shark reported from Fort Polk is LSUMG 11841 a single
tooth lacking its base from Stonehenge
(Schiebout and Ting,2001). According to Robert Purdy (USNM, pers. com.), it could have
come from an animal similar to the sand tiger
shark and could be Miocene. Schiebout and Ting
(2001) considered the possibility that it is re. worked, possibly from Eocene rocks exposed further north. Eocene marine specimens are mixed
. with the older (Miocene, Arikarean) Toledo Bend

25

mammalian fauna of east Texas (Albright, 1992;
Manning 1990). When originally considered, it
was the only possibly reworked fossil in the Fort
Polk Mi~cene. Stonehenge is considered roughly
stratig1;'aphically si~ilar to TVOR SE (Figure
19), ·so the pre~ence of reworked material at
. TVOR SE strengthens the possibility that the
shark is reworked.
Louisiana's first dinosaur fossil
Class REPTILIA
Order Saurischia
dromaeosaur (a small theropod)
Figure 27, 28
Referred specimen LSUMG 12229
Locality TVOR SE
Description A small, sharp theropod tooth
Discussion The oval cross section and chiselshaped denticles on the posterior carina are consistentwith its having come from a small
dromaeosaur (Currieetal, 1990; Baszio, 1997;
Brinkman, 2002). Figure 29 shows a Late Cretaceous shoreline for North America, and Figure 30 shows three versions of Late Cretaceous
coa'stlines derived fro~ the same data, indicating c~nsiderable variation in interpretations,
but all showing land masses north of the area
which was to become Louisiana. The small dinosaur was not a: marine animal, so it lived and
died on a Cretaceous lind mass, most likely to
the north. The animal or the tooth alone could
have been carried by a river and initially deposited, t6 be later reworked, perhaps more than
once, before becoming bed load in a Miocene
river in what Was to become Louisiana.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS
Animals numbers in some groups from the
Fort Polk Miocene are now large enough to allow detailed size and morphology studies such
as one on Copemys, which indicates that the
'Copemys from Stonehenge are best considered
to be one species, 'possibly one new to science,
and that the small sample ofCopemys from
TVOR SE falls within its ranges. Work to follow can include a look at how such animals are
changing though time in response to environ-

mental differences.
Questions remain that have not been clarified by continuing work, most notably the disparity of ages produced by vertebrate paleontology and magnetostratigraphy on one hand
(older) and paleopalynology and study of foraminifera (younger) on the other. Processing of
additional paleomagnetic samples has not resolved the difference.
TVOR SE, the first Fort Polk Miocene site
to yield an in-place marine fauna, continues to
yield surprises. The reworked Cretaceous foraminiferan has been joined by Louisiana's first
dinosaur fossil, a reworked small theropod tooth,
probably also Cretaceous. The site has continued to yield Miocene mammals. Older sites also
remain productive. DISC has yielded remains
such as those of rhinoceri. New fossils from
TVOR SE do not give evidence of an age earlier
than the Cold Spring Local Fauna of Texas.
Recovery of gomphothere and large rhino

fragmentary fossils from TVOR SE strengthens
the idea that a large river capable of moving
large mammal bones and fragments as bed load
was nearby. TVOR SE yields a fauna less localized in age and environment than other Fort
Polk Miocene sites because of reworking both
in the local Miocene deposits and from a range
of rocks contributing to the river's bedload, including Cretaceous rocks to the north.

IX. RECOMMENDATIONS
Sites
Work at all currently known productive
sites should continue. This report represents an
intermediate stage in ongoing work which is
continuing to yield results for publication in the
scientific literature.
As noted in Schiebout and Ting (2001) and
Schiebout et at. 2002 , the possibility of new sites

Figure 27. Photomicrographs of LSUMG 12229, small dromaeosaurid dinosaur tooth,
A. Lateral, B. Anterior, C. Basal. Scanning electron micrographs, D. Lateral, E. Lateral
close-up.

26

Figure 28. Drawing of a sma}l Late Cretaceous dromaeosaurid dinosaur probably similar to the animal that yielded LSUMG 12229. Modified by Mary Lee
Eggart from a sketch by Brandon Kilbourne.
effort. We want to' keep increasing animals avail·
is good wherever the top 20 m of the Castor
able for study, both in numbers per taxa and
Creek Member is exposed, either by erosion or
taxa, but focus has shifted to some of the diffihuman activities. The nodule-bearing layers
cult to identify, like the lower vertebrates and
that have been productive at sites such as DISC,
to analyzing populations rather than simply reStonehenge, and TVORshould be investigated
wherever found, but the amount andtaxhnomic . . cording occurrence of a taxon.
range of specimens from TVOR BE from "mud·
TVORSE
stone, indicates that locally productive SPDts can
be found where no soil nodule concentrates are
Both surface search, quarrying, and
present.
.screening should continue. The clay which overAdditional comparison of Fort Polk Mi· .. lies arid smothered the original oyster bed, ofocene fossils with specimens at other museums
fers an~nviroment of much less sporadic
such as the Florida State Museum in Gainesville
depositon than the younger sites where most
and the Nebraska State Museum in Lincoln
specimens are recovered by screening of concenshould take place. Research on vertebrates
trates produced from erosion of soils. More comwhich are less thoroughly reported in the Miplete bones and more complete animals are a
ocene literature, like the lower vertebrates such
possibility. As TVOR SE information develops,
as frogs and. lizards, is now becoming a focus of
it can be contrasted with the very different suite

27

,

Figure 29. Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian, 70 million years ago)
paleocoastline modified from (Smith et aI., 1994).

28

"..

,".)

I , ..
I \:

.: .......' ,

:

.....~
:. \

•

~"

,,

\

....

,

_"" I

Figure 30. Three late Cretaceous coastlines, produced from similar data,
modified from (Smith et at, 1994). The solid line is the one in Figure 21, the
dotted line is from E.C. Kauffman and D.A. Beeson (unpublished) and the
dashed line is from Funnell (1990).

As noted in Schiebout and Ting (2001),
original TVOR and exposures north and northwest of the well site should be periodically examined for additional conglomerate. Extensive
bulldozing and churning of the surface has taken
place, and future rains may clean off conglomerate now concealed by mud.

of sites like TVOR and DISC. Continued screening of mudstone from the north wall of the TVOR
SE site where the dinosaur was recovered might
yield more Cretaceous material which might
make it possible to pinpoint the region of outcrops from which it was eroded, a more exact
age, and perhaps a closer identification.
TVORS
It should be examined by surface prospecting and the strongly cemented rock which appears similar to the oyster sandstone at TVOR
SE should undergo more quarrying, dissolution,
and screening.

DISC Site Cluster
Stonehenge Rock, previously excavated
and stored on Post, has been moved to our
lab and is undergoing dissolution, with
only one truckload remaining at DISC
landfarm. Stonehenge remains one of our
most productive sites. It is the site pro-

TVOR Site Cluster

29

cessed by screening from which the most
complete specimens of tiny animals are
recovered. Continued processing of the
Stonehenge rock and study of -resulting
fossils is recommended.
Gully Periodic examination for exposure
of new promising conglomerate should be
done.
DISC Surface search of any areas still
open should continue. The associated artiodactyl bones recently recovered from
DISC indicates that there is even a possibility of additional associated remains from
a single animal.

OUTREACH
A main focus of outreach efforts should
remain the Fort Polk Environmental Learning
Center. The recently revised nontechnical booklet for youngsters (Schiebout et at. 2003), the
posters prepared for professional meetings
which are then brought to the center, and the
hands-on fossil dig. which uses casts and picked
screening residue from the project to simulate
fossil hunting, are available there. Videoclips
have been prepared for use at the Center. LSU
undergraduate and graduate classes have been
brought on field trips to the Fort Polk Miocene,
and portions of the research have been carried

modem
human

Figure 31. Sketch of a giant camel (?Aepycamelus) with the location of
specimen LSUM:G 12235 (radius) from TVOR SE shown.
Figure 32. Sketch of giant sea bass in relation to a modern human.
modern
human

30

out by graduate and undergraduate students as
part of their training, and thisshotild continue.
Other outreac~ approaches cOilld include:
Cast replicas of a variety of fossils
Thes~ could qe used in presentations for visitors and could be handled and passed around
without danger to originals. Some fossils could
be replicated at original size, the male and female tortoises, the Prosynthetoceras mandible,
jaws of an equine and hipparionine horse, and
a modern and ancient giant sea bass dorsal
: spine. In many of the fossils, the originals are
too' small to be handled and examined by visitors, but Dr. Timothy Rowe of the University of
Texas at Austin has, the capacity to scan and
make accurate enlarg-ed replicas of tiny fossils
(Digital Morphology program http://
www.digimorph.org!index.phtml). Possible candidates for this procedure could be: the dinosaur; a Copemys molar, the tiny new species of
beaver, a hedgehogtooth:and:a shrew jaw.
Illustrations for dispiay
,
Murals and sketches are a 'possibility, both for
use at the center and for posters and coloring
pages. Sketches such:;ts that pf~he giant camel
from the nontechnicai booklet (Fi~re 31) that
show the size and location of fossil remains recovered from the Fort Polk Miocene, in this case
the animal's radius, can be made. Another example is the sketch of a giant sea bass that
shows size in relation to that of a modern human (Figure 32). It is also from the non technical booklet.
Videos and CD's
Videos on the fossils and the animals they represent have been prepared, but videotaping of
work in the field has not been done. The vodeos
made so far are strings of videoclips, not a
stand-alone video production.
A Miocene gomphothere
This elephant relative is' one of the most spectacular animals from the Fort Polk Miocene .
. This animal now occurs at lower as well as
stratigraphically higher sites. The Sam Noble
History
displays
Oklahoma Museum
of Natural
.
.
.
,
a California Miocene gomphothere cast replica,
and has some duplicate material, and Berke.'

31

ley staff are investigating if the mold from
which it was made may still be useable, allowing reproduction of selected parts. A replica tusk
would m,ak~ ag06d to~chabl~ display.
The LSU Museum of Natural Science is
now the main component of the Louisiana State
Museum of
Natural History,and
it is hoped that
.
.
increased outreach on museum research will
become possible in' the future. Information on
the Fort Polk Miocene research is already on
the Museum webpage. As the Fort Polk Miocene
fauna grows, spectacular animals like the giant camel and rhino are added, and the ecological picture cOmes into sharper focus, to be fit
into earth history on the global scale. The opportunities to interest and educate the public
can be expected to expand in the future.

Ginsburg, R. N. and Beaudoin, B. Eds,
Cretaceous resources, events and
rhythms. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Netherlands. 221-235.

REFERENCES
Albright, Lynn B., 1991, The vertebrate
paleontology, taphonomy, and paleoecology of a new early Miocene site in
the Fleming Formation near Toledo
Bend Dam, Newton County, Texas and
its importance to Gulf Coastal Plain
biostratigraphy: Unpub. masters
thesis, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA. 319 pp.

Hay, Oliver P. 1908. The Fossil Turtles of
North America. Washington, D.C.:
Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Publication No. 75. 568 pp.
Hinds, D. J., 1998, Neogene stratigraphy and
depositional environments of the
Fort Polk and Slagle area, western
Louisiana: Unpub. Masters thesis,
Louisiana State University, Baton
Rouge, 107 pp.

Arata, Andrew A., 1966, A Tertiary proboscidian of Louisiana: Tulane Studies
in Geology, v. 4, p. 73-74.
Baszio, Sven, 1997. Investigations on Canadian dinosaurs: systematic
palaeontology of isolated dinosaur
teeth from the Latest Cretaceous of
south Alberta, Canada. Courier
Forschungsinstitut Senckenberg 196:
33-77.

Hinds, David J., 1999, Neogene stratigraphy
and depositional environments of the
Fort Polk and Slagle areas of western
Louisiana: Louisiana Geological
Survey Report ofInvestigations 99-01,
61 pp.

Brinkman, D. B. 2002. An illustrated guide to
the vertebrate microfossils from the
Dinosaur Park Formation. Alberta
Paleontological Society Workshop on
Vertebrate Microfossils. 102 pp.

Holman, J.A. 1979. A Review of North American Tertiary Snakes. Publications of
the Museum, Michigan State University Paleontological Series. Vol. 4, no.
6.

Butler, P.M. and KA. Joysey, 1978, Development, Function and Evolution of
Teeth. Academic Press.

Jones, M. H., Schiebout, J. A. and Kirkova, J.
T., 1995, Cores from the Miocene
Castor Creek Member of the Fleming
Formation, Fort Polk, Louisiana:
Relationship to the Outcropping
Miocene terrestrial vertebrate fossilbearing beds: Gulf Coast Association
of Geological Societies Transactions, v.
45, p. 293-301.

Cande, S. C., and Kent, D. V. 1992. A new
geomagnetic polarity timescale for the
Late Cretaceous and Cenozoic: Journal of Geophysical Research. 97:
13917-13951.
Can de, S. C., and Kent, D. V. 1995. Revised
calibration of the geomagnetic polarity
timescale for the Late Cretaceous and
Cenozoic. Journal of Geophysical
Research. 100, B4: 6093-6095.
Currie, P. J., J. K Rigby, Jr., and R. E. Sloan.
1990. Theropod teeth from the Judith
River Formation of southern Alberta,
Canada. In K Carpenter and P J.
Currie (eds.), Dinosaur Systematics:
Perspectives and Approaches, pp. 107125. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Lindsay, Everett H., 1972. Small Mammal
Fossils from the Barstow Formation,
California. Univ. Calif. Publ. Geol.
Sci., 93: p. 74-100.
MacFadden, B. J., 1997, Tale of two rhinos:
isotopic ecology, paleodiet, and niche
differentiation of Aphelops and
Teloeceras from the Florida Neogene:
Paleobiology, v. 24, no. 2, p. 274-286.
Manning, E. M., 1990, The late early Miocene
Sabine River: Gulf Coast Association
of Geological Societies Transactions, v.
40, p. 531-549.

Dorsey, Sara L. 1977. Biostratigraphy of the
Mio-Pliocene of the Texas Gulf Coastal
Plain: Unpub. masters thesis, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX,
65pp.

McCulloh, Richard P, and Paul V. Heinrich,
2000, Geology of the Fort Polk Region,
Sabine, Natchitoches, and Vernon
Parishes, Louisiana: Unpublished
report prepared for U. S. Army Corps
of Engineers, Fort Worth District,
under contract no. DACW63-90-D-

Funnell, B.M. 1990 Global and European
shorelines, stage by stage. In
32

Schiebout, J. A, Suyin Ting, and J. T. Sankey,
1998, Microvertebrate concentrations
in pedogenic nodule conglomerates:
recognizing the rocks and recovering
.and interpreting the fossils.
<1>Palaeontologia Electronica, </
1>1(2): 54p., 2 MB. HYPERLINK
http://www-odp.tamu.edu/paleol
1998 2/schiebt/issue2.html.

0008, delivery order no. 13., Fort
Worth, Texas: U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, 92 pp.
Mein, P. and M. Freudenthal, 1971. Les
. Cricetidae (Mammalia, Rodentia) du
. Neogene Moyen de Vieux-Collonges.
Partie 1: Le genre Cricetodon Lartet,
1851. Scripta Geologica, 5: p. 1-51.
Prothero, D. R., and P. C. Sereno, 1980,
Allometry and paleoecology of medial
Miocene dwarf rhinoceroses from the
Texas Gulf Coastal Plain:
Paleobiology, v. 8, no. 1, p. 16-30.

Schiebout, J. A and S. Ting, 2001,
Paleofaunal survey, collecting, processing, and documentation at locations in the Castor Creek Member,
Miocene Fleming Formation, Fort
Polk, Louisiana. Corps of Engineers,
Fort Worth District. Open-file report,
95p.
Schiebout, J. A , S. Ting, D. R. Wilhite, and
P.D. White, 2002, Paleofaunal and
Paleoenvironmental Research on
Miocene Fossil Site TVOR SE on Fort
Polk, Louisiana, with Continued
Survey, Collection, Processing,and
Documentation of other Miocene
localities on the Post. Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District. Open-file
report, 42 p.

Rogers,J. E.; and A J. Callandro, 1965, Water
Resources of Vernon Parish, Louisiana: Department of Conservation,
Louisiana Geological Survey and
, Louisiana Department of Public
Works, Water Resources Bulletin 26,
104 pp. "
Schiebout, J. A, 1994, Fossil vertebrates from
the Castor Creek Member, Fleming
Formation, western Louisiana: Gulf
Coast Association Geological. SoCieties
Transactions, v. 44, p. 675-680.
Schiebout, J. A, 1996, A Miocene hedgehog
(Mammalia: Erinaceidae) from Fort
Polkiri western Louisiaria.:Occasional
Papers LSU Museum Natural Science,
v.70, p. 1-9.

Slaughter, B. H.,1981,Anew genus of
geomyoid rodent from the Miocene of
Texas and Louisiana, Jour. of Vert.
Paleo., v. 1, no.1, p. 111-115.

Schiebout, J. A, Megan R Jones, John H.
Wrenn, and Paul R. Aharon, 1996, Age
of the Fort Polk -Miocene terrestrial
vertebrate fossil sites: Gulf Coast
Association Geological Societies
Transactions,v. 46, p. 373-378.
Schiebout, J. A, 1997a;:The'Fort PoikMioeene microvertebrate sites compared
to those from east Texas: The Texas
,Journal of Science, v. 49, no. 1, p. 2332.
Schiebout, J. A, 1997b, Paleofaunal survey,
'collecting, processing, and documentation at two locations on Fort Polk,
Louisiana: Louisana State University
Report to the Corps of Engineers, Fort
Worth District, Texas, USA

Smith, Alan G., David G. Smith, and Brian M.
Funnell, 1994, Atlas of Mesozoic and
Cenozoic coastlines. Melbourne,
Australia, Cambridge University
Press, 99pp.
Tedford, R. H., Skinner, M. F., Fields, R. w.,
Rensberger, J. M., Whistler, D. P.,
Galusha, T., Taylor, B. E., Macdonald,
J. R. and Webb, S. D., 1987, Faunal
succession and biochronology of the
Arikareean through Hemphillian
Interval (late Oligocene through
earliest Pliocene Epochs) in North
America, in Woodburne, M. 0., ed.,
Cenozoic mammals of North America:
Berkeley, University of California
Press, p. 153-210.

Schiebout, J. A and S. Ting, 1998, Miocene
terrestrial microvertebrates recovered
from conglomerate rich in pedogenic
nodules, Fleming Formation near
Coldspring, Texas: Texas Journal of
Science, v. 50, no. 3, p. 199- 204.

Wilson, J.A, 1956. Miocene Formations and
Vertebrate Biostratigraphic Units,
Texas Coastal Plain: American Association of Petroleum Geologists
Bulletin, vAO, p. 2233-2246.

33

Woodburne, M. 0., 1969, Systematics, biogeography, and evolution of Cynorca and
Dyseohyus (Tayassuidae): Bulletin of
the American Museum of Natural
History, v. 141, p. 273-356.
Woodburne, M. 0., and C. C. Swisher, III,
1995, Land mammal high-resolution
geochronology, intercontinental
overland dispersals, sea level, climate,
and vicariance: in Berggren, W. A., D.
V. Kent, M. Aubry, and J. Hardenbol,
Geochronology, Time Scales, and
Global Stratigraphic Correlation,
SEPM Special Publication no. 54, p.
335-364.
Wrenn, J. H., 1996, Gulf Coast Neogene
palynological zonation of Shell Offshore, Inc., Ninth International
Palynological Congress, Program and
Abstracts: American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas, p. 176.

34

APPENDICES

APPENDIXA.
Abbreviatimis·
AP-Anteroposterior
AMNH-American Museum of Natural
History
. D-V-'dorso-ventrally
DISC-Discovery, as in DISC Site or
cluster of sites.
FP-Fort Polk
FPM-Fort Polk Miocene
~Length

LSUMG-Louisiana State University
Museum of Natural Science, Division
of Geoscience. Fort Polk Miocene
fossils are mainly in the vertebrate
. paleontology collections, with a small
number with invertebrate paleontology.
LSUMZ-Louisiana State University
Museum of Natural Science, Division
of Zoology
TMM-Texas Memorial Museum,
University of Texas at Austin
TRANS or T-Transverse
TVOR-TVOR site, near the terminal
very-high frequency omni range radar
tower, and other sites occurring in its
cluster
USNM-US National Museum
UT-University of Texas at Austin
W-Wide

35

APPENDIXB

animal fossils are curated to the Collection of
Fossil Protists and Invertebrates. Copies of all
published papers are on file at the LSD Museum of Natural Science. Computer data, including curational information, reports, SEM
photographs and black and white photographs,
is on the computer and backed up on Syquest
cartridges or CD's at the Museum.
This research is part of an ongoing project,
and some materials from screening and surface
search are not identified or curated. If further
research and more recent finds allow their identification, they will be numbered and curated
to the Museum of Natural Science, and if not,
they will be preserved in curated lots in the
Museum for further research.

CDRATION LIST
Through 07/3112003
Vertebrate Fossils (4, 628)
540 added in period of this report
Fish
Chondrich thyes

9

Osteichthyes

80

Reptiles

131

Amphibians

4

Mammals

528

Lagomorphs

7

Carnivorans

75

Insectivores
Cetaceans
Artiodactyls

241
5

27

Perissodactyls

35

Proboscidea

2

Rodents

3,986

Invertebrate fossils (4)
Records
Field notebook
Topographic maps
Laboratory notes
Acid lab notes
Computer curation files
Computer files of all SEM pictures
Specimens are curated to the LSD Museum of Natural Science and records are kept
at the Museum, with the exception of palynological slides which are kept in collections of
the LSD Department of Geology and Geophysics' Center for Excellence in Palynology. Vertebrate fossils are curated to the MNS Vertebrate
Paleontological Collections and invertebrate
36

APPENDIXC
New Paleomagnetic Samples,
Core 1
Depth

190
230
260
278
296
318
329
372
384
568
749
753
920
925 .
1065
1070
1141
1145
1148
1306
1442
1446
1510
1514

Inclination

39
-20
44.5
-1
44.5
-55
-46.6
49.7
-3.8
53.1
46.6
49.3
44.4
52.3
-38.9
-49.4
.:0.6
6~2

4.4
76.1
69
lL7
-48.6
-51.2

37

APPENDIXD
Stonehenge Site Copemys
Measurement Data (mm)

LSUMG
3870
3563
4910
11360
4129
10347
9209
3819
3912
9206
V12358
9719
V12359
9939
11238
11359
11606
9199
4886
11605
9718
V12410
4895
10348
10166
4420
3783
11713
4073
11751
11140
11603
10639
11609
4889
11141
10169
11361

Length
(AP)

1.56
1.5
1.3
1.6
1.59
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.32
1.54
1.64
1.4
1.38
1.91
1.49
1.48
1.43
1.63
1.4
1.5
1.44
1.5
1.74
1.44
1.61
1.4
1.3
1.73
1.7
1.6
1.9
1.7
1.52
1.6
1.7
1.46
1.5
1.8

Width

(LL)
0.98
0.98
0.91
0.95
0.99
1
1
1
1.04
0.95
1.07
1
0.9
1.22
0.92
0.94
0.92
0.93
0.9
0.95
0.94
0.95
1.2
0.78
1
1
0.95
1.13
0.92
1.13
1.2
0.9
0.87
1.12
1.1
0.9
1
1

Features

1,4
2,3
5
2,4
2,4
2,3
2,4
5
5
2,3
2,4
2,3
5
2,3
2,4
2,4
2,3
2,3
1,4
2,3
2,4
5
2,3
1,3
2,4
2,4
2,4
5
2,3
5
2,4
2,3
5
5
2,3
1,4
5
5

38

lUltilS

11142
9721
3125
3862
11604
10170·
11006
3782 '
11738
10632
10938
9204
11254
11358
4890
10346
9993
3791
4896
10631
9208
11608
V12412
9201"
.10167
4125
11610
11139
9942
11850 9200
10421
3330 ~892

3367
11607
4412
4885
4419
V12411
.9207
,10165
9202 -

-

.

1.7
1.5
1.5
1.72
.1.48 1.95
1.6
1.45
1.45 -,
1.42
1.42
1.6
1.5
2.2
1.55
1.42
1.6
- 1.5
1.6
1.74
1.96
1.52 _
1.59
1.79
1.62
' 1.84 -1.25
1.48
1.32 '
1.42
-- 1.5
1.58
1.56
1.5
1.38
1.82
" ; 1.62
. 1.52
1.49
1.32
-1.35
1.53
1.52
1.48

1.05 '
1.1
1.1

1.1
1.12
1.2
1
0.75
1.14 1
1
1
11.3
0.95
0.82
1
L

0.92
1.1

1.35
.1.15
1.1
1.22
0.94 1.25
0.9
1.12
'0.9
' 0.89
1.1

,

0.93
0.94
0.92
1
0.98
0.96
0.9
1
0.9
0.92
0.95
0.9
-0.92

,

!

4
4
4
4
4
3
5
5
4
5
3
4
4
3
4
4
3
3
4
3
4
5
4
4
4
4
4
3
4
3
5
4
4
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
5
4
4
4

39

11849
9205
11096
4887
4110
4893
4888
11714
4894
10887
3795
9720
V12356
V12357
11752
9203
11716
3793
9717
11524
11715

1.45
1.5
1.35
1.62
1.55
1.4
1.4
1.6
1.6
1.72
1.53
1.7
1.4
1.48
1.64
1.6
1.45
1.45
1.5
1.5
1.56

1.1

1
1
0.85
0.94
0.93
0.83
1.1

1
0.87
1.04
0.75
0.9
1
1.15
1
0.7
0.7
1.1
0.92
0.98

5
4
5
5
4
3
4
5
4
3
3
5
5
5
4
5
5
4
4
4
5

40

(M:ammalia: Erinaceidae) from Fort
, Polk in western Louisiana, Occas.
Papers LSU Mus. Nat. Science. v. 70,
p.I-9.

APPENDIXE
Scientific publications or presentations

Repol"ts
"

1995. Schiebout, J. A Fort Polk Louisiana
Miocene Fossil Land Mammals. Corps
of Engineers, Fort Worth, District.
Open-file report, 38 pp.

1996. Schiebout, J. A., Megan H. Jones; John
H. Wrenn, and Paul R. Aharon, Age of
the Fort Polk Miocene terrestrial '
vertebrate fossil sites,Gulf Coast
Assoc. Geol. Soc. Trans. v. 46, p. 373-

1997. Schiebout, J. A Paleofaunal survey,
collectiI~g, processing, and documentation at two locations on FortPolk,
Louisiana. Corps of Engineers, Fort
Worth District. Open-file report, 93pp.

378~

1997. Schiebout, J. A, The Fort Polk MiOcene
microvertebrate sites compared to
those from east Texas, The Texas
'Journal of Science, v.49, no. 1, p. 23-32.

2001. Schiebout, J. A and S. Ting,
Paleofaunal ~urvey, collecting, processing, and documentation at locations in the Castor Creek Member,
Miocene Fleming Formation, Fort
Polk, Louisiana. Corps of Engineers,
Fort Worth District. Open-file report,
95 p.

199'7. Schiebout, J. A, Microvertebrate sites,
in Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs, Philip J.
Currie and Kevin Padian(eds.)
Academic Press, 437-442.
19Q8. Schiebout, J. A, Suyin Ting, and J. T.

Sankey, Microvertebrate concentrations in pedogenic nodule conglomerates: recognizing the rocks and recovering and interpreting the fossils.
Palaeontologia Electronica, 1(2): 54p.,
2 MB.http://www-odp.tamu.eduipaleo/
1998_2/schiebt/issue2.htm.

2002. Schiebout, J. A, S. Ting, D. R. Wilhite,
and P.D. White. Paleofaunal and
Paleoenvironmental Research on
, Miocene Fossil Site TVOR SE on Fort
Polk, Louisiana, with Continued
Survey, Collection, Processing, and
Documentation of other Miocene
'localities on the Post. Corps of Engi,
neers 'Fort
. ~
. Worth District.
' . Open-file
'.
report, 42 p.
,

1998. Schiebout, J. A and S.Ting, Miocene
terrestrial microvertebrates recovered
from conglomerate rich in pedogenic
nodules, Fleming Formation near
Coldspting, Texas. Texas Journal of
Science, v. 50(3):199- 204.

'

Chapters and articles

2003. Board~an, G. S., J. A Schiebout, and J.
Wrenn, How many species of the fossil
rodent Copeinys occur at a'single
prolific screening site in the Miocene,
Fleming Formgtion at Fort Polk,
Louisiana? Gulf Coast Association of
Geological Societies Transactions, v.
53.

1994. Schiebout; J. A., Fossil vertebrates from
, the Castor Creek Member, Fleming
, Formation, western Louisiana. Gulf
Coast Assoc. Geol. Soc. Trans. v. 44, p.
675-680.
1995:Jones, Megan H., J. A Schiebout, and
Julitta T. Kirkova, Cores from the
Miocene Castor Creek Member of the
Fleming Formation, Fort Polk, Louisiana: Relationship to the Outcrbpping
Miocene Terrestrial Vertebrate FossilBearing Beds, Gulf Coast Assoc. Geol.
Soc. Trans. v. 45, p. 293-301.

2003. Williams, M.J. and Schiebout, J.A
, Miocene Vertebrates From Fort Polk,
"La: A Preliminary Report. Gulf Coast
Association of Geological Sciences,
Transactions, v. 53.

1996. Schiebout, J. A, A Miocene hedgehog

Submitted

41

Dooley, A C., Jr., Judith A Schiebout, and
Brett S. Dooley, An inexpensive,
environmentally friendly method for
bulk acid processing of carbonate
rocks to obtain microvertebrates, in
Vertebrate Paleontological Tech·
niques, v. 2, Pat Leiggi (ed.) , 13
manuscript pages.

middle of the Age of Mammals in
Louisiana. Louisiana Geological
Survey Information Series. 9 manuscript pages, 9 figures.

Papers presented at professional meetings or seminars (Schiebout is presenter
unless otherwise noted.)
1994. Schiebout, J. A, The Fort Polk Miocene
Terrestrial Vertebrate Site. Tex. Acad.
Science Ann. Meeting. March 4, 5.

Other publications (popular reports and
articles, guidebook articles,
letters)

1994. Schiebout, J. A, Fossil vertebrates from
the Castor Creek Member, Fleming
Formation, western Louisiana. 1994
GCAGS-SEPM Convention. October.

1995. Schiebout, J. A and B. S. Dooley, Fort
Polk Fossils, PopUlar Report Submit·
ted to Fort Polk Environmental
Learning Center, 15 p.

1994. Schiebout, J. A, The first Miocene
terrestrial vertebrate fauna from
Louisiana. Soc. Vert. Paleontol. Ann.
Meeting. October.

1996. Schiebout, J. A and B. S. Dooley, Fort
Polk Fossils, June, 1996 edition,
Popular Report Submitted to Fort
Polk Environmental Learning Center,
23 p.

1995. Schiebout, J. A, Preliminary comparison of Louisiana's Fort Polk Miocene
terrestrial small mammal fauna to
Texas faunas, Tex. Acad. Sci. Ann.
Meeting March ( abs. only).

1998. Schiebout, J. A When Elephants and
Rhinos Roamed Louisiana: Hunting
Miocene Fossils on Fort Polk. Phi
Kappa Phi Kappa Phi National Forum
Winter Edition, p. 26-29.

1995. Jones, Megan H., J. A Schiebout, and
Julitta T. Kirkova, Cores from the
Miocene Castor Creek Member of the
Fleming Formation, Fort Polk, Louisiana: Relationship to the Outcropping
Miocene Terrestrial Vertebrate FossilBearing Beds, Gulf Coast Assoc. Geol.
Soc. Convention. October. Jones and
Schiebout presented.

1999. Schiebout, J. A When Elephants and
Rhinos Roamed Louisiana: Hunting
Miocene Fossils on Fort Polk. (adapted
from the Phi Kappa Phi 1998 article).
Environmental Monitor, U.S. Army
Central Regional Environmental
Office, Winter. p. 1, 8, 9.
2001. Schiebout, J. A and B. S. Dooley, Fort
Polk Fossils, February, 2001 edition,
Popular Report Submitted to Fort
Polk Environmental Learning Center,
23 p.

1995. Schiebout, J. A, A Miocene (Barstovian)
hedgehog, beaver, large carnivore, and
other new finds from western Louisiana, Soc. Vert. Paleontol. Ann. Meeting. November.

2002.2003. Schiebout, J.A, Brett S. Dooley,
and Brandon Kilbourne, Fossils from
Fort Polk, Louisiana. September 2003
edition. Popular Report Submitted to
Fort Polk Environmental Learning
Center, 23 p.

1995. Schiebout, J. A, A Barstovian (Miocene)
terrestrial vertebrate fauna from the
Castor Creek member of the Fleming
Formation in Fort Polk, western
Louisiana. GSAAbstracts with Programs, v. 27, no. 6, p. A 454.

Submitted for publication

1995. Jones, Megan H., P. Aharon, J. A
Schiebout, Climatic and chronologic
implications of stable isotope composi-

Schiebout, J.A and P. Heinrich. The Fort Polk
Miocene Fauna: Fossils from the

42

. 1997. Ting, S. Y. and J. A Schiebout, Squirrels
from the Fort Polk Miocene fauna,
western Louisiana, Soc. Vert.
Paleontol. Ann. Meeting. October.
Chicago. Jour. Vert. Paleo. Abstracts of
Papers,81A.

tion of pedogenic carbonate: Castor
Creek Member, Fleming Formation
(middle Miocene), Fort Polk, Louisiana; GSA Abstracts with Programs, v.
27, no. 6, p. A 454.
.1996. Jones, Megan H.,J. A Schiebout, and
Julitta T. Kirkova, Cores from the
Miocene Castor Creek Member of the
Fleming Formation, Fort Polk, Louisiana: Relationship to the Outcropping
Miocene Terrestrial Vertebrate FossilBearing Beds, New Orleans Geological
Society. February. Jones and
Schiebout presented .

1998. Schiebout, J. A, Suyin Ting (Ding), Paul
Aharon', Mingji Chu, Megan H. Jones.
Miocene terrestrial & marine vertebrates of Fort Polk LA: paleoecology,
bio- & magnetostratigraphy, geochemistry. Salt Lake City. Jour. Vert. Paleo.
Abstracts of Papers. 75A-76A Ting
presented.

.1996. Schiebout, J. A,'The Fort Polk Miocene
microvertebrate sites compared to
those from east Texas, Tex. Acad. Sci.
99th Ann. Meeting,, March, Program
and Abstracts of Papers; p. 90. ,

1999. Schiebout, J. A and Suyin Ting. Enigmatic mammal tooth from the terrestrial Miocene (Barstovian) of Fort Polk
in western Louisiana. Denver. Jour.
Vert. Paleo. 19(3) Abstracts of Papers.
73A

"

1996. Schiebout, J. A, Miocene lower vertebrates from terrestrial deposits on
Fort Polk in western Louisiana.
American Society ofIchthyologists
.and Herpetologists 76th Annual
Meeting Program and Abstracts, p.
274-275.

1999. Ting, Suyin. The Paleocene/Eocene
boundary in China, and the Fort Polk
Miocene in western Louisiana, USA
National Science Museum, Japan.
Tokyo.
2000.Schiebout, JA, Suyin Ting, P. Aharon, J.
Wrenn, and C. Stromberg. The Fort
Polk Miocene sites of western Louisiana in regional and global context
Jour. Mexico City. Vert. Paleo. 20(3)
Abstracts of Papers. 68A

1996. Schiebout, J. A, Megan H. Jones, John
H. Wrenn, and Paul R. Aharon, Age of
the Fort Polk Miocene terrestrial
vertebrate fossil sites, Gulf Coast
Assoc. of Geol. Soc., October. San
Antonio.

2001. Schiebout, Judith A, Suyin Ting, Ray
Wilhite, Paul White, and Laurie
Anderson, Finds from the Miocene of
Fort Polk in western Louisiana,
including a new quarry site yielding
whale and terrestrial mammal material. SVP. Bozeman, Montana.

1996. Schiebout, J. A and S. Y. Ting, New
mammal and lower vertebrate finds
from the Fort Polk Miocene sites
(Barstovian) of western Louisiana,
Soc. Vert. Paleontol. Ann. Meeting.
October. New York. 1997. Schiebout, J.
A, The Paleocene/Eocene boundary in
, ~errestrial rocks in Big Bend National
Park, Texas, G.S.A Penrose Conference on the Paleocene/Eocene Boundary. April. Albuquerque. ,

2001. Schiebout, J. A, P. Aharon, M. Chu, C.
Stromberg, D. Hinds, Paul White, J.
Wrenn. The Fort Polk Miocene Vertebrate Sites (Louisiana, USA): Implications For Local And Global
Paleoenvironmental Changes. Geological Society of America, Boston.

1997. Schiebout, J.A. A paleontologist in
Louisiana, Phi Kappa Phi Centennial
National Meeting. August. New
Orleans.

2002. Schiebout, J.A., Ting, Suyin, D. R.
Wilhite, P.D. White, Paul D., M. J.
43

Williams, Brandon Kilbourne. Update
On The Miocene Of Fort Polk, Western Louisiana. SVP. Norman, Oklahoma.
2003. Boardman, G. S., J. A. Schiebout, and J.
Wrenn, How many species of the fossil
rodent Copemys occur at a single
prolific screening site in the Miocene,
Fleming Formation at Fort Polk,
Louisiana? Gulf Coast Association of
Geological Societies Transactions,
Annual Meeting, Baton Rouge, LA.
Boardman presented.
2003. Williams, M.J. and Schiebout, J.A.
Miocene Vertebrates From Fort Polk,
La: A Preliminary Report. Gulf Coast
Association of Geological Sciences,
Annual Meeting, Baton Rouge, LA.
Williams presented.

44

. APPENDIX F .
Sample Videotape Shooting ScripV'Louisiana'sFirst.Dinosaur". Script is pre. sented in or!ginal spacing to 'maintain relationships of segments.
AUDIO
VIDEO
Videoclip- Louisian~'s First Fossil Dinosaur'
People who want to hunt for fossils in Louisiana can find Presenter holding
rocks
fossils older than the dinosaurs in river gravels
These rocks were eroded from older rocks further north and Presenter puts rock
under the Elmo
carried to Louisiana by.rivers.
These fossils are remains of ancient sea life, a trilobite and Cut to Elmo
a clam. The fossil shows a trilobite's tail. This replica of a
trilobite shows a similar tail.
The animals are from the middle of the Paleozoic, as shown
. in this chart from Norman (i99I). They did not live or die
where they were found today.

. People often ask me about Louisiana dinosaur fossils, and I
have .told t4em for over twenty five years, that finding any
. dinosaur fossils in Louisiana IS unlikely-we just don't have
rocks of the correct age. LouisIana is built out into the Gulf
by river and coastal d~posits, so rock from th~ time of the
dinosaurs is'deeply buried under our state. Dinosaur-bearing rocks are exposed in areas where erosion is taking place
further north so there always has been a tiny chance of some
material being carried along with the sand and gravel in
river bottoms, and deposit~d in younger rocks.

Powerpoint I-chart

Presenter

Powerpoint of screenmg
Powerpoint of tooth

Screening for tiny fossils from the middle of the Age ofMammals
Presenter
Elmo-see dino tooth
Work onn Fort Polk has' yielded over four thousand tiny fosactual size
sils, including one from the Age of Dinosaurs, this tiny tooth.
Although this dinosaur was fotlnd in western LA, the animal did not live or die here. It did not hunt the animals
from the Age of Mammals whose bones are recovered from
Fort Polk, any more than the trilobites in river gravels live
in modern waters. The dinosaur tooth is "reworked", eroded
from older rocks.

Powerpoint of scanning electron micro~
graph

Powerpoint -3 dino

The tooth is very small, Teeth are the toughest, most resis- teeth
45

AUDIO
tant part of a vertebrate's skeleton. This tiny tooth may have
traveled with sands carried by rivers for hundreds of miles
from the location of the rock deposited in the Age of the
Dinosaurs, in which it was originally buried.

VIDEO

We can tell from what kind of dinosaur the tooth came. It is
the tooth of a small meat-eater. It is sharply pointed and
has serrations like a steak knife.

Powerpoint
Dilophodon
fight over lizard

A closer look with a scanning electron microscope reveals Powerpoint of time
chisel-shaped serrations. This serration shape and some scale
other features indicate this is a tooth from'a dromaeosaurid,
a type of theropod. Theropods include 7}rannosaurus rex Presenter
and many smaller meat eaters.
Powerpoint Schiebout
We can not tell exactly'what type of small dromaeosaur used and Ting hunt in
this tooth. Here are three dromeosaurs from Dixon et al., field.
1988.
Another example of a small dromaeosaur is the animal
Dilophodon, which was featured in the first Jurassic Park
movie. It was represented as having a neck frill and being
able to spit poison. We don't really know that it had a frill or
was poisonous. This reconstruction shows two dilophodon
fighting over a small lizard they have caught.
Our dinosaur probably hunted small prey in the Cretaceous,
the last of the periods of the Age of Dinosaurs. It may have
lived at the same time as T. rex, or may have lived earlier.
There is a very small chance of finding more tiny dinosaur
fossils in the study of Fort Polk fossils, but such fossils represent a very rare set of circumstances, and the chance of
finding a skull or skeleton is effectively zero.

46

