PALEOFAUNAL SURVEY, COLLECTING,
PROCESSING, AND DOCUMENTATION
AT TWO LOCATIONS
ON FORT POLK, LOUISIANA
by
Judith A. Schiebout
Museum of Natural Science
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803

with contributions by

Paul R. Aharon, Alton C. Dooley, Jr., Brett S. Dooley, Megan H. Jones,
Julitta T. Kirkova, Suyin Ting, Michael C. Wiemann and John H. Wrenn

US Army Corps
of Engineers
Fort Worth District

PALEOFAUNAL SURVEY, COLLECTING,
PROCESSING, AND DOCUMENTATION
AT TWO LOCATIONS
ON FORT POLK, LOUISIANA
by
Judith A. Schiebout
Museum of Natural Science
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803

with contributions by
Paul R. Aharon, Alton C. Dooley, Jr., Brett S. Dooley, Megan H. Jones,
Julitta T. Kirkova, Suyin Ting, Michael C. Wiemann and John H. Wrenn

US Army Corps
of Engineers
Fort Worth District

Form Approved
OMB No. 0704-0188

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE

Public reporting hurden for [his liollection of information is estimated to 3Ver:lge I hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions. searching existing data sources
galheri,ng :lnd, maintai,ning. the d~la ",ceded. ,and completi~g and, reviewing the col,lection of information. S~nd co~menls regardin.g this ,hurden est!m:llC or any other aspect of thi~
coll~ctto.n of !RfnCm,allon. Inctud,lng suggestions [or redUCing thiS burde? to W:uhlDgton Headquarters Servlces, DUCClorat,e for In,formallon Operallons and Reports, 1215 Jefferson
DavIS H,ghway. SUlle 1204. Arlington. VA 22202·4302. and to the Off,ce of Management and Budget. Paperwork Reducuon Project (0704-01&&). Washingtuo. DC 20503.

12. REPORT DA TE

l.AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank)

13. REPORT TYPE AND DA TES CO VERED

Final Report 8/26/94-8/1/95

1 September,1997

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE

5. FUNDING NUMBERS

Paleofaunal Survey, Collecting, Processing, and
Documentation at Two Locations on Fort Polk, Louisiana

Contract Number:
DACW 63-90-10-008

6. AUTHOR(S)

Delivery Order No. l3

Judith A. Schiebout
8.PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

LSU Museum of Natural Science
119 Foster Hall
Louisiana State University
70803
Baton Rouge, LA

Fort Polk Miocene

-

2

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

U. S. Army Corps of Engineers
Fort Worth District
819 Taylor St. , Box 17300
76102-0300
Fort Worth, TX
11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

12a. DISTRIB UTION AVAILABILITY ST ATEMENT

1 2b. DISTRIBUTION CODE

Approved for public release

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)

This report covers recovery of fossils and research on the first Miocene terrestrial mammal fauna from Louisiana and its
paleoenvironment, from August, 1994 to August, 1995. A total of 577 specimens were numbered, ranging from tiny bat teeth
up to the relatively large limb bones of merychippine horses. Techniques for the recovery of tiny and fragile fossils from strongly
cemented carbonate nodule conglomerates were developed and refined, allowing the processing of over 2.5 tons of rock. The
drilling of three 50-foot holes to recover core for sedimentological. isotopic. and palynological study, and the these studies were
also a major focus of the year. The fossiliferous beds, from the Castor Creek Member of the Fleming Fonnation, are fluvial
overbank deposits including fossil soils, with the best concentrations of small vertebrates coming from conglomerates fonned by
concentration of coarse material. Remains of eight orders of land mammals, including insectivores, chiropterans, a lagomorph, a
large carnivore, rodents, horses. a prosynthetocerine, and a gomphothere, have been recovered. Lower vertebrate fossils include
fish, crocodile, turtle, and lizard remains. At least two small rodents, a beaver and a member of the genus Copemys, are
considered to be new species. Age of the fauna is early late Barstovian, probably between 14.5 Ma and 12.5 Ma, and carbon
isotope study confinns that the carbonate nodules and associated faunas are definitely older than the worldwide 7.0 to 7.4 Ma d 13C
shift, from a dominant C3-type vegetation to a C 4-type vegetation. The Fort Polk site was coastal and environmentally different
from the long-studied Great Plains sites, which may explain why many of the small mammals are particularly small for their
kinds.
14. SUBJECT TERMS

.

15. NUMBER OF PAGES

Fort Polk, Vertebrate Paleontology in the Miocene, Palynology,
Geochemistry, Invertebrate Paleontology, and Sedimentology.
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF REPORT

Unclassified

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF THIS PAGE

Unclassified

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICA TION
OF ABSTRACT

Unclassified

93
16. PRICE CODE
20. LIMITATION OF
ABSTRACT

Same as report
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) (EG)
Prescribed l1y ANSI SId. 239.18
Designed using Perform Pro. WHS/DIOR. OCl94

r

PALEOFAUNAL SURVEY, COLLECTING, PROCESSING,
AND DOCUMENTATION AT TWO LOCATIONS ON
FORT POLK, LOUISIANA
by
Judith A. Schiebout
Museum of Natural Science, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803
with contributions by
Paul R. Aharon, Alton C. Dooley. Jr., Brett S. Dooley, Megan H. Jones, Julitta T.
Kirkova, Suyin Ting, Michael C. Wiemann, and John H. Wrenn

Prepared for
U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District
Contract No. DACW63-90-D-0008
Delivery Order No. 13

Submitted by
Elton R. Prewitt
Co-Principal Investigator
Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
and
Judith A. Schiebout
Co-Principal Investigator
Museum of Natural Science, Louisiana State University

September 1997

PALEOFAUNAL SURVEY, COLLECTING, PROCESSING, AND
DOCUMENTATION AT TWO LOCATIONS ON FORT POLK,
LOUISIANA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ThITRODUCTION
Background
Geologic History
FIELD METHODS
LABORATORY METHODS
SITE DESCRIPTIONS
SEDIMENTOLOGY AND DEPOSmONAL ENVIRONMENT
STABLE ISOTOPES OF PEDOGENIC CARBONATES
TAPHONOMY
SYSTEMATIC PALEONTOLOGY
Paleobotany
Pollen and other plant microfossils
Palynological analyses
Wood
Invertebrate animals
Vertebrates
Class CHONDRICHTHYES
Class OSTEICHTHYES
Order Siluriformes
Order Lepisosteiformes
Class REPTILIA
Order CHELONIA
Order SQUAMATA
Order CROCODYLIA
Class MAMMALIA
Order LAGOMORPHA
Order CARNIVORA
Family CANIDAE or URSIDAE
Order CHIROPTERA
ANTROZOUS sp
Order INSECTIVORA
LIMNOECUS NIOBRARENSIS
BRACHYERIX cf B. INCERTIS
Order ARTIODACTYLA
PROSYNTHETOCERAS FRANCISI
Order PERISSODACTYLA
cf. "MERYCHIPPUS" GUNTERI
Order PROBOSCIDEA
GOMPHOTHERIUM sp.
Order RODENTIA
MONOSAULAX sp.
TEXOMYS RITCHIEI

i

v
v
1
1
1
4
4
7
13
20
21
25
25
25
25
31
33
34
34
35
35
36
37
37
39
40
41
41
42
42
44
44
46
47
48
50
50
54
54
59
59
61
61
63

PROHETEROMYS sp.
COPEMYS
cf NOTOTAMIAS ATELES
larger sciurid
AGE, STRATIGRAPHY AND REGIONAL COMPARISON
PALEOECOLOGY
RECOMMENDATIONS
Discovery site
TVOR
Outreach
CONCLUSION
REFERENCES
APPENDIX
TASKS AND DELNERABLES
ABBREVIATIONS
CURATION LIST

ii

66
69
72
73
73
77
80
80
81
81
81

82
90
90
91

92

LIST OF PHOTOGRAPHS
1. Timothy Dalbey at the Discovery site.
2. Alton Dooley, Jr. examining conglomerate from acid treatment boxes.
3. Brett Dooley filling overbarrels
4. Brett Dooley screening.
5. John Wrenn at east side of DISC, examining the lower conglomerate.
6. Conglomerate exposed at west side of DISC.
7. Robert Hays (L) and James Grafton (R) at Stonehenge.
8. Timothy Dalbey at TVOR, photographing the conglomerate outcrop.
9. Black silty layer at TVOR South.
10. Thin section of DISC lower conglomerate.
11. Thin section of DISC upper conglomerate.
12. Thin section of TVOR conglomerate.
13. Thin section of DISC lower conglomerate showing septarian features.
14. Core photographs depicting sedimentological and paleosol features.
15. Collecting the Prosynthetoceras francisi mandible.
16. Unsorted fossil concentrate from Discovery site.
17. Palynomorphs from FPM sites.
18. Palynomorphs from FPM sites.
19. Thin section of petrified wood, Diospyros (persimmon).
20. Thin section of petrified wood, Diospyros (persimmon).
21. Thin section of petrified wood, Juniperus (eastern red cedar).
22. Thin section of petrified wood, Juniperus (eastern red cedar).
23. Snail steinkern exposed at surface of upper conglomerate
at Discovery site.
24. Myliobatis sp. partial pavement tooth.
25. cf. Ictalurus fragmentary fin spines.
26. Lepisosteus scales and tooth.
27. Trionychid turtle shell fragment.
28. Lizard maxilla fragment.
29. Alligator tooth.
30. Gavialosuchus tooth.
31. Miocene canid or ursid baculum and modern dog baculum.
32. Antrozous teeth.
33. Limnoecus niobrarensis incisor and mandible fragment.
34. Brachyerix MI.
35. Prosynthetoceras francisi mandible, Ml or M2.
36. Merychippus mandible.
37. Merychippus teeth and limb element.
38. Gomphothere tooth fragment.
39. Monosaulax tooth.
40. Texomys richiei teeth.
41. Proheteromys teeth.
42. Copemys teeth.
43. Sciurid teeth.

iii

3
5
6
7
9
9
11
11
13
14
15
15
16
19
22
24
29
30
31
32
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
43
45
47
50
52
57
58
60
62
66
68
71
72

FIGURES
1. Location map: Fort Polk, Fleming Formation, sites within Fort Polk.
2. Members of the Fleming Formation.
3. Schematic sketch of DISC.
4. Sketch map of TVOR South.
5. Schematic representation of topographic relationship between cores
and outcropping conglomerates at the TVOR site and DISC site.
6. Core graphic logs illustrating sedimentology and paleosol
development at DISC and TVOR.
7. Distribution of kinds of fossils from DISC (300-count).
8. Distribution of kinds of fossils from TVOR (300-count).
9. ? Lagomorph lower molar.
10. Artiodactyl tooth nomenclature.
11. Suggested phylogeny of the Synthetoceratinae.
12. Horse tooth nomenclature.
13. Castorid tooth nomenclature.
14. Geomyoid p4 size distribution.
15. Texomys premolar nomenclature.
16. Heteromyid p4 size distribution.
17. Heteromyid premolar nomenclature.
18. Cricetid ml size distribution.
19. Cricetid molar nomenclature.
20. Barstovian: age and subdivisions.
21. Texas Coastal Plain sequence of local faunas.
22. Texas Coastal Plain rodent distributions.
23. Fort Polk Miocene rodent distributions.

2
4
8
12
17
18
23
23
41
51
54
56
61
64
65
67
67
69
70
75
76
78
79

LIST OF TABLES
1. Samples collected and studied for palynomorphs to date.
2. Environmental significance of the important plants
for which pollen was recovered.
3. Chiropteran measurements.
4. Horse characteristics.
5. Comparison of Miocene horse.
6. Copemys mlmorphologic variation.
7. Statistical comparison of rodent distributions, Texas and Fort Polk.

iv

26
27
46
55
59
70
78

ABSTRACT
This report covers recovery of fossils and research on the fIrst Miocene terrestrial
mammal fauna from Louisiana and its paleoenvironment, from August, 1994 to August,
1995. A total of 577 specimens were numbered, ranging from tiny bat teeth up to the
relatively large limb bones of merychippine horses. Techniques for the recovery of tiny
and fragile fossils from strongly cemented carbonate nodule conglomerates were
developed and refIned, allowing the processing of over 2.5 tons of rock. The drilling of
three 50-foot holes to recover core for sedimentological, isotopic, and palynological
study, and the these studies were also a major focus of the year. The fossiliferous beds,
from the Castor Creek Member of the Fleming Formation, are fluvial overbank deposits
including fossil soils, with the best concentrations of small vertebrates coming from
conglomerates formed by concentration of coarse material. Remains of eight orders of
land mammals, including insectivores, chiropterans, a lagomorph, a large carnivore,
rodents, horses, a prosynthetocerine, and a gomphothere, have been recovered. Lower
vertebrate fossils include fIsh, crocodile, turtle, and lizard remains. At least two small
rodents, a beaver and a member of the genus Copemys, are considered to be new
species. Age of the fauna is early late Barstovian, probably between 14.5 Ma and 12.5
Ma, and carbon isotope study confIrms that the carbonate nodules and associated faunas
are definitely older than the worldwide 7.0 to 7.4 Ma ol3C shift, from a dominant C3type vegetation to a C4 -type vegetation. The Fort Polk site was coastal and
environmentally different from the long-studied Great Plains sites, which may explain
why many of the small mammals are particularly small for their kinds.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to thank individuals at Fort Polk, especially Director of Public Works,
LTC Francis X. Gillis and his environmental staff for their help and cooperation which
made this research possible. Special acknowledgment is made to the environmental staff,
Dr. Charles Stagg, James Grafton, Bob Hays, and James Hennigan, who participated in
field work and found some of the most exciting large specimens. Greg Dahlman found
the first piece of fossil bone. The following heavy equipment operators helped recover
the petrifIed wood: Charlie Grant, George Simmons, Ronald Hines, Greg Dahlman,
Billy Everidge, Mike Willis, Arthur Perkins, Willie Warren, Bill Ray, Carl Cedars,
Marvin Froemming, Herschel Keel, Kevin Martin, Lenard Monk, Larry Moore, and
Ricky Stark. They were supervised by Robert Sellers and Ernie Bryant, both of whom
work for the Roads and Grounds Branch of the Directorate of Public Works. James
Rogers, a consultant retired from the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), and David E.
Pope, of the Louisiana Geological Survey, brought the site to my attention. Persons
taking part in field andlor laboratory work include James Rogers, Suyin Ting, Ruth
Hubert, Richard McCulloch, Alton and Brett Dooley, Megan Jones, Julitta Kirkova,
Jason Hartness, Pam Borne, Susan Meiers, Mingji Chu, and Yan Huang. Suyin Ting
and Ruth Hubert did initial laboratory sample processing and a major portion of picking
and sorting throughout. Alton and Brett Dooley developed and ran the large-scale bulk
processing lab. The USGS, Ruston office, drilled and cored three holes for
sedimentological, stratigraphic, and other study. James Rogers logged the well coring.
Megan Jones did the sedimentological study of the cores, and Julitta Kirkova did the
petrologic study of thin sections. John Wrenn and Julia Garrett carried out the

v

palynological work and Paul Aharon did the isotope work. Michael Wiemann identified
the petrified wood,
I thank the Smithsonian Institution (U. S. Museum of Natural History) for
facilitating comparative study of the Norden Bridge fauna, the American Museum of
Natural History for access to the Frick Collection, and the University of Texas at Austin
and Southern Methodist University for facilitating comparative study of Texas coastal
plain Miocene fossils. Vertebrate paleontologists Everett Lindsay, Louis Jacobs, John
A. Wilson, Melissa Winans, David Bohaska, Nick Czaplewski, Mary Dawson, Eugene
Gaffney, Bruce MacFadden, Richard Hulbert, Robert Emry, Richard Tedford, and John
Maisey provided valuable discussions on the fossil vertebrates. James Rogers, Richard
McCulloch, Dag Nummedal, Ezat Heydari, Arnold Bouma and Timothy Dalbey
provided valuable insight into the geology and depositional environments. Gary Byerly,
Xiaogang Xie, and Dominique Hornberger provided microphotography expertise.
Kerry Lyle took photographs of large fossils. David Good assisted with computer
expertise.
Work is currently supported by U. S. Army FORSCOM, on a contract
administered and managed by Timothy S. Dalbey, Fort Worth District, U. S. Army
Corps of Engineers, issued under Contract No. DACW63-90-D-0008, Delivery Order
No. 13, entitled "Paleofaunal Survey, Collection, Processing, and Documentation at
Two Locations on Fort Polk, Louisiana" to Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Support has
also been provided by the LSU Museum of Natural Science.

VI

INTRODUCTION

Background
The history of scientific research on the Miocene fossil mammals of Fort Polk
(Figure 1) began on June 24,1993 when a group from the LSU Museum of Natural
Science visited Fort Polk to investigate the reported find of a small fossil mammal
mandible, which turned out to belong to a merychippine horse. Judith Schiebout,
vertebrate paleontologist at LSU, was invited to see the fossil and the locale where it was
found. This area, now called the Discovery site, had been bulldozed as a barrow pit
(Photograph 1), creating a flat area fortuitously exposing the Castor Creek Member of the
Fleming Formation in a region otherwise covered by pine forest and inaccessible for
fossil collecting. Two hard, resistant-to-erosion layers of rock, rich in calcium carbonate
nodules, were exposed in the bulldozed area. The lower layer was also rich in tiny chips
of bone and tooth enamel, and was recognized as very promising for small vertebrates.
Fort Polk personnel assisted in collecting bulk rock samples for return to the laboratory at
LSU for treatment to recover the tiny fossils. In subsequent search of eroded surfaces,
significant additional specimens have been discovered. Four additional fossil localities at
natural conglomerate exposures have been discovered within approximately two miles
distance from the original Discovery site. Laboratory treatment of bulk samples of
conglomerate from sites at Fort Polk has yielded a diverse fauna of small Miocene
mammals. The most productive of the newer sites has been christened the TVOR site.

Geologic History
A prominent band of Miocene rocks, the Fleming Formation, crops out on Fort
Polk, and it is a segment of these rocks, the Castor Creek Member, that yields the fossils
(Figures 2,3). Rogers and Callandro (1965) described the deposits of the Fleming
Formation, Castor Creek Member, in the Fort Polk area as a sequence of interfingering
sand and clay units. The Lena, Dough Hills and Castor Creek Members alternate with
the sandier Carnahan Bayou, Williamson Creek and Blounts Creek beds. The Castor
Creek Member is dominantly a clayey unit with thin, fine to very fine sands (Figure 2).
It is about 92 m (300 feet) thick with outcrops extending six to eight miles (10-13 km) at
Fort Polk (Rogers and Callandro, 1965), and has been described from parishes
immediately to the east of Vernon Parish, as brackish water deposits sandwiched between
fluvial members of the Fleming (Fisk, 1940). The locus of deposition in the Gulf of
Mexico basin has not been constant throughout the Cenozoic (Winker, 1981, 1982;
Galloway et aI., 1991), and these shifting depocenters have been linked to tectonic events
in the western United States and Mexico. Miocene to Quaternary sedimentation patterns
are related to the reactivation of the southern Rockies and renewed uplift of the southern
Appalachians. Galloway et ai. (1991) outline a migration of depocenters from Texas in
the Oligocene, to southeast Texas and western Louisiana in the early Miocene, to eastern
Louisiana in the mid-late Miocene. These variations in sediment influx result in a
complex depositional setting, dominated by fluvial and delta-plain environments in the
updip Miocene sediments (Glowacz and Horne, 1971; Galloway et al., 1991) most likely
with multiple source areas.

1

N

[:~y,Qai:~;l
":'.' .. ....:
-

Quaternary
alluvium

IMfcg I

t

,_D_

.4

Mfcg

Castor Creek
possibly underlain
by fossiliferous
conglomerates

I~Mf&1
:.
'.

-~ ,,~.', "

I

:'~

Castor Creek

Mfcg

subjacent to
fossiliferous
conglomerates

,

outcropping
fossiliferous
conglomerate
N

e
borehole
approximate
contact

0

lkm

Figure 1. Location map: Fort Polk, Fleming Formation, sites within Fort Polk. A. DISC;
B.Stonehenge; C. Gully; D.TVOR; E. TVOR-South. The Castor Creek Member/Quaternary
alluvium boundary approximates the 280 foot contour.

Photograph 1. Timothy Dalbey, Geoarchaeologist, of the US Army Corps of Engineers,
Fort Worth District, at the Discovery site. View to the south.
The only terrestrial fossil mammal from Louisiana, older than the Miocene,
is a single Paleocene specimen from a well core in Caddo Parish, so the Fort Polk
Miocene fauna is the oldest terrestrial mammal fauna for the state. Before the discovery
of the Fort Polk Miocene site, there was only a single report of a Miocene land animal
from Louisiana. This find, reported by Arata (1966), consisted of the tips of the lower
tusks of a gomphothere (Mammalia: Proboscidea). Arata estimated that the specimen
was from Miocene beds of Fort Polk, but precise stratigraphic and locality data were not
available to Arata (1966). It could have come from the Castor Creek member.
Manning and MacFadden (1989) reported younger material, a few isolated teeth
and bones of three-toed horses from the Tunica Hills, West Feliciana Parish, in eastern
Louisiana, discovered in stream gravels probably derived from the Citronelle Formation
of early Pliocene age. The Texas coastal plain has many Miocene sites, most of which
have yielded mainly large mammals. The major Miocene land mammal site nearest to
Fort Polk is located in east Texas. It was recovered from an ancient river channel deposit
in the Carnahan Bayou Member of the Fleming Formation at Toledo Bend, just south of
the Toledo Bend reservoir (Albright, 1991). The Toledo Bend site is considerably lower
in the geologic section than the Fort Polk Miocene sites, older by approximately 10
million years, and is approximately 23 million years old (Manning, 1990; Albright,
1991,1994). The lack of Louisiana Miocene mammalian faunas has always indicated that
the mammalian fauna at Fort Polk was likely to consist of genera reported from Louisiana
for the first time.

3

~------------------,.""~-

FIELD METHODS
Field collection of conglomerates involves breaking up beds with hammer or jackhammer
and bagging them in woven plastic bags for transport to the laboratory. Individual bags
weigh 23 to 45 kilograms (50-100 pounds).

W

w:I
zw
Wz

00

Oa:

-t..J_

1l.0

SS

w

z
w
o

MS
~

----

w .;:;.;:_:_
a: .-.-:-:_-

o

w ----

:E

o _

e:en ____
. . ·',.-,..- '
a:

~-:-::::

0<

:-::-:-::.

MS

C
C
C

1 ___ -

MS
~c(

-..J

W ::l

Z

0

W J:

SS

oo <
tCJ

<

:JO

o

Figure 2. Fleming Formation and its members as recognized in western Louisiana.
Member thicknesses after Rogers and Callandro (1965). SS= sandstone, MS= mudstone,
and C= conglomerate.

LABORATORY METHODS
Laboratory treatment of the Fort Polk Miocene conglomerates involves soaking
rocks in approximately 10% acetic acid to partially dissolve and break them up, which

4

releases the fossils and nodules as a residue (Photograph 2). Calcium carbonate (CaC03)
is the main mineral in the nodules and in the cement holding the rock together. Teeth and
bones are composed of apatite and are not dissolved. The residue from acid treatment is
rinsed, screened on a coarse screen to remove big nodules and rock chips for return to the
acid and on a fine screen to remove the mud. The residue is then sorted under a
microscope and small fossils are picked out, mainly bone scrap and teeth. The fossil
specimens are stored in large gelatin capsules. A pin is inserted through the end of the
capsule, and a tiny fossil is stuck to the end with a small piece of wax so that individual
fossils can be numbered (written on the capsule), studied, and photographed. The use of
wax instead of glue allows shifting the fossil's orientation or removing it if necessary.
Larger fossils from the Fort Polk sites are often encased in calcium carbonate nodular
masses or covered in mud. They may need only washing, or may require hours of
preparation under a microscope to chisel the rock off with a hand engraver. Large fossils
such as a merychippine horse mandible have their museum numbers written on them and
are filed for study in individual cardboard trays.

Photograph 2. Alton Dooley Jr. examines a piece of conglomerate which has been
soaking in dilute acetic acid in a treatment box.
One of the goals of this project is to develop an efficient process for bulk
dissolution of sediments for faunal extraction. The initial process used 12 to 20 heavy
plastic lO-gallon lidded storage boxes. Roughly 9-11 kg (twenty to twenty-five pound)

5

portions of conglomerate were placed into each box and covered with 10% acetic acid for
two weeks. Mter two weeks, the residue in the boxes was washed in running water over
a sieve with 0.59 mm openings, then spread in trays to dry.
The new acid lab procedure has two main stages: nine 85-gallon barrels
(hazardous waste overbarrels) and ftfteenlO-gallon boxes. The process is to fill the
barrels with 130 to 180 kg (300 to 400 pounds) of rock, then add a standardized amount,
30 gallons, of 10% acetic acid solution (Photograph 3). When the rock and acid have
reacted until the pH has risen to about 5.0, the barrels are washed. Each rock is taken
out and hosed off to remove sediment and the spent acid solution is pumped into an 85
gallon waste barrel to await neutralization to within the range allowed for disposal. To
raise the pH of the waste water to the EPA-required 5.5-9.0, sodium bicarbonate
(NAHC03) is added.

Photograph 3. Current bulk processing, Brett Dooley filling overbarrels.
The insoluble residue in the overbarrels is collected by vacuuming out the barrels
with a 20 gallon wet-dry vacuum cleaner. The residue is screened using a sieve with
0.59 mm openings (Photograph 4). Pieces small enough to get stuck in the vacuum
hose but large enough to require further processing are placed into the lO-gallon boxes,
where the same procedure, but using 10 liters of acid solution on 9-18 kg (20-40 lb.) of
rock, is followed. In June, researchers began weighing each bag of rocks with a 91 kg
(200 lb.) spring scale before placing it in the barrel and weighing the rocks after each
wash began. This allows monitoring of weight loss during processing. New rocks are
added to keep the barrels at a weight of 136 to181 kg (300 to 400 pounds).

6

Photograph 4. Current bulk: processing, Brett Dooley screening.
SITE DESCRIPTIONS
There are five localities at Fort Polk: where the vertebrate-fossil-bearing
conglomerate is exposed. All are in the Castor Creek Member (Welch, 1942), upper
Fleming Formation. These exposures are usually in creek beds or in erosional gullies. In
most places, the exposed conglomerate is a near horizontal, tabular ledge ranging in
thickness between 10-25 cm, and about 1.0 to 1.5 m wide with some evidence of trough
cross-bedding. It is usually overlain and underlain by a massive gray clay of variable
thickness, often with common CaC03 nodules. Pieces of conglomerate which had
broken off ledges and fallen into stream beds have also been collected. Site elevations are
derived from topographic maps and are elevations above mean sea level. Additional site
locality data is on file at the LSD Museum of Natural Science.
DISCOVERY Site (DISC, 300-325 ft) -- This site is a seven and a half acre
barrow pit south of the Fort Polk: landfill (Figure 1) west of Georgia Ave. At this locality
the conglomerate is exposed in several outcrops at both the east and west ends of the
landfill (Figure 3). There are several small, 0.5-1.0 m, surface conglomerate exposures at
the east end (Photograph 5), and they are just beneath the surface throughout most of the
east end. The clay surface is littered with CaC03 nodules, some of them clearly root
casts. Two layers of conglomerate were recognized early in the bulk: collecting and
characterized as the upper and lower conglomerate at DISC site. The coarser, more

7

Schematic Sketch of DISC Site
~ Conglomerate outcrops (27 June 95)

(j) Core locations
'A Strike and dip

--

""-Paleocurrent.z1muth
--_:Temporary road

~ From landfill

/

\ \
\

-

00

t

\

\

\ \

e B3
f? B2

N

\

g)..1Jl 81

A~}4

I

~

,\,~ "''-' ~A6
,~~

+-~A3A1 ~

iT 41:

ogA2

"",,"---__ _
--__________ _

®

Figure 3. Sketch map of Discovery (DISC) site, a borrow pit south of the Fort Polk
landfill.

-

'-

:<~ ("-".<-~

,j"~~~~~"~'~;',~~;;~ W:

"

..'

' ",','

~

"

,o~

Photograph 5. Dr. John Wrenn, palynologist from the LSD Department of Geology and
Geophysics, at east side of DISC, examining the lower conglomerate.

Photograph 6. Conglomerate exposed at west side of DISC site. Conglomerate layers
indicated with arrows.

9

nodule-rich layer is stratigraphically below the sandier upper layer, actually a coarse
sandstone, which is often rich in steinkerns of turritellid-like gastropods. Less than 0.5
meter of clay separates them, and digging to collect the rock in bulk has not revealed any
separation in some parts of the east side of the site. The upper layer is a medium dark
gray, moderately-sorted, subangular to rounded, coarse sandstone. Strike and dip data
from three exposures suggests that it strikes northwest and ranges in dip from 3° to 5°
SW. Trough cross-bedding is evident in several of these exposures. Preliminary
paleocurrent azimuths suggest stream flow from due west to northwest.
At the west end of the landfill, there are three (as of 28 June 95) erosional gullies,
about 3-5 m apart, that expose conglomerate layers lithologically similar to the lower
conglomerate layer found at the east end (Photograph 6). This end of the landfill appears
topographically lower than the east end, though this may be the result of surficial
disturbance by bulldozers over the area. The conglomerates in these exposures range in
thickness from 10 to 15 cm, are about 1m wide, and are overlain and underlain by a gray
clay. Like the layers at the east end, these layers strike NW.
STONEHENGE Site (270 ft)-- This locality is a creek bed due south of the DISC
landfill. There are a few broken and overturned tabular blocks lying in the creek bed
(Photograph 7). No strike or dip data were taken at this site because of the disturbed
nature of the beds. The lithology of these layers is similar to that of the conglomerate at
TVORsite.
GULLY Site (280 ft) -- This locality is an erosional gully to the east of Stonehenge
and to the south of the DISC site. Here the conglomerate is patchy, friable and about 10
cm thick within a meter-thick gray clay. This layer is not as lithified and continuous as
layers found at the DISC, TVOR and TVOR South sites. The lithology at this site is the
same as that found in the layers at the west end (sites B 1-3) and in the lower layer at the
east end of the DISC site.
TVOR Site (310 ft)-- This site is near the Terminal Very-High Frequency Omni
Range radar tower, off of Exchange Road. The primary exposure of conglomerate
(Figure 8) at this site is in an erosional gully directly on strike with the radar tower and
north of the east-west dirt road. In the woods north of this outcrop there are a few field
outcrops and some displaced blocks scattered in the cleared area above the gully exposure
and in the woods to the north of it. The conglomerate layer in the gully may be a channel
fill.
TVOR South Site (300 ft) -- This site is due south of the TVOR site in an -40 m
long erosional gully striking N-S (Figure 4). At the far south end of the gully is a section
about 1.75 m thick (Figure 4, section at B). From the gully floor up 130 cm is a light
brown to beige mottled, massive clay; from 130-147 cm a Fe-stained, black silty layer
with some parallel and concentric laminations (Photograph 9); from 147 to the ground
surface is a mottled clay. The conglomerate layer at this site is in the center of the gully
(Figure 4 A), stratigraphically below the section (Figure 4 at B). It forms a meter-wide
ledge about 15-25 cm thick. It is underlain by CaC03 nodular gray clay about 10-15 cm
thick which is in turn underlain by a half-meter-thick gray clay without carbonate
nodules. Abundant clasts and broken blocks of several lithologies are found from this
ledge north 18.6 m within the gully.

10

Photograph 7. Robert Hays (L) and James Grafton (R) of the Fort Polk environmental
staff at Stonehenge site.

Photograph 8. Timothy Dalbey, Geoarchaeologist, of the US Army Corps of Engineers,
Fort Worth District, photographs conglomerate outcrop at the TVOR Site.

11

rvOR South Site
Section
at B

[.~ clay, light beige, mottles abundant

III iron-stained black sill with some concentric laminations

N

t

~ clay, light gray to white, mottles abundant

1
U

apparent dip
capped pipe

C

0

e--......,5m

B
Figure 4. Sketch map of TVOR south site. An erosional ravine is deepest at the
southern end (B) rising to ground surface at the northern end (D) and eastern edge (E).
Vertebrate fossils are found in the conglomerate layer (A) and along the gully walls near
A and C. Section at B does not encounter any conglomerate.

12

Photograph 9. Black silty layer at TVOR South

SEDIMENTOLOGY AND DEPOSITIONAL ENVIRONMENT
A series of clays and silty clays with moderately developed paleosols was
recovered from the three 15-m, 3-inch cores which were drilled in the Castor Creek
Member. No exposure of a large channel currently exists; however, a sandy channel
(approximately 100 yards long by 25 feet wide by 4 feet thick) with a pronounced
convex lower base, stratigraphically above the DISC site, was removed while excavating
for the landfill at DISC (James Grafton, personal communication, 1995). At the base
was a four to five inch thick conglomerate. He remembers the channel as fairly straight,
without the strong curves of a highly meandering stream (James Grafton, 1995, pers.
comm.). The following discussion of the sedimentology and depositional environment
is modified from Jones, Schiebout, and Kirkova (1995), where more-detailed
descriptions of the cores are also given.
The limited distribution of the outcropping conglomerates and the fact that they
were not penetrated by any of the cores, drilled to reveal their stratigraphic relationships,
indicate that they are very discontinuous, localized deposits. They probably formed as
lag deposits at the bases of minor channels and gullies. They are composed primarily of
well-rounded, carbonate peloids, which appear similar to the carbonate nodules found in
the paleosols of the cores, as well as sediment from multiple source areas within the
basin. The composition and texture of these conglomerates indicate that considerable
erosion, reworking, and redeposition of penecontemporaneous soils and sediments had
occured, facilitating the concentration of the vertebrate fossil remains.
Hand specimens of the conglomerates were thin-sectioned and examined for
petrology. Compositional percentages are based on point counts of 300, and rock
names assigned are based on the classification of Folk (1959). Two stratigraphically

13

adjacent (sometimes not separate) conglomerate horizons from the east side of the DISC
site have been sampled for thin section analyses. The lower conglomerate is composed
of carbonate peloids (51 %) and other sedimentary rock fragments (22%) in a matrix of
carbonate cement (Photograph 10). The conglomerate is a pelsparite and has a total
porosity of 12%. Stratigraphically above it lies the other conglomerate layer, a carbonate
arenite. This horizon is made up of carbonate peloids, quartz grains, feldspar grains,

Photograph 10. Petrology photomicrograph of DISC lower conglomerate. A, peloid: B,
calcium carbonate cement: C, rock fragment. Scale=lmm.
volcanic rock fragments, and other sedimentary rock fragments (Photograph 11). The
percentage distribution of framework grains varies within the unit; the lower portion is
relatively richer in quartz and volcanic rock fragments than the upper one and has higher
cement percentage and lower porosity values. The upper conglomerate exhibits two
distinct undulated quartz populations: 1) larger, subangular to subrounded cracked
grains, and 2) smaller, subrounded, undeformed grains, whereas the upper portion is
enriched in the cracked quartz grains. The quartz components suggest two separate
source areas; the larger, sub angular grains indicate shorter distance of transportation,
whereas the smaller, rounded grains could be inferred as being transported over a larger
distance.
Another conglomerate bed, from the TVOR site, has been studied in detail. At
present, its stratigraphic relationship to conglomerates at Discovery site is unknown.
Petrologic studies identify this unit as a pelsparite composed of carbonate peloids (41 %),
quartz grains (5%), carbonate-dominated rock fragments (2%), and wood fragments
(1 %) (Photograph 12). The total porosity is 18%, and the framework grains are
cemented by either carbonate cement (11 %) or a black mineral cement (18%), as yet
unidentified. Mter the formation of the black mineral cement, the rock has undergone
carbonate cementation (photograph 12). The exact composition of the black mineral is
unknown. Preliminary SEM studies indicate that it has a complex, and most likely
partially altered, composition, which could be attributed to pedogenic processes. In
addition, microfractures sealed by coarse (microsparitic) calcite are observed at some

14

places within the thin section. A post-compactional event is a probable explanation for
the microfracturing.

Photograph 11. Petrology photomicrograph of DISC "upper conglomerate", a carbonate
arenite. A. Quartz.; B, peloid. Scale=lmm.

Photograph 12. Thin section of TVOR conglomerate in polarized light. A, peloid; B,
calcium carbonate rock fragment; C quartz. Scale=lmm.

15

The peloids incorporated into the DISC and TVOR conglomerates were most
likely formed originally as carbonate nodules in soils that were reworked as solids and
deposited in stream channels. Some of the carbonate peloids show septarian structure,
with sparry calcite filling cracks formed by the relatively slower rate of desiccation and
crystallization of the central part of the nodule (Photograph 13). The observed
pronounced rounding of the peloids is most likely caused by the softness of the calcite
and the inherited original shape of the nodules. The peloids probably formed at some
distance from the deposition site. Some of them were partially dissolved after
deposition. The dissolutional event occurred before the initial cementation of the rock.

Photograph 13. Photomicrograph oflower conglomerate (DISC) showing peloid with
septarian features (upper center) and partially dissolved peloid (right), in polarized light.
Scale=1mm.
Moderately developed soil profiles, containing A, B, and C horizons, characterize
the fine-grained sediments (Figures 5, 6; Photograph 14). Mottle coloring indicating
oxidation and possible water table fluctuations is prevalent throughout the paleosols.
Roots and large root burrows which characterize A horizons are abundant. Calcium
carbonate concentrations are common in most B and some C horizons. Slickensides,
resulting from the alternating wetting and drying of soils, are common. A preliminary
attempt to classify the paleosols based only on the core observations suggests that the
highly slickensided and pedoturbated nature of these paleosols is indicative of vertisols.
Vertisols are characterized by shrinking and swelling clays, such as smectite (Brady,
1991; Mack and James, 1992) which impart the slickensided and highly pedoturbated
texture described throughout many parts of these cores. Vertisols commonly form in
subhumid to semiarid environments, though there are instances of these forming in
humid climates today (Brady, 1991), where there is a seasonal variation in precipitation
which facilitates the shrink and swell phenomena. A reasonable interpretation is that this
paleosol development and sedimentation occurred at the same time. These sediments are
floodplain deposits which are periodically inundated and subaerially exposed for lengths
of time suffi~ient for paleosol development. Recent studies of floodplain mudstones

16

(Farrell, 1987; Smith et aI., 1989; Kraus and AsIan, 1993) have suggested that these
deposits can record a complex depositional history attributed to episodic avulsion, as
opposed to simple widespread overbank deposition (AsIan, 1994). Modem deposits
resembling these have been reported from well-drained, floodplain backswamp and
interdistributary basin settings (Coleman, 1966; Farrell, 1987; AsIan, 1994), whereas in
studies of ancient rocks, deposits such as these are usually reported as being simply of
floodplain or overbank origin in a well-drained, oxidizing environment (Ghosh, 1987;
Blodgett, 1988; Kraus and Bown, 1988).
The sequences of clays, silty clays, and clayey silts and very fine sands of the
Castor Creek in the Fort Polk area reflect deposition in several interchannel settings.
The root-marked and mottled massive clays are indicative of floodplain backswamps.
The paleosol features such as mottle coloring, formation of carbonate rather than siderite
or vivianite, and the lack of preserved organic matter indicate an oxidizing environment
suggestive of moderatly to well-drained, rather than poorly drained swamps. More silty
and laminated units may represent lacustrine delta-fill sequences resulting from
crevasse-splay development diverting stream flow into a floodplain lake or backswamp.
The vertic nature of the paleosols, as well as, the repeated development of paleosols in
each core indicate that these sediments were periodically inundated and subaerially
exposed for considerable periods of time.

A

B

NOR
310'

DLSCl
-325'

DISC 2
3(1()'

Figure 5. Schematic representation of topographic relationship between cores and
outcropping conglomerates at the TVOR site (A) and DISC site (B).

17

Carbonate
Soil
Horizon Development
I
A

Bk

A

Bk

* (OYR5f6) It. brown
f-'=-:JJ:iViiii'-=_-!.'=-l I

Ck

DISC II
m

»
"'."
'0"(4

0

Stage of
Carbonate
Soli
Horizon Development

'"c
'"
'"

** liE5~lt
bmwn to
IOYR ! dk.yellowlsh

II
II

X

0

A

II

n

I

Il~1

II

II

BCkm
Bk

~Y'I. ~ray--%,

@i(5YZ2)to",;

Bg

!ill. olive oravt

I
II

5

A

~1"1

II
II
II

StagS of
Soil
Carbonate
Horizon Development

m

I

Bk

10

I

10 ~~lFs I ~ I<Q"'" ~n. ~.

B

J~~.*(10YR~~

C

A

J I

I-'

00

---~--------.

~-.-

A

SOIL STRUCTURE & CARBONATE
ss slickensides
lOOCX MnOxide stains
B3 blocky peds
TT
powdery dispensed carbonate
c:D

carbonate nodules'

_._.- -----,.... --."

BC

1ji:~:~~';':

1d~:t~:;:~~ *11~YR5i4fiii[jiC""'0 C

(1OYR5I4) GSA Rock Color Chart
designation
MOTILE ABUNDANCE
,. few

* common

** many

SEDIMENTARY STRUCTURES
~ cross·bedding
planar laminations
~<>.. wavy beddIng

-=--

15

die. yellowish orange

~

LITHOLOGIES

_ClAY
~SILT
~SANO
~SILTYCLAY

FOSSILS
} root traces
YOe;:, burrows
X organic matter

Figure 6. Core graphic logs illustrating sedimentology and paleosol development
at DISC and TVOR.

Photograph 14. Core photographs depicting sedimentological and paleosol features.
These are segments of cores showing specific features and are not whole cores.
A. sequence of massive clay with dispersed, powdery carbonate throughout, DISC I
core, 693 cm to 726 cm; B.lower portion illustrating preserved depositional planar
bedded, alternating clays and silty clays with silts and very fine sands, TVOR core, 1254
cm to 1287 cm; C. preserved depositional bedding, disrupted wavy laminations, DISC II

19

p

core, 1452 cm to 1485 cm; D. indurated cross-bedded sandstone interval, DISC II core,
396 cm to 429 cm; E. massive clay with many prominent mottles, B horizon, DISC I
core, 561 cm to 594 cm; F. vertically penetrating, drab-haloed root traces of A horizon
DISC II core, 561 cm to 594 cm; G. slickensided, angular, blocky peds of massive clay
unit, B horizon, DISC II core, 1221 cm to 1254 cm; H. silty clay-filled root trace and
floating blocky peds overlain by unaltered original material, DISC II core, 1485 cm to
1518 cm.

STABLE ISOTOPES OF PEDOGENIC CARBONATES
A number of recent studies (Cerling et aI., 1989; Quade et aI., 1989; Mora et aI.,
1991; Cerling et al., 1993) have indicated that pedogenic carbonates are robust indicators
of terrestrial depositional systems and have been shown to retain their isotopic
compositions through diagenesis. The relationship between the 813C compositions of
pedogenic carbonates and coexisting organic soil, established on the basis of modem
examples, suggests that the former are a direct function of the soil CO2 which in tum
reflects the nature of the biomass. For example, soil carbonates formed in the presence
of pure C3 and pure C4 biomass would have 813C values at 25°C of about -12%0 and
+2%0, respectively (Quade et aI., 1989). In addition, 818 0 values of soil carbonates
have been shown to have a very strong positive correlation with the isotopic content of
local rainfall (Cerling, 1984), which is affected by the climatic conditions and topography
of the specific locality.
A rigorous stable isotope study by Quade et ai. (1989) of a well-exposed paleosol
record spanning the past 18 Ma in the Siwalik Group of northern Pakistan has established
that a remarkable 8l3 C positive shift of 12%0 occurred in soil carbonates at about 7.0 to
7.4 Ma ago accompanied by a less dramatic positive shift in 818 0 compositions. The
observed 813 C shift, coinciding with the timing of a major vertebrate faunal turnover, has
been attributed to a rapid change in biomass from a dominant C3-type vegetation to a C4 type vegetation, related to an expansion of C4 plants on floodplains. Initially the marked
ecological shift recorded during the latest Miocene was attributed to development of the
Asian monsoon (Quade et aI., 1989). Subsequent studies of paleovegetation from
paleosols and paleodiets from fossil tooth enamel (Cerling, 1992; Cerling et aI., 1993)
indicate that the C4 biomass expanded rapidly and simultaneously in both the Old World
and New World, and this global expansion may be related to lower atmospheric CO2
levels «800 ppmv). This is because C4 photosynthesis is favored over C 3
photosynthesis, when there are lower concentrations of CO2 in the atmosphere.
Regardless of the exact cause of the rapid C4 biomass exp,ansion recorded
globally in pedogenic carbonates, the ubiquitous post-7.4 Ma 81 C positive shift provides
a sharp time marker which can serve to constrain the age of the Castor Creek floodplain
deposits from Fort Polk, Louisiana. Stable isotope analyses of eight calcite concretions
from the conglomerate beds yield 813C values in the range of -9.3%0 to -13.5%0 PDB
(mean -11.1 ±1.2%0 for n=8) that are consistent with a >7.4 Ma age of predominantly
C 3-type biomass. This age assessment is in agreement with the age estimates (14.5 to
12.5 Ma, late Barstovian) derived by Schiebout (1994) on the basis of vertebrate fossils
associated with the concretions. The 818 0 values of the carbonate nodules vary over a
narrow range from -4.2%0 to -5.3%0 (mean -4.9 ±OA%o for n=8). Assuming a soil
temperature of 25°C (a reasonable assumption for a floodplain within the subtropical
belt), then the 8180 value of the water equilibrated with the carbonate nodules is estimated
to be -3.10/00 SMOW. This value is close to the mean 818 0 of present rainfall in
southeast Louisiana (i.e., -3.8%0 SMOW, Gonthier and Aharon, 1990) suggesting that
20

the rainfall pattern on the mid-Miocene floodplain was driven by the proximity to the Gulf
of Mexico, as is the case today.
As yet, there are not sufficient isotope determinations in the pedogenic carbonates
from the DISC and TVOR cores to draw definitive interpretations. A carbonate nodule
from a depth of 69 cm in the DISC core yielded a 013C value of -4.7% 0 , that is
substantially heavier relative to the mean value of nodules from the conglomerate beds
(i.e., -11.1% 0). The 13C-enrichment suggests a modem to submodern paleosol thus
confmning the conclusion derived by Jones et al. (1995) on the basis of morphology.
The nodules deep in the DISC core (1.97 to 9.08 m) yield 013C values in the range
-8.1% 0 to -11.3 % 0 (mean -lOA ±1.SO/oo for n=4) and 0180 values in the range
3.8% 0 to -5.3 % 0 (mean -4.8 ±0.7%0 for n=4) that are statistically indistinguishable
from the nodules occurring in the adjacent conglomerate beds. On this basis a late
Barstovian age should be assigned to the deeper paleosols encountered in the DISC core.
The three nodules analyzed from the TVOR core yield 013C values from -8.5% 0 to
10.8% 0, suggesting a pre-modem age, but more samples need to be processed in order
to confrrm this speculation. Suggested additional analytical work includes:
1. Increase the density of sampling of the pedogenic carbonates in order to cover
all the paleosols reported from the DISC and TVOR cores.
2. Sample and analyze a large pool of nodules from different conglomerates.
3. Analyze the 013C compositions of the organic matter in the paleosols coexisting
with the pedogenic carbonates and the residual organic fraction in the nodules. These
analyses are essential in order to confrrm the validity of the 013C results, as previous
studies have indicated that a reliable system must show a 15% 0 isotope fractionation
between the pedogenic carbonate and the coexisting soil organics.
4. Analyze the 013C values of the fossil teeth enamel in order to determine whether
a match exists between the grazing fauna and the pedogenic carbonates.
5. Establish a baseline of isotope values in unambiguous modem soils from the
area including (a) soil organics, (b) pedogenic carbonates, and (c) biomass to establish
the proportion of C 3 to C4 vegetation in the present environment.

TAPHONOMY
Evidence available for evaluating taphonomy of the Fort Polk vertebrate fossils
comes from three different collection methods. The rarest fossil occurrence is that of inplace remains of large animals, with only a single good example collected so far, a
partial mandible of Prosynthetoceras jrancisi, a deer-sized artiodactyl related to early
camels. The mandible was oriented teeth-up in clay just above the prominent
conglomerate layers at the Discovery Site (Photograph 15). It was partially exposed by
weathering and was collected in the classic vertebrate paleontological manner, by
blocking out a segment of the bone-containing clay and covering it with a gauze-andplaster protective coating. Removing the specimen from its block and cleaning it in the
laboratory revealed that a dense carbonate nodular mass, similar to nodules in the
conglomerates, covered the front of the mandible including the symphysis and canine
and incisor root area. Incisors and canines were absent, probably detached before burial.
Several hollow, irregular, and elongate nodules were recovered from the adjacent clay.
These are considered to have formed around roots near the specimen, and they and the
nodular mass on the symphysis formed after burial in the Miocene, not inthe Recent,
because this specimen was well below the modem ground and soil levels.

21

..------------------------------

~

Photograph 15. Collecting the Prosynthetocerasfrancisi mandible. In the foreground, a
crew from the LSU Museum of Natural Science (from left to right) Suyin Ting, Dr.
Judith A. Schiebout, and Pam Borne, dig while Fort Polk staff watch.
The bulk of the remains of animals larger than a small antelope were recovered
from surface float either on natural or bulldozed outcrops, although a few large teeth and
bone fragments came from the conglomerate layers. No bone was clearly associated
with any other. Calcium carbonate nodular masses covering part of the bones and teeth
are common, indicating that the porous nature of the large bones made them a center for
carbonate accumulation after burial. The first specimen found, the horse mandible from
Discovery site, was heavily encrusted. All of the remains of large animals are considered
to be from normal attrition on the fauna resulting in carcasses being exposed to
weathering and scavenging, and bones being broken and scattered before burial.
The small animal fauna was recovered by acid treatment and screening of large
volumes of well-cemented rock rich in nodules. The vast majority of identifiable
vertebrate specimens are loose teeth, averaging a millimeter in length, although a single
lizard maxilla fragment and two mammal mandible fragments have been recovered. The
small mammal teeth, which are a major focus of this study, occur with fish and alligator
teeth, chips and flakes of teeth of larger mammals, and a much more common class of
both angular and well rounded bone chips (Figure 7,8; Photograph 16). The texture of
the bone chips indicates that some are from animals much larger than those providing the
teeth, i. e. sheep-sized or horse-sized. Teeth of larger animals were subject to splitting,
weathering, and transport wear, and whole teeth and pieces large enough for
identification would have been left as lag, not transported with the size fraction of
material being processed for screening.
Behrensmeyer (1978) characterized weathering stages in large mammals,
Andrews (1990) did the same for small mammals, and both conclude that splitting of
teeth and bones are extensive in five years. Andrews (1990) indicates that small bones
and teeth show no modification in the first two years, and Behrensmeyer (1978) reports
bone cracking in large animals in less than two years, suggesting that the mix of whole
small teeth with large tooth and bone flakes and chips could result from similar periods of
exposure of the two size fractions on the Miocene ground surface. The sorting and
rounding (Photograph 16) evident in the conglomerates indicates that the small teeth in

22

2. large tooth frag. (15%)
3. small tooth frag. (21 %)
5. fish tooth (1 %)
7. large bone frag. (23%)
8. small bone frag. (40%)

ocount:
1. whole mammal tooth
.4. crocodile or lizard tooth
6. small whole bone
9. fish scale
10. turtle shell
11. reptile scutes
12. vertebra

Figure 7. Distribution of kinds of fossils from DISC (300-count).

1. whole mammal tooth (0.3%)
2. large tooth frag. (3 %)
3. small tooth frag. (4.3%)
5. fish tooth (1.7%)
6. small ident. bone (1 %)
7. large bonefrag. (14.7%)
8. small bone frag. (71.3%)
9. fish scale (2.7%)
10. turtle shell (0.7%)
12. vertebra (0.3%)

ocount:
4. crocodile or lizard tooth
11. reptile scutes
Figure 8. Distribution of kinds of fossils from TVOR (300-count).
them have undergone transport. Small teeth may have entered soils upon the death of
their original owners, been eroded with soil-formed nodules, and concentrated in small
channel bases to form the discontinuous conglomerates. It is possible that some of the
rodents and insectivores were burrowers and that their life style facilitated incorporation
of their remains in soils and later preservation among soil-formed nodules. This could be
the case for the hedgehog, geomyid, and beaver. Some Miocene beavers are known to
be burrowers (Peterson, 1905). Some small teeth may have undergone more than one

23

cycle of erosion and deposition; however, most show no sign of wear in water transport,
and some retain delicate long roots. This indicates that their transport affected them little
and may not have been long.

Photograph 16. Unsorted fossil concentrate from Discovery site. Scale=1 cm.
There is no evidence of unusual or mass mortality producing the Fort Polk
Miocene fossil deposits, and both large and small remains can be explained by normal
attrition of local populations. The thinness and restricted lateral extent of the
conglomeratic deposits suggests that they are not the bases of large channels bringing in
bed load from a great distance; therefore, the fossils all represent life on the western
Louisiana coastal plain. The small fossils may represent a wider geographic range and
more time averaging than the larger specimens, because the small ones have clearly
undergone at least one local cycle of reworking.

24

SYSTEMATIC PALEONTOLOGY
Paleobotany
Pollen and Other Plant Microfossils
Photographs 17, 18; Tables 1,2.
The most nodule-rich of the two Discovery Site conglomerates has yielded
charophytes (Susan Meiers, 1993, pers. comm.). Charophytes are fruiting bodies of
stoneworts, algae usually indicative of quiet river or lake environments, but sometimes
found in coastal brackish water (Tappan, 1980, pp.927-930). Some are found in highly
saline lakes (Timothy Dalbey, 1994, pers. comm.)
The following discussion represents methods and initial results from LSD
palynologist Dr. John Wrenn:
Palynomorphs (organic-walled microfossils) are present, often in great
abundance, in most types of sediments and sedimentary rocks. Study of these
palynomorphs can greatly refine our understanding of their source(s), age and the
depositional paleoenvironments in which they accumulated. The purpose of conducting
palynologic analysis on the Fort Polk mammal beds and associated units is to provide
additional age and paleoenvironmental control for the mammal assemblages. Samples
have been collected from outcrops and the TVOR and DISC II cores. Taxonomic studies
are continuing on the assemblages. Completion of a new palynological research
laboratory in July 1995 is expected to greatly facilitate work.
All samples were non marine in origin. The pollen assemblages recovered from
the very productive samples suggest derivation from a mixed evergreen and hardwood
forest with associated open areas containing grass and herbaceous plants. Freshwater
algal cysts (e.g., Pseudoschizea circula) indicate periodically wet or permanent standing
bodies of shallow water in the woodland. Fungal debris, including hyphae and spores
(e.g., Uncinulites, Atrophonites sp., Polyporisporites spp., ?Asyregraamspora sp.)
indicates active plant degradation occurred under oxygenated and damp, if not wet,
conditions.
The presence of Tricolporopollenites sp. A (Photograph 17M,N) and Ambrosia
sp. (Photograph 17K,L) type Compositae pollen in the uppermost sample (0.64-0.66 m)
studied in the TVOR Core indicates that the sample can be no older than late-middle to
early-late Miocene (Serrevallian-Tortonian, approximately 10-12 MA). Age
determinations are not complete for the other samples that contained good assemblages.
Table 1 lists the samples collected and those processed thus far. Palynological
sample processing generally followed the procedures described in Barss and Williams
(1973), but included sieving after oxidation to concentrate palynomorphs and remove
fine, unwanted organic debris. Residues were mounted in glycerin jelly. Phytolith
samples were processed by weighing (10 grams) and drying in an oven overnight. The
sample was then sieved through a 1 mm sieve. Half of the sample was digested in HCL
to dissolve carbonates and washed to neutrality. The residue was then sieved on a 10J..lm
sieve and a slide made of the +10 and the -10J..lm fractions. Permount was used for the
mounting medium.

Palynological Analyses
This is a preliminary discussion of the palynomorphs recovered from each sample
and their significance. Distribution tables and charts will be prepared when the study is
more mature. Table 2 lists the scientific and equivalent common names of the important

25

plants from which palynomorphs were recovered, as well as their environmental
significance.
Table 1
The samples collected and studied for palynomorphs to date. The relative recovery of
palynomorphs and the interpreted age of the samples is shown.
Source

Sample
Number

Depth

TVOR-94

1

0.64-0.66

TVOR-94
TVOR-94
TVOR-94
TVOR-94
TVOR-94
TVOR-94
TVOR-94
TVOR-94
TVOR-94
TVOR-94
Discll
Discll
Discll
Discll
Discll
Discll
Discll
Discll
Discll
FP (Discovery Site)
FP (Discovery Site)
FP (Discovery Site)
FP (Discovery Site)
FP (Discovery Site)
FP (Discovery Site)
FP (Discovery Site)
FP (Discovery Site)
FPMUpper
Conglomerate
FPMLower
Conglomerate
FPMTVOR
TVORSouth

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

1.32-1.35
1.67-1.69
3.43-3.46
4.18-4.21
4.96-4.99
5.72-5.75
7.50-7.53
10.33-10.36
12.66-12.69
14.96-14.99
3.71-3.73
8.84-8.92
9.91-9.98
11.89-11.96
13.23-13.31
15.55-15.60
6.22-6.25
6.91- 6.93
15.95-15.98

11

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

(M)

26

Processed Palynomorph
AGE
and
Recovery
studied
X
Abundant late middleearly late
Miocene

X

Very Rare

Indet.

X

Very Rare

Indet.

X

Very Rare

Indet.

X

Abundant

Indet.

X

Very Rare

Indet.

X

Very Rare

Indet.

X
X

Abundant
Common

Indet.
Indet.

Table 2
The environmental significance of the important plants for which pollen was recovered.
The scientific and common names are given.
Present-day distribution in Gulf
Coast
Small trees and shrubs growing along
streams in north central Gulf Coast.
Compositae
Herbaceous plants.
Ambrosia type
Hickory, pecan
Wide variety of species with wide
Carya
range of ecological requirements.
Hackberry, sugarberry Grows on rich moist alluvial soils of
Celtis (?) laevigata.
bottomlands, scattered among other
hardwoods.
Widespread; difficult to separate the
Grass
Graminea
many types.
Holly
Shrubs, some species of which grow
Ilex type
in wet pinelands and on the margins of
swamps.
Typical of moist, well-drained sandy
Liquidambar styraciflua Sweet gum
soils, and does not tolerate extremely
dry conditions. Occurs with oak and
pine.
Different species are shrubs to small
Bayberry
Myrica
trees that grow in longleaf pinelands,
bogs, swamps, or boggy branch
bottoms.
Various species, occur in sandy areas
Pine
Pinus
in delta; more widespread in upland
sandy areas.
Restricted to Asia today.
Pterocarya sp.
Various species occupy a wide variety
Oak
Quercus sp.
of settings.
Swamp or bald
Grows in wet soil, swamps, and banks
Taxodium distinctum
of rivers and lakes, especially in
cypress
Louisiana.
Scientific Plant
Name
Alnus

Common Plant
Name
Alder

Discovery Site Samples:
DISC II Core (32'7" - 32'9") Light olive gray silty clay. Rare pollen grains,
including Pinus sp. (similar to Photograph 17J), ?Ambrosia sp.(similar to Photograph
17K,L), and an unknown tricolporate grain indicate a terrestrial source. Fungal material
was common and indicates the breakdown of organic matter was underway in an
oxygenated depositional environment that was at least periodically wet.
DISC II Core (51' - 51'2") Light olive gray silty-clay. Similar to above, though
fungal debris is much less common.
Discovery Site Lower Conglomerate This sample is similar to FP-6 in appearance
but produced very few palynomorphs and no spores. A single grain each of Gramineae
and Pinus sp. was recovered. This indicates a terrestrial source for the organic matter.
27

Discovery Site Upper Conglomerate This sample is from the very muddy sand
that contains common snails. Only a few grains of Pinus sp. and two grains of Celtis sp.
were recovered. This assemblage indicates a terrestrial origin of the palynomorphs but is
too sparse to say more.
TVOR Site Samples
FP-6 is from the lower of two conglomeratic units that crop out along the road at the
TVOR site and is composed of rounded granules and clay clasts cemented by calcite.
Abundant palynomorphs, apparently spore type A, of unknown origin were recovered
from FP-6 (Photograph 18 G,H). Although they bear a resemblance to the freshwater
algae Gloeocapsa, their identification remains uncertain. This is because some specimens
still contain cell contents, which is usually not preserved. The outer surface of the
conglomeratic sample was washed before it was processed to prevent contamination by
modem material. However, these spores remain suspect, until the sample can be rerun.
No such spores have been seen in any other sample.
FPM-TVOR is from the well cemented, upper conglomerate that crops out at the TVOR
site. An approximately 1" cubic sample was cut out of a large block of the conglomerate
and scrubbed prior to processing. This was done to insure that the organic material
recovered was in situ and not surface contamination. Recovery was very good. Pinus
sp. was the most abundant and Gramineae the second most common pollen observed.
Rare grains of Ambrosia sp., Carya sp., ?Celtis sp., and Liquidambar sp. (Photograph
171) were recovered. Also abundant was a wide variety of fungal spores (e.g.,
Monoporisporites, Polyporisporites, Brachysporites) and hyphae. Pseudoschizea circula
(Photograph 181), reputedly the cysts of a freshwater Zynegmatacean algae, was present,
though was not abundant.
This assemblage suggests the source area was a mixed forest of pine and
hardwood trees, probably dominated by Pinus. Areas open to the sun are indicated by
the presence of Pseudoschizea circula and Gramineae pollen. P. circula can live in damp
soil or ephemeral to permanent shallow freshwater sites. This may indicate that
occasionally wet grassland or marsh settings were associated with the forest. This is
supported by the presence of abundant fungal material, which indicates the breakdown
of organic matter was underway and suggests an oxygenated depositional environment
that was at least periodically wet.
TV OR Core 0.64 - 0.66 m This sample (light olive gray mudstone) yielded
abundant and varied palynomorphs. Pinus sp. (similar to Photograph 17J), an
unidentified monosu1cate grain (similar to Photograph 17E) and Pseudoschizea circula
were extremely abundant. Corylus, Gramineae, Compositae (long spine, long furrow
type), and Psilotritetes sp. were abundant. Rare pollen include Alnus sp., Ambrosia sp.
(similar to Photograph 17K,L), Carya sp., Liquidambar sp. (similar to Photograph 171),
[lex sp., Pterocarya sp. (similar to Photograph 17H), Salix sp. (similr to Photograph
17F), and Taxodium sp. Fungal material was abundant and diverse, including
Polyporisporites (similar to Photograph18D), Echilacrima, Triangulinites, ?"Rigidonites"
(similar to Photograph 18A), and Microsporonites. Golden-colored fibrous, elongate
bodies were common to abundant and may be fecal pellets (similar to Photograph 18F).
This assemblage indicates a terrestrial setting, probably a mixed forest of pines
and hardwoods, with open grassy areas. The fungal debris indicates an oxygenated and
damp to periodically wet environment in which organic degradation occurred. The
abundance of P. circula, which can live in damp soil or ephemeral to permanent shallow
freshwater sites, supports this interpretation. This may indicate occasionally wet
grassland or m.arsh settings associated with the forest.

28

M

N

Photograph 17. A. Laevigatosporites sp. (Slide TVOR-94, O.64rn11; 720x); B, C.
Gleicheniidites sp. (Slide TVOR-94, O.64rn11; 720x); D. Polyporisporites sp. (Slide
TVOR-94, O.64rn11; 720x); E. Monocolpites sp. (Slide TVOR-94, O.64m11; 1100x); F.
Salix sp. (Slide TVOR-94, O.64rn11; 1100x); G. Myrica sp. (Slide TVOR-94, O.64rn11;
1100x); H. Pterocarya sp. (Slide TVOR-94, O.64m11; 1100x); I. Liquidambar sp. (Slide
TVOR-94, O.64rn11; llOOx); J. Pinus sp. (Slide TVOR-94, O.64rn11; 720x); K, L.
Ambrosia sp. (Slide TVOR-94, O.64rn11; 1800x); M, N. Tricolporopollenites sp. A
(Slide TVOR-94, O.64rn11; 720x).
The presence of Tricolporopollenites sp. A (similar to Photograph 17M,N) and
Ambrosia sp. (similar to Photograph 17K,L) indicates that the sample can be no older
than late-middle to early-late Miocene (Serrevallian-Tortonian, approximately 11-12 MA).
12.66 - 12.94 m The very rare palynomorphs recovered include Gramineae (2
specimens) and Compositae. Rare fungal spores were noted. Overall the assemblage is
too sparse to interpret other than to note that it indicates a terrestrial source.

TVOR South Site Samples
TVOR South Black silty mud. Palynomorph recovery was low and included
occasional pollen of Pinus sp., Gramineae, ?Ambrosia sp. and Quercus? sp. The most
common and diverse palynomorphs were fungal spores, including Atrophonites sp.,
29

--,.
I

Monoporisporites similar to Photograph 18B,C), and Uncinulites. One foraminifer,
Ammonia beccarii (Photograph 18J,K) also was observed.
This assemblage suggests a terrestrial source and perhaps a connection to marine
waters via a low salinity coastal setting. The common fungal material indicates the
breakdown of organic matter was underway and suggests an oxygenated depositional
environment that was at least periodically wet.

Photograph 18. A. Rigidonites sp. (Slide TVOR-94, 0.64m11; 1l00x); B.
Monoporisporites sp. A (Slide TVOR-94, 0.64m11; 720x); C. Monoporisporites sp. B
(Slide TVOR-94, 0.64m11; 720x); D. Polyporisporites sp. (Slide TVOR-94, 0.64m11;
1l00x); E. Monoporisporites sp. C (Slide TVOR-94, 0.64m11; 1l00x); F. fecal pellet?
(Slide TVOR-94, 0.64m11; 720x); G.,H. Spore type A (Slide TVOR-94, 0.64m11;
1l00x); I. Pseudoschizaea circula (Slide TVOR-94, 0.64m11; 720x); J.,K. Ammonia
beccarii (Slide TVOR South FPM; 720x).

Phytolith analysis
Two samples were processed for phytoliths, but none were recovered. Efforts
will continue to recover phytoliths from soil horizons in the cores. Soil horizons have

30

been newly sampled in the DISC II core as a result of discussion with Timothy Dalbey
during his June 1995 visit to LSD.

Wood
Photographs 19, 20, 21,22
Silicified wood sometimes preserves tiny details of original wood structure which
may allow identification of the general type of tree that produced it by study of the
structure in thin section. Silicified wood is very common in the Miocene of western
Louisiana, and a concentration of large pieces has been recovered at the Discovery site.
This wood appears to be all one type, Diospyros, persimmon, although Juglans, walnut
or butternut, is also a possible identification (Michael Wiemann, 1994, pers. comm.).

Photograph 19. Thin section of petrified wood, Diospyros, persimmon. Cross-sectional
view, A. Multiple pore, B. Multiseriate ray. Scale=0.1 mm.
Salient features of this wood (Michael Wiemann, 1994, pers. comm.) include: pores
solitary and in radial groups; pores medium-sized; parenchyma abundant; diffuseaggregate (numerous narrow lines between the rays); rays homogenous; 1-3 (mostly 2)
seriate; 5-25 cells high; some growth rings seemed to be marked by marginal
parenchyma.
Dr. Wiemann has also identified a single small piece of wood from surface float at
the Discovery Site as a gymnosperm, most likely Juniperus (eastern red cedar), although
other possibilities are Cupresssus (cypress - now only found farther south or west) or
Taxodium (bald cypress), which usually has larger diameter tracheids. Salient features
include: pores absent; resin canals abundant; rays uniseriate; 2-22 cells high; intercellular
spaces sometimes present at the comers of the tracheids.

31

Photograph 20. Thin section of petrified wood, Diospyros, persimmon. Tangential view,
A. Pore filled with banded chalcedony, B. Biseriate ray. Scale=0.1 mm.

Photograph 21. Thin section of petrified wood, Juniperus (eastern red cedar)
Cross- sectional view, A. Ray, B. Tracheids. Scale=0.1 mm.
In addition to the two samples of wood from the Castor Creek Member at
Discovery site, Dr. Wiemann has examined a half dozen other wood samples collected by
Fort Polk staff for which exact provenance is unavailable. In general, the wood looks
much more tropical than the current flora, much more similar to the flora of tropical
Central America; many plants that are herbaceous in the temperate zone are trees in
Central America (Wiemann, 1994, pers. comm.).

32

Photograph 22. Thin section of petrified wood, Juniperus (eastern red cedar) Tangential
view, A. Ray, B. Tracheids. Scale=O.l mm.

Invertebrate Animals
Several samples from the cores were examined for microfossils. These samples
were dried and washed over a 63m sieve to remove the silt and clay fraction. The sandsized residue was dried and then scanned for microfossils using a binocular microscope.
All of the samples were barren of microfossils and any shelly material.
So far, in the course of work at Fort Polk, the only fossils of large shelled
invertebrates recovered are casts produced when sediment filled the shells of small,
high-spired snails. All that is left of them is the compacted sediment, because the shells
have been dissolved (Photograph 23). Their form is consistent with that of freshwater
snails (Megan Jones, 1994, pers. comm.), but it may never be possible to be sure of
their genus. The vertebrate-bearing conglomerates show no shell fragments, before acid
treatment. The acid would be expected to dissolve any carbonate mollusk shells.
Processing to recover invertebrate microfossils such as foraminifera or ostracodes from
samples collected both from outcrops and from cores has been unsuccessful so far, with
the one exception mentioned below. No surface-exposed marine invertebrate locality in
the Castor Creek Member in the Fort Polk vicinity was previously known (James
Rogers, 1995, pers. comm.).
The first foraminifer recovered during this project was observed by John Wrenn,
LSD paleopalynologist, during palynologic preparation of the black silt outcrop sample
from TVOR South. The test, though partially digested by acids during processing, was
complete enough to be initially identified as Ammonia beccarii by Megan Jones. This
benthic foraminifer may suggest marine influence, though it in itself is not
environmentally significant, because it inhabits brackish to abyssal marine waters. Its
long stratigraphic range precludes its use for age determination. The specimen may have
been reworked, or carried inland on the foot of a bird, or it may even be contamination

33

from an unknown source. More specimens need to be found before any sound
interpretation can be put forward.

1 mm
Photograph 23. Two whorls of a snail steinkem in place in the top of the upper
conglomerate layer at the east end of the Discovery site.

Vertebrates
Vertebrate recovery and study are ongoing at the Fort Polk Miocene sites, with
plans under way for continuing large-scale acid processing for fossils for the 1995-1996
year, as well as drilling to core completely through the Castor Creek Member, and
continued sedimentologic, palynological, and isotopic research. The following
systematic paleontology of vertebrates is, therefore, not a report on a completed work.
H is expected that animals such as the cricetid, geomyoid, and heteromyid rodents will
soon be known from greatly expanded samples. The immediate priority, where very
large samples are expected in the next year, has been to separate the most diagnostic
teeth and to examine the size distributions for a preliminary estimate of the number of
species present in each group. Descriptions of animals where recovery of more material
is uncertain have been prepared in more complete style, as have descriptions of animals
of particular stratigraphic or ecologic importance. New species are noted, but cannot be
technically described in this type of report. Lower vertebrate distribution is expressed in
the point count charts under the Taphonomy section. Individual specimens of some
lower vertebrates from one site are curated under a lot number, as is normal procedure in
studies of ancient vertebrates.
Class CHONDRICHTHYES
Order BATOIDEA
Genus MYLIOBATIS
MYLIOBATIS sp.
Photograph 24

34

A sin~le partial. ray pavem~nt tooth is kno,,:n from :rVOR, ~SUMG 3884. Rays
are not rare m the Tertiary record m mammal-beanng flUVIal deposIts. They swim
considerable distances up freshwater rivers.

A

B

Photograph 24. Myliobatis sp. partial pavement tooth. A. Lateral view. B. Ventral view.
Scale=l mm.
Class OSTEICHTHYES
Order SILURIFORMES
Family ICTALURUS
cf. ICTALURUS PUNCTATUS
Photograph 25
Fragments of small catfish fin spines with striated shafts, small, evenly spaced anterior
crenulations, and large, sharp retro-directed posterior dentations sometimes arising from
a groove, are a distinctive component of the lower vertebrate material in screened
residue. Albright (1994) recognized Ictalurus ?punctatus from Toledo Bend, and the
species is also reported from the Norden Bridge fauna of Nebraska, the Garvin Gully
fauna of east Texas, and ranging to the recent (Lundberg, 1975).

35

A

B

Photograph 25. Two fragmentary catfish fin spines (cf. Ictalurus punctatus), A.
LSUMG 3648, B. LSUMG 3647. Scale=lrnrn.
Order LEPISOSTEIFORMES
Family LEPISOSTEIDAE
Genus LEPISOSTEUS
LEPISOSTEUS sp.
Photograph 26
The smooth surface of the relatively rare gar scales recovered from the Fort Polk
Miocene indicate that they are from Lepisosteus, not Atractosteus, the alligator gar,
which has strongly ornamented scales. Identifiable gar material from the Fort Polk
Miocene is limited to scales and loose teeth. Albright (1994) describes teeth, skull and
maxilla fragments, and scales of Lepisosteus and a dentary, jaw fragment, vertebra, and
scales of Atractosteus, from the Toledo Bend Arikareean site. Norden Bridge in
Nebraska has a small, smooth-scaled gar, but not enough data to identify to the species
level (Voorhies, 1990). Gar scales are often the first vertebrate material to be found in
searches for new Tertiary terrestrial mammal sites, and their comparative rarity at the
Fort Polk Miocene sites is one of many indications that the sites differ taphonomic ally
andlor environmentally from many previously studied fossil mammal sites.

36

A

B

c
Photograph 26. A. Three small gar scales (Lepisosteus sp., LSUMG 3886) external
view. B. Internal view of gar scale. C. Lateral view of gar tooth (LSUMG 3887).
Scale=hnm.
Class REPTILIA
Order CHELONIA
Family TRIONYCHIDAE (Meylan, 1987)
Genus and species indeterminate
Photograph 27
Referred specimen -- LSUMG 3883
Locality -- DISC.

37

Description -- Two fragments of turtle carapace found together, the smaller a
medial costal fragment with a rib head, and the larger one showing two transverse
sutures and the shell lateral edge.
Discussion -- The shell fragments are thick and heavily sculptured, indicating
that they were part of a large soft-shelled turtle. A revision of the Trionychidae by
Meylan (1987) lists thirty characters of use in resolving phylogenetic relationships of
recent trionychid turtles. Only two of these can be used with the specimens at hand:
shell sculptured or not, which can be observed, and adult size (disc length) over or
under 200 mm, which can be inferred. The fragments of shell from Fort Polk are
heavily sculptured and appear to have come from a turtle larger than the complete
carapace of Trionyx quinni, USNM 351939, from Norden Bridge in Nebraska.
LSUMG 3883 has a thicker shell and similar, but coarser ornament. Matching the angle
of the shell edge and the sutures suggests that the largest piece from the Fort Polk
Miocene turtle may have been at the left posterolateral edge where the anteroposterior
distance between sutures is 25-30 mm in USNM 351939, which is 200 mm in
maximum disc length. The anteroposterior distance between sutures is 45 mm in
LSUMG 3883, indicating that the turtle could easily have been over 300 mm in disc
length.
Meylan (1987) placed the modem North American turtles, often previously called
Trionyx, in the genus Apaione, and this generic name is likely to be used for older forms
previously referred to Trionyx. The Norden Bridge turtle, to which LSUMG 3883 is
compared above, has been placed in Trionyx quinni, a species named by Holman
(1982), based on the Norden Bridge specimens. Voorhies (1990, p. A65) mentioned
that Matthew (1924) named a large soft-shell Trionyx miocaenus from the Lower Snake
Creek fauna, so there are two specific names in the literature for Barstovian soft-shelled
turtles, Matthew's name based on upper shell characters and Holman's on hypoplastron
features.

Photograph 27. Shell fragment of a trionychid turtle. A. Dorsal surface. B. Ventral
surface. Scale=1 cm.

38

Albright (1994, p. 1136) described abundant fragmentary remains of large softshells from the early Miocene Toledo Bend fauna of east Texas, but was unable to utilize
the features of Meylan's (1987) revision to assign them to a genus. His fragments are
mostly from even larger, more coarsely ornamented turtles than the Fort Polk
specimens. Albright (1994, p. 1131, 1136) mentions that soft-shell turtle fragments are
the most abundant fossil at Toledo Bend, which is a paleochannel deposit. The rarity of
large fragments of soft-shelled turtles at the Fort Polk Miocene sites is partly a result of a
difference in the environment of deposition, and possibly also of overall environmental
differences.
In general, trionychids are rapid-swimming fish eaters that spend some time
burrowed into the subaqueous substrate (Meylan, 1987, pp. 78-79). Meylan (1987, p.
79) suggested that shell sculpture may reduce stress in the bones and thus strengthen the
shells. Gaffney (1995, pers. comm.) points out that big soft-shelled turtles are
inhabitants of large, throughgoing rivers. The presence of shell fragments of such a
sizable soft-shell turtle at the Discovery Site, where material was weathering from
mudstone containing thin conglomerate stringers, suggests that a large channel was not
very distant. James Grafton of the Fort Polk environmental staff recalls that prior
excavation in the Discovery Site area removed a large sandy channel.
Order SQUAMATA
Photograph 28
Very worn lizard right dentary fragment, LSUMG 3644 from TVOR, has bony
rim on tooth sockets, which show a slight medial A-P constriction. Albright (1994) has
described a lizard from Toledo Bend site, based on osteoscutes.

Photograph 28. Lizard right dentary fragment, LSUMG 3644. Scale=1 mm.

39

r

I

Order CROCODYLIA
FrunilyCROCODYlIDAE
Genus ALLIGATOR
ALLIGATOR sp.
Photograph 29
Description -- Small crocodile teeth, rugose, with a low, rounded lateral
profile, clearly differing from the sharply pointed Gavialosuchus teeth.
Discussion -- Albright (1994, p. 1139) referred early Miocene alligator
specimens from east Texas at Toledo Bend to Alligator olseni instead of Alligator
mississippiensis on the basis of characters of the splenial and symphysis, based on
Malone's (1979) revision of the genus Alligator. These bones are not available from the
Fort Polk sites, so a specific assignment can not be made at this time.

A

B

Photograph 29 A. External view of alligator tooth (LSUMG 3888, TVOR site). B.
Internal view. Scale=1 mm.
Order CROCODYLIA
Genus GAVIALOSUCHUS
GAVIALOSUCHUS sp.
Photograph 30
Description -- Conical, sharply pointed, slightly curved teeth are considered to
belong to Gavialosuchus. Albright (1994, p. 1139) described six teeth which he
referred to this genus and noted that his Arikareean occurrence was a range extension for
the genus, whose previous oldest occurrence had been from the late Barstovian in the
Hawthorn Formation in Florida (Morgan, 1986).
Discussion -- In Fort Polk deposits, teeth of Alligator are rarer than teeth of
Gavialosuchus, the reverse of the Toledo Bend situation, probably a result of habitat
preference differences in the animals and the difference in accumulation mode of the Fort
Polk and Toledo Bend fossils. It appears that Gavialosuchus at Fort Polk were even
smaller animals than the Fort Polk alligators, which in turn average much smaller than
the Toledo Bend specimens. Larger alligators, which inhabited the large channels at
Toledo Bend, were either not dwelling in the small gullies in which the Fort Polk
fossiliferous conglomerates formed or not being washed into them. The Gavialosuchus,
smaller animals, were more likely to have inhabited small streams and lakes.

40

Photograph 30. Lateral view of tooth of Gavialosuchus sp., LSUMG 3889, TVOR site.
Scale=1 mm.
Class MAMMALIA
Subclass THERIA
Infraclass EUTHERIA
Order LAGOMORPHA
Figure 9
A single tooth, LSUMG 3578 from TVOR, is tentatively identified as a
lagomorph lower molar, smaller than any North American lagomorph yet discovered.
No lagomorphs are known from the Texas coastal plain Miocene sites (Slaughter,
1981), so that if additional specimens confirm the presence of lagomorphs at Fort Polk,
they will be the first such species in the west or central Gulf Coast Miocene.

B

Figure 9. Drawing of LSUMG 3578, ? lagomorph lower molar. A. Crown, B. Lateral
C. Oblique. Scale=1 mm.

41

Order CARNIVORA
Family CANIDAE or URSIDAE
Photograph 31
Referred specimen -- LSUMG 3631.
Locality -- TVOR South.
Description -- Fragmentary large carnivore baculum, at least the proximal half.
Tapering at the distal end suggests that the fragment is most of the robust portion of the
baculum. In left and right lateral view, the ventral edge of the bone appears almost
straight and the dorsal surface is gently bowed dorsally. In cross section, the bone is a
rounded triangle with maximum width at the ventral edge. The bone narrows distally.
The ventral view shows a shallow irregular urethral groove the length of the specimen,
growing more shallow at each end. At the proximal end, a slight constriction separates
the proximal end from the shaft. Wear and breakage of the bone may have obscured
some original rugosity, but there is sufficient surface present to suggest that there is no
very strong demarcation of a proximal end. The urethral groove is shallowing at the
distal end of the specimen, and this may well have been the limit of the groove's extent.
Wear on the sides at the distal end exposes coarsely porous bone, but the exterior
surface appears to have been relatively smooth. The texture of the urethral groove is
coarsely irregular. Two slight swellings of the specimen at roughly 1/3 and 2/3 of its
length also mark narrowing and shallowing of the urethral groove. The proximal
swelling is the bone's area of maximum transverse width, 13 mm. The maximum
vertical (perpendicular to length) dimension is 15 mm, and the length of the broken piece
is 7.5 cm.
Discussion -- Large carnivores in general tend to be rare in populations of large
mammals. They are high on the food chain, and bacula were, of course, present in only
the male portion of the original population. Bacula have been very rarely reported from
the Miocene, exceptions being Harrison (1982) and Wang (1994). Possibly these
bones, although rarely found, may also go unrecognized, and be put in with limbs or
ribs, without any particular notice taken of them. At this time, no explanation other than
chance is reasonable for why this rare element is the best carnivore specimen from the
Fort Polk Miocene sites and the only unmistakable fragment of a large carnivore.
Ewer (1973) discusses bacula of modern Carnivora, indicating that they are
distinctive at the specific level for some animals. Harrison's (1982) work is the only
comparative work focusing on Tertiary bacula, and it clearly establishes that bacula in
Tertiary fossil animals are distinctive and can sometimes be identified to the generic
level. Where fossil faunas and their carnivore components are well known, as in the
Hemphillian Edson local fauna from western Kansas, a process of elimination can help
in identifying bacula which are not clearly associated with a particular carnivore
(Harrison, 1982), but LSUMG 3631 is the only available carnivore material, with the
exception of a few tooth fragments of much smaller animals.
Wyss and Flynn (1993), in their recent phylogenetic analysis and definition of the
Carnivora, consider that, "Although there exists considerable variation in form, a
generally large and elaborated baculum is diagnostic of Caniniforma" . This baculum is
not felid, as felid bacula are reduced (Ewer, 1973). Although there are large Miocene
cats, and the Fort Polk Miocene gomphothere could have been a suitable prey for a large
cat, there is no fossil evidence for their presence.

42

Photograph 31. A. Ventral view of LSUMG 3631 and of a modern large dog baculum,
B. Lateral view, C. Proximal view. The Miocene baculum is darker in color. Scale=1
cm.
Post-death wear and breakage, particularly the lack of the distal end, limits the
potential for identification, but the following features of LSUMG 3631 are probably
distinctive: triangular cross section, urethral groove shallow but does extend to the
proximal end, dorsal curve only with no sign that a ventral curvature is beginning on the
distal end at a level where the urethral groove is shallowing, and juncture of the proximal
end and the shaft not strongly distinct. Fossil and recent canid bacula may be straight or

43

t

l

I

I
I
I
I

curved in one direction and are triangular in cross section, but they have deep and wide
urethral grooves according to Harrison (1982). The baculum of the canid Hesperocyon
gregarius, a carnivore common in the North American Chadronian and Whitneyan, has a
relatively shallow urethral groove in its proximal portion (Wang, 1994, p. 26, Figure
12), so the depth of the urethral groove should not rule out canids. The baculum of
FAMNH 63359, Hesperocyon gregarius, labeled as from the Middle Oreodon beds of
South Dakota, compared to LSUMG 3631, is much smaller and shows strong lateral
grooves giving it a clover-leaf cross section. The proximal part is straighter and differs
in having the proximal head expanded dorsally.
The urethral groove on mustelid bacula is usually restricted to the distal end, and
most have a proximal end set off from the shaft by a step or shelf (Harrison, 1982, p.
1268) and, in addition, all mustelids are very likely all to have been too small. Ursid
bacula are straight or slightly curved and triangular in cross section (Harrison, 1982, p.
1267).
This is clearly the baculum of a large animal. Comparison with a dire wolf
specimen from the Texas Memorial Museum, a large dog specimen from the LSU
Veterinary School Collections, and Amphicyon at AMNH suggests that it would fall in
the size range of these animals, although none is a good morphological match.
Amphicyon ingens, FAMNH 542805441-21727, from Boulder Quarry, early
Barstovian, Olcott Formation, Sioux County, Nebraska, when compared to LSUMG
3631, is thinner vertically and transversely in its comparable proximal portion, and its
urethral groove is confined to the distal one fIfth. The groove is smoother than that of
LSUMG 3631. Its proximal fIfth is flattened from side to side, oval in cross section,
but most of the bone is circular in cross section. The proximal fIfth has small knobs,
which are prominent on the dorsal side 17 mm from the end. The distal two-thirds is
slightly distally bowed and the proximal three-fIfths is straight with a dorsal edge
straight in lateral view. The bone is broken on its distal end, but is at least 24 cm long
and 14.5 mm at its maximum dorsoventral extent. Initially, the big bear-dog Amphicyon
ingens seemed a good possibility on the basis of body size and geological age, but its
baculum is so morphologically distinct that to rule out all amphicyonids seems
reasonable.
The largest carnivores reported from the Texas Gulf Coastal plain from the middle
and late Miocene are Amphicyon, and the borophagine canids Tomarctus and Aelurodon
(Wilson, 1960). Aelurodon is approximately the size of Canis lupus (Munthe, 1989, p.
17), and the dog-like ursid Hemicyon might also be comparable, if its baculum were
known. At least there are sufficient Barstovian carnivores of a size to be candidates, and
it is not necessary to postulate a previously unknown large carnivore, although this
cannot be ruled out. It would be helpful in understanding the site's ecology to be able to
identify more precisely what must have been its top carnivore, but the only defInite
conclusion possible at this time is that some other part of this animal, preferably some
part of the skull or jaw, must be found before identification can proceed further.
Order CHIROPTERA
Family VESPERTILIONIDAE
Subfamily VESPERTILIONINAE
ANTROZOUS SP.
Photograph 32; Table 3.
Referred specimens -- LSUMG 3437, R Ml or M2; 3395, L ml or m.
Localities -- TVOR, DISC.

44

Description -- LSUMG 3437 is roughly rectangular, has a sharp, piercing
paracone and metacone, with the metacone the tallest cusp, and a much lower, worn
protocone. No hypocone is present, but the tooth has a posterolingual comer, which
does not extend as far labially as the protocone. There is a well-developed basal
cingulum which runs from the anterolabial edge of the protocone, across its lingual side,
to the posterolabial tooth comer, a less-well-developed crista, higher on the tooth, which

B

A

I

c

Photograph 32. Antrozous sp. LSUMG 3437 R Ml or M2 A. crown, B. posterior,
LSUMG 3395 L ml or m2, C. crown, D. labial. Scale=l rom.
connects the protocone crest and the anterolabial tooth comer. The internal basin is
deep, surrounded by the anterior crista, the low postprotocrista, and the high and sharp
ectoloph. The metastyle extends labially farther than the parastyle and has a faint
ectocingulum otherwise lacking on the labial tooth edge. The most noticeable wear is on

45

the anterior edge of the parastyle and the crown of the protocone. LSUMG 3395 has a
strong basal cingulum encircling all of the tooth except the labial edge. Cusps are sharp
and piercing.
Discussion -- Bats previously described from the Barstovian include Myotis,
named from a toothless mandible from the Valentine Formation (Czaplewski, 1991),
Potamonycteris from the lower Valentine Formation, Late Barstovian, known from only
one specimen, upper teeth only (Czaplewski, 1991), Antrozous, from the Norden
Bridge local fauna (Voorhies, 1990), and Ancenycteris, from the Barstovian Anceney
Local fauna in Montana (Sutton and Genoways, 1974), based on a lower jaw from a
much larger bat than Potamonycteris (Czaplewski, 1991, p. 719). Morphological
differences of m2 of the Fort Polk Miocene bat from Ancenycteris described by Sutton
and Genoways (1974) include the following: the distance between paraconid and
metaconid is not longer than the distance between these cusps and the protoconid, so the
trigonid is not as open as in Ancenycteris, and although the entocristid and the cristid
obliqua are roughly parallel, the cristid obliqua meets the posterior trigonid wall midway
between paraconid and metaconid, not at the protoconid internal base. The best upper
molar from Fort Polk, LSUMG 3437, resembles Antrozous instead of Myotis in lacking
a paraloph and metaloph (Czaplewski, 1993). It has a hypoconal shelf, and thus differs
from Potamonycteris which lacks a hypocone and hypoconal shelf (Czaplewski, 1991).
Table 3
Chiropteran measurements.

LSUMG 3395
Ancenycteris rasmusseni
(Sutton and Genoways,
1974)
TTU-P 4093
LSUMG 3437
Potamonycteris
biperforatus (Czaplewski,
1991)
USNM 52008

Transverse

m2

AnteroPosterior
1.6

m1

1.72

1.08

m2
M2

1.61
1.6

1.12
2.1

M2

1.36

1.95

M3

0.97

1.88

1.2

All of the species considered above were probably insect eaters. If any fruit-eating
bat were to be discovered, it would be a clear indication of warmer climate than that of
the present in western Louisiana.
Order INSECTIVORA
Family SORICOIDEA
Subfamily CROCIDURINAE

46

LIMNOECUS NIOBRARENSIS
Photograph 33
Referred specimens -- LSUMG 3852, right mandible fragment with m2-m3'
five falciform incisors, LSUMG 3321, 3436, 3602, 3603, 3875.
'
-- TV

Photograph 33. Limnoecus niobrarensis. A. LSUMG 3436, Upper incisor, Lateral, B.
LSUMG 3852, Right mandible fragment with m2-m3, Crown. Scale=1 mm.

Description -- Upper incisors are falciform with a single large root, tooth
strongly convex on the anterior face, with a low interior heel bearing two low cusps, no
lateral cingula. The posterior edge of the ascending ramus in LSUMG 3852, including

47

the mandibular condyle, are missing, but assuming that the widest part of the broken
area is the fonner location of the condyles and that the ascending ramus was similar to
those of the variety of shrews pictured by Repenning (1967, p. 4), the general
arrangement of the posterior edge of the mandible is most similar to Repenning's
category containing the subfamilies Limnoecinae and Crociurinae, i.e., the condyle
would have been situated slightly dorsal of the midpoint of the jaw in posterior view.
The talonid of m3 is small, consisting mainly of a large hypoconid and an
anteroposteriorly directed metalophid. Entoconid crest and basin are so faint that their
presence could be considered debatable.
Discussion -- Repenning's (1967) work on the subfamilies and genera of
shrews recognizes falciform upper incisors as a shrew character. The posterior
mandible form and the reduced m3 trigonid are similar to those of Limnoecus
(Repenning, 1967, pp.26, 27). The upper incisors are similar to those of Limnoecus
tricuspis as pictured by Lindsay (1972, Fig. 9) from the Barstow Formation. L.
tricuspis is long ranging in the Barstow Formation in California and ranges to the mid
Pliocene of Oregon according to Repenning (1967). Lindsay (1967, p. 23) presents
measurements of L. tricuspis (mean width of m2, 0.72 mm; m3, 0.57 mm), and L.
niobrarensis (mean width of m2, 0.86 mm, m3 0.64 mm). LSUMG 3852 has m2
length of 1.1 mm and width 0.8 mm and m3 length 0.9 mm and width 0.5 mm. The
differences between L. tricuspis and L. niobrarensis from the Barstovian of Nebraska
are very slight according to Repenning (1967). James (1963) considered them
conspecific, but Lindsay (1972) retained both species. The difference
between" ... talonid basin virtually lost..." in L. tricuspis and" no trace of talonid
basin... " (Repenning, 1967, pp. 26-27) in L. niobrarensis is relatively subjective. The
Fort Polk Miocene specimen falls closest to L. niobrarensis.
FamilyER]NACEllDAE
Subfamily BRACHYERICINAE
BRACHERIX Matthew
BRACHYERIX cf. B. INCERTIS Rich and Rich, 1971
Photograph 34
Referred specimen -- LSUMG 3380, R M1, Locality TVOR.
Description -- Moderately worn, roughly quadrate tooth with anterior, posterior
and labial sides convex and lingual side concave. The tooth has four principal cusps, the
metacone being the most prominent, a very faint protoconule and faint metaconule, a
prominent anterior cingulum which connects the anterolabial comer and the anterolingual
side of the protocone, a posterior cingulum well developed except across the posterior
faces of the hypocone and metacone, and a lingual cingulum which is absent across
lingual faces of cusps. There is no ectocingulum connecting metastyle and paracrista,
but this edge may have undergone some breakage and/or erosion. A small cuspule lies
between the labial end of the anterior cingulum and the stylocone at the posterolabial end
of a low, indistinct paracrista. Wear is strong on the top of the paracone and the
anterolabial side of the protocone, forming a comma-shaped wear surface along the
crista, with the comma head being the protocone. Enamel is also worn thin along the
metastyle. The paracone and protocone are very close to exactly anterior to the metacone
and hypocone, respectively.
Discussion -- The Subfamily Brachyericinae originated in North America in the
Hemingfordian, was confined to the continent, and became extinct in the Clarendonian
(Rich, 1981). No member of the subfamily has been reported from east of the
Mississippi River or any part of the Gulf Coast in North America (Rich, 1981, p. 81),

48

and the only member of the Family Erinaceidae from this region is a single m2 reported
by Rich and Patton (1975) from north Florida. The common name "hedgehog," usually
applied to members of the two genera in the Subfamily Brachyericinae, Brachyerix and
Metechinus, is not to be taken as an indication that the lifestyles of these animals are
hedgehog-like or even well understood. Brachyerix incertis, known from the
Barstovian of Nebraska, Nevada, and California, is considered the culmination of a
lineage that Rich and Rich (1971, p. 50) considered to have become steadily smaller.
Rich and Rich (1971, pp. 50-51) speculate that it may be the ancestor of Metechinus
amplior that also occurs in the Barstovian and Clarendonian, or as another possibility,
that this pattern of occurrence is " ... an example of ecological displacement, one lineage
becoming slowly smaller and conservatively retaining the ancestral basicranial condition
and the other rapidly evolving into a larger form, Metechinus, with a radically modified
basicranial region". B. incertis and M. amplior have overlapping geographic ranges, but
they never occur at the same locality (Rich and Rich, 1971).
Among the characters used by Rich and Rich (1971, pp.1O-111) to separate the
genus Brachyerix from Metechinus and the European Miocene hedgehog genus
Exallerix, the only one applicable in this case, is its smaller size. LSUMG 3380 is
slightly below the size range of the smallest Brachyerix species, B. incertis. Among the
characters used to separate Brachyerix and the other European Miocene hedgehog
Dimylechinus are " ... shortening of M1 metastyle; presence of M1 cingulum on buccal
margin only, not on all four sides; posterior and buccal sides of M1 straight or slightly
excavated, not deeply concave ... " (Rich and Rich, 1971, p. 11). A Metechinus amplior
M1 at AMNH (74922) from the Observation Quarry in Nebraska has a faint anterior
cingulum and a lingual and posterior cingulum similar to those of LSUMG 3380, so the
cingular development is not a matter on which to base suppositions regarding European
links for the Fort Polk Miocene hedgehog.
Rich and Rich (1971, p. 27) comment that modem hedgehogs never have the
hypocone and metacone nearer to the midline of the tooth on M1 than the protocone and
paracone, but Brachyerix does. The Fort Polk Miocene hedgehog appears similar to
modem forms in having major cusps roughly equidistant from the midline. Other
differences from Brachyerix, as described by Rich and Rich (1971, pp. 10-27), are the
presence of conules, which are very faint, and the fact that the metacone, and not the
paracone, is the largest cusp.
LSUMG 3380 measures 2.09 mm in A-P diameter and 2.34 mm in transverse
diameter, making it the smallest M1 of Brachyerix yet reported. The differences
between the two species of Brachyerix, B. macrotis and the smaller B. incertis, in
addition to size, are features of P3 (Rich and Rich, 1971, p. 41), a tooth which is not yet
available from the Fort Polk Miocene sites. Rich (1981, Table 20) gives measurements
for three B. incertis M1 IS, which have an A-P diameter of 2.1-2.5 mm and a transverse
diameter of 2.6-2.9 mm. Storer (1975) described m2 of a smaller Brachyerix, ascribed
to B. cf. B. incertis, from Saskatchewan, and although not the same tooth, it does
suggest the presence of animals in the size range of LSUMG 3380.
Many of the Fort Polk Miocene small rodents are smaller than previously
described animals of their genera, so that the small size of LSUMG 3380 may in part be
ascribed to some factor affecting many small mammals of the local environment.
Brachyerix has a short face, auditory bullae extremely large, inflated, and completely
ossified, with "... vessels and some nerves in tympanic cavity enclosed in bony
tubes ... ," like a living hedgehog Paraechinus (Rich and Rich, 1971, p. 2, 11). It seems
sensible to consider Brachyerix's unusual ear morphology as representing some very
particular adaptations, which may be strongly controlling its distribution. Further study

49

of the Fort Polk sites' paleoenvironment and recovery of more specimens of Brachyerix
may shed light on what these adaptations are and how they relate to these particular sites.
The fact that the smallest Brachyerix occur in Louisiana and Saskatchewan rules out any
suggestion that the small size of LSUMG 3380 relates to a southern-to-northern size
gradient.

A

B

Photograph 34. Brachyerix cf. B. incertis, LSUMG 3380, R Ml, A. crown view, B.
Lingual view. Scale=1 mm.
ORDER ARTIODACTYLA
FrumilyPROTOCERATIDAE
PROSYNTHETOCERAS FRANCISI
Photograph 35; Figures 10, 11
Referred specimens -- LSUMG 3639, mandible missing incisors, canines,
and ascending rami, with left p3 and 4, right talonid of ml, and complete left and right
m2 and m3; LSUMG 3640, R Ml or M2; LSUMG 3632, brow horn tip; LSUMG
3641, distal end of left tibia.
Locality -- DISC.

50

Description -- On the mandible, the canine alveolus suggests a large canine,
and the diastema is long. The jaw flares laterally at large canine sockets, post canine
diastema is long, and the mandible is slender both left to right and dorso-ventrally in the
diastema region. The ventral edge of the diastema is sharp. Three mental foramina are
present on the lateral surface of the diastema region: a large one posterior and ventral to
the canine socket, a tiny one behind and slightly dorsal to it, and a medium one roughly
2/3 of the way posterior from the canine socket to the second premolar socket. There is
clearly one socket for a small p2, and possibly it could have been two-rooted; p3 is
simple, with a strong protoconid at the widest part of the tooth with two sharp posterior
crests enclosing an oval, narrow trigonid area. The p4 is broken, but the trigonid area is
slightly wider and there is a distinct metaconid on the labial posterior crest. Lower
molars are normal for this group.

A1

2

3

3

4

4
5
2

B

C

9
27

8

3

4

2
34
1

26
25
24
23
22
21

29
30
31
7

33

32

5

18
20

19

4

Figure 10. Artiodactyl tooth nomenclature, modified from Gentry and Hooker (1988,
Figure 9.1) Key to features: I-paraconid, 2-protoconid, 3-cristid obliqua, 4-hypoconid,
5-entoconid, 6-protocristid, 7-metaconid, 8-accessory crest, 9-parastyle, lO-paracone,
ll-postparacrista, 12-mesostyle, 13-premetacrista, 14-metacone, 15-postmetacrista, 16premetaconule crista, 17-postmetaconule, 18-metaconule, 19-postcingulum, 20postprotocrista, 21-protocone, 22-protolophule, 23-preprotocrista, 24-paraconule, 25preparaconule crista, 26-postparaconule crista, 27-preparacrista, 28-postcristid buccal,
29-hypolophid, 30-hypoconulid, 31-postcristid lingual, 32-entoconulid, 33-metastylid,
34-paracristid.
The single upper molar is worn, but includes several distinctive features,
including a basal tubercle between the protocone and metaconule, a small crista
extending from the postprotoconule crista towards the paracone, and a slightly stronger

51

crista on the postmetaconule crista which contacts the metacone to form a small fossette.
The horn tip is strongly rugose, and it has no bulb on the end. The m3 is 31.56 mm
long.

Photograph 35. Prosynthetocerasfrancisi mandible, LSUMG 3639, A. Crown, B.
Lateral, C. Close up of second and third premolars. LSUMG 3640, R M1 or M2, D.
Crown, E. Lingual. Scale=1 cm.

52

Discussion -- The Fort Polk: Prosynthetoceras mandible and the other
specimens need not be from a single individual, and the mandible, although the closest
thing to a large bone in place found yet at the site, was probably not totally undisturbed,
because of passage of very heavy machinery over the area in which it was exposed.
The prosynthetocerine lineage in east Texas is considered by Patton and Taylor
(1971) to show a very stratigraphically distinctive size increase. Patton and Taylor
(1971) recognized two Barstovian prosynthetocerines of roughly the same size from east
Texas: one, P. francisi, descendant of a lineage common and widespread in the Gulf
Coast (Subgenus Prosynthetoceras); and one P. trinitensis (Subgenus Lambdoceras),
representing an incursion of High Plains stock into the region. Patton and Taylor (1971,
pp. 167-168) name Lambdoceras to a new rank as a subgenus of Prosynthetoceras,
distinguished, among other features, by " ... less elongate skull and jaws, shorter
diastemata ... , premolars more wedge-shaped and less reduced; p1 invariably present and
p2 invariably double-rooted." They name and include in it P. trinitensis, known only
from the Trinity River Pit and considered by them to be stratigraphically intermediate
between the occurrences of P. texanus and P. francisi (Patton and Taylor, 1971,
pp.168, 172).
Skull and hom proportions are the most important distinguishing features,
premolar form and diastema form are helpful, and, unfortunately, lower molar size and
form are of little use in distinguishing the animals (Patton and Taylor, 1971). Premolar
form and tooth spacing in the mandible compared with that of specimens in the TMM
and AMNH collections place the Fort Polk: Miocene animal in Prosynthetoceras francisi.
It falls well within the P. jrancisi size range and near the lower end of the P. trinitensis
range. For example, in direct comparison with TMM 31219-213, P. jrancisi left ramus
with p3-m3, from Site 3, San Jacinto County, figured in Patton (1969, Fig. 28) and
Patton and Taylor (1971, fig 13a), LSUMG 3639 is longer in the tooth row, and if the
mandibles are lined up on the back of the m3's, the posteriormost mental foramina are
even. TMM 31219-213's m3 is 27.92 rom long, and the shapes ofp3 and p4 are
similar in the two animals. A P. trinitensis feature is the bulb on hom tips (patton and
Taylor, 1971), which the Fort Polk: Miocene hom fragment does not show, but at least
one P. jrancisi specimen also shows a bulb. The right brow hom of AMNH 33072, P.
jrancisi from the Cold Spring local fauna, San Jacinto County, Texas, has a bulb.
The Fort Polk: Prosynthetoceras is useful in stratigraphic comparison with animals
of the Texas coastal plain, because the faunas on which the Texas sequence of local
faunas was developed included mainly large animals. The presence of Prosynthetoceras
francisi at Fort Polk: indicates the closest ties with the Cold Spring local fauna of the
Texas coastal plain sequence.

53

W

-I

I..;

z

.Q
~

0

«
:r:

E-<

z
~

"'0

§

"C

I=l

c
ro

~

z

t:l.

~

~

Il..
-I

~

«
0

I=l
'.0

~
(J)

~

C'::l

0

~

(J)

Q

~

B
II)

w

~>-.

I-

C/.l
II)

oS
'-H

0

S
II)

gf
......

(J)

z

E0..

-I

"'0

«
Il..

E
00

~
W

•

II)~

OJ)t--OJ)M

a::

t5~

c:l

• OJ)
..........
.....
~

II)

~

1..; .....

::It--OJ) 0\

c

ro

.g
OJ

(/)

OJ

Cl

<:
c

~~

.c E

E
o ro

1::

2::;;

dJ~
0:5~

ao

~

6
~
ca

'2
C!J«

~15

::20:

Wa
ILL

~

2

0:

2

w

;2
a:
«

~

t:
I

S

~
w

0:

a

~

..........
~'--'

~

a~

Order PERISSODACTYLA
Family EQUIDAE
cf. "MERYCHIPPUS" GUNTER!
Photographs 36, 37; Figure 12; Tables 4, 5
Referred specimens -- LSUMG 3629, R P2; LSUMG 3628, L p2-m2;
LSUMG 3630, L m2; LSUMG 3634, distal fragment of metapodial.
54

Locality -- DISC.
Description -- The Fort Polk horse material belongs to a small merychippine
horse with high-crowned teeth. Its metapodial has a well developed sagittal ridge.
Hulbert and MacFadden (1991, pp. 17-19) have published a detailed cladistic analysis of
the complex of horses at the base of the adaptive radiation of Miocene hypsodont horses,
recognizing 38 characters relevant for discriminating taxa. Most of these characters
cannot be determined for the Fort Polk Miocene sample, but those which can be
determined are given below in Table 4. Hulbert and MacFadden's (1991) character 23

Table 4
Horse Characteristics.
Hulbert and
MacFadden
(1991)
characters
21

Character
state of
FPM
specimens

30

2or3

32

a

33
35
38

a
2
2

52
54

a
a

55

1 or 2

57

Oor1

63

a

66

a

67

a

a

Character description of Fort Polk specimens

Thin layer of cement on permanent cheek
teeth, seen on LSUMG 3628 on the lingual
side only and on the two loose lower molars
on both labial and lingual sides.
Pli caballin small (less than 2 mm long), twobranched. Clearly seen on moderately worn
tooth, LSUMG 3629.
External fossette plications: pli protoloph
absent, pli hypostyle tiny and single.
Internal fossette plications absent.
Metastyle well developed on LSUMG 3624.
Hypoconal groove open but would close with
only a little more wear.
No protostylid on p3-m3.
Metaconid-metastylid complex less than 45%
of anteroposterior length in p3 and p4.
Metaconid and metastylid well separated
from each other on p3-m3, but wear stage on
LSUMG 3628 is very early.
Pli entoflexid present on m1 and m2 of
LSUMG 3628.
Ectoflexid on p3-p4 deep, completely
penetrates isthmus.
Metaconid and metastylid of p3-p4 sub equal
on LSUMG 3628.
Metaconid and metastylid sub equal on m1m2.
55

is protocone shape on P3-M2, and character 27 is timing of protocone connection to
protoloph on P3 and P4. LSUMG 3629, a P2, is the only available upper tooth. On it,
the ratio of protocone length to width is 1.01. The protocone has a very narrow
connection in moderate wear.

17 16

12

B

40

28 29

39

38

37

36

35

Figure 12. Horse tooth nomenclature. After Hulbert and MacFadden (1991, Fig. 1).
Key to features: 1-anterostyle, 2-parastyle, 3-paracone, 4-prefossette, 5-postfossette, 6mesostyle, 7-metacone, 8-metastyle, 9-pli hypostyle, lO-metaloph, ll-prefossette loop,
12-pli postfossette, 13-pli prefossette, 14-protocone, 15-pli protoconule, 16-hypoconal
groove, 17-hypocone, 18-pli caballin, 19-protoconal spur, 20-protoloph, 21-pli
protoloph, 22-paraconid, 23-paralophid, 24-lingua flexid, 25-metaconid, 26-metastylid,
27-entoconid, 28-metaflexid, 29-hypoconulid, 30-heel, 31-postisthmus, 32-antisthmus,
33-endoflexid, 34-ectoflexid, 35-protostylid, 36-hypoconid, 37-pli entoflexid, 38isthmus, 39-pli caballinid, 40-protoconid.
Discussion -- Four of the merychippine horses found on the Texas Gulf Coastal
Plain are given detailed comparison with the Fort Polk Miocene specimens in Table 5.
They are: Protohippus vetus (known from the early to middle Barstovian of the Texas
Gulf Coastal Plain, type specimen from TMM site 31242), "Merychippus" gunteri
(known from the Torreya Formation in Florida and the Burkeville and Cold Spring local
faunas of the Texas Coastal plain), and "Merychippus" goorisi and "Merychippus" sp.
near "Merychippus" sejunctus (both from the Trinity River Pit, early Barstovian of the
Texas Coastal Plain). Ranges are from Hulbert and MacFadden (1991). The degree of
development of the sagittal ridge on the distal end of the metapodial is consistent with
that expected from a merychippine horse (MacFadden, 1992, p. 253). The
characteristics recognizable on Fort Polk Miocene specimens, out of the total used by
Hulbert and MacFadden (1991), do not give an unambiguous tie to one of the four, but
comparison to "Merychippus" gunteri appears most reasonable. It must be remembered
that as many as five horse species were coexistent at one Texas coastal plain site in the
Miocene (Hulbert and MacFadden, 1991), and that the distinguishing features can be
56

very subtle. The Fort Polk Miocene horse material consists of elements, none of which
may be from the same individual, and the possibility that several taxa are represented is
real. On the other hand, for the small number of specimens available, there is no clear
evidence that more than one species is represented, so the most parsimonious course at
this time is to consider the horse specimens together.

Photograph 36. cf. "Merychippus" gunteri mandible, LSUMG 3628, L p2-m2, A.
Crown, B. Lingual, C. Labial. Scale=l cm.
Direct comparison to the Texas coastal plain horses has not produced an
unambiguous result either, in part because these sites often include several horse
species. TMM 31242-72 from Bennett Farm site is a P2 very like the Fort Polk
specimen. Its hypocone groove is closed, but that of the Fort Polk specimen would

57

Photograph 37. cf. "Merychippus" gunteri, LSUMG 3629, R P2, A. Crown, B. Labial;
LSUMG 3630, L m2, C. Crown, D. Lingual; E. LSUMG 3634, distal fragment of
metapodial, Anterior. Scale=l cm.
close with a little more wear, and protocone shape and pli cabillin form is very close.
TMM 31242-71, from the same site, holotype of M. vetus, has a left and right maxilla
with right P3-M3 and left P2-M3. Its protocone is very round but unconnected and its

58

pli cabillin is more pointed and longer. Forsten (1975) put TMM 31242-72 in P. vetus ,
and Hulbert and MacFadden (1991) placed topotypic specimens from TMM locality
31242 in Protohippus vetus while commenting that MacFadden (1984) had earlier
mistakenly put TMM 31242-71 into "Merychippus" goorisi, forgetting that it was the
holotype of P. vetus. TMM 31242-72 may not be P. vetus even though TMM 31242-71
is. The Bennett Farm site is near the town of Point Blank, high in the Fleming
Formation according to the TMM locality map. It has been classically considered to
belong to the Burkeville local fauna (Figure 21). TMM 31242-37, labeled
Prosynthetoceras, a mandible with m1 and m2, from Bennett Farm, is very similar in
size to Texas P.francisi from the younger Cold Spring local fauna The prosynthetocerine
stratigraphic succession in Texas is relatively well understood, so, judging on the
possible presence of P. francisi at Bennett Farm site, the site may actually be younger
than it has been considered. At present, the most conservative course is to consider the
similarity of the Bennett Farm merychippine P2 to the Fort Polk one, not to weigh
strongly toward considering the Fort Polk Miocene sites to be earlier in the Barstovian
than the Cold Spring local fauna.

Hulbert and
MacFadden
(1991)
characters
21
30
32
33
35
38
52
54
55
57
63
66
67

Table 5
Comparison of Miocene Horses
"M./I
Fort
P.
"M."
Polk
vetus
goorisi
gunteri
horses
0
2or3
0
0
2
2
0
0
lor2
o or 1
0
0
0

2
2
0
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2
3
1
5
2
0
2
1
2
1
0
0
0

2
2
0
3
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0

cf. "M."
sejunctus

2
2
0
3
1
2
?
1
2
1
0
0
0

Order PROBOSCIDEA
Family GOMPHOTHERIIDAE
GOMPHOTHERIUM SP.
Photograph 38
Referred specimen -- LSUMG 3635.
Locality -- DISC.
Description -- Fragment of a single cusp, roughly one-fourth of the cone from
the wear facet to the beginning of basal flaring of the cusp. Enamel exterior shows

59

many crescentic marks, probably chatter marks from transport, and part of acuspule at
the edge of a cluster of tiny cuspules roughly halfway down one side. Maximum enamel
thickness is 7 mm on the occlusal surface and 6.5 mm on the lateral broken edge.
Discussion -- This is a very small sample of the largest animal in the fauna, but
the enamel thickness indicates that it can only be a proboscidean, and the specimen form
agrees well with gomphothere cusp shape, wear patterns, and cusp height. Comparison
with gomphothere molars USNM 351931 and 351932 from Norden Bridge Quarry in
the Valentine Formation suggests that it could have come from a similar animal.
Comparison to TMM 40773-1 (TAM 2121B), L m3 of Gomphotherium cimmaronis,
from the upper Miocene Ed Noble Farm Site, Fleming Formation near Navasota, Texas,
suggests that LSUMG 3635 could have been part of the anterolabiallarge cusp, as wear
on other cusps is more angled to the horizontal. Enamel thickness measured on the
occlusal surface on this tooth is 8.5 mm compared to 7 mm in LSUMG 3635.
Similarly, comparison to TMM 4075-10 (TAM 2121E), R M2 of Gomphotherium
cimmaronis, from Ed Noble Farm Site suggests that LSUMG 3635 could be a scrap of
the anterolabiallarge cusp. Its enamel is 5.7 mm thick.

A

B

Photograph 38. Tooth fragment of a gomphothere A. Lateral view, B. Crown view, of
broken tooth. Enamel is dark. Scale=l cm.
Arata (1965) described the tips of the lower tusks of a gomphothere which he
estimated to be from Miocene beds on Fort Polk, but precise stratigraphic information on
the specimen was unavailable to him. This find was the only report of a Miocene land
animal from Louisiana before the discovery of the Fort Polk Miocene sites. It is
possible that it came from the Castor Creek Member of the Fleming Formation and even
from one of the sites under study in this report.
As noted by Tobien (1973, p.229) and Voorhies (1990), the species-level
taxonomy of Gomphotherium is in need of a revision. A revision of proboscidean
taxonomy is expected to become available later in the summer of 1995. It is unlikely,
however, that it will provide any data helpful in closer identification of such a small
fragment as LSUMG 3635.

60

Order RODENTIA
Family CASTORIDAE
MONOSAULAX SP.
Photograph 39, Figure 13
Referred specimen -- LSUMG 3448, R p4.

A

B

2

6

3

8

c

D

12
11

9

Figure 13. Castorid tooth nomenclature. A. R P4, B. R p4 occlusal, C. R p4 buccal, D.
R p4lingual. Modified from Korth (1994, Figure 13.2). Key to features: 1metafossettid, 2-mesofossettid, 3-parafossettid, 4-hypofossettid, 5-metaflexid,
6-mesoflexid, 7 -paraflexid, 8-hypoflexid, 9-hypostriid, lO-parastriid, ll-mesostriid,
12-metastriid.

Locality -- DISC.
Description -- The tooth has three fossetids and one flexid, and the most
reasonable application of the terminology of Korth (1994, p. 138) is that the
anteriormost fossettid, the anterofossettid of Voorhies (1990), is not present in Korth's
diagram (1994, Figure 13.2A), the larger one posterior to it is the parafossettid, the
medial lingual flexid is the mesoflexid, the posterior fossettid is the hypofossettid, and
no metafossetid is seen.
In anterior or posterior view, the lingual side is straight and the labial curves
lingually towards the occlusal surface. The mesostriid is the only striid on the lingual
side and it extends only about a millimeter down the side of the tooth from the occlusal
surface. The hypostriid is more pronounced and extends 4.5 mm down the tooth side,
ending at a break, so it could have been longer.

61

The hypofossettid and the mesoflexid extend so that both are almost touching the
edge of the hypoflexid. The mesoflexid extends across 2/3 of the tooth width. There is
no sign that the parafossettid was a paraflexid in earlier wear stages, but the small
fossettid anterior to it has a small pit in the dentine on its lingual edge which does extend
to very near the enamel on the anterolingual tooth edge. This may be the very bottom of
an enamel fold.

A

B

c

Photograph 39. Monosaulax sp. R p4, LSUMG 3448, A. crown view. B.labial view.
C. lingual view.
Lindsay (1972, p. 34) comments that loose beaver teeth are difficult to orient to
achieve repeatability of measurement, and this is certainly the case. Small differences in
measurements should not be considered important. LSUMG 3448 measures 2.40 mm in

62

maximum anteroposterior diameter and 3.30 in transverse diameter measured
perpendicular to the first measurement.

Discussion -- Barstovian castorid taxonomy is in an uncertain state at present,
requiring an overall new study to determine the appropriate generic name for the
common North American beaver for this time. Stirton (1935) synonymized Monosaulax
and Eucastor in 1935, but his practice has not been universally followed. Voorhies
(1990) used "Monosaulax" pending a new study, and Leite (1990) suggested that
Monosaulax should be used for the Barstovian castorid and Eucastor for the
Clarendonian one. Korth, in his 1994 summary work on rodents of North America,
lists Monosaulax in his classification as the castorid genus occurring most often in the
Barstovian, but discusses it among problematical taxa (1994, pp.146-148). Another
complexity is the close relationship to castorids of the eutypomyid Amblycastor, which
clearly must be considered in any identification of a Barstovian castorid which does not
fall readily into existing species (Korth, 1994, pp.147,125-133). Korth (1994, p. 132)
recommended that North American species which have been referred to the genus
Anchitheriomys be placed in Amblycastor.
Castorid and eutypomyid tooth occlusal surface patterns change considerably with
wear, as shown in three p4s figured in Skinner and Taylor (1967, pA8), with even the
number of fossettes varying considerably with wear in one species, as discussed by
Voorhies (1990, pp. A89-A90) in Amblycastor fluminis from Norden Bridge. Stirton
(1935) recognized as a difference between the rest of his Eucastor and that portion which
others retain as Monosaulax or "Monosaulax," that para- and metafossettids form by
closure of the lingual striids, not from downfolding of enamel from the tooth crown.
Like LSUMG 3448, Voorhies' Monosaulax cf. curtus lacks parastriids and metastriids,
and has a short mesostriid and longer hypostriid (Voorhies, 1990, pp. A89-A90).
Voorhies (1990) described one specimen of Monosaulax cf. curtus, USNM 85508, an
almost unworn p4, as having a small anterofossettid as LSUMG does, but both worn
and unworn specimens have a metafossette which LSUMG 3448 lacks.
LSUMG 3448 is a castorid, but a particularly small one. Castorids in the Texas
Memorial Museum collection from the Miocene of the coastal plain are relatively large,
and the smallest beavers from the Norden Bridge faunas, assigned by Voorhies (1990)
to "Monosaulax" cf. curtus, are twice its size. The size difference alone suggests that it
is actually a new species. Both assignment of this specimen to any existing species or
designation of a new species on the basis of a single tooth are considered inappropriate.
Superfamily GEOMYOIDEA
Family INCERTAE SEDIS
Genus TEXOMYS
TEXOMYS RITCHIEI
Photograph 40; Figures 14, 15
Referred specimens and localities -- Fourth premolars are the most
diagnostic teeth. They are listed, and total Texomys from each site are given below.
p4: LSUMG3383, 3238,3356, 3172, 3656,3459, 3320, 3465,3764,3666,3665,
3463, 3769, 3766, 3553, 3480, 3830, 3663, 3659, 3324.
TVOR: 198
DISCOVERY: 26
STONEHENGE: 23
GULLY: 5

63

r
Description -- The location of the "opening" in the anterior circle of cusps of p4
in the Fort Polk: specimens, the least subjective of the characters separating Texomys and
Jimomys can be characterized as follows: 37% have a posterior opening, 26% have an
anterior opening, 26% are worn so that the anterior third of the tooth is a closed lake,
and 11 % have both.
2.2~----------------------------------------------------~

R(l)

2.0

S(l) T(l)

III

III

pel)
III

K(l)

II1II

Q(3)

III

l1li

III

II1II

L(l)

1.8

l1li

N(l) 0(1)
III

M(2)
iii

J(l)

III

F(l)

.. C(l)

l1li

E(l)
III

1.4 -

iii

A(l)

1.2

iii

II1II

III

1(1)

G(l)

III

H(l)

D(l)

B(l)

I

2.0

1.0

A=3659
B=3666
C=3861
D=3463
E=3383

F=3459
G=3320
H=3172
1=3656
J=3553

length
K=3254
L=3663
M=3660,3324
N=3769
0=3465

3.0

4.0

P=3764
Q=3665, 3766, 3830
R=3480
S=3356
T=3238

Figure 14. Plot of distribution of length and width in millimeters of geomyoid p4 1s from
the Fort Polk: Miocene.

Discussion -- Slaughter (1981) named a new genus of rodent, Texomys, based
on specimens from the late Hemingfordian and Barstovian of the Texas coastal plain and

64

from early Hemingfordian deposits of Panama. He described Texomys as related to
Jimomys, separable in that Texomys has more complex mesoloph-metaloph-posteroloph
and mesolophid-metalophid-anterolphid complexes, lophs and lophids more diagonal,
and the anterior circle of cusps on p4 opening posteriorly instead of anteriorly as in
Jimomys. Comparison with specimens in the SMU collections suggests that these
differences are not very clear in differentiating the Fort Polk Miocene specimens from
each other or either genus in the SMU collections. For example, the location of the
"opening" in the circle of cusps depends on degree of wear and very minor cusp size
differences. The Fort Polk specimens are as complex and diagonal as Texomys.
LSUMG 3172 is similar in size and morphology to the Texomys ritchiei type specimen,
SMU 65555, from the Trinity River site.
In the three most common kinds of small mammals from the Fort Polk Miocene
sites, the heteromyids, geomyoids, and cricetids, the stage has been reached where
estimates can be made regarding the number of species present, based on the size
distribution of the most diagnostic tooth, which for these animals is p4. The geomyoid
p4's available at present do not clearly separate into more than one species. With the
samples of Fort Polk Miocene geomyoids growing rapidly, the decision has been made
to use the term Texomys ritchiei, with the proviso that further work may change the
number of geomyoid species and the generic name used, because that further work is
expected to yield the fIrst really statistically reliable samples of Gulf Coastal geomyoids.

B

2

9
10

___"I""r'-4

7

-~5

6

__.........r--

11

Figure 15. Texomys premolar nomenclature after Slaughter (1981). Key to features: 1protoconid, 2-anterolophid, 3-metaconid, 4-mesolophid, 5-entoconid, 6-posterolophid,
7-hypoconid, 8-paracone, 9-anteroloph, lO-protocone, ll-hypocone, 12-posteroloph,
13-metacone, 14-mesoloph.

65

B

A

c

D

Photograph 40. Texomys ritchiei P4s, illustrating variety of morphology in anterior third
of tooth. A. LSUMG 3172, B. LSUMG 3238, C. LSUMG 3356, D. LSUMG 3383.
Family HETEROMYIDAE
PROHETEROMYS SP.
Photograph 41; Figures 16, 17
Referred specimens and localities -- Fourth lower premolars are the most
diagnostic teeth, and they and heteromyids from each site are listed.
p4: LSUMG 3393,3620,3712,3627,3484.
TVOR: 39
STONEHENGE: 16
DISCOVERY: 5
GULLY: 3
Description -- p4 has four cusps on two transverse lophs and is square in
outline. The anterior cusps, the protoconid and protostylid, are closer to each other than
the posterior ones, the metaconid and hypoconid. The hypostylid and cingulum are
absent in all specimens.

66

0.9

III

0.8

III

0.7

DCI)

C(l)

A(2)
B(l)
0.6 . $ _ - - - - r - - - - - - 1 - - - I 1 1 1 - - - - - - r - - - - - , . - - - - r - - - - - - r - - - r - - - - i
0.7

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.9

length
A= 3393,3712
B= 3620
C= 3627
D=3484
Figure 16. Plot of distribution of length and width in millimeters of heteromyid p4's
from the Fort Polk Miocene.

A

2

B

3

8

9

6

5

4

10
Figure 17. Heteromyid premolar nomenclature, after Storer (1975). Key to features: 1protostylid, 2-longitudinal ridge, 3-hypoconid, 4-entoconid, 5-protoconid, 6anteroconid, 7-buccal accessory cusps, 8-metacone, 9-hypocone, 10-hypostyle, 11protocone.
Discussion -- The most diagnostic tooth for Proheteromys is p4 (Herrin,
1977). Samples are still very low for this animal, the rarest of the three common rodents
at Fort Polk. Morton Green (Green, 1995, in press) summarizes roughly 25 years of
work on heteromyids, including a review of all Proheteromys and Mookemys species,
in a paper based on large samples, mainly loose teeth, from the Black Bear Quarry III

67

r

r
,
,~

I

A

B

c

Photograph 41. Proheteromys, A. LSUMG 3510, p4 crown, B. LSUMG 3627, p4
crown, C. LSUMG 3484, P4 crown. Scale=1 mm.
local fauna (Rosebud Formation, early Hemingfordian, South Dakota). Features that
have been considered diagnostic at the species level according to Green include: presence
or absence of anterior cingulum or anteroconid, presence or absence of sagicristid,
bicuspid posterolophid, tricuspid posterolophid, hypostylid present or absent, posterior
cingulum present or absent, anterior cuspids close or separated, and tooth outline
triangular or quadrate. He considered sampling to be inadequate for mass synonymizing
of species of these genera, and concluded that size of cheek teeth and form of p4 are
actually umeliable in separating species and the two genera, because of variation
observed in his large samples. Sulcate upper incisors in Mookemys and asulcate in
Proheteromys do separate the genera (Wood, 1935; Green, 1995, in press). Green
(1995, in press) points out that this criterion leaves Proheteromys wide ranging both
stratigraphically (Orellan to Barstovian) and geographically, with a range" ... from

68

Florida westward, while that of Mookemys is limited to two mountain states, Montana
and Colorado."
The large sample of heteromyids expected from ongoing work on the Fort Polk
Miocene is expected to characterize a second large local heteromyid population, this one
from the south, and differences from Green's northern population of animals will be of
special interest. The small size of the Fort Polk Miocene heteromyid sample at this time
does not preclude the presence of more than one species with great assurance.
Family CRICETIDAE
Genus COPEMYS (probably two species)
Photograph 42; Figures 18, 19; Table 6
Referred specimens and localities -- First lower molars are the most
diagnostic teeth, and they are listed in Figure 18. Copemys from each site are:
TVOR(95)
Stonehenge (41)
Discovery (14)
Gully (2).
1.2 , . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ,

1.1

III

E(l)

III

D(6)

1.0

~
......

~

0.9

C(1)

0.8

B(l)

III

0(4)

III

F(6)

III

H(2)

II

1(1)

A(l)
0.7 "*_----..,.....----r---r---..------..---r---...----.-----.----i
1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

length
A=3815
B=3864
C=3804
D=3601,3499,3812
3243,3541,3738
E=3806

F=3378,3859,3521
3540,3334,3376
G=3490,3698,3706,3247
H=3784,3789
1=3515

Figure 18. Plot of distribution of length and width in millimeters of cricetid m1's from
the Fort Polk Miocene.

69

~l.....................................................

A

123456

B

17
20 22
1 16 18 19 21 23

7

Figure 19. Cricetid molar nomenclature, after Storer (1975). Key to features: I-anterior
cingulum, 2-protoconid, 3-central mure, 4-ectolophid, 5-ectostylid, 6-hypoconid, 7posterior cingulum, 8-hypolophid, 9-entoconid, 10-mesolophid, Il-mesostylid, 12metalophid, 13-metaconid, 14-anterior mure, 15-anteroconid, 16-parastyle, 17-anterior
protoloph, 18-paracone, 19-posterior protoloph, 20-mesostyle, 21-mesoloph, 22metacone, 23-metaloph, 24-hypocone, 25-enterostyle, 26-protocone, 27-anterocone.
Description -- The m1's have narrow, medial anterocones, anterior cingula
separated from the anterolabial base of the metaconid by a sharp notch, labial and lingual
cingula differ among the specimens ranging from sharply defined to absent. Table 6
summarizes the mesostylidlmeslophid and ectostylidlectolophid conditions on the m1 'so

Table 6
Copemys m1 Morphologic Variation.
Teeth (LSUMG
numbers)
3738
3806,3784,3804,3789,
3812,3376,3706
3698
3499,3243,3247,3864,
3373, 3601, 3540, 3521,
3859,3515,3490

Mesostylidmesolophid of m1
3

Ectostylid-ectolophid
of m1
5
5

4
5

5
5

2

Characters
1 Both cusp and loph present and connected to each other
2 Both cusp and loph present and not connected to each other
3 Only loph present
4 Only cusp present
5 Neither cusp nor loph present

70

A

Photograph 42. Copemys. A. LSUMG 3247, L m1 crown. B. LSUMG 3376, L m1
crown, C. LSUMG 3377 R M2 crown. Scale=l mm.

Discussion -- Jacobs and Lindsay (1984) derive modern peromyscines from
Copemys. The most diagnostic tooth for these animals is m1. If the Fort Polk animals
are one species, it is quite variable in size and form (Figure 18; Table 6). The Fort Polk
Miocene fauna includes at least one new species of Copemys, smaller than any described
by Lindsay (1972). Lindsay (1972, p. 92), divided the Barstovian Copemys into two
lineages, one beginning with C. pagei and "characterized by an increase in size and
retention of an asymmetrical anteroconid on Mil" and a second lineage, C. tenuis to C.
russelli which" .. .is characterized by small size and retention of a symmetrical
anteroconid on Mil." Lindsay found species of the second lineage hard to separate
except arbitrarily on stratigraphy (Lindsay, 1972). The symmetrical anteroconid of the
Fort Polk: Miocene animals allies them with the C. tenuis lineage. The largest Fort Polk
animals would be small even for C. pagei, and C. tenuis is far too large for even the
largest Fort Polk: animal, so it appears possible that there are two new species.
Preliminary comparison suggests that some of the Fort Polk: Miocene specimens are

71

I4

rl

similar to Copemys from Trinity River site in east Texas, described as a new species in
an unpublished Masters thesis by Dorsey (1977).
Family SCIURIDAE
Genus NOTOTAMIAS
cf. NOTOTAMIAS ATELES
Photograph 43A,B,C
Referred specimens -- LSUMG 3785, L M1 or M2; LSUMG 3798, L M1 or
M2; LSUMG 3767, L M1; LSUMG 3322 L p4; LSUMG 3502, very worn R lower
molar.

A

B

c

D

Photograph 43. Sciurids. cf. Nototamias ateles, A. LSUMG 3785, L M1 or M2 crown,
B. LSUMG 3388, worn R m crown, C. LSUMG 3322 L p4 crown, D. LSUMG 3464,
worn partial talonid crown.

Localities -- TVOR, Stonehenge.
Description -- On upper molars, the protoloph and metaloph form a "V" in the
area near the protocone and a distinct metaconule is present in LSUMG 3785, but absent
in LSUMG 3798. LSUMG 3322, L p4, has a low ectolophid and no mesoconid.

72

LSUMG 3785 is 1.4 mm in A-P length and 1.9 mmin transverse width. LSVMG 3388
is 1.3 mm in A-P length and 1.0 mm in transverse width.
Discussion -- Dalquest et al. (1995, in press) commented that in modem North
America two species of the chipmunk Tamias are often found together, but that large
samples of fossils would be needed to document such a phenomenon in the fossil record.
Eventually, such a large sample may be recovered from Fort Polk:. Dalquest et al. (1995,
in press) did studies of recent animals to evaluate characters for separating Tamias and
the ground squirrel Spermophilus. In Tamias the protoloph and metaloph form a "V" in
the area near the protocone, in Spermophilus they form a "V" and its metaconules are
distinct and rounded, but metaconules are rare in Tamias, small and slender when present
(Dalquest et aI., 1995, in press). Lezak (1979) recognized Tamias sp. from the Trinity
River Local Fauna, and Pratt and Morgan (1989) described a new genus of chipmunks,
Nototamias, distinguised in part by lack of a mesoconid on lower molars, and they placed
Tamias ateles in it, distinguishing N. ateles from their new species of the genus because
N. ateles has a metaconule. Size and morphology of the Fort Polk: specimens suggest
that they are comparable to N. ateles. Variability of features such as metaconule
development require more specimens for evaluation.
larger sciurid
Photograph 43D
Referred specimen -- LSVMG 3464.
Locality -- TV OR.
Description -- Very worn partial talonid.
Discussion -- This badly worn tooth is from a considerably larger animal.
Without better material, it is not possible to go further than to note the presence of a larger
squirrel.

AGE, STRATIGRAPHY AND REGIONAL COMPARISON
The age of the Fort Polk: Miocene sites hinges on a few specimens. Tedford et ai.
(1987) define the beginning of the Barstovian on the first appearance of the immigrant
cricetid rodent Copemys and the hemicyonine bear Plithocyon, and Lindsay (1995) has
redefined the Hemingfordian/ Barstovian boundary as solely determined by the first
appearance of Copemys (Figure 20), which he considers to be a descendant of the very
similar Asian genus Democricetodon. Copemys occurs in both DISC and TVOR sites.
Lindsay (1972) recognized a trend of increasing size with time in Copemys in the classic
Californian Barstovian faunas. The small size of all the Fort Polk: Miocene Copemys, in
conjunction with the occurrence of a proboscidean, considered by Tedford et ai. (1987)
to mark the base of the late Barstovian, has been a consideration in the decision for an
early late Barstovian age assignment of the Fort Polk Miocene fauna (Schiebout, 1994).
As more small animal remains are recovered from the Fort Polk: Miocene sites, it becomes
strikingly evident that almost every rodent is small for its genus, and several are likely to
be new species. It appears likely that there are environmental as well as taphonomic
components to the size of the Fort Polk Miocene small forms. Small size was initially
considered important in thinking about the age of the fauna, specifically, where in the
Barstovian the sites fall. It is now considered less definitive.
The proboscidean specimen, like the specimens of Copemys, limits the age to
after the immigration of these animals to North America, but the proboscideans did not
spread throughout the North American continent instantaneously. Evander (1986)
proposed that the first appearance of proboscideans marks the HemingfordianiBarstovian

73

boundary, and Tedford et al. (1987) suggested that their first appearance marks the
beginning of the late Barstovian. Woodburne and Swisher (1995) note that they appear
in North America in the Hemingfordian at about 16.2 Ma in Nevada and at 15.8 Ma in
Florida, but that the mid-continent appearance that defines the beginning of the late
Barstovian there occurs at about 14.8 Ma. The Fort Polk Miocene proboscidean sample
is meager, and it is float from a site highly disturbed by heavy equipment (the Discovery
Site). The site's topography suggests, however, that considering the proboscidean to be
contemporaneous with the rest of the Discovery site fauna is the most likely scenario.
The only Miocene mammal specimen from Louisiana discovered previous to the
discovery of the Fort Polk Miocene fauna is a gomphothere mandible fragment reported
from the Fort Polk region, possibly from the Castor Creek Member (Arata, 1966), which
strengthens the idea that the Castor Creek does fall after the proboscidean datum. It is not
possible to say which of the two proboscidean first appearances it postdates, the one
dated in the northwest and southeast, or the later one of the mid-continent (Figure 20).
The reasons for the late arrival of these animals in the mid-continent are not known, and
to estimate whether western Louisiana would be likely to receive an early or late
proboscidean influx is difficult. Lindsay (1995) commented on problems in California
that result from the fact that proboscidean remains can be identified from small scraps
alone, and that they are rare in those deposits, in explaining why he excludes proboscidea
in defining the HemingfordianlBarstovian boundary. New finds of even a scrap could
cause significant boundary shifts.
Initially, hope was high that some marine or brackish-water beds would be found
to interfinger with the terrestrial fossiliferous beds of the Castor Creek on Fort Polk,
allowing a close tie to the marine time scale. So far efforts to recover any marine
microfossils, with one exception, have been fruitless. Palynological results have so far
included little age-diagnostic material. Earlier workers have found marine or
brackish-water invertebrates of the Potamides matsoni zone in the Castor Creek (Rogers
and Callandro, 1965). Proboscidea and the fauna of the Potamides matsoni zone occur at
the Burkeville site in Texas (Tedford, et al., 1987), a site which has yielded the
mammalian Burkeville local fauna, older than the Cold Spring local fauna in the sequence
of Texas Miocene successive local faunas (Figure 21). Occurrence of the Potamides
matsoni zone in the Louisiana subsurface in conjunction with benthic foraminifera led
Tedford et al. (1987, p. 176) to conclude that the Burkeville local fauna is between 14.513.0 Ma and should be considered Barstovian in age. MacFadden et al. (1990) place the
base of the Barstovian within Chron C5B of Berggren et al.(1985, 1995). Lindsay
(1995) places it in the lower part of Chron C5CN, at approximately 16.8 Ma.
The Fort Polk Miocene prosynthetocerine is perhaps the best large specimen
available for age determination by comparison of stage-of-evolution in a lineage
reasonably well known in the Gulf Coast. The Prosynthetoceras francisi partial mandible
is the single best specimen from the Castor Creek Member at Fort Polk and is clearly
identifiable to species. A fairly recent detailed study of the Gulf Coast members of this
family has been made (Patton and Taylor, 1971). It places P. francisi in the Cold Spring
local fauna of the east Texas Gulf coastal plain. The older Burkeville local fauna
contained P. texanus, clearly a smaller animal than the Fort Polk Miocene
prosynthetocerine specimen.
Preliminary comparison with the Texas system of local faunas (Wilson, 1956)
suggests that the Fort Polk Miocene fauna is equivalent in age to the Cold Spring local
fauna, currently considered to be Barstovian (Hulbert and MacFadden, 1991). If the age
estimates of Tedford et al. (1987) based on correlation of the older Burkeville fauna with
the marine realm are correct, Cold Spring and equivalent faunas must be younger than

74

14.5 Ma, the oldest age considered possible for the Burkeville. Tedford et al. place the
base of the late Barstovian at about 14.5 Ma and Woodbume and Swisher (1995) place it
at 14.8 Ma, indicating that the Fort Polk sites are at least late Barstovian. The Texomys
and small Copemys similar to those from Trinity River and small horse specimens similar
to Burkeville animals suggest that the age is probably not late in the late Barstovian.
BLANCAN

I-

w

5

~

...I

I-

!- - ...I

1-

I-

"'"w

HEMPHILLIAN

~

0:
<I:

w

r- ------_ ... _w

1-10

~
!----'
> CLARENDONIAN
...I

0:
<I:

I-

w

1...I

W

1-

.
1-15

~

I--

...I

w

BARSTOVIAN

I---~

L

0:
<I:

w

I-

w

!-

j

- - -

datum

L

Copemys

./

Proboscidian
datum
(NW and SE N.A.)

~

!-

Proboscidian
(Interior N.A.)

HEMINGFORDIAN

~

!-

0:
<I:

w

1-20

-- -- ---_ ... --...I

!-

-

w

0-

w

...I

0-

-25

-

~

--...I

ARIKAREEAN

>
...I
0:
<I:
W

W

Figure 20. Barstovian age and subdivisions after Woodbume and Swisher (1995).

75

...; ,i!};,:.:

...

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .~C

10

11

Epoch NALMA NPZ High Plains Texas Gulf Coast
Early
Snake Creek
ClarenFormation
I- - donian
N13
Goliad
I- - - Formation
N12

Late
Barstovian

12

Valentine
Formation

- - - c

0
:;::;

CD

C

13

~

N9

ca

- -

- -

CD

~

N8

15

-

Early
Barstovian

16

17

0

u.

Cold
Spring
Fauna

CD

:0

14

ca
E
....

CD

(.)

.2

Lapara
Creek
Fauna

Late
Hemingfordian

N7

-

-

Upper
Fleming
Formation

·s
CD
~
....::J Burkeville
co L. F.

Olcott
Formation

Trinity R.
L. F.

- - - -

Point Blank
L. F.

- -

- -

Sheep Creek
Formation

Figure 21. Texas Coastal Plain sequence of local faunas, after Prothero and Manning
(1987).
Other North American faunas most likely similar in age include the Norden Bridge fauna
(Voorhies, 1990) and other lower Valentine Formation faunas in Nebraska and the fauna
of the middle member of the Barstow Formation of the Mojave desert in California
(Lindsay, 1995). One pollen sample from the TVOR core indicates that that sample can
be no older than late-middle to early-late Miocene (Serrevallian-Tortonian, approximately
11-12 Ma), indicating that further palynological studies may be very helpful in
conjunction with the vertebrate data, particularly if age-diagnostic pollen can be recovered
from any of the beds which yield vertebrates .

76

The problem of whether the Fort Polk: Miocene sites are Burkeville or Cold
Spring equivalent may be complicated if some of the east Texas coastal stratigraphic
"successions" result from geographic shifts of faunas that were actually more longranging than they have been considered, because they were living in regions where no
fossil record is available, nearer or further from the coast. This could be an explanation
for the close similarity of the Fort Polk: Miocene horse upper premolar to a specimen from
a site (Bennett Farm) considered lower Burkeville (Prothero and Manning, 1987).
Prosynthetoceras francisi occurs both there and at Port Polk:. It is an animal seen by
Patton and Taylor (1971) as Cold Spring. It must be remembered that Patton and Taylor
(1971) and Tedford et al. (1987) saw the Trinity River site prosynthetocerine, P.
trinitensis, as a northern incursion into the south, and the Cold Spring P. francisi as a
return of the Gulf Coast lineage. Finding a P. francisi at a stratigraphically lower and
older site than classic Cold Spring confmns that the Gulf Coastal lineage of
prosynthetocerines was still in the vicinity during the P. trinitensis incursion. The Fort
Polk: Miocene site may eventually prove to have several forms which do not commonly
occur together at east Texas sites.

PALEOECOLOGY
The most striking generalization about the Fort Polk: Miocene fauna is that many
of the animal remains recovered in screening, from catfish to rodents, are very small.
Certainly there are biases produced by the deposition and the mode of recovery of the
specimens. The most likely explanation at fIrst glance would be that the Fort Polk: small
mammals are smaller than those at most other sites because of sorting in the original
deposition and because of the use of fIne screens in processing the residue left after acid
treatment. The catfish spines, for example, are smaller than most comparative material,
and it is difficult to conjecture a single ecological cause for small cricetid rodents and
small catfish. There are larger bone fragments in the screens (Photograph 16); however,
indicating that the lack of larger rodents is not all a result of depositional sorting and
processing biases. If a beaver the size of classic Monosaulax were present, it would
certainly have been found on our screens, and the odds of its teeth being within the range
concentrated in the fossiliferous conglomerates of Fort Polk: are good. Likewise,
although many of the Fort Polk: Miocene small animals, such as the tiny heteromyids,
would pass through the window screen used in some prior bulk: screening, animals such
as the Fort Polk: Miocene beaver should have been found. The possibility that much
smaller kinds of mammals would be universally available if our techniques were used at
other sites is intriguing, but the more likely scenario is that there is some environmental
component to the explanation. The Castor Creek Gulf Coastal environments may have
been more finely divided into microhabitats than Great Plains wooded or savanna
environments, may have offered less overall food, or more concentrated food sources
available to small forms. Black (1963) commented that forest-dwelling forms tend to be
rare as fossils, and many of the Fort Polk: animals are probably forest types. Of the
twelve taxa listed by Tedford et al. (1987, Figure 6.3) as characteristic of the Barstovian,
only one, Copemys, is found at Fort Polk:, indicating that some factors must be different
between Fort Polk: Miocene sites and those of the west coast and Great Plains.
The question of intersite variation at Fort Polk: is approached herein solely by
comparison of the faunas recovered by laboratory processing and screening. The lack of
appreciable surface exposure of the claystones from which the Discovery site large fauna
appear to be weathering, at sites like TVOR, rules out their yielding comparable large
material. In addition to comparing the two main Fort Polk: Miocene sites to each other

77

Table 7
Statistical Comparison of Rodent Distributions
DISC
DISC
TVOR
Stonehenge
Gully
Trinity
River
Town Bluff

TVOR

Stonehenge

Gully

248.1

25.7
1435.7

161.5
12206.3
881.6

Trinity
River
51.3
423.6
63.4
104.2

Town
Bluff
112.6
317.5
83.9
168.6
62.8

All Chi square values are significant at the 0.001 level. Program used was StatView II.
Figure 22. Diagram of cricetid, heteromyid, and geomyoid rodents in Texas sites, Trinity
River and Town Bluff, studied by scientists from SMU (Dorsey, 1977).

A

B
Geomyoid
(39.4%)

Trinity River Rodent Distribution
(total: 123)

Heteromyid
(40.9%)

Town Bluff Rodent Distribution
(total: 188)

Figure 22. Diagram of cricetid, heteromyid, and geomyoid rodents in Texas sites,
Trinity River and Town Bluff, studied by scientists from SMU (Dorsey, 1977).
(Figure 22) and newer sites, they can be compared to the two Texas Coastal Plain sites
from which good faunas of small animals are available (Table 7). The two Texas sites
shown in Figure 23 (Town Bluff Site and Trinity River Site) have the most abundant
faunas from a SMU program, which Dorsey (1977) reported as having screened 150
tons. The amount screened from Fort Polk: for roughly similar amounts of rodents to the
Texas sites was about 1 1/2 tons. Modern heteromyid rodents prefer open areas and
cricetid rodents prefer wooded areas (Dorsey, 1977), and this type of information may be
used to infer degree of woodedness of individual Fort Polk: sites. The geomyoids at both
Fort Polk: and the two Texas sites are ones whose lifestyle may not be close to that of
modern geomyids, so their lifestyle is less certain. Korth (1994) called Texomys and

78

Jimomys "problematical taxa." At the DISC, TVOR, and Trinity River sites, geomyoids
are first in abundance, cricetids second, and heteromyids third. At Gully site on Fort
Polk:, geomyoids are first in abundance with heteromyids second, and cricetids third. At
Town Bluff site in Texas, heteromyids are slightly more abundant than geomyoids, with
cricetids third in abundance. Stonehenge is the only site of the six to have cricetids most
abundant, with geomyoids ranking second and heteromyids third.

A

B

Geomyoid
(58%)

Geomyoid
(59.6%)

TVOR Rodent Distribution
(total: 332)

Discovery Rodent Distribution
(total: 45)

c

D
Geomyoid
(28.8%)

Heteromyid
(30%)

Heteromyid
(20%)

Geomyoid
(50%)

Gully Rodent Distribution
(total: 10)

Stonehenge Rodent Distribution
(total: 80)

Figure 23. Diagram of cricetid, heteromyid, and geomyoid rodents at Discovery, TVOR,
Gully, and Stonehenge sites at Fort Polk:.
All of these sites have statistically significant differences in rodent distribution
(Table 7), and all probably included specimens from both wooded and open areas,

79

probably averaging mixed environments in addition to time averaging, which results from
the mode of burial and recovery. The Texas sites were sandy (Jacobs, 1994, pers.
comm.), probably from fluvial channels, and much larger amounts of material were
screened at the Texas sites. These differences suggest that percentage differences
between Texas and Fort Polk: sites, which are roughly equivalent in rodent types, should
not be taken too seriously. Possibly, Stonehenge was the most heavily wooded area of
the sites at Fort Polk, with DISC, TVOR, and Trinity River having a more mixed
environment, and Town Bluff being the most open, but still having a significant wooded
component. It appears that the geomyids thrived in a variety of coastal areas in the
middle Miocene.
In addition to analysis of the animals present in the Fort Polk: Miocene sites and
consideration in variations between sites, it is interesting to consider some of the animals
that might be expected to be present at these sites, but which are not. Of course, in the
case of vertebrate fossils, absence of specimens can indicate that the animals were not
preserved or have not yet been found. For large members of the fauna, the chance that
more kinds remain to be found is good. Their remains are scarce and scattered in
occurrence, exactly what might be expected from normal attrition without much effect of
concentrating agents. For example, four genera of rhinoceroses are known from the
Texas coastal plain, including two dwarf species (Prothero and Sereno, 1982), so the
appearance of an unmistakable rhinoceros specimen in the Fort Polk: Miocene has been
expected. Available fragments of teeth with enamel thicker than that of the horse or
prosynthetocerine, but smaller than that of the gomphothere, are estimated to belong to
some type of rhinoceros, but not with sufficient assurance to report in the Systematic
Paleontology for this report. Also, among the missing are peccaries, small ruminants and
carnivores, and the many large rodents reported from other sites similar in age. In some
cases, Fort Polk: Miocene small specimens indicate the presence of forms which cannot
yet be identified. An example is LSUMG 3599, a small artiodactyl right premolar, which
differs from AMNH 95489, Blastomeryx from the Trinity River site in Texas, in lacking
a distinctive posterolabial heel. Without more of this animal, further identification
attempts are likely to be futile, but there was a Blastomeryx-sized small artiodactyl at Fort
Polk:. Holman (1977) reported four salamanders, four anurans, and nine snakes from the
Miocene of the Texas Gulf Coast, so additional lower vertebrates are certainly possible.
It seems likely at this stage that not many common contributors to the harvest of
small mammal teeth are missing, at least at the genus level at Discovery site and TVOR,
while rare types will continue to turn up. There is enough intersite variation to suggest
that new sites or even different conglomerate layers could be significantly different.

RECOMMENDATIONS
I recommend that other exposures in the Castor Creek Member at Fort Polk,
particularly those at around the 300-foot topographic elevation that marks the present
productive areas, continue to be examined through both surface search and laboratory
treatment of conglomerate lenses as located. Work at all currently known sites should
continue. Productivity per pound of material processed is much higher than that of the
Texas sites. Recommendations for the sites which are the focus of this report are:
Discovery Site
As the sole currently available large exposure of the Castor Creek which has
proved rich in Miocene vertebrates, it provides the best hope for ongoing recovery of
medium- and large-sized animals. It is no longer a barrow pit yielding clay and sand, but

80

it is yielding a slow but steady harvest of bones and teeth as erosion exposes the animal
remains buried in the fine overbank fluvial sediment. As long as the erosion causes no
problem for Fort Polk:, it is recommended that the site be left open and that it undergo
periodic surface reconnaissance. Personnel of the environmental section have proved
proficient fossil collectors and have added important specimens to those collected by LSD
scientists. Collection of bulk: samples should also continue.
TVOR
This site has very little natural exposure, and most fossils are recovered from a
conglomerate bed exposed in a narrow gully in the side of a small hill. The fact that
drilling and coring from a spot immediately uphill did not encounter the fossiliferous bed
suggests that it is very limited in extent. It is entirely possible that the bulk: of the
fossiliferous bed will be collected and processed before the point of diminishing returns
of fossils will be reached. The site is very productive and convenient to a road, and
excavation of the fossiliferous layer has little impact on the landscape, so it is
recommended that continued work at TVOR be a priority.

Outreach
Mr. Grafton reports great success in communicating with youngsters in the fifth,
sixth, and seventh grades in the programs at Fort Polk: Environmental Learning Center.
Future outreach materials can target students at a less advanced level than the previous
popular report, along the lines of the small brochure (Schiebout and Dooley, 1995).
Efforts should be made to keep the outreach materials user friendly and appealing, while
taking advantage of the fact that the Fort Polk: Miocene sites offer a unique chance to
teach a broad range of earth science concepts, and they have a particular appeal to
Louisiana youngsters, because of the lack of previous pre-Pleistocene terrestrial
vertebrate faunas. A vivid picture can already be formulated:
The Fort Polk: region in the early late Barstovian can be envisioned as looking like
parts of western Louisiana today, with a mixture of forest and grassy areas, both pines,
mixed hardwoods and shrubs. Garfish, catfish, soft-shell turtles, alligators and gavials
inhabit river and riverbank areas. Shrews hunt insects. Bats flutter after flying insects
when dusk falls. Algae-choked ponds support snails. A close look at the common mice
and squirrels would reveal some familiar patterns, Copemys probably behaving much
like modern mice, and some surprises, with the geomyids more likely to be different,
possibly not burrowing like modern forms. The most visual difference to humans would
be in the large animals, immediately recognizable as different: small browsing "elephants"
(the gomphotheres), small grazing horses with three toes, and, instead of deer, "slingshot
horned" prosynthetocerines. A very large predator lurks in the shadows, watching the
herbivores.

CONCLUSIONS
The sites offer not only the oldest terrestrial mammal faunas from the state of
Louisiana but also sites unusual for the North American Miocene. The Fort Polk:
Miocene sites are early late Barstovian in age, and the deposits containing small fossils
are produced by reworking of soils and deposition in small channels and gullies in an
overall fluvial overbank setting. The Cold Spring local fauna is the most similar to the
Fort Polk: site of the Texas Coastal Plain sequence. High-crowned grazing animals, such

81

as merychippine horses and the geomyoid rodents, are present, but the region was not a
grassland. It was probably wooded with some open areas of grass and herbaceous
plants. An ecologically fine-textured diverse environment may be partially responsible
for the prevalence of very small mammals, but taphonomic factors also played a role.
Future expectations include:
Large samples of all but the rarest animals are solely a matter of continuing the
work. Recovery of the diverse small vertebrates at the Fort Polk Miocene sites is labor
intensive, but no longer a gamble. Statistical treatment of all of the more abundant kinds
will be possible, offering a dimension often unavailable for Miocene small mammalian
taxa, or most extinct mammals.
Finds new to science were predicted, and several new species are present.
Continued processing will make available sufficient material to name them. The total
numbers of species of both mammals and lower vertebrates will increase dramatically
with further research. Some forms that were almost surely present, such as snakes,
salamanders, and marsupials, await discovery.
The sites are definitely Barstovian, but different from most Barstovian sites. They
represent an opportunity to study a geographic region where data for that time period has
been scant. Eleven of the genera usually considered diagnostic of the Barstovian Land
Mammal Age are not present (or not yet recovered). Addition of sedimentological,
palynological, and isotopic data to that from vertebrate paleontology is yielding valuable
insight into the paleoenvironment. For example, the soil carbonate isotope data suggest
that the Miocene rainfall pattern was similar to the present one. Palynological data
support the idea that wooded and open areas were present, an idea also supported by
rodent distributions. The fact that there are differences between individual sites, for
example, differences in the abundances of the common rodents, taken together with the
environmental information being developed for the sites, offers an opportunity for
continued unraveling of habitat differences of Miocene mammals.

REFERENCES
Albright, Lynn B., 1991, The vertebrate paleontology, taphonomy, and paleoecology of
a new early Miocene site in the Fleming Formation near Toledo Bend Dam,
Newton County, Texas and its importance to Gulf Coastal Plain biostratigraphy:
Unpub. masters thesis, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA. 319 pp.
Albright, Lynn B., 1994, Lower vertebrates from an Arikareean (earliest Miocene) fauna
near the Toledo Bend Dam, Newton County, Texas: Journal of Paleontology, v.
68, no. 5, p.I131-1144.
Andrews, 1990, Owls, Caves, and Fossils: London, British Museum (Natural History),
p. 1-231.
Arata, Andrew A., 1966, A Tertiary proboscidian of Louisiana: Tulane Studies in
Geology, v. 4, p.73,74.
AsIan, A., 1994, Holocene sedimentation, soil formation, and floodplain evolution of the
Mississippi River floodplain, Ferriday, Louisiana: Ph.D. Dissertation, University
of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 258 pp.

82

Barss, M. S. and G. L. Williams, 1973, Palynological and nannofossil processing
techniques: Geological Survey of Canada Paper 73-26, 25 pp.
Baskin, J. A., 1986, The late Miocene radiation of Neotropical sigmodontine rodents in
North America: University of Wyoming Contributions to Geology, Special Paper
3, p.287-303.
Behrensmeyer, A. K., 1978, Taphonomic and ecologic information from bone
weathering: Paleobiology, v.4, no.20, p.150-162.
Berggren, W. A., D. V. Kent, C.C. Swisher, and M. Aubrey, in press, A revised
Cenozoic geochronology and chronostratigraphy: in Berggren, W. A. , Kent, D.
V., and Rardenbol, J., eds., Geochronology, Time Scales, and Global
Stratigraphic Correlations: a Unified Temporal Framework for an Historical
Geology. Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists Special Volume
no. 54.
Black, C. c., 1963, A review of the North American Tertiary Sciuridae: Bulletin of the
Museum of Comparative Zoology (Harvard), v.130, no.3: 109-248.
Blodgett, R. R., 1988, Calcareous paleosols in the Triassic Dolores Formation,
southwestern Colorado: Geographical Society of America Special Paper 216, p.
103-121.
Brady, N. c., 1991, The Nature and Properties of Soils: New York, NY, Macmillian
Publishing Co., 612 pp.
Cerling, T. E., 1984, The stable isotope composition of modern soil carbonate and its
relation to climate: Earth and Planetary Science Letters, v.71, p.229-240.
Cerling, T. E., 1992, Use of carbon isotopes in paleosols as an indicator of the PC02 of
the paleoatmosphere: Global Biogeochemical Cycles, v.6, p.307-314.
Cerling, T. E., Quade, J., Wang, Y., and Bowman, J. R., 1989, Carbon isotopes in
soils and paleosols as ecology and palaeoecology indicators: Nature v.341,
p.138-139.
Cerling, T. E., Wang, Y., and Quade, J., 1993, Expansion of C4 ecosystems as an
indicator of global ecological change in the late Miocene: Nature v.361, p.344345.
Coleman, J. M., 1966, Ecological Changes in a Massive Fresh-Water Clay Sequence:
Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies Transactions, v.16, p.159-174.
Czaplewski, N. J., 1991, Miocene bats from the lower Valentine Formation of
northeastern Nebraska: Journal of Mammalogy, v.72, no.4, p.715-722.
Dalquest, W. W., J. A. Baskin, and G. E. Schultz, in press, Fossil mammals from a
Late Miocene (Clarendonian) site in Beaver County, Oklahoma.

83

i!4lii'

Dooley, A. c., Jr., J. A. Schiebout, and B. S. Dooley, submitted, An inexpensive,
environmentally friendly method for bulk acid processing of carbonate rocks to
obtain microvertebrates: in P. Leiggi and P. May (eds.), Vertebrate Paleontological
Techniques, v. 2, 13 manuscript pages.
Dorsey, S. L., 1977, Biostratigraphy of the Mio-Pliocene of the Texas Gulf Coastal
Plain: Unpub. masters thesis, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, 65 pp.
Evander, 1986, Formal redefinition of the Hemingfordian/Barstovian land mammal age
boundary: Journal Vertebrate Paleontology, v.6, p.374-381.
Ewer, R. F., 1973, The Carnivores: Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 494 pp.
Farrell, K. M., 1987, Sedimentology and facies architecture of overbank deposits of the
Mississippi River, False River region, Louisiana: in Etheridge, F. G., Flores, R.
M. , and Harvey, M. D., eds., Recent developments in fluvial sedimentology:
Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists Special Publication 39,
p.III-120.
Fisk, H. N., 1940, Geology of A voyelles and Rapides Parishes: Louisiana Geological
Survey Bulletin 18, 240 pp.
Folk, R. L., 1959, Practical petrographic classification of limestones: American
Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, vA3, p.I-38.
Forsten, A., 1975, The fossil horses of the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain: A revision: Texas
Memorial Museum, The Pearce-Sellards Series, no.22, 86 pp.
Galloway, W. E., D. G. Bebout, W. L. Fisher, J. B. Dunlap, R. Cabrera-Castro, J. E.
Lugo-Rivera, and T. M. Scott, 1991, Cenozoic: in Salvador, A. I., ed., The
Geology of North America, The Gulf of Mexico Basin: The Geological Society of
America, p.245-324.
Gentry, A. W. and J. J. Hooker, 1988, The phylogeny of the Artiodactyla: in Benton,
M. J., ed., The Phylogeny and Classification of the Tetrapods: Clarendon Press,
Oxford p.235-272.
Ghosh, S. K., 1987, Cyclicity and facies characteristics of alluvial sediments in the
upper Paleozoic Monongahela-Drunkard groups, central West Virginia: in
Etheridge, F. G., Flores, and Harvey, M. D., eds., Recent Developments in
Fluvial Sedimentology: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists
Special Publication 39, p.230-239.
Glowacz, M. F. and J. C. Home, 1971, Depositional environments of the early Miocene
as exposed in the Cane River diversion canal, Rapides Parish, Louisiana: Gulf
Coast Association of Geological Societies Transactions, v.21, p.379-386.
Gonthier, G. and Aharon, P., 1990, Groundwater sources and flow patterns derived
from stable isotopes and elemental chemistry of the southeast Louisiana

84

*i
freshwater aquifers: Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies Transactions,
v.40, p.251-264.
Green, M., in press, The validity of the genera Proheteromys Wood, 1932 and
Mookemys Wood, 1931.
Harrison, Jessica A, 1982, The baculum of Plesiogulo (Carnivora: Mustelidae): Journal
of Paleontology, v.56, no.5, p.1266-1273.
Herrin, E. T., 1977, Large heteromyids of the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain: Unpub. masters
thesis, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, 126 pp.
Holman, J. Alan, 1977, Amphibians and reptiles from the Gulf Coast Miocene of Texas,
Herpetologica, v.33, no.4, p.391-403.
Holman, J. A., 1982, New herpetological species and records from the Norden Bridge
Fauna (Miocene: late Barstovian) of Nebraska: Transactions, Nebraska Academy
of Sciences, v.IO, p.31-36.
Hulbert, R. C. Jr., and B. J. MacFadden, 1991, Morphlogical transformation and
c1adogenesis at the base of the adaptive radiation of Miocene hypsodont horses:
American Museum of Natural History Novitates, no.3000, 61 pp.
Jacobs, L. L., and Lindsay, E. H., 1984, Holarctic radiation of Neogene muroid rodents
and the origin of South American cricetids: Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology,
v.4, p.265-272.
James, G. T., 1963, Paleontology and nonmarine stratigraphy of the Cuyama Valley
Badlands, California: University California Publications Geological Science, v.45,
p. 1-145.
Jones, M. H., J. A Schiebout, and J. T. Kirkova, 1995, Cores from the Miocene Castor
Creek Member of the Fleming Formation, Fort Polk, Louisiana: Relationship to
the Outcropping Miocene terrestrial vertebrate fossil-bearing beds: Gulf Coast
Association of Geological Societies Transactions, 20 pp., 1 pI.
Korth, William W., 1994, The Tertiary Record of Rodents in North America: New York,
Plenum Press, 319 pp.
Kraus, M. J. and A AsIan, 1993, Eocene hydropomorphic paleosols: significance for
interpreting ancient floodplain processes: Journal of Sedimentary Petrology,
v.63, p.453-463.
Kraus, M. J. and T. M. Bown, 1988, Pedofacies analysis; A new approach to
reconstructing ancient fluvial sequences: Geological Society of America Special
Paper 216, p.143-152.
Leite, Michael B., 1990, Stratigraphy and mammalian paleontology of the Ash Hollow
Formation, (Upper Miocene) on the north shore of Lake McConaughy, Keith

85

County, Nebraska: University of Wyoming Contributions Geology, v.28, no.l,
p.I-29.
Lezak, J. L., 1979, Variation of tooth morphology in Sciurius niger and Citellus
tridecemlineatus, and Miocene sciurids from the Texas Coastal Plain: Unpub.
masters thesis, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, 54 p.
Lindsay, E. H., 1972, Small mammal fossils from the Barstow Formation, California:
University of California Publications in Geological Sciences, v.93, 104 pp.
Lindsay, E. H., 1995, Copemys and the BarstovianiHemingfordian Boundary: Journal
of Vertebrate Paleontology, v.15, no.2, p.357-365.
Lundberg, J. G., 1975, The fossil catfishes of North America: Papers on Paleontology,
Museum of Paleontology, University of Michigan, no.l1, 51 pp.
Mack, G. H. and W. C. James, 1992, Paleosols for sedimentologists: Geological
Society of America Short Course Notes, 97 pp.
MacFadden, B. J., 1984, Systematics and phylogeny of Hipparion, Neohipparion,
Nannipus, and Cormohipparion (Mammalia: Equidae) from the Miocene and
Pliocene of the New World: Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural
History, v.179, p.I-196.
MacFadden, B. J., C. C. Swisher III, N. D. Opdyke, and Woodburne, M. 0., 1990,
Paleomagnatism, geochronology, and possible tectonic rotation of the middle
Miocene Barstow Formation, Mojave Desert, southern California: Geologic
Society of America Bulletin, v.102, p.478-493.
MacFadden, B. J., 1992, Fossil horses: Systematics, Paleobiology, and Evolution of the
Family Equidae: New York, Cambridge University Press, 369 pp.
Manning, E., 1990, The late early Miocene Sabine River: Gulf Coast Association of
Geological Societies Transactions, v.40, p.531-549.
Malone, B. S.,1979, The systematics, phylogeny and paleobiology of the Genus
Alligator, Unpub. dissertation, City University of New York, 159 pp.
Manning, E. M. and MacFadden, B. J., 1989, Pliocene three-toed horses from
Louisiana, with comments on the Citronelle Formation: Tulane Studies in
Geology and Paleontology, v.22, no.2, p.35-46.
Matthew, W. D., 1924, Third contribution to the Snake Creek Fauna: Bulletin of the
American Museum of Natural History, v.50, p.59-21O.
Meylan, P. A., 1987, The phylogenetic relationships of soft-shell turtles (Family
Trionychidae): Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History, v.186, 101
pp.

86

Mora, C. 1., S. G. Driese, and P. G. Seager, 1991, Carbon dioxide in the Paleozoic
atmosphere: Evidence from carbon isotope compositions of pedogenic carbonates:
Geology, v.19, p.1017-1020.
Morgan, G. S., 1986, The so-called giant Miocene dolphin Megalodelphis magnidens
Kellogg (Mammalia: Cetacea) is actually a crocodile (Reptilia: Crocodilia) Journal
of Paleontology, v.60, no.2, pA11-417.
Munthe, K., 1989, The skeleton of the Borophaginae (Carnivora, Canidae), morphology
and function: University of California Publications in Geology, v.133, 115 pp.
Patton, T. H., 1969, Miocene and Pliocene Artiodactyls, Texas Gulf Coastal Plain:
Bulletin of the Florida State Museum, v.14, no.2, 226 pp.
Patton, T. H. and B. E. Taylor, 1971, The Synthetoceratinae (Mammalia, Tylopoda,
Protoceratidae): Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History, v.145,
p.119-218.
Peterson, O. A., 1905, Description of new rodents and discussion of the origin of
Daemonelix.: Memoirs of the Carnegie Museum, v.2, noA, p.139-191.
Pratt, A. E. and G. S. Morgan, 1989, New Sciuridae (Mammalia: Rodentia) from the
Early Miocene Thomas Farm Local Fauna, Florida: Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology, v.9, no.1, p.89-100.
Prothero, D. R., and E. M. Manning, 1987, Miocene rhinoceroses from the Texas Gulf Coastal
Plain: Journal of Paleontology, v. 61, no. 2, p. 388-423.
Prothero, D. R., and P. C. Sereno, 1982, Allometry and paleoecology of medial
Miocene dwarf rhinoceroses from the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain: Paleobiology,
v.8, no.1, p.16-30.
Quade, J., T. E. Cerling, and J. R. Bowman, 1989, Development of Asian monsoon
revealed by marked ecological shift during the latest Miocene in northern
Pakistan: Nature v.342, p.163-166.
Repenning, C. A., 1967, Subfamilies and genera of the Soricidae: United States
Geological Survey Professional Paper 565, 73 pp.
Rich, T. H. V., 1981, Origin and History of the Erinaceinae and Brachyericinae
(Mammalia, Insectivora) in North America: Bulletin of the American Museum of
Natural History, v.171, art.1, 116 pp.
Rich, T. H. V., and T. H. Patton, 1975, First record of a fossil hedgehog from Florida
(Erinaceidae, Mammalia): Journal of Mammalogy, v.56, no.3, p.692-696.
Rich, T. H. V., and P. V. Rich, 1971, Brachyerix, a Miocene Hedgehog from western
North America, with a description of the tympanic regions of Paraechinus and
Podogymnura: American Museum of Natural History Novitates, no.2477, 58 pp.

87

Rogers, J. E., and A. J. Callandro, 1965, Water Resources of Vernon Parish, Louisiana:
Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey and Louisiana
Department of Public Works, Water Resources Bulletin 26, 104 pp.
Schiebout, J. A., 1994, Fossil vertebrates from the Castor Creek Member, Fleming
Formation, western Louisiana: Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies
Transactions, v.44, p.675-680.
Skinner, M. F., and B. E. Taylor, 1967, A revision of the geology and paleontology of
the Bijou Hills, South Dakota: American Museum of Natural History Novitates,
no.2300, p.1-53.
Slaughter, B. H., 1981, A new genus of geomyoid rodent from the Miocene of Texas
and Louisiana: Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, v.1, no.1, p.1U-U5.
Smith, N. D., T. A. Cross, J. P. Dufficy, and S. R Clough, 1989, Anatomy of an
avulsion: Sedimentology, v.36, p.1-24.
Stirton, R A, 1935, A review of the Tertiary beavers: University of California
Publications in Geological Sciences, v.23, no.1, p.391-458.
Storer, J. E., 1975, Tertiary mammals of Saskatchewan, Part Ill: the Miocene fauna: Life
Sciences Contributions, Royal Ontario Museum, no.103, 134 pp.
Sutton, J. E, and H. H. Genoways, 1974, A new vespertilionine bat from the
Barstovian deposits of Montana: Occasional Papers, The Museum Texas Tech
University, no.20, 8 pp.
Tappan, H., 1980, The paleobiology of plant protists: W. H. Freeman & Co., San
Francisco, 1028 pp.
Tedford, R H., M. E Skinner, R W. Fields, J. M. Rensberger, D. P. Whistler, T.
Galusha, B. E. Taylor, J. R MacDonald, and S. D. Webb, 1987, Faunal
succession and biochronology of the Arikareean through Hemphillian interval
(late Oligocene through earliest Pliocene Epochs) in North America: in
Woodburne, M. 0., ed., Cenozoic mammals of North America: Berkeley,
University of California Press, p.153-210.
Tobien, H., 1972, On the evolution of the mastodons (Proboscidea, Mammalia), Part 1:
the bunolophodont, trilophodont groups: Notizblatt des Hessischen Landesamtes
fur Bodenforschung zu Weisbaden, v.10l, p.202-276.
Voorhies, M. R, 1990, Vertebrate paleontology of the proposed Norden Reservoir area,
Brown, Cherry, and Keya Paha Counties, Nebraska: University of Nebraska
Technical Report 82-09, prepared for the U. S. Bureau of Rec1amation, 138 pp.
plus 593 p. appendix.
Wang, Xiaoming, 1994, Phylogenetic systematics of the Hesperocyoninea: Bulletin of
the American Museum of Natural History, v.221, 207 pp.

88

Welch, R. N., 1942, Geology of Vernon Parish: Geological Bulletin no. 22. Baton
Rouge: Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, 90
pp.(inc1udes one 1:62,500-scale geologic map).
Wilson, J. A., 1956, Miocene formations and vertebrate biostratigraphic units, Texas
Coastal Plain: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, vAO,
p.2233-2246.
Wilson, J. A., 1960, Miocene Carnivores, Texas Coastal Plain: Journal of Paleontology,
v.34, no.5, p.983-1000.
Winker, C. D., 1981, Cenozoic shelf margins, northwestern Gulf of Mexico: in B. F.
Perkins, W. P. S. Ventress, and M. B. Edwards, eds., Recognition of ShallowWater Versus Deep-Water Sedimentary Facies in Growth-Structure-Affected
Formations of the Gulf Coast Basin: SEPM, Gulf Coast Section, 2nd Annual
Research Conference, Programs and Abstracts, p.74-82.
Winker, C.D., 1982, Cenozoic shelf margins, northwestern Gulf of Mexico: Gulf Coast
Association of Geological Societies Transactions, v.32, pA27-488.
Wood, A. E., 1935, Evolution and relationships of the heteromyid rodents: Annals of the
Carnegie Museum, v.24, p.73-262.
Woodburne, M. 0., and C. C. Swisher, III, 1995, Land mammal high-resolution
geochronology, intercontinental overland dispersals, sea level, climate, and
vicariance: in Geochronology, Time Scales, and Global Stratigraphic Correlation,
SEPM Special Publication no. 54, p. 335-364.
Woodbury, H. 0., I B. Murray, P. J. Pickford, and W. H. Akers, 1973, Pliocene and
Pleistocene depocenters, outer continental shelf, Louisiana and Texas: American
Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v.57, no.12, p.2428-2439.
Wyss, A. R. and, J. J. Flynn, 1993, A phylogenetic analysis and definition of the
Carnivora: in Szalay, F. S., M. J. Novacek, and M. C. McKenna, eds., Mammal
Phylogeny: New York, Springer-Verlag, p.32-52.

89

APPENDIX
TASKS AND DELIVERABLES
Support under Contract No. DACW63-90-D-0008, Delivery Order No. 13 was
provided for completion of the following tasks:
a) survey and collection of paleofaunal specimens that have been exposed by the
grading and clearing activities at Discovery and TVOR sites.
b) processing sediments for faunal specimen extraction;
c) & d) preparation of faunal specimens for identification, morphometrics and
detailed description;
e) documentation of the geologic contextual setting of the two locations, leading
to interpretive paleoenvironmental models. Included in this task is petrology and optical
mineralogy of major sedimentary facies as necessary for paleoenvironmental
interpretation;
f) palynological study leading to paleofloral reconstruction;
g) where appropriate (marine facies) sampling for other microflora (protista,
diatoms) and microfauna (ostracoda);
h) core samples extracted for use in interpreting the depth of deposit in order to
create stratigraphic cross-section data from the two locations sufficient for
paleoenvironmental reconstruction;
i) &j) preparation of a draft popular report and 3000 casts of a Miocene fossil for
use in educational projects of the Fort Polk Environmental Learning Center;
k) permanent fossil collections are to be made and curated;
1) the end product of the above tasks was to be a report (this one) on the
paleofauna recovered from the sites, including geologic and paleoenvironmental
reconstruction.
In addition to the results reported herein, previous deliverables have'included:
• 3000 casts of LSUMG 3629, a moderately worn merychippine horse upper premolar
which shows a complex pattern of enamel folds;
• Labeled 8 x 10 photographs of fossil wood for Mr. Grafton to use in developing a
display;
• Coloring sheets for youngsters showing the fossil horse, gomphothere, and
Prosynthetoceras;
• A copy of the Smithsonian's horse evolution video (loan from the Smithsonian
arranged);
• Two popular reports:
1995 Schiebout, J. A. and B. S. Dooley, Fort Polk Fossils, Popular Report.
Submitted to Fort Polk Environmental Learning Center, 15 p.
1995 Schiebout, J. A. Fort Polk Louisiana Miocene Fossil Land Mammals.
Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District. Open-file report, 38 pp.
Scientific publications or presentations on the Fort Polk Miocene
Papers:
1994. Schiebout, J. A., Fossil vertebrates from the Castor Creek Member, Fleming
Formation, western Louisiana. Gulf Coast Assoc. Geol. Soc. Trans. V. 44, 6 p.

90

Presentations:
1994. Sch~ebout, J. A., Th~ Fort Polk Miocene terrestrial vertebrate site. Tex. Acad.
SCIence Ann. meetmg. March 4-5.
1994. Schiebo~t, J. A., Fossil v~~ebrates from the Castor Creek Member, Fleming
FormatIOn, western LoUISiana. 1994 GCAGS-SEPM Convention. October.
1994. Schiebout, J. A., The first Miocene terrestrial vertebrate fauna from Louisiana.
Soc. Vert. PaleontoI. Ann. Meeting. October.
1995. Schiebout, J. A., Preliminary comparison of Louisiana's Fort Polk Miocene
terrestrial small mammal fauna to Texas faunas. Tex. Acad. Sci. Ann. Meeting,
March. (abs. only).
Upcoming:
Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies - October 25-27, 1995
Jones, Megan H., J. A. Schiebout, and Julitta T. Kirkova, Cores from the Miocene
Castor Creek Member of the Fleming Formation, Fort Polk, Louisiana: relationship to the
outcropping Miocene terrestrial vertebrate fossil-bearing beds, Gulf Coast Assoc. GeoI.
Soc. Trans., 20 manuscript pages, 1 pI.
Society of Vertebrate Paleontology National Meeting - November 1-4, 1995
Schiebout, J. A., A Miocene( Barstovian) hedgehog, beaver, large carnivore, and other
finds from western Louisiana.
Geological Society of America Meetings, Symposium on Gulf and Atlantic Coast
Vertebrate Paleontology- November 9
Schiebout, Judith A., A Barstovian (Miocene) terrestrial vertebrate fauna from the Castor
Creek Member of the Fleming Formation in Fort Polk, western Louisiana
Jones, Megan H., Aharon, Paul, Schiebout, Judith A., Climatic and chronologic
implications of pedogenic stable isotope composition: Castor Creek Member,
Fleming Fm (middle Miocene), Fort Polk Louisiana.

Abbreviations
AP--Anteroposterior
AMNH--American Museum of Natural History
DISC--Discovery site
FP -- Fort Polk
FPM -- Fort Polk Miocene
LSUMG--Louisiana State University Museum of Natural Science, Division of Geoscience
SMU- Southern Methodist University
TAM- Texas A & M University
TMM-Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin
TRANS-Transverse
TVOR- TVOR site, near the terminal very-high-frequency omni range radar tower
UT -University of Texas at Austin

91

CURATION LIST
Fossils
Fish
Chondrichthyes
Osteichthyes
Reptiles
Mammals
Lagomorphs
Carnivorans
Chiropterans
Insectivores
Artiodactyls
Perissodactyls
Proboscidea
Rodents

1
6

4
1
1

2
7

4
4
1

472

Cores (3, 50-foot)
DISC 1
DISC 2
TVOR
Thin sections (8)
Palynological slides (49)
Records
Field notebook
Topographic maps
Laboratory notes
Acid lab notes
Computer curation files
Computer files of all SEM pictures
Specimens are curated to the LSU Museum of Natural Science and records
are kept at the Museum, with the exception of palynological slides which are kept in collections
of the LSU Department of Geology and Geophysics' Center for Excellence in Palynology.
Copies of all published papers are on file at the LSU Museum of Natural Science. Computer data,
including curational information, reports, SEM photographs and black and white photographs, is
on the computer and backed up on Syquest cartridges at the Museum. Color slide sets have been
furnished to the Fort Polk Environmental Learning Center for preservation and use.
This research is part of an ongoing project, and some materials from screening and
surface search are not identified or curated. If further research and more recent finds allow their
identification, they will be numbered and curated to the Museum of Natural Science, and if not,
they will be preserved in curated lots in the Museum for further research.

92

