PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Forty, Number Six, September 2019

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Andy Burchard
Miranda Bible
Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller
Newsletter Editor
Erin C. Frigo

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Program Information

4

Upcoming Events

5

Flyer (Investigating Shelters: Curriculum Workshop)
Some Summer Events (Archaeology Fair—2019)

https://www.pinterest.com/pin/542402348844265298/
2

6
7-8

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of May 15, 2019
The meeting was called to order by Veronica Arias at 7:00 p.m. in the Amarillo Downtown Library.
There were 21 persons in attendance.
PROGRAM: Speaker for the evening was Rick Day, Lockney School Science Teacher, President of Canyonlands Archeological Society, and Archeological Steward. Rick’s topic was, “Mackenzie on the Middle
Pease River”. He recounted the discovery of a Military Campsite in Motley County on the headwaters of the
Middle Pease River, now recorded as site 41MY45. After an initial metal detector find of just 2 cartridges, a
more rigorous survey with metal detectors located over 400 metal artifacts. Of these, 260 could be identified as
“military artifacts”. Functional groupings of the artifacts across the large campground revealed a “horseshoe
area”, a “picket chains” area, and a “people” area. Rick showed a very good visual fit between Historic Military
sketch maps and modern landforms on a marked up topographic map. This site is very likely a campsite of Mackenzie’s troops during their return from the 1874 Battle of PaloDuro Canyon.
MINUTES: Rolla Shaller moved that the April Minutes be approved as published in the PASTIMES Newsletter. This was seconded by Elaine Maples and the Minutes were accepted.
TREASURER’S REPORT: A Treasurer’s Report was not available.
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported ending April 2019 balances of $2,340.24 in the Money
Market Account, and $5,185.50 in the Certificate of Deposit.
OLD BUSINESS:
Science Day at Lamar Elementary will be all day this Friday (May 17). PAS members can volunteer to introduce Lamar students to Archeology with a presentation and hands-on activities.
Beryl Hughes was applauded for being the PASTIMES Newsletter Editor for the past 5 years, with the May
issue being her last. Erin Frigo will take over this task, beginning with the September issue.
NEW BUSINESS:
Veronica announced that PAS will be hosting the 2020 Annual Symposium of the Southwest Federation of Archeological Societies.
Scott Brosowske was not present, but Veronica relayed these updates pertaining to the upcoming TAS Annual
Meeting:
Scott is writing an informative article about the TAS Annual Meeting for the next TAS Newsletter.
Deidra Hood will serve as Registrar for the Annual Meeting, and will be attending Field School.
A planning session for the Annual meeting will be held at Field School.
Veronica announced that PPHM will host a reception for TAS Field School attendees at 2pm on Monday, June
10.
An Archeology Fair (Open to the Public) will be held during Field School from 4-8pm Thursday, June 14 at the
Mack Dick Pavilion parking lot in PaloDuro Canyon State Park.
Other pending events were mentioned as follows:
The next PAS meeting will be September 18.
.
The meeting adjourned at 8:20 p.m.
Respectfully submitted,
Andy Burcham, Secretary

3

Remarkable Details Identified in Burned Daub Defining Prehistoric Architecture
and Engineering
L. Douglas Wilkens, TASN Steward, Region 2, TAS Region 1 Director

Abstract
Rarely is archeological evidence of a prehistoric structure so well preserved that one can reverse-engineer and reconstruct the structure. At
Drover’s house in Roberts County (41RB108), the mechanism for
preservation was intense burning in a catastrophic firing event. Architectural features and house-fill stratigraphy show that the two primary
building materials used in the superstructure were a timber framework
and a substantial earthen roof component. Differential burning is evident throughout the house, but charred posts and negative impressions
of whole and split branches preserved in fired daub provide critical
evidence of this structure’s architecture.
This paper presents some exceptional specimens of burned daub
demonstrating the complexity, as well as engineering abilities used in
constructing this earthlodge. The Daub analysis has revealed architectural details not previously known to exist in a Late Prehistoric, Middle Ceramic period house on the Southern High Plains.
Biography
Doug has been a member of the Texas Archeological Society since 1988 when TAS came to Ochiltree
County and held a field school at buried city. He is currently Region 1 director which covers the upper Panhandle area. In 1992, Doug was ask to join the Texas Historical Commission’s, Stewardship Network comprised of professional and non-professional archeologist serving the public with education, encouraging cultural resource stewardship with landowners, and working on special projects.
Doug started working with landowner John Erickson in 1994 and starting in 2000 he and a team of professional and advocational archeologist began intensive research on the ranch in a valley called West Pasture.
Within this valley the team has investigated four site areas, three of which date to the middle ceramic period,
ca. A.D. 1150-1450. Work on two burned houses dated to A.D. 1300-1350 demonstrated these villagers
were living in earthlodges. This is a new concept for southern plains architecture. Today Doug will present
the complexity of the architecture that went into constructing these houses as evident in burned dirt, burned
daub, and post. As far as anyone on the team knows, this is the first prehistoric structure that has incorporated the discipline of a structural engineer to reverse engineer and develop a model defining these 700-yearold structures.

4

UPCOMING EVENTS

October 11-13
October 16

TAS Annual Meeting, Amarillo.
7:00 p.m. Regular meeting, PAS. Amarillo Public Library, Downtown
Branch, Upstairs.
5:30 p.m. Please join us for our pre-meeting dinner, Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor.

October 16-19
September 13-15

Plains Anthropological Society conference, Bloomington, Indiana
Regional TASN Work Shop

https://i.pinimg.com/originals/ac/69/45/ac694533d1d2499da0fd233f5d68f1be.jpg

5

Investigating Shelters
Curriculum Workshop
AN EXCITING OPPORTUNITY FOR EDUCATORS AND PUBLIC
ARCHAEOLOGISTS!
Date: Friday, October 11, 2019 Time: TBD Location: Embassy Suites Downtown Amarillo
This workshop will be held in conjunction with the 90th Texas Archeological Society Annual Meeting in Amarillo,
Texas (see: https://www.txarch.org/tas-annual-meeting). Learn first-hand how to help students practice the
basics of scientific inquiry using authentic archaeological data and texts. You will work through activities that
teach context, cultural comparisons, and observations and inferences before investigating a Plains tipi. Then you
will get the first sneak-peek of our new, upcoming curriculum that investigates a prehistoric Antelope Creek grassthatched house structure, similar to many other lodges found throughout the Oklahoma and Texas panhandles.
Project Archaeology is a heritage education program for people interested in teaching archaeology, historical
preservation, and appreciation of other cultures. This 4-hour workshop will show teachers and public archaeologists how to guide our audiences to an interdisciplinary understanding of how archaeologists reconstruct the past.
Your fee of $20 will provide you with your toolkit of nine supplementary lessons in the Investigating Shelter series. This inquiry-based curriculum helps you easily integrate science and social studies while you and your students analyze the artifacts found in a house to understand what life was like in the past.
Reservations are on a first-come, first-serve basis with a maximum of 15 participants.
For more information or to register contact Sarah Luthman: Sarah.E.Luthman-1@ou.edu.

Learn more about Project Archaeology at: projectarchaeology.org

6

ARCHEOLOGY FAIR 2019
Everyone enjoyed the archaeology fair this year. During the Texas Archeological Society
field school out at Palo Duro Canyon, the Panhandle Archeological Society held a corngrinding station for the kiddos! Our very own Andy Burcham held a station to make cord
rope out of yucca leaves, and also showed the kids how to make fire using sticks made
from the yucca stalk. Here are some pictures of the event!

7

ARCHEOLOGY FAIR 2019

8

