Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History
Department of Archaeology
Newsletter, May 2013

It has been an exciting spring for Archaeology at SNOMNH! At the beginning of January we
welcomed our new curator, Dr. Marc Levine, who came to us from the Denver Museum of Nature and
Science.
May 1st found Dr. Levine and our Collection Manager,
Dr. Elsbeth Dowd, at the State Capitol. We were there
to participate in the Oklahoma Cultural Heritage Trust
Top 10 Endangered Artifact’s program. The Museum’s
entry in the competition is the Spiro “lace”, a rare textile
fragment from the Spiro Mounds site in eastern
Oklahoma. The competition is meant to raise
awareness of Oklahoma’s cultural heritage and the
preservation needs at museums, libraries, and archives
across the state. To learn more and vote for us, visit
www.culturalheritagetrust.org.
Elsbeth Dowd and Marc Levine

Emily Turriff, who received her Master’s degree last year from OU and is now our Collection
Assistant, has been hard at work implementing a grant from Institute for Museum and Library
Services. The $149,956 grant, “Collections Stewardship: Inventory and Databasing of Archaeology”,
was awarded over three years to inventory, catalog, repackage, and database artifacts and
associated archives from the Spiro Mounds site and other sites excavated by the Works Progress
Administration from 1936-1942. This year we are focusing solely on Spiro.

Engraved shell, stone earspool, and polished boatstone from Spiro Mounds. Copyright Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of
Natural History, University of Oklahoma.

Visit our new blog, http://samnoblearchaeology.wordpress.com/, for more info on the project!

Our three undergraduate interns, Louisa Nash, Laurel Lamb, and Alyxandra Stanco assisted in the
Spiro project, as well as with loan preparation and other ongoing work in the department. We thank
them for all their work this semester, along with volunteers Pam Leader, Jordan Buswell, Parker
Melendez, Bridget Sutton, Michael McQuinn, Holly Andrew, and Jenna Domeischel. Projects this
semester included inventorying and repackaging the Baldwin, Pine Creek Mounds, Von Elm, and
A.W. Davis sites.

Interns working in the archaeology lab

Our graduate students, including Simone Rowe, Lindsay Maass, Shawn Lambert, and Tiffany
Fluornoy continue to research the collections. We were also pleased to welcome Sonya Beach this
spring as our Graduate Assistant for the Bureau of Reclamation. Sonya will continue on with us this
summer as a GA for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, joined by Lauren Cleeland.

Pam Leader sorting pottery from the
A.W. Davis site in McCurtain County

Jordan Buswell measuring projectile points from a
Woodland site in the Wister Valley

Our students are looking forward to a busy summer. Laurel, Alyxandra, and Parker are all attending
Dr. Bonnie Pitblado’s field school in Colorado. Jenna Domeischel will be interning for us the first part
of the summer and then heading to Poland for a field school. Brittany Munda will be joining us at the
end of May for an undergraduate internship.
Finally, a big congratulations to Louisa Nash, who has graduated with her B.A. in Anthropology and is
heading to Cornell next year for grad school. Good luck Louisa!

