Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

November 14, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2012-61: A Cultural Resources Survey of the 1,050-Meter South
Flat Creek Lateral in Southeastern Dimmit County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our cultural resources background review of the 1,050-Meter
South Flat Creek Lateral right-of-way (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. South Flat Creek Lateral on large topographic map.

Figure 2. South Flat Creek Lateral on MacDonald Lake (1982) 7.5' USGS topographic map.

Background Review
Old Maps, Aerial Photographs, Historic Research
Diagnostic projectile points such as Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview types found in Dimmit County
indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000 years. Plentiful food sources such as wild
game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable. Early technology included tools from wood
and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes, and a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a
throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness of their spears (Hester 1984; Leffler 1996).
Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery and to hunt with bows and arrows.
"During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians native to Dimmit County
were squeezed out by other Indian who were migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were
moving up from the south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila.
Apaches and Comanches moved in to take their place" (Leffler 1996).
"No permanent Spanish settlement seems to have been established in the future Dimmit County.
Beginning in the late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio
Road, a camino real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. After the Mexican War of

Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its citizens to settle in Texas.
Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that included territory now in
Dimmit County. None of the recipients seems to have made use of the land, however. By 1836, when
Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated almost solely by Indians"
(Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of Dimmit County lay in the
disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for desperate
characters until about 1865. Carrizo Springs was founded in 1865, with the new settlers who lived
in jacals or dugouts frequently being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part tobeing
pursued by the Texas Rangers, and being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave
Dimmit County by 1877, and in 1880 Carrizo Springs became the county seat for the newly formed
county. By 1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also an
important part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators
combined to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
Although the residents of Dimmit County learned to cope with the sparse annual rainfall, artesian
wells ushered in an era of large vegetable truck farms in the 1890s, and Dimmit County became
known as part of the Texas Winter Garden Region, one of the most prolific vegetable-growing areas
in the country.
As with rest of the nation, the Great Depression many of the county's farmers were forced to cut back
their once-lucrative vegetable production during the depression, and fell back on raising poultry,
hogs, and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county in the
1950s certainly bolstered Dimmit County's economy, and although large ranches lay claim to most
of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively increasing part
of the county's development (Leffler 1996).
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the Dimmit County
area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts
of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the
hunter-gatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his experiences
in 1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves to the easily
exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer, occasionally sending a hunting party
onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each other in the
semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents (Campbell and
Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are
documented accounts of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to
establish any sort of permanent structures (Chipman 1992).
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the South Flat Creek Lateral
passes through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. A standard source of
review is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs available at the Perry

Castañeda Library at the University of Texas at Austin. In this case, the only map found was a 1941,
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers tactical topographic map of the Catarina area (Map 2012). This map
shows no structures existing on or near the South Flat Creek Lateral at that time. Technically, any
structures older than 45 years are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission,
and this should be considered when the lateral is constructed.
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Other than early work done by A. T. Jackson in 1932, perhaps the earliest systematic archaeological
survey in Dimmit County was conducted by Thomas Hester and Parker Nunley in 1964 and 1965.
Their work resulted in the documentation of 24 archaeological sites in the county, ranging in age from
the Early Archaic through the Late Prehistoric Toyah phase (Nunley and Hester 1966).
However, other surveys in the county since that time have resulted in a total of 160 archaeological
sites being documented in the county as of October 10, 2012. Of these, 99 are prehistoric open
campsites ranging in age from the Paleoindian through Late Prehistoric periods. Prehistoric burials
have been discovered at four of these campsites. Prehistoric lithic scatters and lithic procurement sites
account for 50 of those documented. Historic sites documented in the county include houses from
the 1800s built of stone (one with a cowboy burial), farmstead operations, and a railroad berm from
the 1800s. Other sites of interest include a carved Indian petroglyph, and other petroglyphs near
Campo de los Cuervos. The only designated State Archaeological Landmark in the county is the
Dimmit County Courthouse (Atlas 2012).
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say what
bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of Dimmit County before then. Only
cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and apparent
lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods. Archaeologists have
documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites, including large open campsites that are
most commonly located along stream or river terraces with numerous campfires, where a wide variety
of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal remains are found. Where
gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are
sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric
quarries.
Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the lack
of cultural resource surveys near the Project Area (PA) that would have located sites, rather than the
probable non-existence of sites. In fact, the PA lies to the west of a large archaeological survey
conducted in anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al. 1981).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both Live
Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000 years
ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and gathering
natural food resources available in the area. In addition, archaeologists from the Center for
Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted archaeological
investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir. A number of different types of
structures were investigated, the purpose being to extract as much information as possible about
architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns during the last half of the 19th century within the
reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met
the challenges of living in a frontier area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming

of law and order, railroads, and modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
A review of the Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites indicated that there were no previously
documented archaeological surveys within 1,000 meters of the proposed South Flat Creek Lateral.
However, as shown in Figure 2, TAAI has conducted surveys of both the Asherton Trunkline and the
Flat Creek Lateral, resulting in the discovery of no previously undiscovered archaeological sites
within one mile of the proposed South Flat Creek Lateral (Nickels 2012 a, b). In addition, Site
41DM14 was initially recorded in 1969 by Tom Hester, and a portion of it was re-visited by TAAI
archaeologists in 2012 during the Asherton Trunkline survey (Nickels 2012a). The result of that 2012
investigation was that the portion of the site that would be impacted by construction of the Asherton
Trunkline was assessed as non-significant.

Soils
The South Flat
Creek Lateral
crosses two soil
types that offer
varying depths,
sedimentation and
deposition rates, and
b r o a d , s h a l l ow
s t r e a m c o u rs es
through the area
(see Figure 2). As
such, the soils and
their proximity to
streams likewise
imply the potential
for the preservation
of intact cultural
resources to exist.
Figure 3 shows the
soils that there are
to be intersected by
the South Flat Creek Figure 3. Soils to be dissected by the South Flat Creek Lateral.
Lateral (Web Soil
Survey 2012). Table 1 then presents a brief description of each type, and their potential to contain
buried and intact cultural deposits.

Table 1. Soils to be Dissected by the South Flat Creek Lateral.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact Archaeological
Potential

Pryor sandy clay loam (PyB)

Moderately deep loamy soils on gently
undulating uplands

Minimal to moderate to about 9
inches below the surface

Tonio fine sandy loam (TOB)

Deep loamy soil on gently undulating
uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about 30
inches below the surface

Field Survey Goals, Methodology, and Levels of Effort
Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey, along with limited shovel testing. The topics addressed were site
type, distribution, density, size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical framework is structured
around patterns of settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems for the South Texas region.
The goals of the project were to:
1)
locate and record cultural locations and sites in the project area using a systematic survey
methodology;
2)
quantify site size, as well as depth, and stratigraphy; and,
3)
place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.
Methods and Levels of
Effort
T h r e e a r c h a e o l o gi s t s
conducted an intensive 100percent pedestrian survey
along the pipeline,
meandering back and forth
across the 100-foot width of
the right-of-way. Surface
visibility ranged from 70 to
100 percent (see for
example, Figure 4). All
cutbanks, and rodent and
mammal backdirt piles along
the right-of-way were
thoroughly examined. One
area of particular interest
was the right-of-way
crossing at an intermittent
tributary of Appurceon Figure 4.Surface visibility around Isolated Find 1 - a chipped stone
Creek. In accordance with a drill.

general “no collection” policy, cultural material of a redundant nature, both prehistoric and historic,
were not to be collected. Instead, they were to be fully documented via sketches, field photographs,
and copious notes.
Exceptions were to be made for diagnostic artifacts, particularly those artifacts which could be
considered as significant to the interpretation of Texas prehistory, such as Early Archaic-Paleoindian
transitional, or Paleoindian diagnostics. These were to be collected on a case-by-case basis, and that
decision was left up to the Principal Investigator and/or the Project Archaeologist. Historic buildings,
trash scatters, or other historic occurrences adjacent to the ROW were to be documented with
photographs.

Results of the Investigations
Pedestrian Survey
A t h o r o u gh s u r f a c e
examination revealed heavily
eroded surfaces south near
the intermittent drainage as
well along the entire rightof-way. The intermittent
drainage is shallow and
broad in this area, with little
if any evidence of terrace
building (Figure 5). A single
Isolated Find was found east
of the drainage, and is
described below.
Isolated Find (IF)
The only cultural artifact
observed was an isolated
prehistoric chipped stone
unfinished dart point that Figure 5. Low, ephemeral and intermittent drainage crossing of the
was apparently subsequently South Flat Creek Lateral at N3138893 E432995 (NAD83); facing
re-tooled for use as a drill northwest.
(Figure 6). As a dart point
preform, it exhibits flute scars along both the dorsal and ventral surface at its base. As a drill, it
exhibits double beveling along both distal lateral edges, suggesting that it was likely utilized. It was
found on a heavily eroded and deflated upland sideslope surface just east of the intermittent drainage,
and near a machine push pile. Although interesting, as a non-diagnostic isolate, it is considered as
non-significant.

Summary,
Conclusions, and
Recommendations
Based upon the lack of
archaeological sites
documented within close
proximity to the proposed
South Flat Creek Lateral,
and the at best minimal
potential for significant
archaeological deposits to
exist in the upland soils in
the area, we recommend
that construction of the
South Flat Creek Lateral as
currently aligned be allowed
to proceed as planned, with Figure 6. Dart point/drill.
no further archaeological
investigations. However, we further advise that if any previously undiscovered cultural resources are
encountered during development of the pipeline, such finds should be examined and evaluated by
Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
March 20, 2012].

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.
Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke
Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series:
Volume 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Hester, T. R.
1984 Fragments, Flints, and Footprints: The Prehistory of Dimmit County. In Dimmit
County Mesquite Roots, Volume I, pp. 1-6, edited by L. K. Tidwell. Wind River
Press. Austin, TX.
Leffler, J.
1996

Dimmit County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 6, pp. 645-648.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Map
2012

Catarina U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Map, 1941. Perry Castañeda Library
Map Collection. [Accessed March 15, 2012].

Nickels, D. L.
2012a A Cultural Resources Survey of the 5-Mile Asherton Trunkline in Dimmit
County, Texas. Archaeology Report #91. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations, Martindale, Texas.

2012b A Cultural Resources Survey of the 0.75-Mile Flat Creek Lateral in Central
Dimmit County, Texas. Final Letter Report #2012-2 submitted to Flatrock
Engineering & Environmental, Ltd., by Tierras Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations, Martindale, Texas (March 15, 2012).
Nunley, P., and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. XVIII, No. 3, pp. 233-253.
Perry Castañeda Library
2012 Perry Cestañeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed March 15, 2012].
Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2012 Dimmit County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed March
10, 2012].

