Texas Archeology Academy Report

Field Day Report on the Seco Creek Area Survey
Medina County Texas

by
Jason D. Weston
with contributions by
Harry J. Shafer and Bryant Saner

Prepared for
Texas Archeological Society

August 29, 2003

Acknowledgements

The author would like to thank the following people who made this field day possible:
Pam Wheat, Harry Shafer, Tom and Lynda Hester, Mike Durack, Ellen Sue Turner, Roy
Banning, Jose Contreras, Frank Griffin, Curt Harrell, Cathy McCool, Wilson McKinney,
Paul Smith, Paul Stein, and Woody Woodward. Thanks also to all of the participants in
the course whose hard work, cooperation and excellent attention to instructions made the
day easy. For his editing of this report and for work on the cultural settings section a
second thanks goes to Harry Shaffer. Thanks also to Bryant Saner and Dr. Shaffer for
their work on the Previous Investigations section.
To the over 50 persons who participated in the field day, and indeed all who enjoyed the
classroom experience, the author has enjoyed meeting and working with you all. Your
enthusiasm and curiosity are deeply appreciated. I would also like to thank again the crew
chiefs listed above for their work and skill, since in the rush to leave before the storm I
neglected to thank them at the end of the field day as they deserved.
It was by the grace of Tom and Lynda Hester that the field day could be conducted at
such a fascinating location, providing enjoyment for all. Thanks again for letting 50
people tromp on your lawn and dig holes in it.

2

Contents
Acknowledgements ……………………………………………………………………...2
Section 1: Introduction…………………...……………………………………………….4
Section 2: Research Design ………………..……………………………………………..4
Section 3: Geographic and Cultural Settings ………………………………………...…..9
Section 4: Previous Investigations ……………………………………………………...12
Section 5: Fieldwork Results …………………………………………………………....14
Section 6: Summary ………………………………………………………………….…19
References Cited ………………………………………………………………………..21

Tables List
Table 1: Crew Rotation Schedule ………………………………………………………..6
Table 2: Biface Metric Data …………………………………………………………….15
Table 3: Projectile Point Metric Data, All sites ………………………………………...16

3

Section 1: Introduction
In 2003 the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) initiated a course to educate people
interested in archaeology on its basic methods, theories, ethics and practice. This course,
Texas Archeology 101, was carried out in three different cities and included a two-day
classroom experience and a one-day field session. This report will present the results of
the one-day field session associated with the Texas Archeology 101 course held in San
Antonio.
The sites used for the March 22, 2003 field day are clustered within approximately 5
acres of land on the east bank of the Seco Creek in Medina County, Texas. The Seco
Creek Area contains a number of historic and prehistoric sites. Work during the field day
focused on four of these sites: 41ME88, 41ME89, 41ME91 and 41ME92. The Seco
Creek Project Area is surrounded by high hills but the sites are on a flat, open area of
land, a terrace just high enough to have avoided inundation by the floods of 2002.
Passing between Seco Creek and the archaeological sites is a small, narrow gravel road
providing the access for all residents in the area to the main highways. The current human
occupation makes use of a extensively updated, remodeled, and enlarged house that dates
to the 1800’s and a few minor sheds, fences and a post-Civil War ranch house now used
as a guest cabin (41ME91).

4

Section 2: Research Design
Goal
The overall aim of the Texas Archeology 101, a course created by the TAS, is to provide
those interested in archaeology a chance to learn more by receiving basic information on
archaeological theory, methods and ethics. This allows participants to understand and
enjoy archeology more and enable them to properly record sites, protect and preserve
sites and, when the needs of salvage and research require it, aid archaeologists in
excavations.
The 101 course is a two-component class. The first component is a two-day classroom
and activity experience. After the classroom the component the one-day field experience
takes place. The goal of this single field day is to provide class participants with the
opportunity to apply the site recording and survey methods they learned in class. To this
end, the activities are designed more to teach than to perform an archeological
investigation. This is due mostly to the limits of time and to the fact that a project area
likes Seco Creek, with such a complex number of cultural features cannot be thoroughly
investigated in a single day. Despite this complexity, the project area (the Seco Creek
Area) was chosen as the best location to expose participants to site mapping, note taking,
surface collecting, shovel testing, artifact cataloging and washing at a variety of site
types. The density of artifacts also provided clear, in-the-field examples of a wide range
of cultural materials and how they are recovered, recorded and cataloged. The field day
essentially introduced participants though the entire field process from site locating and
mapping, to noting surface materials, shovel testing and filling out the proper paperwork
to cleaning and cataloging in the lab.
Organization
The Principal Investigator (Jason D Weston) managed the fieldwork and crew rotation
schedule and coordinated with the Field Lab Director, Ellen Sue Turner. The crews were
run directly by the eight Crew Chiefs (Roy Banning, Jose Contreras, Frank Griffin, Cathy
McCool, Wilson McKinney, Paul Smith, Paul Stein, and Woody Woodward). Each
5

managed five to eight persons and implemented the work activity assigned to each site
location. Artifact photography was performed by Curt Harrell. Mike Durack was the
logistics specialist.

The landowner, Thomas R. Hester, and the instructor of the

classroom sessions, Harry J. Shafer, both highly experienced professionals, acted as
advisors and troubleshooters.
The eight crews were assigned before the field day began and identified by each crew
chief’s last name. The first activity of the day was to walk the crews through the pacing
exercise. This involved setting out two stakes 30 meters apart. Each crewmember walked
the distance between the two and counted paces. This helped them determine how many
steps, taken under a normal stride, equals a meter. Such knowledge is necessary when
mapping using pacing when long tape measures are not available. At each site crews
were assigned a specific set of activities and rotated from activity set to activity set and
from one site to another on a 1 hour 15 minute interval (see Table 1).
Table 1: Crew Rotation Schedule
1

st

Interval
McCool

Lab

Crew

(house)

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

Interval

Interval

Interval

Interval

41ME92

41ME88

41ME89

41ME88

41ME89

41ME88

41ME92

41ME89

Lab

41ME91

(house)

(house)

41ME89

41ME88

Smith Crew

41ME89p

41ME88

Stein Crew

41ME88

41ME89

41ME88

41ME89

Griffin Crew
Contreras
Crew

Banning
Crew
McKinney
Crew

41ME92

Lab
(house)

Woodward

41ME91

Lab

Crew

(house)

(house)

Lab
(house)
Lab

41ME91

(house)

(house)

41ME92

41ME88

41ME89

Lab

41ME91

(house)

(house)

41ME91

Lab

(house)

(house)

41ME89

41ME88

41ME89

41ME88

41ME92
Lab
(house)
Lab
(house)

6

This rotation of crews ensured that all participants were able to experience mapping
surface survey and shovel testing (when appropriate) at each site as well as all aspects of
the field lab work. Three of the five planned rotations were performed on the field day. A
storm from moving in after lunch threatened to flood the three river crossings in the
county road that all participants needed to ford to get home safely. Therefore, the
afternoon schedule was altered. The activities performed at each site during each of the
three rotations were as follows:
41ME91, The Fritz Weber House:
At this site three crews were employed during one rotation. As the field lab and
photography set up was located in the historic house, two crews cataloged, labeled and
cleaned artifacts here. The third crew mapped the site in plan view and drew the house
walls.
41ME89, A burned rock midden site:
Two crews were employed at this site. Both crews surveyed the site using pin flags to
mark the midden boundary. One crew then established the baseline and mapped the site
while the other crew conducted shovel testing. Both crews were responsible for taking
field notes.
41ME88, A burned rock midden & off-midden surface scatter:
Two crews worked this site. Both crews were responsible for the surface survey to mark
with pin flags the artifact concentrations and conduct limited surface collection. The first
crew set up the baseline and mapped the entire site, both the burned rock midden and the
off midden surface scatter. The second crew performed shovel testing at the locations
with the highest density of artifacts as indicated by the surface survey. Both crews were
responsible for recording the location of any tool or diagnostic artifact recovered and for
taking field notes.

7

41ME92, A small burned rock midden and buried cultural deposits:
At this site location only one crew was employed. This crew was responsible for the site
baseline, mapping and shovel testing as well as the field notes.
Field Methods
Surface surveys were carried out by aligning the crewmembers between 5 and 10 meters
apart, depending upon the site and what each crew chief felt would work best. The aim of
the surface survey was to define the extent of surface deposits and map the boundaries of
surface features such as burned rock middens and historic structures. Artifacts identified
on the surface were marked by pin flags to identify the higher density areas. Partial
surface collection took place after the survey. Each crew recovered only a few of the
artifacts they identified. This was for the practical needs of teaching: some artifacts had
to remain to be located and collected by following crews. During surface collection only
diagnostic artifacts and tools were mapped and collected. The locations where
concentrations of debitage and burned rock were identified by the pin flags were noted by
the Principal Investigator (PI), but no debitage was collected from the surface.
Site mapping generated a plan view map of each site. The tools for this were a compass
and crewmember pacing to measure distances. A datum and baseline were established
and all relevant cultural features, trees, structures and fences were drawn in.
Shovel test units were 30 cm in diameter and excavated in arbitrary 10cm thick levels.
All soils were screened through ¼ inch mesh. Except for burned rock, which was
pervasive throughout the site, all cultural materials (artifacts) recovered in shovel tests
were collected and sent to the lab. All information on crewmembers, artifacts recovered
and basic soil information was recorded on a standardized form. If time allowed shovel
tests were to be excavated to a maximum depth of 70 cmbs (centimeters below surface).
As shall be noted in the Fieldwork section shovel tests at each site were placed in
response to the conditions at each site.

8

At the end of an interval, each crew filled in their shovel test or finished their mapping
and all paperwork was turned into the PI. All artifacts were turned into the field lab,
located in 41ME91, the old Rieber House.
Field Lab Methods
The field lab cataloged and labeled artifacts previously surface collected from the site and
proceeded to wash all artifacts arriving in from the field and create a Master Bag List as a
means of tracking all bags of recovered artifacts. The labeling of artifacts used India Ink,
a traditional archival media. As mentioned earlier artifact photography was also
performed in the field lab using a camera on a mounted stand with the appropriate
lighting to ensure a quality documentation of artifacts.
After cleaning, all artifacts recovered during the field day were re-bagged and given to
the PI for analysis and write-up. After completion of analysis all paperwork and artifacts
from the field day will be returned to the landowner for curation due to ongoing study
and analysis.

9

Section 3: Geographic and Cultural Settings
Geographically the sites at the Seco Creek Area in northern Medina County sit in the
portion of the picturesque Edwards Plateau commonly known as the western Balcones
Canyonlands. The topography is characterized by deeply eroded canyons separating
uplifted ridge fingers of the Edwards Plateau (Decker et al., 2000: 7, 8). The Balcones
Escarpment, which forms the southern and eastern edge of the Edwards Plateau, is a
prominent topographic feature that “marks a major physiographic, geologic, and biotic
boundary that divides hills, and plains, woodland and brushland, eroded rocks and their
re-deposited sediments” (Decker et al., 2000: 7). Seco Creek originates in southwestern
Bandera County, flows southward through Medina County, and eventually joins Hondo
Creek in Frio County. The creek is spring-fed permanent stream in this location. It,
along with all major streams heading in this part of the Canyonlands, is prone to flash
floods during periods of heavy rainfall.
The Native American cultural chronology for central Texas spans the entire period of
human history in North America, from 11,500 radiocarbon years to the latter half of the
19th century. The division of archaeological materials into segments of time is based on
changes in material characteristics. The most recognizable changes through time are in
artifact groupings called types and assemblages. Site locations also change throughout
time, influenced by changes in location of the resources exploited. Some changes signal
fundamental shifts in life ways, while others represent periodic shifts in weaponry design,
possibly stimulated by subtle shifts in prey animals and hunting strategies. The basic time
periods are detailed in the following paragraphs. The chronological model followed in
this report is that of Collins (1995).
Paleoindian Period
The earliest known cultural period, the Paleoindian dates to between 11,500-9,000 years
ago (9500 BC-7000 BC). This period, characterized by the waning Pleistocene and early

10

Holocene transition, is often seen as populated by big game hunters. Certainly this was
true during the early Clovis times when large animals such as mammoth and giant bison
were available prey. High mobility characterized the life ways of the early inhabitants.
Changes at the end of the Pleistocene were dramatic, and the first human arrivals had to
adjust to changing conditions (Collins 1995:381). Some groups continued to follow the
bison, and are identified as Folsom and related groups. Others assumed a more Archaic
existence and established the founding hunter-gatherer populations in central Texas along
the Balcones Escarpment. Non-fluted points such as Plainview, Golondrina, St Mary’s
Hall, Scottsbluff, and Wilson projectile points characterize the later portion of the
Paleoindian Period (Bousman 1998).
Archaic Period
The Archaic Period dating from 9000 BP-2800 BP (7000 BC to AD 800) marks a long
time span of hunting and gathering as the main life style (Black and McGraw 1985). The
period is divided Early, Middle, and Late subperiods; these are further divided into
intervals based on changes in projectile point types.
Early Archaic (8800-5800 BP, 6800-3800 BC)
Human populations in the Early Archaic were highly mobile groups sparsely scattered
across the land just as they had been in the Paleoindian Period. Archaeological sites from
the Early Archaic are dispersed and show no specialization, meaning that each site looks
much like the others showing no focus on one particular type of activity (Black and
McGraw 1985). As opposed to the apparent hunting specialization of the previous period,
these site assemblages demonstrate generalized hunting and gathering of a wide range of
food sources (Black and McGraw 1985). The earliest evidence of earth oven baking in
slab-lined earth ovens, and possibly the initial stages of burned rock midden formation
occur at this time (Black and Creel 1997). Intervals identified by changes in projectile
point styles, from early to late, are Angostura, Early Split Stem, and Martindale-Uvalde
(Collins 1995).
Middle Archaic (5800 BP to 4000 BP, 3800-2000 BC)

11

Middle Archaic sites are more numerous, perhaps reflecting a population increase. The
artifact assemblages and the site locations show specialized adaptations to different
environments. A range of site types includes campsites, lithic workshops and a variety of
special activity sites. Populations seem to concentrate near streamsides and general
settlement patterns suggest the early stages of territoriality (Black and McGraw 1985).
Burned rock middens become a prominent site feature along with rock-lined earth ovens.
Intervals, from early to late, marked by changes in projectile points are Bell-Andice,
Taylor, Nolan-Travis.
Late Archaic (4000 BP to 1200 BP, 2000 BC to AD 800)
The Late Archaic represents a further development of Middle Archaic patterns with
firmly established group territories and certain groups concentrating in the use of specific
types of food sources found within their territory (Black and McGraw 1985). Burned rock
middens (earth-ovens) used in cooking plant foods became much more frequent in this
period. The spread in earth-oven technology may have been due to an increased reliance
on plant species resistant to drier conditions (i.e. sotol, lechuguilla, yucca, prickly pear).
(Johnson and Goode 1994).

Changes in projectile point styles take place more

frequently, for reasons unexplained. Intervals marked by such changes, from early to
late, are Bulverde, Pedernales-Kinney, Lange-Marshall, Montell-Castroville, Marcos,
Ensor, Frio, Fairland, and Darl.
Late Prehistoric Period
The Late Prehistoric (AD 800 to AD 1700) is identified by the introduction of the bow
and arrow. Site features such as burned rock middens continue into the early interval of
the Late Prehistoric, and deer remains the main game animal exploited.

The early

interval, or Austin phase, is identified by the presence of Scallorn, Edwards, and Sabinal
arrow points. A major life way change in the late interval may have shifted subsistence
focus away from burned rock middens to deer and bison. These technological changes
seem to be coupled with an increase in population and overall cultural diversity (Black
and McGraw 1985). The late interval or Toyah phase is recognized by the presence of a
distinctive assemblage of artifacts, including Perdiz arrow points, four-edge beveled

12

knives, flake awls, and end scrapers (Huebner 1991).

This assemblage reflects an

economic emphasis on hide working, specifically deer and bison. Ceramics make their
appearance in central Texas at this time as well. Thin orange bone-tempered ware,
brushed utility jars, and plain bone-tempered bowls and jars are among the ceramic types
represented.
Historic Period
The Native American presence in the Balcones Canyonlands during Historic Period is,
with some exceptions, poorly documented. Wade (2003) devotes an entire book to the
topic of identifying Historic Native American groups who were in the Edwards Plateau at
the time of Spanish exploration. Most relevant are the groups that possibly made up the
“Toyah folk” (Johnson 1994), which undoubtedly included Jumano among others.
Apache presence was sensed in the latter part of the 17th century when the MendozaLopez expedition ventured into the Edwards Plateau.

The Apache became more

prevalent during the early half of the next century, menacing both Spanish and other
Native American settlements. The Spanish attempted to missionize the Apache and
established two short-lived missions among them, San Saba in 1757-1758 and San
Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz in 1762-1771 (Tunnell and Newcomb 1969). The Apache
presence became somewhat moot, however, with the arrival of an even more formidable
equestrian force, the Comanche who appeared on the scene in the early 1800s.
Comanche threats to the newly arrived German and Anglo settlers, and existing Mexican
settlements and ranches, were serious, as history recalls numerous encounters between
the Comanche and the other cultures. The last bands of Texas Comanche were finally
subdued in 1874 and removed to Oklahoma reservations.

13

Section 4: Previous Investigations
Considering the picturesque canyons and abundant natural resources such as water, game,
edible plants and fruits, chert, and limestone, one would expect the Balcones
Canyonlands to have received considerable archeological attention. Despite the fact that o
documenting and excavating of archeological sites (burned rock middens and
rockshelters) began in the 1930s, only a few investigations are in the literature (Decker et
al., 2002: 50-67). An excellent and thorough overview of the archeological history of the
Balcones Canyonlands is presented in Decker et al. (2000).
Before the TAS Texas Archeology 101 Field Day archaeological investigation of the Seco
Creek sites themselves was limited to site recording and collecting. Previous attention
involved collecting by the previous owner and monitoring, mapping, note-taking, artifact
cataloging and the recording of surface finds by Dr. Thomas Hester, the current
landowner. In the general geographic area, however, a respectable amount of work has
been performed although not to the scale of other portions of central Texas. In fact, there
are few reported archeological investigations in the upper Seco drainage where the TAS
Academy was held. In 1986 Betty and John Guntharp of STAA (Hester personal
communication 2003) documented 11 sites on the Gazaway Ranch. In 1990 during the
Utopia TAS field school C.K. Chandler conducted several documenting sessions
including the Ada Ruth Rieber (now Crawford) Collection. This collection consists of
surface finds from the Seco Creek Project Area (Hester personal communication 2003).
Formal archeological work was a survey conducted by Paul Maslyk (1993). Maslyk
recorded 109 prehistoric sites along Little Seco Creek. Of these, 34 had burned rock
middens (Decker et al., 2000: 59).
More intensive archeological investigations have been conducted in the Sabinal Canyon,
the next drainage to the west (Decker et al., 2000: 58, 59; Hester 1989). Here intensive
surveys and excavations were conducted during the last half of the 20th century. First
done among these were the excavations at Kincaid Shelter by the Texas Memorial

14

Museum in 1948. The site is unique in that the cultural sequence spanned the period
from Clovis times to Late Archaic. Major Clovis and Folsom components were present
in the shelter (Collins 1999: 41, 47; Decker et al., 2000: 53; Hester 1989). Surveys by
UT-Austin and the 1989 and 1990 Texas Archeological Society field school together
recorded 175 sites in the Sabinal Canyon (Maslyk (1993). The 1989- and1990 Texas
Archeological Society field schools also conducted major excavations at four sites, La
Jita, Blue Hole (Mueggenborg 1994), Mingo (Houk and Lohse 1993), and Smith. Dr.
Thomas Hester had previously conducted major excavations at La Jita (Hester 1971). All
of these sites contained burned rock middens and were occupied during the Middle and
Late Archaic periods. Mingo, Blue Hole, and La Jita also had Late Prehistoric
components, however. A fifth excavation was conducted by the Texas Department of
Transportation at the Rainey Sinkhole (Henderson 2002). This very important site was a
small rockshelter beneath a sinkhole overhang that yielded exceptionally well stratified
Late Prehistoric Austin and Toyah phase components.

15

Section 5: Fieldwork Results
Fieldwork at four sites in the Seco Creek Area was conducted by the TAS as a part of the
Texas Archeology 101 course in San Antonio given in March in 2003. The goal of this
field day was to teach how to apply the archaeological theory, methods and ethics learned
in the classroom experience (Shafer 2003). The sites used for this lesson provided
exposure to a historic structure (41ME91), a large domed midden with significant,
surface-exposed off-midden artifacts (41ME88), a low, long burned rock midden with an
unknown sub-surface extent (41ME89) and finally a site with a small burned rock
midden and an undefined but known buried artifact deposit (41ME92). As the goal was
education, emphasis was not placed on how much work was done or how fast, but rather
how well each participant understood what they were doing and how well they did it.
41ME88
This prehistoric site consists of a dome-shaped burned rock midden located on the southsoutheast side of the main house near the center of the property. The midden is
approximately 22 meters in diameter and rises 1.4 meters above the current surface. The
off-midden portion of the site is separated from the midden by a fence and is in a plowed
field. This portion of the site consists of a moderate to dense lithic scatter extending
south-southeast of the midden and is 71 meters long by 65 meters wide. Pasture and lawn
grasses that surround the plowed field cause limitations on visibility. Artifacts recovered
from this site consist of burned rock scattered across the surface and lithics (chipper
stone) in the form of tools and debitage.
Surface collecting at this site recovered three dart points, one biface and an iron fragment.
The surface survey located two areas of higher debitage density within the overall scatter.
In these higher density areas three shovel tests were placed. These shovel tests recovered
a total of 4 dart points, 4 bifaces and 98 pieces of debitage.

16

Table 2: Biface Metric Data
Site

Provenience from

Condition

Datum

Length

Width

Thickness

(mm)

(mm)

(mm)

41ME88

Surface, 59.2m and 14°

Complete

75.7

42.4

14.6

41ME88

Surface

Proximal frag.

45.4

40.1

11.8

41ME88

Surface

Proximal frag.

23.3

18.1

5.0

41ME88

Surface

Distal frag.

30.4

11.5

4.0

The bifaces recovered from the surface consisted of 1 complete specimen, 2 proximal
fragments and one distal fragment. Table 2 shows the metrics of all bifaces recovered at
this site. The two dart points recovered from the surface are a possible Langtry, dating to
the Middle Archaic, 2500BC to 1000BC (Turner and Hester 1999) and an untyped point.
Both points have suffered major impact breaks from use. The Langtry has been reworked
along the blade edge after the initial impact break that shows its continued use. Table 3
provides the metric details for all dart points recovered from 41ME88.
Table 3: Projectile Point Metric Data
Site
ME88

Point
Type
Langtry

Provenience

Max

Blade (mm)

Stem (mm)

Length

Length

Width

Thickness

Length

Width

Thickness

Surface

35.7

16.7

19.6

4.9

17.5

18.8

5.6

Surface

36.8

18.8

20.7

7.5

--

--

--

St2 Level 2

37.2

19.1

22.7

6.7

17.9

16.8

4.8

St3 Level 2

--

--

--

--

20.6

20.9

5.2

St3 Level 2

11.9

11.9

12.3

2.1

--

--

--

dart point
ME88

Unknown
dart point

ME88

Andice
dart point

ME88

Pedernales
dart point
stem

ME92

Unknown
arrow
point

The debitage (56 pieces) collected from the surface survey consist of 62.5% (n=35)
primary flakes, 32.2% (n=18) secondary flakes and 41.1% (n=23) tertiary flakes. Biface
manufacture accounts for 19.6% (n=11) of the debitage while 39.3% (n=22) are

17

core/platform production flakes. 41.1% (n=23) of the debitage is of an indeterminate
production phase source due to post depositional breakage or platform damage.
The iron fragment recovered from the surface is most likely from historic or more recent
farm equipment, as the land has functioned as a farm.
Shovel Test 1 recovered a total of 14 debitage. Level 1 (0-10 cmbs) yielded 4 flakes: two
tertiary flakes (0% cortex present) and two secondary flakes (1-90% cortex). Level 2 (1020 cmbs) recovered 10 flakes: six tertiary, three secondary and one primary flake (100%
cortex covered). Seven flakes resulted from core/platform preparation, 6 were
indeterminate and only one was from biface manufacture.
Shovel test 2 yielded 18 total debitage. Level 1 (0-10 cmbs) recovered 15 flakes and one
heat spall. A heat spall or pot-lid is a fragment of chert that is blown off when the chert is
heated too quickly, either accidentally by a hearth fire or ground fire or by intentional
heat-treating (Cooper 1975). Heat-treating is a process of heating the chert in a fire that
can improve the quality of some course-grained cherts. All 15 flakes were tertiary (0%
cortex) as were the two flakes from level 2 (10-20 cmbs). Nine flakes were indeterminate,
5 were core/platform preparation and 2 resulted from biface manufacture.
The dart point recovered from level 2 is likely the stem from an Andice point. This point,
commonly having two large barbs that extend parallel to the stem, has been reworked
until it is only a stem with a short triangular blade. There is only the slightest indication
of the barbs left at what are not the point’s shoulders (see Table 3 for metric details). The
Andice point dates to the Early Archaic approximately 4050BC to 3050BC. (Turner and
Hester 1999).
Shovel test 3 yielded 2 flakes from level 1(0-10 cmbs), 3 from level 2(10-20 cmbs) and 6
flakes from level 3(20-30 cmbs). 54.6% (n=6) were secondary flakes and 45.4% (n=5)
are tertiary flakes. The production source of the debitage is 8 indeterminate flakes, 2
core/platform preparation and 1 biface manufacture flake. The single dart point recovered

18

from this shovel test is the base of a possible Pedernales dart point that was broken during
manufacture (Table 3).
41ME89
Sitting in the northern portion of the project area this prehistoric site is a large, low,
domed burned rock midden. It is oval with the long axis running northwest to southeast.
Maximum dimensions visible from the surface are approximately 50 meters long by 24
meters wide. The subsurface extent of this large feature of burned rock is unknown at this
time. Some light amounts of debitage and other lithic materials are associated with this
site. As expected shovel testing in the center of the midden failed to provide information
of the subsurface extent of the feature. What was discovered is reported here.
A total of 35 pieces of debitage were recovered from the three shovel tests placed into the
center and edges of the midden. St1 yielded substantial amounts of burned rock and little
else as is typical of a feature made of burned rock. As it is so abundant the burned rock
was not collected. Six pieces of debitage were collected, however. Two flakes were
secondary and 4 tertiary. Core/platform production accounted for 2 and 4 battered flakes
were of an indeterminate type.
Shovel test 2 recovered 7 pieces of debitage, all tertiary flakes. Only one flake was of an
identifiable, being a biface manufacture flake.
Shovel test 3 was placed on the edge of the burned rock midden feature. In this location it
encountered fewer burned rock (still a significant amount) and yielded the most debitage
(n=22). 13.6% (n= 3) of the debitage were primary flakes, 27.3% (n=6) were secondary
and 59.1% (n=13) were tertiary. In looking at the flake production types biface
manufacture accounts for 5 flakes, as does core/platform preparation. Indeterminate
flakes make up the remaining 12 lithics.

19

41ME91
41ME91 is a board and batten house with an attached porch and one stone exterior wall.
Named after previous owners, it is known as the Fritz Weber House. The condition of the
house is excellent, being well maintained as a functional guesthouse with modern
plumbing and electricity that does not detract from the structure’s historic character. The
site, on the northern side of the project area and immediately adjacent to 41ME89,
includes the house, the remains of a fence in front of it, and an unspecific area of yard
around it. Prehistoric lithics have been found in the yard around the house representing an
earlier occupation. Being only a few steps from 41ME89 such prehistoric materials may
be associated with that midden.
No shovel testing was done at the Old Weber House, instead photo documentation was
conducted and architectural illustrations were made. The home has been well researched
and documented. The Frosts who owned the property in 1997-99 restored the Old Weber
house. When removing an old fence they discovered Frio and Ensor points. This places
the prehistoric occupation in the Transitional Archaic (Hester personal communication
2003).
41ME92
This site was first identified by a small burned rock midden sitting on the fence line next
to the county road, which cuts through a portion of it. The off-midden extent of the site is
a mostly buried deposit of late prehistoric ceramics and lithics that continues along the
roadside fence at least up to the modern driveway that runs from the county road to the
main house. These were identified in trenching done to help protect oak trees in the area
from getting oak wilt through the roots. The full extent and density of the site is unknown
as is the relationship between the midden and the off-midden deposits.
Shovel testing at this site took place well to the north of the midden. Shovel test 1
encountered only burned rock and road gravel. Shovel test 2 yielded 19 pieces of

20

debitage, 7 of which were secondary flakes and 11 tertiary. Biface manufacture accounts
for 4 flakes while 6 were core/platform preparation and 9 were of an indeterminate type.
Shovel test 3 recovered 9 pieces of debitage and an arrow point. The debitage included 3
secondary flakes and 6 tertiary. Biface manufacture, core/platform preparation and
indeterminate flakes each accounted for 3 debitage (totaling 9). The single arrow point is
a blade only, with indications of a tip, stem and barbs being broken away. The type is not
identifiable from the fragment present (see Table 3 for metric details).

21

Section 6: Summary
While the surface survey and shovel testing conducted during the single field day of the
TAS Texas Archeology 101 course barely scratched the surface of the archaeological
deposits present at the Seco Creek Area, it does indicate a large, extensive accumulation
of artifacts and features of several types and ages. The projectile points recovered during
the field day alone provide evidence of human habitation from the Early Archaic (the
Andice point from 41ME88) over 6,000 years ago, then a 7,000 year old Gower point
(from Oak Wilt treatment trenching) to the Late Prehistoric represented by the arrow
point fragment from 41ME92. This is followed by the late 19th century European
immigrant historic occupation (the Weber Home, 41ME91) and the current American
culture occupation. In essence the Seco Creek Area has a record covering over 7,000
years of human presence.
Due to such a significant record this project area has a very great research potential. Such
potential would include issues such as the extent of each feature, the relationship of each
site to the others around it, the age range of each portion of the project area, the sequence
of site formation, the change in use over time and in the locations and types of activity
areas as well as the distributions of artifacts and features across the site. It would also be
interesting to try and discover the length of time that separated the last Late Prehistoric
occupation from the first Historic occupation. The issue of the environment’s impact on
human behavior may also be addressed as this single location. Its flat soils, near water but
above the flooding, drew people throughout the centuries from radically different
cultures, with different means of subsistence, social organization and needs. For all of
these persons it has proven to be a natural human habitation.
Answering all of these questions would be no small challenge and would involve
excavation at each site to locate the important features and concentrations, recover
botanical samples and C14 dates, then excavations between the known site areas to study
the relationship of the smaller site localities to each other.

22

Fortunately this site is in no danger of destruction by construction or looters. In fact the
best possible scenario for such a significant archaeological area is to have it owned by an
archaeologist such as the current landowner. This site, while its full extent and
significance is not known, must be considered scientifically valuable in answering many
of the questions concerning past human culture.
The goal of the field day was to provide an opportunity to put to practice what was taught
in the classroom. These goals were successfully met. Each participant had the opportunity
to learn shovel testing, mapping, note taking, cataloging and the less glamorous artifact
washing. Participants could see, touch and examine a range of artifacts and get a sense of
what fieldwork is like and what activities it entails and skills it utilizes. Those individuals
who took the Archeology 101 course now have firsthand experience of archeology giving
them the foundation of knowledge and skills to understand the discipline and its aims,
practices and ethics.

23

References Cited
Black, S.L., and A.J. McGraw
1997 Hot Rock Cooking on the Greater Edwards Plateau: Four Burned Rock Midden
Sites in West Central Texas. 2 vols. Studies in Archeology 22, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin;
Archeology Studies Program, Report2, Environmental Affairs Department, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin
1985

The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity within the
Upper Salado Creek Watershed, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey
Report, No. 100. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
San Antonio.

Bousman, C.B.
1998 Chapter 8: Late Paleo Indian Archaeology. Wilson Leonard An 11,00-year
Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Volume1:
Introduction, Background and Syntheses. Edited by M.B. Collins. Studies in
Archaeology 31, vol.1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin. Archeology Studies Program, Report 10, vol.1. Texas
Department of Transportation Environmental Affairs Division.
Collins, M. B.
1999 Clovis Blade Technology. The University of Texas Press. Austin.
1995 “Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas” in Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society. Vol. 66. Austin Texas.
Decker, Susan, S. L. Black, and Thomas Gustavson
2000 The Woodrow Heard Site, 41UV88, A Holocene Terrace Site in the Western
Balcones Canyonlands of Southwestern Texas. Studies in Archaeology 33, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin,
Archeology Studies Program, Report 14, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation. Austin.
Headrick, P.J. and L. Wootan Ellis
2001 Along the Valley: The Archaeology of Four Historic Sites in the upper Sabinal
Valley. Southern Texas Archeological Association, Special Publication No.9. San
Antonio Texas.
Henderson, J.
2002 Excavations at the Rainey Site (41BN33), A Late Prehistoric Sinkhole site in
Bandera County, Texas. Texas Department of Transportation Environmental
Affairs Division. Archeological Studies Program, Report 5.

24

Hester, T.R.
1971 Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 42: 51-148.
1989 Notes on South Texas Archaeology: 1989-1, Kincaid Rockshelter, the La Jita Site,
and the Archeology of the Sabinal River Watershed. La Tierra 16(1): 3-4.
1990 Summary of Archeological Investigations by the Texas Archeological Society
Field School, Utopia Texas 1990. Texas Archeology 34(3): 3-5.
Hester, T.R., G.L. Evans, F. Asaro, F. Stross, T.N. Campbell and H. Michel
1985 Trace Element Analysis of an Obsidian Paleo-Indian Projectile Point from
Kincaid Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56:143-153.
Houk, B. A., and J. C. Lohse
1993 Archeological Investigations at the Mingo Site, Bandera County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 61: 193-247.
Huebner, J.
1991 ‘Late Prehistoric Bison Populations in Central and Southern Texas.” In Plains
Anthropologist. 36(137):343-356.
Johnson, L. and G.T. Goode
1994 “A New Try at Dating and characterizing Holocene Climates, as well as
Archaeological Periods, on the Eastern Edwards Plateau.” In Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 65: 1-51.
Johnson, L.
1994 The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk as Seen from the Buckhollow
Encampment, site 41KM16, of Kimble County, Texas. Texas Department of
Transportation, Austin Texas.
Maslyk, Paul
1993 Prehistoric Settlement in the Sabinal River Valley, Uvalde and Bandera Counties,
Texas. Unpublished MA thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Mueggenborg, H. E.
1994 Excavations at the Blue Hole Site, Uvalde County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 62: 1-74.
Shafer, H.J.
2003 Recognizing and Documenting Archeological Sites in Texas. Texas Archeology
Academy, Texas Archaeology 101. Texas Archeological Society.

25

Soil Survey Staff
1977 Soil Survey of Medina County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service, United States
Department of Agriculture. Washington D.C.
Tunnell, C. T., and W. W. Newcomb
1969 A Lipan Apache Mission, San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz 1762-1771. Texas
Memorial Museum Bulletin 14. Austin.
Turner, E.S. and T.R. Hester
1999 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of the Texas Indians. Gulf Publishing, an imprint
of Rowman and Littlefield Publishers Inc. Lanham, New York and Oxford.
Wade, M.F.
2003 The Native Americans of the Texas Edwards Plateau, 1582-1799. The University
of Texas at Austin.

26

