The Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society
Volume 54, Number 4

Fall 2010

An Overview of Excavations at the Eagle Bluff Site
and Other Activities of the 2010 Texas Archeological Field School
Thomas R. Hester

Introduction
Excavations at the Eagle Bluff site (41ME147) were
carried out by the Texas Archeological Society Field School
from June 12 to June 19, 2010. The artifacts and other materials from the fieldwork are currently being processed and
cataloged at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
under the supervision of Mae Schmidt and Jonelle MillerChapman.
While the work at Eagle Bluff was a focal point of the
field school, there were other investigations that were carried
out. Lynn Yakubik directed excavations of a Historic trash
deposit in downtown Castroville, yielding many artifacts
related to military activities in the early 1860s. A summary
of this work is described by Yakubik later in this paper. Luis
Alvarado directed site survey program in the Hill Country
State Natural Area, during which several new sites were
documented and some previously documented sites were
re-examined. Additional site survey of the Calvert Ranch,
location of Eagle Bluff, was overseen by Ron Ralph; two
additional prehistoric sites were found and a historic feature
was recorded. Daniel R. Potter, with the able assistance of
Dr. Ken Brown, carried out test excavations at the McSween
site, a multicomponet terrace occupation near Pipe Creek in
Bandera County. Stratified Late Prehistoric and Late Archaic
deposits were explored. All of these projects, as well as
more in-depth coverage of all the excavation areas at Eagle
Bluff, will be represented in the Field School Symposium,
scheduled (Saturday) for the annual meeting in Corpus
Christi. Dr. Leslie Bush worked at Eagle Bluff throughout
the field school, field processing soil samples for future
paleobotanical analysis.

Linda Dommelsmith assists Leslie Bush by processing soil
samples to recover flotation botanicals. The creek
came in handy! (Photo/John Forister)

Fieldwork at Eagle Bluff
In a previous issues of this newsletter (Winter 2009;
Spring 2010), a number of details were provided on the nature
and character of the site, as it was then understood, and I laid
out its archeological potential and our some of our research
goals. From a geological perspective, W. F. “Feather” Wilson
has studied the site and its environs, estimating about 30 ft
(9 m) of Holocene terrace sediments, with Pleistocene-age
formations a short distance to the west. Relic-digging at the
site took place in the 1990s, going to a depth of about l m
in an area at the northern end of the site (the collection was
made available for initial documentation during the field
school). The first scientific work was done by the Southern
Texas Archaeological Association, and the most informative
Continued on page 3

Inside

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
ETHICS
• Members of TAS must abide by all terms and
conditions of the TAS bylaws and all Federal
and State antiquities laws or regulations.
• TAS does not condone the practice of buying
or selling artifacts for commercial purposes.
• TAS does not condone the disregard of proper
archeological field techniques or the willful
destruction or distortion of archeological data.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Joe D. Rogers, President
Britt Bousman, President Elect
Grant Hall, Immediate Past-President
Paula Vastine-Norman, Secretary
Marybeth Tomka, Treasurer
Timothy K. Perttula, Publications Editor
Jonelle Miller-Chapman, Newsletter Editor
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR: Laura Beavers
Send all membership inquiries, changes of address
and other business to the TAS Business Office:
Texas Archeological Society
Center for Archaeological Research
One UTSA Circle
San Antonio, Texas 78249-0658
(210) 458-4393
FAX (210) 458-4870 (call first)
tasinquiries@txarch.org
http://www.txarch.org
Office hours are Tuesday and Thursday from
9 A.M. to 2 P.M. During other hours please leave a
message on the answering machine.
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
Quarterly Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society
Editor: Jonelle Miller-Chapman
11201 Pickfair Dr.
Austin, TX 78750-2525
(512)257-0618
millerjo@austin.rr.com
Opinions, unless otherwise stated, are those of the
editor and contributors and do not necessarily reflect
the policies of the Society.
COPYRIGHT © 2010 by Texas Archeological Society
All rights reserved. ISSN 0082-2949
Printed at Morgan Printing in Austin, Texas

Ellen Sue Turner and Thomas R. Hester give permission
to the Texas Archeological Society to use a reproduced
image of the Marshall point, p. 150, in A Field Guide to
Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians, 2nd ed., as part of the TAS
logo. Illustration by Kathy Roemer.

2

✦

Fall 2010

TAS Investigates McSween Site

6

Youth Program at Calvert Site

7

Come Dig with Us!

9

Reflections of a Camp Boss

10

Conference Announcements

10

Native Involvement at 2010 Field School

11

Sawdust in My Shoes

12

TAS Annual Meeting in Corpus Christi

13

Conference Details

14

Friday Forum

15

Saturday Banquet

16

Education Update

16

Lower Pecos Field School

17

Texas Beyond History

19

Glen Evans’ Legacy

20

New Members

22

TAS Annual Meeting Schedule

23

SHA Annual Conference Announcement

24

Newsletter Deadlines
Spring, March 1, Summer, May 24,
Fall, August 30, Winter, December 3

Calendar
October 22-24—TAS Annual Meeting, Corpus Christi
November 12-13—Center for Big Bend Studies 17th
Annual Conference, Alpine, Texas
March 25-26— 53rd Annual Caddo Conference, Fort Bend,
Arkansas
January 5-8—SHA 2011, Austin

✦

✦

✦

Field School
Continued from page 1

of their discoveries was the exposure of a large basin-shaped
pit (their Feature 5) in the bluff face, the top of which was
3.5 meters below the surface (radiocarbon dated at 5820+/-50
B.P.), associated with a Gower, or more likely, a Uvalde point.
The initial work for the field school was done over several
weekends from the fall 2009 through spring 2010. A great
deal of clearing was done, and a continuing effort was made
to clean up the disturbed area dug up in the 1990s [Area 1
in 2010]. David Calame’s expertise with the backhoe accomplished this task. Also during this time frame, Ron Ralph
and friends of his from Austin (professional surveyors) were
able to map the site so that grid points and elevations could
be established across the area.
It was also during this “site preparation time”, during
which Glynn Osburn and the field school committee did very
hard work, that we set up for four areas of excavation. Area
1 was to be dug at the location of the cleaned-out collector’s
pit. The objective was to start at the end of the Late-Middle
Archaic and go deeper. Area 2 was close to previous STAA
excavation units, near the bluff in the central part of the site.
Just to the west, Area 3 was set-aside for the Youth Program.
And, at the south end of the site, Area 4 was staked out to
explore the Toyah phase materials that had been found there
during some construction work by the landowner, Dr. William Calvert.
On June 13, nearly 200 field school participants arrived
at the Eagle Bluff site. As usual, crew coordinator Bryan
Jameson had detailed lists of all crews, crew chiefs, and others
to be working in one of the four areas. Crews were busy laying out units, setting up screens, clearing the surface of each
Area, and staking out excavation units. In Area 1, additional
effort was needed to shape up the base of the collector’s pit,
as exposed by the backhoe.

of artifacts that had fallen from exposed profiles (Perdiz point,
ceramics, a small obsidian flake, etc.). Once this was done, the
continuing and gradually deeper excavations began to uncover
rich Early Archaic (or some would prefer, early Middle Archaic) deposits. Large hearth or pit-like burned rock features
were exposed. One very large feature, perhaps a basin-shaped
hearth or an earth oven was exposed by Joe Rogers’ crew in
Unit N1020 E694. Much of this feature remains unexcavated,
awaiting fieldwork in 2011. Early Triangular and La Jita
points comprised the diagnostics associated with the burned
rock features (Figure 1). Radiocarbon dating for these types,
based on results from a few sites suggest an age of about
5500-8400 B.P. for Early Triangular, overlapping somewhat
with La Jita, ca. 4800 to 4000 B. P. At the western end of Area
1, and best seen in the profiles of Unit N1020/E694, a gravel
stratum (point bar?) was encountered, up to 30 cm thick and
apparently linked to a high velocity flood. This flood deposit
came not from Hondo Creek, but from the deep unnamed
tributary immediately north of Area 1. Based on aerial photos,
this stream heads up to the west and has a broad watershed of

Excavation Areas
At this point, less than 3 months since the end of excavations, I can offer only a generalized and quite skimpy
summary of what was found and what was learned in work
at Areas 1-4. And, in doing this, I am sure I will have some
details wrong or will inadvertently omit important finds!
Area 1 was supervised by Tiffany Osburn. She had seven
crews, usually 60 folks each day. At the bottom of the cleared
collector’s pit several 2x2 and 1x1 meter squares were set up,
and, overall a total of 27 square meters were opened up during
the field school. The first levels, at the base of the disturbance,
had been compressed in the backhoe-clearing efforts. These
levels were time consuming to excavate, and had some mixing

Figure 1. Looking west at N1020/E694; note gravel stratum
overlying large basin-shaped FCR feature.
Continued on page 4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

3

Field School
Continued from page 3

no less than 200 acres. It was easily capable of laying down
such a gravel layer. Of great interest is that La Jita and Early
Triangular points were on top or just above these gravels, and
Early Triangular (Figure 2) and La Jita points were below it.
In an archaeological sense, the deposit was a “rapid” event
that only briefly interrupted the ancient occupation. It would
certainly seem that both types were in use before the flood
gravels and immediately afterwards. The more we learn about
Early Triangular, the less we know about its affiliation(s) and
relationships. Hopefully, Area 1 excavations in 2011 will add
substantially to this issue.

Figure 3. Profile close-up showing the top mantle of sterile
matrix, overlying an occupation zone.

Figure 2. Early Triangular in situ, N1020,E694,
base of gravels.
And those of us weaned on Ernst Antev’s “Altithermal”
(cf. Hypsithermal), the warm and dry period between ca.
9000-5000 B.P. might be tempted to link this gravel deposit,
given its age, to the closing part of that climatic episode. The
late Glen L. Evans liked to note high velocity flood deposits
of this antiquity in south central Texas, as at the Granberg II
site (41BX271), and would comment that maybe Antevs’ had
been right all along.
Area 2 was supervised by Brad Jones. Located just west of
STAA Units and just east of the battery of blue porta-potties, the
crews (30 members per day) excavated three 2x2 meter units.
The upper 40 cm frustrated the excavators, as it was basically
sterile. Though studies are far from complete, it is likely that
this is a colluvial deposit. These soil features are seen especially
in the north profiles, as horizontal thin lines of silt (Figure 3).
However it is eventually interpreted by geoarcheologists, it
accumulated in the mid-19th century, give or take a few decades.
There were no prehistoric artifacts, but there was a single pistol
cartridge casing, unmarked, but thought by on-site experts to
be post-Civil War, maybe late 1860s.

4

✦

Fall 2010

Below this fairly recent historic-age deposit were Late
Prehistoric, Late Archaic, and Middle Archaic occupational
debris. Perdiz and bone tempered pottery reflect Toyah campsite debris, below were a number of Frio and Ensor points;
Montell points, associated with scattered fire-cracked rock
were found in Level 7, deeper were Castroville and Langtry
(the latter being the deepest diagnostic). While the excavations
reached Middle Archaic deposits a little more than a meter in
depth, much deeper cultural remains are anticipated. Nearby,
on the Hondo Creek bluff, is where the STAA exposed the
large hearth at 3.5 meters below the surface.
Area 3. The youth program was assigned to this area
in the central part of the site. Doug Boyd supervised the
fieldwork, as he has done in recent field schools. A number
of parents-TAS members assisted him (Figure 4). Combining
the efforts of the parents and the kids, Doug had 50-75 people
working each day. A total of 11 2 x 2 meter units were excavated, some to a depth of 80 cm. Features of fire-cracked rock
were numerous, including small and medium-sized hearths, a
possible earth oven, and a burned rock deposit in the east part
of Area 3. Three occupations were recorded: (1) Toyah (large
numbers of Perdiz, beveled knives and other lithic artifacts;
ceramics); (2) below, an occupation characterized by stemmed
and corner notched arrow points (Scallorn, Edwards, and several rectangular stemmed arrow points of uncertain typology);
and (3) Late Archaic, represented by Frio, Castroville and
Montell. The later points were above and in the burned rock
deposit in the eastern units. Prior to the field school, a small
backhoe test in this area had cut into a zone with abundant

Dispatches from Castroville
Lynn Yakubik

Figure 4. View of Youth Unit with one adult.
burned rock—and a large Pedernales point.
Area 4. At the southern end of the site, a water line laid
several years ago by the landowner turned up Perdiz points,
bison bone, and other indicators of a Toyah occupation.
Supervised by Dr. Harry Shafer and Bryan Jameson, influenced
by Art Tawater, crews of 28 excavators carefully exposed a
15-cm thick zone (about 10 cm below the surface) containing
abundant Toyah remains (Figure 5). A large number of Perdiz
points (of all sizes!), end scrapers, flake drills, a beveled knife,
and numerous potsherds were recovered. The pottery will
require careful study, as some of it varies (in color; vessel
shape) considerably from the traditional bone-tempered ware
once called ‘Leon Plain.” Animal bones were well preserved
in the Toyah occupation, including bison, deer and/or antelope,
turkey, and many remains to be identified. In two adjacent units
(N797/E629; N798/E630), 11 end scrapers (some made on
blades) were found among a cluster of faunal materials. This is
likely a specific work-area that will require intensive analysis.
In 2011, expanded excavations may well uncover other workareas associated with this Toyah component.

Ahh, archaeology. Long hot days under the boiling sun,
out in the middle of nowhere, answering the call of nature
in the woods and sorting Rabdotus snails…. That is unless
you were part of the TAS Field School Castroville crew! We
spent our week in a shady courtyard of a fabulous restaurant
in the middle of an historic district, listening to the church
bells across the street and smelling the ribs smoking in the
kitchen! Our hosts, Ken and Arlene Smith, brought us sweet
tea every day and the Alsatian Bakery was just a half a mile
away. Oh, and did I mention the indoor restrooms?
What we had out in Castroville was a large buried trash
heap, filled with what appears to be artifacts dating to the Civil
War period. There lots of uniform parts (belt plates, buckles,
etc), horse bridles, leather fragment, personal items, broken
bottles, and enough pieces of window glass to supply a skyscraper. Ginger beer bottles and wine bottles were abundant,
and there were well preserved examples of patent medicine
bottles of the times.
We know that the 8th US Infantry was in the area in May
of 1861, trying to get to the Gulf coast to evacuate to the
North. They were tipped off by the folks in Castroville that
a Confederate force was coming from San Antonio, aiming
to take them prisoner. The Union forces attempted to avoid
capture but were met at a place called Adams Hill, just east
of town, where they surrendered.
Many of the artifacts came from two large backdirt piles
left by laborers who were digging a barbeque pit for the
Smiths, who soon discovered they had a site outside their
restaurant. Before we started our field school excavations, our
crew screened for a day and a half to go through these piles.
I would like to thank my wonderful, fun crew, and my
awesome crew chiefs, Jim Schmidt and Jesi Mann. A special
thanks to Tim Brewster and his I-Phone which permitted us
to do instant internet research.
I am still processing the artifacts through the UTSA-CAR
lab, and we spent one day on the site, August 28, to finish up
the last of the digging. What I’ll be looking for in the analysis
of the artifacts will be evidence that this is indeed a dump
site from part of the Union abandonment of Castroville, or if
other events in addition to that one are also included in the pit.

References Cited
Hester, Thomas R.
2010a 2010 TAS Field School in Medina County, Texas. Texas
Archeology 54(1): 8-9.

Figure 5. Area 4 looking south.

2010b Archaeology Along the Hondo: The 2010 Texas Archeological Society Field School. Texas Archeology 54(2):
1-3,5-6.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

5

Texas Archeological Society Investigates
McSween Site, 41BN113, as Part of 2010 Field School
Dan Potter, Texas Historical Commission
amount of material (total of debitage, bone fragments, and
complete or partial tools) can be seen in this unit. The first of
these was in levels 2 and 3, and was associated with Late Prehistoric II Perdiz arrowpoints. A second peak was encountered
in level 10, and it included two Late Archaic dartpoints of the
Montell type. A third peak may also be present, indicated by
high Fire Cracked Rock (FCR) recovery (weight in pounds)
in level 6. We recovered Late Archaic Frio dartpoints from
levels 5 and 6, and think these are probably good temporal
indicators for these levels.
The above description gives us an initial (and no doubt
overly simplistic) picture of at least three vertical components
from Late Prehistoric to Late Archaic times in the upper meter
of deposits in the central area of the site.
Our tests elsewhere encountered Late Prehistoric remains
as well. Excavators working with Wayne Clampitt nearer the
southern end of the site encountered Edwards and Scallorn
arrowpoints overlying a well-preserved burned rock midden.
The upper surface of the midden contained broad-bladed
diagnostics of the Marshall type, which gradually gave
way to several earlier Pedernales dartpoints as excavations
worked towards the base of the midden. Unfortunately, our
excavations here were halted at the end of the field school
just as the base of the midden was encountered, and we were
therefore unable to determine when midden-formation began.

Artifac t V ertic al P rofile, N1009E 991

C ount (wt, for fc r)

During the 2010 TAS Field School held in Hondo Texas,
a small testing program was conducted at the McSween Site,
a multi-component terrace site on the Medina River in Bandera County. The project was conducted at the request of the
McSween family, who wanted the site assessed, particularly in
light of significant damage and trespassing that had occurred
in recent years. While the family has an extensive collection
from the site, they were not very familiar with the chronology
of occupation there.
Testing revealed relatively deep, stratified archeological
deposits over a large area, including Late Prehistoric I & II
and Late Archaic deposits. The site includes multiple burned
rock middens as well as extensive surrounding terrace occupation areas. Two small rock shelters, one of these appearing to
be completely destroyed by looting, also exist. The site had
been partially damaged by uncontrolled excavations and looting by trespassers and TAS testing was intended to determine
the nature and extent of undisturbed deposits.
Testing focused on three parts of the site. Wayne
Clampitt’s test focused on one of three known burned rock
middens, a unit directed by Woody Woodward and Ken Brown
investigated a central portion of the site, and a third test unit
examined an area towards the northern end of the site known
to have produced Late Prehistoric artifacts. A series of small
shovel tests excavated by Art Tawater, Dave Packett and Steve
Laird were also critically important in establishing site limits. Shovel testing also provided good
evidence that buried archeological surfaces at the
site dip strongly to the east and south, paralleling
700
modern topography.
600
Generally speaking, our testing program was
very modest in scope, and none of our units en500
countered the bottom of archeological deposits.
We therefore we can provide only a partial and
400
somewhat schematic view of occupation history at
300
McSween. Still, our work was sufficient to show
that the site does have extensive and deep undis200
turbed deposits, complex vertical and horizontal
100
stratigraphy, good (if sparse, so far) preservation of
organic remains, and intact features.
0
A look at the vertical debris profile from one
test unit, N1009E991, provides a view of the occupational history of the central portion of the site
(Figure 1). As can be seen, two clear peaks in the

6

✦

Fall 2010

Total Material Count
FCR Weight
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

L evel Number

Figure 1. Artifact Density Profile from N1009 E991.

Our best guess at present is that the initial formation period
is associated with Late Archaic times, and more specifically
with the Pedernales timeframe. While soil color was
lightening rapidly in our bottom-most level, every indication
was that fine sediments continued downward, and additional
archeological deposits were expected.
Towards the northern end of the site, Don Keyes’ team encountered a long, deep sequence of occupation, with Late Prehistoric materials again in the uppermost levels. Of all known
site areas, Don’s area appeared to have the best depositional
environment. Sedimentation here appeared to be more rapid,
yet remained relatively fine-grained. This context produced
upper levels with relatively light amounts of fine debitage
and Late Prehistoric I diagnostics. As excavation progressed
lower, artifact densities increased, and earlier diagnostics,
including Frio, Langtree and Bulverde were recovered. At the
bottom of Don’s meter-deep test units, significant amounts
of well-preserved archeological materials were encountered,
including a very compact and well-defined feature, Feature
1, located in the southwest corner of N1031E1011. Again,
excavations halted at the end of the week in relatively rich
and well preserved archeological deposits.
Generally speaking, our modest testing program at McSween achieved its goals. Testing produced ample evidence
that extensive intact and well-preserved deposits exist at
the site, and that these may have considerable depth, easily
exceeding one meter below surface. Good bone and feature

Figure 2. The McSween Site crew, last day of testing.
Photo by Ken Brown.
preservation were evident in our sample. Shovel testing added
much better information on site limits and site character as
well.
Thanks to all those who participated, particularly Dr.
Ken Brown and our great crew chiefs, who collectively kept
good control over the testing program. Our deep thanks and
appreciation also go to the McSween family, for allowing
us to investigate the site and even providing lunch on two
different days. We couldn’t have asked for more generous or
friendly hosts.

2010 Youth Program at the Calvert Site
Doug Boyd, Trudy Williams, and Neal Stilley

The 2010 field school was a great success in many ways.
We had 62 kids total, and the daily count ranged from 25
to 54. But we always had plenty of adults to help out, with
between 17 and 25 adults on any given day. Among those
adults were many people with years of digging experience.
All things considered, the youth program ran very smoothly
this year. We had great off-site activities, way-cool archeology, good weather, and lots of fun learning. I think the
award for finding the most diagnostic artifacts goes to Carl
Kneupper, who not only found many important diagnostic
artifacts but also found some arrow points in situ! The only
exception to our good times was an accident that cut short
the field school for one young lady. A veteran of several
previous field schools, Abby Milligan, had to go home early
after she broke her leg at camp in a flip-flop-related crash.
Abby had to have surgery, but has healed well and we hope
to see her again next year.

Youth Activities
This year we continued the hand-on activities, and had
a great group of students attending these informal classes.
Many activities involved learning about primitive tools which
included bone awls, bone knives, a bone cattail saw, paleo and
archaic projectile points, chert knives, and pump drills, just
to name a few. The students saw demonstrations of various
friction-fire starting techniques, and then practiced the assisted hand-drill method. Two of the kids were able to generate
embers. During this activity, the Lower Pecos River Cultures
“Shumla Notch” was demonstrated as a unique friction-fire
starting method. The kids also got to see a display and talk
about prehistoric cooking of plant foods in earth oven pits.
The most popular activity, as usual, was dart throwing with
an atlatl, and there were some great throws by all students.
Thanks to local rancher Bob McCoy for the loan of a hay
Continued on page 8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

7

Archaeology along the Hondo
Continued from page 5

bale for our dart target, and to David Calame for making the
arrangements. A special thanks goes to Nancy LeMieux, who
shared her Choctaw heritage and stories with the students. She
also did a beading activity that everyone enjoyed.
Midway through the field school, the youth group took
a field trip to Castroville where we visited three historic
sites. We stopped by to see TAS excavations at 41ME211
in downtown Castroville near the Old Alsatian Steakhouse.
Laurie Mosley and Lynn Yakubik told everyone that they were
looking for a probable 1861 trash pit and described what they
were finding. We then went to the Landmark Inn State Historic
Site, where the Texas Historical Commission folks treated
us like royalty. Jose Zapata made the arrangements for us,
and Glenn Nuyttens and Julian Summons gave the site tours
during our visit. The final stop was the Steinbach house that
serves as the office of Castroville Chamber of Commerce.
Priscilla Garrett and Mary Louise Burel gave presentations
and described how the “fachwerk” frame of this house was
built in Alsace between 1618 and 1648, and then moved from
that region of France to Castroville in 1998.
Later that day, the kids performed the “Sinking of the
Titanic” play at the evening program. We dearly missed having Gay Smith and Diedre Hood to direct the performance in
Hondo, but we managed to sink the ole’ ship for one more year.

Area 3 Archeology
The youth group worked in Area 3 of 41ME147. We
had a nice flat spot with many shade trees, and it turned out
to be rich in archeology. We excavated eleven 2x2-m units

Deserted Youth Group area, “Waiting for 2011”
by John Forister.

8

✦

Fall 2010

Carl proudly poses with the arrow points he found.
(Photo courtesy Doug Boyd)

to at least 40 to 80 cm below surface. We had a wonderful
site secretary, Sharon Menegaz, who kept all our excavation
records, collection bags, and photo logs in order.
We discovered and documented eight cultural features—a
very large burned rock midden, a large burned rock cluster
that may prove to be an earth oven, several small burned rock
clusters, a bone cluster, and a small intrusive pit with burned
sediment and daub. We finished with most of the features, but
a few of them will have to be looked at more closely next year.
Area 3 appears to have three components buried in the
late Holocene alluvial sediments of Hondo Creek. The upper component is a pretty solid Toyah phase occupation. We
found quite a few Perdiz arrow points, bone tempered pottery, and beveled knives, along with a few end scrapers. This
component seems to be an extension of the same occupation
found in Area 4.
Immediately below the Toyah remains in Area 3, there
appears to be a transitional zone with some earlier-style arrow
points, but it doesn’t look like classic Austin phase. There

were a couple of corner-notched (a.k.a., Scallorn) points, but
most were Perdiz-like points with square stems, and other
stemmed points that looked somewhat Alba-like and Bonhamlike, and a few that don’t match any defined arrow point styles.
Area 3 appears to have an underlying Late Archaic component, but we were just beginning to get into the top of this
zone at about 50 cm in most units. In addition, a large burned
rock midden deposit was found from about 30 to 80 cm deep
in the two easternmost units. However, it seems to be a Late
Archaic feature that was exposed on the surface as the cumulic
alluvial soils continued to aggrade while the Late Prehistoric
peoples occupied the terrace. If our hunch is correct, the presence of a Late Archaic midden explains the many reworked
dart points found in the upper deposits that must have been
picked up and reused by the Late Prehistoric peoples.
The final feature, found on the very last day of the field
school of course, is an intrusive pit with in situ burned clay

sediment on one side and what appear to be fragments of
burned daub in the upper fill. It could be a burned post and
post hole associated with the Late Prehistoric occupations or
it may be nothing more than a burned tree stump. But this
mystery will have to wait until next year when we can continue investigating this portion of the site.

Thanks to Our Volunteers
The youth program ran very smoothly this year because
we had lots of great help. We extend our sincere thanks to
the many wonderful adults who volunteered to work with
the youth group. It really helped having lots of people who
dedicated their entire week to the kids. This was an outstanding group of folks to work with, and not a single adult had
to be put into Time Out! I hope all of you will join us again
next year as we continue our adventures at the Calvert site!

Come Dig With Us!
Rancho de las Cabras, Floresville, Texas—It’s FREE!!!!
Join archaeologists from the UTSA Center for
Archaeological Research and the San Antonio Missions
National Historical Park at this 18th century Spanish
Mission Ranch just outside San Antonio
When:
•
•
•
•

Saturday Sept 11
Saturday October 2
Saturday October 16
Saturday November 6
8:30 am-2:00 pm

Please bring your own lunch and snacks, we will
provide water and digging tools. Because the site is
undeveloped, it contains brushy areas and fire ants; it is
recommended that boots and appropriate clothing be worn.
Access Rancho de las Cabras from San Antonio by
taking US 181 south to Floresville. Turn west-southwest on
State Highway 97 travel approximately 3.5 miles to County
Road CR144 (right across from Promise Land Dairy). Turn
south onto County Road CR144 and travel approximately
1.6 miles to Rancho entrance.
Call 210-458-7822 or e-mail marybeth.tomka@utsa.
edu for more information!

Rancho de las Cabras is located in Wilson County
within the San Antonio Missions National Historical Park.
It was built in the mid 1700s (sources range from 17461760) to contain the livestock belonging to the missions.
Participants will excavate the courtyard to improve documentation of ranch life, which will assist the National Park
Service’s effort to interpret the site for visitors.
Open to ages 10 to adult. Children 16 and under must
be accompanied by an adult. There must be at least one
adult per every three children. Teachers can earn CPE credits for attending! We will limit participants to 50 each day.
Individuals are encouraged and groups and interested Scout
Leaders must RSVP. Site tours will be available each day.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

9

Reflections of a Camp Boss
Glynn Osburn
Naked people in the showers? A Hondo city official
informed me of this at the campgrounds on Monday of Field
School. As Camp Boss I thought better go see… er… find
out if we had a problem. Off I went to the Hondo Rec Center
(where we took our showers). “Yes,” Abby, the Center Director told me, “we have had complaints.” Who from? Well,
some five year olds were shocked by the nakedness, she told
me. I thought maybe we could turn the nakedness down a
little bit. So that evening I mentioned it at the Program. We
had no more complaints, so I guess people were a little less
naked than before.
The naked shower incident was all part of what I learned
about being the Camp Boss. I have been on the Field School
Committee for most of the last 10 years and Committee Chair
for many, but until this year I still had no appreciation for what
the Camp Boss goes through. This year at Medina County I
reluctantly agreed to undertake the duty (no volunteers) and
I quickly found that arrangements would mean multiple trips
from my home in Bedford to Medina County.
I don’t know if many at Field School realized that we
were camped in both the Hondo City Park and in the Medina
County Fairgrounds. A chain-link fence was all that separated
the two areas. Prior negotiations with both the city for the
park and with the Medina County Fairgrounds for use of that
facility were required. Fortunately, I found that both the city
and the county were very supportive and were gracious hosts.
Arrangements also had to be made for portable toilets, trash
pickup, utilities, etc. As Camp Boss and Committee Chair
there were decisions to be made such as placing the kitchen

trailer, Lab, Program venue, and so forth.
The cooks arrived on Wednesday before Field School. By
Thursday, many participants were pulling in and looking for
shaded areas. My worry was that portions of the park were
reserved for a couple of family reunions during the weekend
and there would not be enough shade for all campers until
Monday. In fact we had to move campers out from under one
cluster of the large live oaks to make room for a family that
ended up not using it. Finally by Monday morning we just
about had everyone under shade and everything appeared to be
settling down. But things never just “settle down.” Incidents
occur daily in the life of a Camp Boss. There are blown fuses,
burners in the kitchen that will not light, fuel for the propane
tanks, this or that needed from the hardware store or lumber
yard, and so forth. One such event was when I was awakened
at nearly midnight to be told that our refrigeration trailer generator was out and a replacement truck with trailer had arrived.
It took an hour for myself, the cooks, and volunteers (some in
pajamas) to empty one trailer of all that foodstuff and move
it to the other. Then it was up just a few short hours later to
perform that most pleasant daily duty, to awaken the camp
by honking the horn at 5AM. Thankfully, Janice Hinojosa, the
leader of our cooks, always had a cup of coffee ready for me
as I began my honking tour.
So, how was it being a Camp Boss? Actually, looking
back, it wasn’t bad at all. The cooks were amazing, and took
care of me. The field schoolers were all super and I had plenty
of help. Would I want to do it again? Any volunteers? See
you next June.

CBBS 17th Annual Conference

2011 Caddo Conference

The Center for Big Bend Studies at Sul Ross State
University in Alpine, Texas, will have their 17th Annual
Conference on November 12 and 13, 2010. The conference
brings together historians, archeologists, folklorists and other
researchers studying the past and present of the Big Bend region and northern Mexico. Dr. T. Lindsay Baker will present
“The 1927 Stanton Frame-up: Slaying Innocent Men for a
Bounty” at the banquet on Friday, November 12. Please visit
www.sulross.edu/cbbs for information and registration forms
or call 432-837-8179.

The 53rd Caddo Conference will be held on 25 and 26
March 2011 in Fort Smith, Arkansas. Co-sponsors for the
Conference are the Arkansas Archeological Survey and
University of Arkansas-Fort Smith. Program Chairman is
Arkansas Archeological Survey archeologist Dr. Mary Beth
Trubitt who can be reached at trubitm@hsu.edu, and PO Box
H-7841-HSU, Arkadelphia, AR 71999-0001. Arrangements
Coordinator is Dr. Ann M. Early, who can be reached at
amearly@uark.edu, and 2475 North Hatch Ave, Fayetteville,
AR 72704. More information about local arrangements and
activities will be posted in the Fall, 2010.

10

✦

Fall 2010

Native Involvement High at 2010 Field School
by Margaret Howard
2010 was great year for the TAS Native American Field
School Scholarship Program. Scholarships were awarded to
11 Native Americans from the Lipan Apache Band of Texas,
Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma, Seminole Nation of Oklahoma, Sinatsuak Native Corporation, and Cherokee Nation.
Recipients included an archeology major, a tribal historic
preservation office staff member, a teacher, a medical librarian, an artist, and two young people.
Most scholarship awardees stayed for the entire field
school. Nine persons excavated at Eagle Bluff, one joined the
Hill Country State Natural Area survey, and one worked in the
laboratory. A mother and son shared their Native traditions
with TAS children too young to dig. Scholarship recipients
were featured on the front page of the Hondo Anvil newspaper
and interviewed by the Lytle Leader.
The response from Native recipients was enthusiastic,
as exemplified by comments from teacher Abby Brown: “I
believe that this program is good for the Native American
community and archeology—there is so much that can be
learned from both sides. Native American involvement will
help connect the dots to the past. It all ties back to where we
come from and what we can learn because we don’t have
much of a written history, and we need to preserve as much
as possible before it’s all gone.”

Vem Abloogalook of the Sitnasuak (Inuit) Native
Corporation learns about record-keeping from TAS
member Tracy Danna. (Photo/Barbara Chadwick)
Since 2003, TAS has introduced Indian people to archeological methods of learning about the past, while benefiting
from their insights on our work. The 2010 Native American
scholarship program was supported entirely by contributions
from the Council of Texas Archeologists, Clements Foundation, Prewitt & Associates, SWCA, PBS&J, the Travis County
Archeological Society, Carol Macaulay, Tim Sullivan, and many
other generous TAS members. To continue this effort to promote
understanding among the many cultures that call Texas home,
donations may be submitted to the TAS office in San Antonio.
✦

✦

✦

Archaeological
Heritage Award

Jared Johnson of the Seminole Nation of Oklahoma (seated in
center foreground) is pursuing a bachelor’s degree in anthropology and hopes for a career in tribal historic preservation.
Photograph by Evan Ortega, courtesy of Hondo Anvil.

Two longtime TAS members found themselves in Santa
Fe, New Mexico recently, attending the state’s Heritage Preservation Awards Ceremony on May 21. The Archaeological
Heritage Award was presented to Louis “Pinky” Robertson
and Jimmy E. Smith II, whom many of you know.
The award was given “for forty years of work including
scientific excavations and investment of personal resources
that preserved an important archaeological site, and led to
publication of Techado Spring Pueblo, which documents its
history for future generations.” We are proud of you guys!

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

11

Sawdust in My Shoes
Jonelle Miller-Chapman
Did you say, “Lab in a barn?” Yes, it can be done! Faced
with no tables, no artifact cleaning brushes, no sorting trays,
no drying racks, a dirty trailer and sawdust on the floor, about
30 cheerful volunteers showed up to work their magic, and
the 2010 TAS Lab was now in session.
A few tables showed up and lab workers immediately
began to empty the trailer of its contents and they soon began
washing off the dirt that accumulated over the years on the
shelving and other items. Before we knew it, plastic colanders and basins were arranged in orderly fashion on the clean
shelves along with the supply of plastic bags and anything
else that was deemed usable. Thanks to Glynn Osburn for
his trailer cleaning assistance, which made our work progress
rapidly! Finally the trailer was swept clean and it provided
overnight, lockable storage for artifacts during the week.
By the second day, we had artifacts to process, so workers grouped around the few tables we had, using chairs and
cleaning brushes brought from home. Our toothbrushes had
somehow disappeared over the years, so May headed to the
local Dollar Store for a new supply. Pam Beran did not like
rummaging through cardboard boxes in search of the various
sizes of plastic bags. She solved that problem with a trip to
WalMart where she purchased some plastic tubs for organizing the bags. Thank you Pam!
Drying screens were in short supply and ragged ones were
repaired in a wink of the eye! Drying racks were cleverly created when lab workers stacked animal pen sections on their
sides to make platforms on the sawdust floor. One night Jean
and Richard Hughes and Tess Weaver visited the hardware store

Lab workers processing artifacts, lot by lot.

12

✦

Fall 2010

Artifacts on screens drying atop makeshift drying racks
laid across sawdust floor of Livestock Barn.
(Photo/Tess Weaver)
and bought wood and screen to construct additional screens that
were needed the next day. Some new small window screens for
drying artifacts magically appeared one morning. Thank you
Jean and Tess! Good vibes were everywhere.
As the week progressed, lab skills improved as newcomers
were taught the basics and experienced workers answered questions and helped everybody. More work tables showed up. More
lab workers came, and some went, depending on their schedules.
Friendships were rekindled and new friends were made.
The steady breeze in the barn provided welcome relief
from the heat all week. A rhythm to our work had developed
and we could all see progress being made. By Thursday we
had sawdust in our shoes, and we could say all the artifacts
turned in by then had been washed. Inventory lists and cataloging had begun in earnest.
Thanks to all the dedicated lab volunteers who found
an ill-equipped 2010 lab and cheerfully coped with the challenges that came along. Your hard work made the magic
happen and got the job done! Since field school, 30 cafeteria
trays have been purchased for sorting in the lab. Hopefully,
we will gradually acquire more drying screens, drying racks,
sturdy shelving, and tables and chairs for future TAS field
labs. Yes, I STILL have sawdust in my shoes, and I hope to
see you in Hondo next summer!

All Roads Lead to Corpus Christi

You’re invited to join fellow archeological enthusiasts
at the 81st Annual Meeting of the TAS October 22-24. The
schedule is packed with interesting talks and posters. The
silent auction and vendors offer bargains galore. And the
beachfront makes a tropical backdrop to catch up with your
friends and associates.
Special rates at the Omni Bayfront hotel begin Thursday
evening, October 21. Friday, October 22, starts with the CTA
MEETING at 9 AM and the TOUR of the Corpus Christi
Museum at 10:30 AM. The Book Room and Silent Auction
open at noon and the STEWARDS meet at 1:00 PM. A TAS
BOARD MEETING (open to everyone) is set for 2:15 PM.
A unique opportunity at this meeting will be a series of
ROUND TABLES with scholars from Mexico, the U.S. and
Native communities. The first Round Table on Friday afternoon will be “Archeology without Borders: An International
and Intercultural Approach” will featuring Carolyn Boyd,
Kim Cox, Ismael Arturo Montero Garcia, Alston Thoms
and Dolores Pompa.
Other Round Tables on Saturday will be “Archeological
Record in Texas and New Mexico: Rock Art and Ethnography” with Jonathan Zilberg, Jesus Jauregui, Steve Black,
and Ben Carnes and “Tribal Oral Histories and Archeology:
Different Perspectives of the Same Reality” by Charles
Koenig, Jesus Gerago Ramirez Almaraz, Josie Red Wing
and Benjamin Muratalla and Richard Iyote.
On Friday evening at 7:00 PM, the PUBLIC FORUM
will offer “Native Peoples of the Texas Coast: Prehistory to
Today.” The speakers will be followed by artifact identification and a CAREER SOCIAL. This program was made
possible in part with a grant from Humanities Texas, the
state affiliate of the National Endowment for the Humanities.
On Saturday three CONCURRENT SESSIONS offer papers, posters and round table discussions. Symposia
submitted for the program include: Collaboration for Rediscovery: The Bernardo Plantation Project, Waller County;
2010 Archeological Field School Research Results: Lower
Nueces River Valley; The Community Historical Archeology
Project with Schools (CHAPS): A New Community-focused
Research program in the Lower Rio Grande Valley; Archaeological Research Potential and Historiography of the Camino
de los Tejas National Historic Trail; TAS Field School 2010;
Social Archeology in Texas: Engendering Gender in the Archeological Record. The program schedule will be online by
October 1. The Book Room and Silent Auction open at 8 AM

and close at 4 PM with pick up of items at 4:30 PM.
At noon the TAS BUSINESS MEETING will feature
several important agenda items—the approval of the budget
and election of officers. Membership certificates are also
awarded at the meeting. Your box lunch is part of the registration fee. The afternoon will be filled with papers, posters
and roundtables.
Everyone is encouraged to wear costumes for the Caribbean theme on Saturday evening. SOCIAL HOUR begins at
6 PM and the BANQUET at 7 PM. Speakers for the banquet
will be Toni Carrell and Don Keith from Ships of Discovery. Officers for the new year will be installed and awards
presented.
On Sunday, October 24 the Executive Committee and
the newly elected TAS BOARD will meet. Papers may
be scheduled on Sunday morning if needed. Please plan
to hit the road to Corpus Christi and join us for a fun and
information-packed meeting in October!

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

13

Conference Details
Texas Archeological Society
Annual Meeting Õ Corpus Christi, Texas
Omni Bayfront Hotel
October 22-24, 2010
Find more information online at www.txarch.org

Registration
Please register online http://www.txarch.org/forms/
annualmeeting/index
Early bird savings until October 7. Registration will go
off-line Oct. 20.
Walk-up registration will be accepted at the conference site
Fri. Oct. 22, 8:00 AM – 7:00 PM & Sat. Oct. 23,
7:00 AM – 10 AM. – Omni Bayfront, Corpus Christi.
October 7 is also the cut off date for banquet tickets.

Book Room (Exhibits and Vendors)
Open Fri. noon – 4:30 PM & Sat. 8 AM – 4 PM
Request table space in the Exhibits/Book Room online with
special form and check.
Cost per table for vendors: $30
Exhibits/Book Room opens
Friday 12:00 PM – 4:30 PM; (10 AM for vendors)
Saturday 8:00 AM – 4:30 PM (Please remove your
materials on Saturday by 5:00 PM.)
Please reserve your table by October 7

Silent Auction Open Fri. 12:00 – 4:30 PM &
Sat. 8:00 AM – 4:00 PM
Enjoy browsing for books and journals to complete your collection; Select unique items that tickle your fancy. We already
have books from Harvey and Mark Kohnitz; and books from
the collection of Ruth Marie. Locally we have a “Segway
through downtown” for two groups. Bring your treasures
to donate to the Silent Auction for the benefit to the TAS
operating budget.

Hotel – Deadline for special rates – October 7; make reservations directly with the hotel at special rate $89, Thurs.,
Fri., and Sat.
Omni Corpus Christi Hotel, 900 North Shoreline Blvd.,
Corpus Christi TX 78401
361 887-1600; 800 843-6664 www.omnihotels.com
Annual Meeting Code 14500809629
(See full Schedule on page 23)

14

✦

Fall 2010

Don’t Miss the
6th Annual CTA
“Careers in Archeology”
Social
Please join us on
Friday, October 22, 2010,
from 8:00-10:00pm
(After the Public Forum)
at the TAS Annual Meeting,
Omni Bayfront Hotel,
Corpus Christi, Texas.
The Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA)
and the Texas Archeological Society (TAS)
have joined forces to provide the students,
TAS members, CTA members, and the general
public opportunities to meet with professional
archeologists and learn about potential
archeology careers and to check out what’s
happening in Texas archeology and cultural
resource management (CRM) around the state.

Cash bar and free
hors d’oeuvres included!!!
(Generously provided by the CTA)
If you have any questions or would like
to sign up to participate in the Social,
please contact Tiffany Osburn
(512) 463-8883
tiffany.osburn@thc.state.tx.us

Not to Be Missed!

Friday Night Public Forum
“Native Peoples of the Texas Coast: Prehistory to Today”
This program was made possible in part with a grant from
Humanities Texas, the state affiliate of the National Endowment for the Humanities.
At 7:00 PM on Friday, October 22
“Native Peoples of the Texas Coast: Prehistory to Today” will
feature talks by Bob Ricklis, Rich Weinstein, and Jose Davila.
Each will relate a specific segment of the history of the people
of the region: Weinstein, “Eight Thousand Years of Indian Occupation along the Central Texas Coast,” Ricklis, “The Native
American Peoples of the Texas Coast during the Colonial Era:
Their Strategies for Cultural Survival in a Rapidly Changing
World” and Davila, “The Apache in NE Mexico and Texas:
Continuity and Change in the 21st Century”
Rich Weinstein
Richard A. Weinstein is a
Vice-President and Senior
Archaeologist at Coastal
Environments, Inc., in Baton
Rouge, Louisiana, where he
has worked since 1975. He
received a BA in Sociology
from Wilkes College (1972)
and an MA in Anthropology from Louisiana State
University (1974). He is
an Honorary Fellow of the
Lower Mississippi Survey,
Peabody Museum, Harvard University, and the Archaeology
Program, Tulane University. Mr. Weinstein specializes in the
prehistory of the Lower Mississippi Valley and the coastal
areas of Louisiana and Texas. His regional research includes
a Guadalupe Bay site in Calhoun County, Texas and two sites
on the lower Lavaca River.

of the Coastal Bend area,
combining archaeological
findings with ethnohistorical evidence gleaned from
archival documents of the
Spanish Colonial period. In
1996, the University of Texas
Press published his book,
The Karankawa Indians of
Texas: An Ecological Study
of Cultural Tradition and
Change. Dr. Ricklis is currently a Senior Archaeologist
in the Austin office of TRC Environmental Corporation.
Jose Davila
Jose Davila is a PhD candidate on Anthropology in the
Universidad Iberoamericana,
Mexico City. His main topics
of research are the continuity, change and identity
patterns of the Native Indian groups in the American
Southwest and the Northern
Mexico. He is a member of
the Permanent Seminar on
Ethnology of the Direction
of Ethnology and Social
Anthropology of the National Institute of Anthropology and
History (INAH); reviewer for the journal Nueva Antropologia;
has presented on anthropology for INAH and at the American
Anthropological Association.

Bob Ricklis
Robert A. Ricklis has spent the past 25 years studying the
archaeology and ethnohistory of the Native peoples of the
Texas Coast. He received his Ph.D. degree from the University
of Texas at Austin, and his doctoral dissertation dealt with the
settlement and subsistence patterns of the Karankawa Indians

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

15

Saturday Banquet—Ships of Discovery
Ships of Discovery, headed by Drs. Toni Carrell and
Donald Keith, has been based at the Corpus Christi Museum of Science and History since 1992. Operating out of
the Museum, they accumulated many geographically and
topically diverse adventures on land and in the sea ranging
from excavating and reconstructing the hull of La Salle’s
ship La Belle, to mapping a British fort in the Turks and
Caicos Islands, and from searching for a ship Columbus
abandoned in Panama to locating dozens of shipwrecks in
Mexican waters. In the Corpus Christi Museum’s conservation lab they teamed up with volunteers and staff to design
and fabricate exhibits, analyze artifacts, and devise new
conservation methods for wood, iron, pewter, and bronze.
For more information visit www.shipsofdiscovery.org.
Since its creation 22 years ago, Ships of Discovery has
worked in a dozen Caribbean and Central American countries
on both terrestrial and underwater sites. They helped create
the Turks and Caicos National Museum 20 years ago and in
the aftermath of Hurricane Ike, worked on Ft. St. George.
See expedition log at www.ftstgeorgeexpedition.blogspot.com
Over the years, Ships of Discovery has worked with people

Toni Carroll and Donald Keith from Ships of Discovery, will
be the featured speakers at the Saturday night banquet.
from all walks of life: museum professionals, archaeologists,
retirees, volunteers, fishermen, and students; and in cooperation with other institutions, government agencies, military
units, and museums, domestic and foreign.

Education Update
Robin Matthews, Education Committee Chairman, reports
that TAS will have an exhibit booth at the Gifted & Talented
Conference in Ft. Worth this November. He will also be giving
a presentation about using “Archeology in the Classroom.”
There will be about 3,000 persons who visit the exhibit booth,
while the presentation will be an hour- long session for about
35 teachers and parents. This is partially funded by a grant
from the Texas Historical Foundation.
This year the Education Committee will be scheduling a
larger workshop for teachers in Hondo and surrounding small
school districts during early spring, 2011. Other teacher workshops are in the planning stages for San Saba, San Angelo,
and San Marcos.
Many thanks to May Schmidt, Neal Stilley, and Paul
Smith for the great workshops they provided for teachers
during Field School. Committee member Beth Stenstrom has
suggested several new topics for workshops for 2011, including GPS and ancient technologies. We will be exploring these
with gusto. I am suggesting some water-oriented activities...
fishing, fish traps, weirs, etc. with perhaps a dip in the creek

16

✦

Fall 2010

In Hondo, Paul Smith gets safely gloved teachers involved
with flintknapping! (Photo courtesy R. Matthews)
and weenie roast after a work-day... teachers only.

The Education Committee still has Gault Site DVD’s
available for $5.00. These are a great introduction to
archeology for grades 4-12 as well as beginning college
anthropology classes.

“Hot, Desolate Place”
Nicholas Linzenmeyer
Shumla, Texas. Approximately fifty miles northwest of
Del Rio, this place is out there. As I was driving there for
the first time I was thinking to myself, “Who in their right
mind would ever live in such a hot, desolate place?” There
were twisted shrubs and all kinds of thorny, prickly things
that went on for miles but absolutely nothing that made me
want to stop my car and look around, let alone stay for any
extended period of time; even the lake looked dry. I had to
stop on the side of US Highway 90 to re-secure my kayak
on the top of my car. As I got out a heat that was simply
oppressive pummeled me. “This is where I’m going to be
living for a month?” Despite my initial reactions to the
place, my experience participating in the Texas State Lower
Pecos Canyonlands Field School this past summer came to
be one of the favorite experiences of my life. I grew to love
this area of the state and the people that I shared it with.

Lower Pecos Field School crew with the author standing
on the back row. Dr. Black is front row, left end. (Photo
courtesy Steve Black)

Our focus during this month was to learn more about
the native American Indians that inhabited this area by
excavating an upland site on a side canyon that feeds into
the Pecos River. Having absolutely no field experience,
all I knew was that Javelina Heights was going to be my

Dr. Black and Maxfield Baker observing cultural stone
alignments. (Photo/N. Linzenmeyer)

home for the next month. The first thing I learned how to
do was to clear a site. Now, I do landscaping, so I have
pulled my share of weeds, but the devilish things we had
to pull at this place were unbelievable. We spent a day or
two clearing all of the tasajillo, dog pear cactus, ocotillo,
lechugilla, and the like from our main site area as well as
from our arms and legs. We had the opportunity to learn
numerous other things while we were out there including using the Total Station, using GPS units to track our
surveys, excavation techniques and methods, keeping an
accurate field journal and field notes, and some of us even
got to throw an atlatl once or twice. From top to bottom
Dr. Steve Black, our fearless leader and the professor
teaching this field school, made sure that we received as
much exposure to as many aspects of archeology as possible. This exposure even extended into our lectures. We
had the amazing opportunity to hear from some of the top
archeologists in Texas and the United States including
Dr. Carolyn Boyd (rock art), Dr. Phil Dering (paleoethnobotany), Elton Prewitt (lithic technologies), Dr. Paul
Smith (flintknapping), Mark Willis (aerial photography),
Dr. Ken Brown (wooden artifacts), Dr. Charles Frederick
(geoarcheology), Dan Potter (bedrock mortars), and Dr.
Continued on page 18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

17

Lower Pecos Field School
Continued from page 17

Alston Toms, among others. To be able to sit at the feet of
such renown professionals, people that I have read about
in my textbooks, people whom, to a youngster like myself, are pretty much famous… I believe I learned more
in that month with the likes of these people than I have
in the rest of my years in college combined!
With Dr. Black and a supporting cast such as he had
there, the learning never ceased. Dr. Prewitt was an amazing integral part of helping us to identify our stone artifacts
that were found all around the Shumla ranch ranging in
dates from late Archaic to late Paleo-Indian. The site proper
however was, in the end, believed to be late Archaic, determined from the numerous Perdiz points that were found
among what were perceived as structural stone alignments.
Dr. Charles Frederick took large part in identifying the
geological processes that have been taking place at the site
in the recent past (the last few thousand years or so) and, in
doing so, helped us realize how unreliable dates from such
a dynamic landscape can be. Such a lesson could not have
come at a more appropriate time; just days after Dr. Frederick left, Mother Nature humored our ideas of a dynamic
landscape by dumping a foot of water on us within a five
day period. This place averages a foot of rain a year, which
means we got a year’s worth of rain in just five days! The
last time this area received that much rain was in the flood
of 1954! The Rio Grande was up almost thirty feet, which,
spectacular as it was, turned out to be unfortunate because
the deluge prevented us from being able to visit the famous
Eagle Cave and Bonfire Shelter… I guess we will just have
to go back another time.
The Texas State Field School at Shumla this past summer was my first experience in field archeology, and as I
was driving out there I was feeling less and less confident
that this experience would be enjoyable. Many of us shared
these feelings as we arrived. Blazing hot and no direction
yet, we were definitely wondering how this month would
turn out. Of course, for those of you who are veterans at
these things, you know that it turned out to be one of the
most amazing experiences for all of us. Personally, I learned
so much, got to meet so many people including people who
in my mind are famous, I gained vitally important experience in the field, and I made some pretty great friends along

18

✦

Fall 2010

The flood swollen Rio Grande during the summer of 2010.
(Photo/N.Linzenmeyer)

the way. All of this happened in that “hot, desolate place”
and came to be one of the best months of my life… just
behind the month I got married (in case my wife reads this).

For Your
Consideration
News from Nick Morgan, Brownie Roberts, and
Barth Robbins: The Nominating Committee proudly
offers the following group of nominees to be elected
to various positions for the Texas Archeological
Society. The election will be held at the Annual
Meeting in Corpus Christi.
President Elect: Bryan Jameson
Publications Editor Elect: Tamra Walter
Newsletter Editor: Jonelle Miller-Chapman
Regional Director, Region 3: TBA
Regional Director, Region 6: Nelson Marek
Regional Directors, Region 9: May and
Jim Schmidt
Regional Director, Region 10: Christine Buckstead
Nomination Committee Chair for 2011: Kathy
Grimmett

New on Texas Beyond History
Nuestra Señora de los Dolores de los Ais:
Spanish Mission on the Camino Real
www.texasbeyondhistory.net/dolores

investigations at the site as well as archival research
This 11-section online exhibit tells the story of Mission
and oral history projects. For instance, Jeff Williams of
Dolores, an 18th-century Spanish outpost along the Camino
SFA, created a GIS (Geographic Information System) to
Real de los Tejas on the eastern frontier of Spanish Texas. The
incorporate all previous and new excavation information
mission attracted few Ais Indians for whom it was built, but
with the current physical landscape. The exhibit features
served as the focal point of a successful wilderness settlement
graphics by Williams that use color infrared aerial
from 1721-1773. Here the resident Spanish priests, soldiers
photographs and archaeological data to highlight the
and settlers interacted peacefully with many local Indians, as
surviving evidence including traces of the Camino Real
well as the European and native peoples who traveled along
linking Mission Dolores with the wider Spanish Colonial
El Camino Real including French traders. There were few
world. Plans are in the works to build a “simulation” of the
places in the American colonies where different European
Spanish mission and its environs based on archaeological
and indigenous peoples managed to get along with one
evidence and historical research.
another. This example of accommodation and acceptance of
Avery and Steve Black of Texas State University,
differences has relevance for our society today.
San Marcos are the primary authors and creators of the
Archaeologically, the story of the search for Mission
online exhibit, assisted by a host of other researchers and
Dolores is one of over a decade of frustration and persisphotographers. Please see the Credits and Sources section
tence. The citizens of San Augustine always knew just where
of the exhibit for full credits and note that most of the
it was—on top of Mission Hill—and beginning in the early
archaeological reports detailing work at the site can be
1960s they kept asking archaeologists and historians from
downloaded in PDF format. This public education project
Austin to come take a look. But Dee Ann Story, Ed Jelks,
was underwritten by the National Park Service and Stephen
and others found little beyond a few scattered Spanish CoF. Austin University.
lonial artifacts. Even Kathleen Gilmore, a veteran of finding
lost Spanish sites, could find nothing on
Mission Hill. Finally, in 1976, a new
professor at Stephen F. Austin, Jim
Corbin, confirmed Gilmore’s suspicions
about “Mission Impossible.” The mission hadn’t been built on top of the hill
and most of what had still existed in the
1930s was destroyed when State Highway 147 was built. Yet he also found
surviving evidence adjacent to the highway including jacal wall foundations,
trash pits, a hand-dug well, and plenty
of Spanish, French, and Indian artifacts.
Mission Dolores had been found.
In recent years Dr. George
Avery of Stephen F. Austin State
University (SFA), has worked with
Mission Dolores, new on Texas Beyond History.
other researchers to carry out new

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

19

Glen Evans Leaves a Legacy
Jan. 22, 1911–July 14, 2010

Glen L. Evans, often referred to as the “Dean of Texas
Paleontology” and “The Father of Geoarchaeology,” died
peacefully July 14, 2010, attended by his two daughters. His
was barely short of making 100 years on this planet, but the
imprint of his life here endures.
Born in Clay County, Texas, on January 22nd, 1911, to
Clifford and Deana Evans, he spent his boyhood on the family farm working fields and livestock while making as many
forays as possible to the banks of the Little Wichita River,
fishing pole in hand. His inborn gifts of abundant curiosity, keen observation and memory for detail began to gather
strength and fodder which would, for the rest of his life, pour
out to others in oral stories of natural history holding audiences in rapt attention.
Long before he learned the word “geology,” Glen knew
his life’s studies would be about the earth. Every feature of
the land was of interest as was every growing thing upon it,
the activities of the sky, and creatures of all descriptions, especially wild ones. He read every book and magazine he found
at home as well as everything loaned or gifted from folks who
began recognizing, early on, that this boy was someone apart,
avid for knowledge.
The effects of the Great Depression delayed Glen’s long
held desire for a college education, but by saving carefully the
meager proceeds from years of heavy labor, by 1934 he had
rebuilt sufficient funds to depart Clay County for the University of Texas in Austin. There, on a food budget of 4 bits a day,
he began to acquire a foundation of knowledge upon which
he would continue to build as his native inquisitiveness ran
ahead of his studies. Geology was both his passion and focus,
but when Glen Evans focused on one thing, related points of
interest were simultaneously absorbed.
A fellow student in freshman English class, Anna Julia
Adams, daughter of two teachers, already knew her English.
Long years after their marriage, Glen’s eyes twinkled when
telling the story of Julia expunging his youthful colloquialisms, buffing out his rougher edges and turning him into a
presentable package.
In the early days of his professional career, Glen worked
as a field geologist with the Bureau of Economic Geology at
UT. This was the work which fueled his soul, for it entailed
weeks in the field walking the land, reading earth signs,
sleeping beneath the vast star-filled skies. Some of his richest
stories came from months spent in the Big Bend area, often
in the company of Texas Ranger Ray Miller.

20

✦

Fall 2010

Glen Evans relaxing with his friends in Dee Ann Story’s
garden. L to R Michael Collins, Jeremiah Epstein, Curtis
Tunnell, Jack Hughes, Ernie Lundelius, Ed Jelks ,
Dee Ann Story, Glen Evans.
An amateur photographer with an artist’s eye, Glen’s
nature photography captured much of the lands he saw
throughout his lifetime. These pictures continue to bring his
visions of beauty and interest to his family and friends. The
Texas Memorial Museum houses, or did house in the past,
great numbers of collections amassed from Glen’s years in
the field. Fossils, one of the most notable being that of a saber
toothed tiger found in the Friesenhahn Cave; minerals and
crystals; meteorites, some from the Odessa Meteor Crater
where Glen was the geologist in charge of exploration of the
crater; arrowheads and flint tools; artifacts such as pottery,
musket balls, gunflints and such, some from the site at Fort St.
Louis; the Paul T. Seashore basket collection, a raven’s nest
made chiefly from barbed wire; and the list goes on.
In 1953, Glen joined the geology staff at Louisiana Land
and Exploration, an oil and minerals company based in New
Orleans. That began a series of relocations which took him
from Austin, to Midland, to Calgary, and back to Midland.
Shortly after returning to Midland, Glen lost his Julia to
cancer in 1971. As the new Director of the Minerals Division
of LL&E, Glen relocated once again, this time to Denver,
Colorado, where he retired some years later.
Late in 1974, Glen married Darla Ward Kirkpatrick. His
entire family found her to be a delight and were especially
pleased by her ability to make him laugh. Early in 1975, Glen
Continued on page 21

and Darla moved again, for what would be for Glen the final
time, returning to Austin, Texas, where together they created
a wonderful life. They were able to travel, read, visit with
old friends and spoil their families when they came to visit.
During these years Glen busied himself with compiling a
small book of nature stories entitled WILDNESS AT RISK,
which Darla typed and retyped about a million times, and
to which she added her charming artist’s illustrations. Glen
also contributed the introduction to TEXAS IN BLOOM
with a foreword by Lady Bird Johnson, along with various
other publications.
Glen was preceded in death by his wife, Julia, his father
and mother, two brothers, Chester and Carl, and two sisters,

Josephine Staton and Mattie Moore. He is survived by wife
Darla, daughters Carolyn Boyd and Dorothy Newcomb, sister
Mary Royer of Henrietta, four grandchildren, and a number of
nieces and a nephew. More information about Glen’s professional accomplishments can be accessed at www.utexas.edu/
tmm/exhibits/glen_evans/.
A memorial service for family, friends, and colleagues
was held the evening of Friday, August 6th, at the Lady Bird
Johnson Wildflower Center, with a reception following. The
family suggests memorials to Hospice at Buckner Villas,
Austin; The Nature Conservancy; Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center; Save Our Springs; or a charity of your choice.
Reprinted from the Austin American-Statesman.

In Memory of Edward A. Vogt
For the best part of 50 years, Ed Vogt was an involved,
conscientious avocational archaeologist who donated thousands of hours of his time excavating on many sites to further
the cause of archaeology in Texas. He was an active member
of the Texas Archaeological Society and a founding member
of STAA (Southern Texas Archaeological Association). He
worked with CoBALT (Coastal Bend Archaeological Logistics Team), a group of THC Stewards and experienced
avocational archaeologists who support landowners with
archaeological research.
Everyone who worked with Ed remembers his wonderful down-to-earth approach to archaeology. Recognizing his
enthusiasm, persistence, and love for digging, his co-workers
fondly referred to him as “The Mole”. Like many early archaeologists, he maintained a private collection of artifacts
when no official repository was available for the sites in
question. Through the years, Ed carefully recorded these sites
and artifacts. After he passed away, Ed’s family donated his
collection to the Museum of the Coastal Bend in Victoria. We
thank his wife, Maxine, for this generous gift.
As a member of CoBALT, Ed worked with the archaeological collections curated at the MCB in Victoria. The lab
work is done in open space for the benefit of museum visitors
who can observe and ask questions. MCB offers a variety
of archaeological exhibits created by members of CoBALT
displaying as many local artifacts as possible.
CoBALT has just completed the task of curating Ed’s
collection and organizing the documentation into a form
compatible with other collections housed at the Museum. Ed’s
files and artifacts will be made available for scientific research
under control of the Museum of the Coastal Bend. We believe
Ed would be pleased to see the results of his work become a
part of the educational mission of the Victoria MCB.

In memory of a good friend and colleague, members
of the CoBALT team are making a contribution to the TAS
Donors’ Fund in Ed’s name. He will always be remembered
for his deep devotion to archaeology.

Ed Vogt digging deep at 41VT141.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

21

New Members !
Kelly A. Allen & Family
Amber Anderson
Lyn Belisle
Claire Burleson
Petrie & Esmeralda Carroll
Mary Chipley
Allan Cobb
Tracy Connell
Jackie Covington
Kristin Croyle
Jim & Sharon Earles
Suzanne & Santiago Feliciano
Jesus A. Figueroa
Anna Garcia & Family
Joshua Gibbs
Bryan Goad
Marco Govea & Abby Brown
Terry Graham & Family
Steve & Barbara Green
Joe Hall
Lisa Hatman
Tom & Betsy Hay
Nathan & Steve Hays
Allie Herrmann
Martha Hix & Family

Michael Hughes
Maria Lagorio
Kimberly Leon
Kole Lovett & Sally Araceli
Katherine Lozano
Francisco Marcos-Marin
Kelly, Josh & Alyssa Marshall
Nicole Martel & Jonathan
Fred Meek
Tommie R. Meier
John Milford
Amy Patton
Edward Rendon
Caitlin Riewe
LaVerne Roberson
Anna Schautteet & Family
Melissa Seely
Richard Stapleton
Lara Stonecifer & Family
Willow Walaszek
Jeffrey Whorton & Family
Richard & Eilene Wright
Nicole Yzaguirre

Announcing the long awaited biography of
the most influential native born
Texan/Tejano leader of 19th century Texas

Donors Fund Contributions
A generous donation to the Native
American Field School Scholarship
Fund has been received from the
Council of Texas Archeologists
Donations to the Donors Fund in
memory of Kathleen Gilmore
have been received from
Gerald & Sherry Humphreys
Timothy K. Perttula
Texas Historical Foundation
A generous donation to the Donor’s
Fund has been received from the
CoBALT Group, Victoria, TX, in
memory of Edward A. Vogt
Endowment Fund Contributions
The following members have
made contributions to the TAS
Endowment Fund
Lance Bussard
Lyndsay DiPietro

Champagne Hor de oeuvres Music
RSVP 210 226 4801

José Antonio Xavarro
In Search of the American Dream
in Nineteenth Century Texas
by David McDonald
You are invited to celebrate the
Navarro Biography Book Launch
Saturday, October 16, 2010
2: 00 pm 4: 00 pm
Neiman Marcus La Cantera
Introductions 2:15 pm

22

✦

Fall 2010

A product of a lifetime of research by author David
McDonald. More than just a political biography;
a story of the American Dream

Membership in TAS
I agree to abide by all terms and conditions of the TAS Bylaws and all Federal and State antiquities laws or
regulations. Completion of this membership form and payment of dues indicates the member’s agreement
with the goals and mission of the Texas Archeological Society.
PLEASE PRINT: __ New membership

__ Renew membership

Year ______ TAS operates on a calendar year.

Name __________________________________________________________ E-mail____________________________
Address ________________________________________________________ Telephone _______________________
City _______________________________ State _______ Zip ____________ Texas County____________________
Please check membership level desired.
Individual: $60.00
Family: $70.00
Student to age 25 $40.00
Association/Society: $55.00

Contributing: $100.00
Supporting: $250.00
Patron: $500.00
Institution: $100.00 Libraries, Universities &
Museums

BUSINESS LEVELS
Plainview: $250
Folsom: $500.00
Clovis: $1000.00

Make checks payable to “TAS” or Texas Archeological Society
DUES Enclosed
$________________
If you wish to renew by credit card, please visit our web site at www.txarch.org
(out of USA add $20 postage)
Please mail to:
Texas Archeological Society
Center for Archaeological Research
One UTSA Circle
San Antonio, TX 78249-0658

Optional Contributions
Donor’s Fund (for research & publication)

$________________

Endowment Fund (for program support)

$________________

Other Donation _________________________

$________________

TOTAL ENCLOSED

$________________

Schedule for TAS Annual Meeting 2010
Corpus Christi
Thursday, Oct. 21

Saturday Oct. 23

Early arrivals (conference rate begins at the Omni Bayfront)

7:00AM – 10:00 AM Registration
8:00 – 4:00 Book Room and Silent Auction (4:30 check out)
8:00 – 12:00 Papers, Symposia, Round table & posters*
12:00 – 1:30 Box Lunch
12:30 – 1:30 TAS Annual Meeting – Election, Budget
approval & Certificates
1:30 – 4:30 Papers, Symposia, Round tables & posters*
4:30 Check out for Auction items
6:00 – Social
7:00 – Banquet: speakers Toni Carrell and Don Keith, Ships
of Discovery

Friday, Oct. 22
8:00 AM – 7:00 PM - Registration
9:00 – 12:00 Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Fall
Business Meeting
10:30 – 12:00 Special Tour at Corpus Christi Museum with
Director Rick Stryker
12 – 4:30 Book Room (exhibits and vendors) and Silent
Auction (set up 10-12)
12:00 – TAS Executive Committee
1:00 – 2:00 Texas Archeological Stewardship Network, Fall
Meeting
2:15 – 3:15 TAS Board meeting
3:30 – 5:30 Round Table: Archeology without Borders
7:00 – Public Forum – “Native Peoples of the Texas Coast:
Prehistory to Today”
8:00 – 10:00 Identification of artifacts and career social

Sunday Oct. 24
7:00 Executive Committee
8:00 NEW TAS Board meeting
9:00 Papers*
* schedule will be posted online by October 1

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

23

NONPROFIT ORG.
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
AUSTIN, TEXAS
PERMIT NO. 1187

Texas Archeological Society
CAR at UTSA
One UTSA Circle
San Antonio, Texas 78249-0658

ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED

Make Plans Now for the Society for Historical
Archaeology Annual Conference
2011 January 5–8

Kick Up Your Heels in Austin, Texas!!
The Austin Site Committee extends a warm and enthusiastic
invitation to members of the TAS to join us this coming January
for the 2011 SHA Annual Meeting! The conference will be held
downtown at the Hilton Austin, just a few blocks from the city’s
famous 6th Street.
The 2011 conference promises to be a memorable one. Come
join us for the Public Archaeology Event, Crossroads of Texas History: Archaeology Expo, where you can view exhibits and learn
how to implement the best practices in public education. The SHA
Technologies Committee will offer, for the first time ever, an SHA
tech expo featuring the latest gadgets for use in archaeological
research, including the display of an ROV (remotely operated
vehicle). Visit the Archaeology Marketplace and bid on original
artwork, ethnographic objects, etc., during our Silent Auction.
We’ll have a Texas Fiesta Buffet on Thursday evening in honor
of the life and career of the late Dr. Kathleen Gilmore at the Bob
Bullock Texas State History Museum, where attendees can peruse
all three floors of the museum at their leisure. On Friday evening
following the SHA Awards Banquet there’ll be live music by The
Pictures Band, one of Austin’s most popular cover bands! These
and other events, plus a fantastic line-up of scholarly symposia,
forums, and posters will be at SHA 2011!

Conference registration begins online on October 1st. For
more information, check out the SHA 2011 website at http://
www.sha.org/about/conferences/2011.cfm, and follow us on Facebook and Twitter. The Preliminary Program will be posted on the
website on September 15th.
For information on volunteering at SHA 2011 (with a waiver
of the registration fee), contact Nedra Lee at nedralee@mail.
utexas.edu.
For all other questions, including exhibitor booth information, please contact the 2011 Conference Co-chairs: Maria
Franklin (mfranklin@mail.utexas.edu) and Jim Bruseth (Jim.
Bruseth@thc.state.tx.us).

