The Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society

Volume 54, Number 2

Spring 2010

Archaeology Along the Hondo
The 2010 Texas Archeological Society Field School
Thomas R. Hester, Principal Investigator

Introduction
In 1866, northern Medina County was a wilderness,
sparsely settled, and visited often by Native American
raiding parties. Although communities like Castroville and
D’Hanis were major settlements; the rough canyons of the
Balcones Escarpment were little used. To the west, on Seco
Creek, some ranches had been established. Three young
men, all used to retrieving strayed cattle, came from these
ranches. August Rothe, at 19, was the oldest; George Miller, 16 and Hubert Weynand, 12, set out to the east toward
Hondo Creek on January 27, 1866 (some accounts put this
as spring 1865). They set up camp atop a bluff of Hondo
Creek and started hunting the scattered cattle. On the third
morning at the camp, Indians (tribal link unknown) came
to the creek below to water their horses. Miller reportedly
looked over the bluff edge, dislodged some rocks and
called attention to their camp. The boys tried to escape,
as they were very lightly armed, but the raiders—perhaps
5 men—were mounted and soon killed Miller, captured
Weynand (never seen again), and only Rothe was able to
escape and get back to a ranch a few days later, with only
a blow from a bow to the back of his neck.
Participants in the 2010 field school will see a historical marker on the “Cow Camp Massacre” just across the
highway from the entrance to the Calvert’s Eagle Bluff
Ranch. It is not clear if the “massacre” described above
took place on the bluff where we will be doing research,
or perhaps it was a few miles further downstream.

Eagle Bluff as seen from the Calvert Site.

Eagle Bluff (41ME147)
I first learned of the “Calvert Site” 10 years ago, when
talking with a local collector who had dug at the site. Later,
Dr. William Calvert, son of the then-landowner, showed me
the site, where we could see someone had been recently
digging. We observed the depth of the digging, and noted
discarded Pedernales point fragments.
A longtime friend of Dr. Calvert, Ron Ralph spent a
number of days at the Calvert Ranch in 2005. Ron submitted a TexSite Site Survey form in May 2005, and that is
when the site number, 41ME147, was assigned. While I
Continued on page 3

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
ETHICS
• Members of TAS must abide by all terms and
conditions of the TAS bylaws and all Federal
and State antiquities laws or regulations.
• TAS does not condone the practice of buying
or selling artifacts for commercial purposes.
• TAS does not condone the disregard of proper
archeological field techniques or the willful
destruction or distortion of archeological data.

Hondo & Calvert Site Have Much to Offer . . . . . . . . 7

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Joe D. Rogers, President
Britt Bousman, President Elect
Grant Hall, Immediate Past-President
Paula Vastine-Norman, Secretary
Marybeth Tomka, Treasurer
Timothy K. Perttula, Publications Editor
Jonelle Miller-Chapman, Newsletter Editor

201 Lithics Academy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR: Pam Wheat-Stranahan
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR: Laura Beavers

TAS Donations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

Send all membership inquiries, changes of address
and other business to the TAS Business Office:
Texas Archeological Society
Center for Archaeological Research
One UTSA Circle
San Antonio, Texas 78249-0658
(210) 458-4393
FAX (210) 458-4870 (call first)
tasinquiries@txarch.org
http://www.txarch.org

So Much in One Weekend! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

Office hours are Tuesday and Thursday from
9 A.M. to 2 P.M. During other hours please leave a
message on the answering machine.
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
Quarterly Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society
Editor: Jonelle Miller-Chapman
11201 Pickfair Dr.
Austin, TX 78750-2525
(512)257-0618
millerjo@austin.rr.com
Opinions, unless otherwise stated, are those of the
editor and contributors and do not necessarily reflect
the policies of the Society.
COPYRIGHT © 2010 by Texas Archeological Society
All rights reserved. ISSN 0082-2949
Printed at Morgan Printing in Austin, Texas

Ellen Sue Turner and Thomas R. Hester give permission
to the Texas Archeological Society to use a reproduced
image of the Marshall point, p. 150, in A Field Guide to
Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians, 2nd ed., as part of the TAS
logo. Illustration by Kathy Roemer.

2

✦

Inside

Spring 2010

Youth Group Changes for 2010 Field School . . . . . . 8
Youth Group Attendance at Field Schools . . . . . . . . . 9
Education Committee Funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
The McSween Site . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
TAS Diversity Scholarship. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Sul Ross Field School . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Call for Papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Lower Pecos Canyonlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
TAM 2010 Calendar Deadline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Recently Departed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

Newsletter Deadlines
Spring, March 1, Summer, May 24,
Fall, August 30, Winter, December 3

Calendar
April 14–18—SAA Annual Meeting, St. Louis
May 16–June 4—Field Methods in Rock Art, SHUMLA
May 24–28—NPS Archaeological Prospection Workshop,
North Dakota
June 12–19—TAS Field School, Hondo
October 22–24—TAS Annual Meeting, Corpus Christi

2010 TAS Board Meetings
April 17, Temple
June 13, Hondo
September 25, San Antonio
October 22, 23, 24, Corpus Christi
All members are welcome to attend
TAS Board Meetings

Archaeology along the Hondo
Continued from page 1

had casually referred to the site as the “Calvert Site,” it was
designated “Eagle Bluff” by Ron and Dr. Calvert.
In 2006-2007, the Southern Texas Archaeological
Association (STAA) conducted some research at Eagle
Bluff. There was concern about large burned rock features
eroding out of the steep bluff. One of these was isolated,
excavated with great care, and radiocarbon dated by Beta
Analytic at 5820+/50 B.P. Efforts were made to map the
site, though Total Data Station (TDS) data were subsequently found to be unusable. Units with Toyah, Scallorn,
and other Late Prehistoric materials were initiated atop the
bluff. Some clean up of the backdirt from the collector’s
dig area was also accomplished.

Previous Archaeology in this Area
Twenty years ago, the 1990 Texas Archeological Society Field School (TASFS) and more than 500 participants
took over the town of Utopia in the picturesque Sabinal
Canyon roughly 20 miles due west of the Eagle Bluff site.
Very important research was done at three prehistoric sites
(Smith, Blue Hole, La Jita), historic site excavations and
studies at several sites, and a broad ranging survey that
added many new sites to the files on Uvalde and Bandera
Counties. Indeed, a 1990 documentation of 41BN125, near
Vanderpool, is the only scientific record of a site completely eradicated by mechanized pay-digs over the last
couple of years. The MA theses, papers in the Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society (BTAS) and a monograph
on the Historic sites are among the scholarly contributions
of the 1990 TASFS.
Increasingly, a number of sites along the Southwestern Edwards Plateau have been excavated and reported in
one form or another. I’ve already noted La Jita (41UV21),
Smith (41UV132), and Blue Hole (41UV159). Like
41ME147, all are multi-component sites, but we expect
41ME147 to go back earlier in time than those sites. Two
sites with important data on the regional Late Prehistoric
are Mingo (41BN101) and Rainey (41BN33); with many
radiocarbon dates in the upper end of the Sabinal Canyon.
Similarly, 21 miles to the east are sites 41BN63 (a
burned rock midden/terrace site; Middle and Late Archaic)
and 41ME29 (a Middle to Late Archaic terrace site). To
the southeast, about 16 miles is 41ME132 (Mangold site),

with cultural remains that go back to Folsom or even Clovis
times but dominated by archaic materials. Unfortunately,
the major excavations in the 1990s were not scientific. The
STAA dug remnants of the site in 2004.
To the southwest, about 24 miles, is the Batot-Hooker
site (41ME34), with three major areas. Overlooking the
floodplain was a poorly preserved Late Archaic component, and a well-preserved Toyah component. On the
lowest terrace, deposits more than 1.5 meters deep yielded
a sequence of Early and Middle Archaic artifacts, and
radiocarbon dates of 4760-5730 B.P.

The 2010 TAS FS at Eagle Bluff
From June 12 to June 19, 2010, the TASFS
returns to the Balcones Canyonlands.

Site 41ME147 (the Eagle Bluff site) lies along Hondo
Creek, 7 miles south of the hamlet of Tarpley on FM462.
This is a large terrace site, sitting atop and with a large
bluff on the north side of the creek. It has a culture history
that goes back to Paleoindian times, and that continues
into the Late Prehistoric (and possibly Historic) times.
Collectors have found large numbers of chipped stone
artifacts some years ago, and the most recent dig areas
are still visible. The collector’s work also indicated that
faunal preservation is good and that is unusual for sites
in this region. Just last month, TAS member and paleobotanist Leslie Bush collected some soil samples from
the collector-pit profile. Her flotation techniques and
analysis led to the identification of wood charcoal of live
oak, nutshells probably linked to Juglandaccae (pecans,
walnuts) and a fragment of charred Allium (wild onion).
In the collector’s materials are several conch shell artifacts from the Texas Gulf Coast (Fig.1) and a potsherd
(Fig.2) identified by Harry J. Shafer as Caddo. There
are also Toyah Phase bone-tempered sherds at the site.
STAA excavators found a tiny piece of obsidian, chemically sourced to Cerro del Medio which is in the Jemez
Mountains of northern New Mexico.
The cultural sequence is represented, in terms of
controlled STAA excavations, by a deeply buried burned
Continued on page 4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

3

Archaeology along the Hondo
Continued from page 3

(Pedernales, Kinney, Montell, Langtry, Ensor [see Figs.3,
4, 5a.], and in deeper contacts Early Archaic forms such
as Uvalde and Andice (Fig.5b). And we know from the
collector’s digs that burned rock features (earth ovens and
hearths) are to be expected, as are, of course, the burned
rock features exposed along the bluff face (Figs. 6, 7).

Figure 1. Shell pendant.

Figure 3.

Figure 2. Potsherd.

rock feature of Early Archaic times, and atop the bluff,
by Perdiz points, bone tempered pottery, and some Late
Archaic material. We believe a Toyah Phase component is
located on the west edge of the site.
Based on diagnostics found by the collector, Late
Paleo-Indian Angostura points are to be expected, as
well as a wide array of Middle and Late Archaic styles

4

✦

Spring 2010

Figure 4.

What are we to do faced with a big, deep site, with
indications of high densities of artifacts, features, fauna,
and archaeobotanical remains? For careful excavation of

Figure 5a. (left) and 5b. (right)

Figure 7.

Figure 6.

specific areas of the site, we will employ several approaches. For example, a large block excavation will be opened
in the floor of one of the large collector pits. Materials
from the surface down to more than a meter have been
removed. However unfortunate its origin, we will use this
opportunity to look for earlier Archaic and Paleo-Indian
occupations during the field school. We will also explore
the Toyah Phase deposits at the west end of the site (supervised by Harry J. Shafer), where bison bone and other
materials were found when utilities were installed for the
landowner’s house. Other excavations will be opened and
investigated. This will be based on the number of participants. But, in all, there will have to be a focus on maximum
data recovery of material culture, such as animal bones and
organic materials.
Leslie Bush will help develop and implement a sampling strategy for the various excavations to insure paleobotanical recovery. Since we are still in the planning stages,
there will doubtless be other experts involved. There will

be more field school opportunities that will arise. If you
want to move dirt quickly and check the screens for artifacts, there is always the very large mound of collector
backdirt which needs to be processed!
There will be other elements to the field school in addition to the work at 41ME147. There will be site survey
activities, in which site recording can be learned. There
will be a Historic excavation at a locale just a few blocks
north of Highway 90 in downtown old Castroville. Lynn
Yakubik will coordinate this, and one thing that we know
to expect is material dumped, discarded or burned by
Federal troops—likely done at the time they were forced
to surrender by Confederate forces in 1861. But you never
know what else will be there, in the central part of a town
occupied since 1844!
I will add in closing that the Historic site and site
41ME147 are extensively shaded, with a running creek at
the latter, and cold beer in Castroville. We shall not suffer.

In Preparation
In May, a volume of reprinted and original papers will
be issued. Price per copy is not yet certain. It is designed
to help participants know what they are likely to find, and
what to think about it when finds are made!
It is roughly based on “readers’ that I have used in
teaching, but I will keep it less expensive. Introduction to
the Archaeology of the Southwestern Edwards Plateau.
By Thomas R. Hester. Seco Creek Publications, 2010.
Order in advance through secocreek@swtexas.net. Copies
will also be available at the field school.
Continued on page 6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

5

Archaeology along the Hondo
Continued from page 5

And some very valuable insights into the local archaeology can be found on Texas Beyond History, such as the
Kincaid site near Sabinal and the Woodrow Head site on
the Dry Frio River, both in Uvalde County. There is a lot of
other material in various sections of that extremely important
resource. I am also working on a “deal” with the publisher
to have discounted copies of Field Methods in Archaeology (Hester, Shafer, Feder) at the field school camp. This is
a new printing by Left Coast Press that came out in 2009.

Closing Observations
We all hope, as professional or avocational archaeologists, that any site we investigate is going to be something
special… something that answers questions, clarifies chronologies, defines dietary patterns, and generally shines a
60 watt bulb on the shadowy mysteries of Texas prehistory.
Without being overconfident, and basing these predictions
on cooperative June rain patterns, I know that the excavations at Eagle Bluff will do all of these things, and more.
There is now a sizable, though uneven, database from
excavated sites in this geographic area. Maybe we fill in
some voids from these other sites, or likely, they help us to
better integrate the findings at Eagle Bluff. The questions
will remain about regional prehistory long after Eagle Bluff
is backfilled. The late Prof. T.N. Campbell at UT-Austin
was fond of telling his students that “…if archaeologists
were honest, rather than saying in the conclusion of a site
report, that ‘with more data, many of these questions will

Portion of Hondo City Park showing trees
and covered picnic area in the back.
(Photo/C.Spock)

6

✦

Spring 2010

be answered.’ Instead, they should say, “…with more data,
we will only be more confused.”
But Eagle Bluff and the upcoming TAS efforts at the
site have the potential to ease some of our acknowledged
confusion! For example, we know that it is a thick, deeply
buried terrace deposit. That geomorphological reality is
very unusual for the southwestern Edwards Plateau. We
hope that the deep deposits will allow us to separate distinct cultural episodes and events, unlike some of the sites
in the area (Blue Hole, La Jita, Smith, Batot-Hooker, and
others) that are rarely over a meter thick and in many cases,
the cultural remains greatly compressed. In particular, we
will be oriented toward getting new and more precise data
on the Early Archaic…its cooking pits, archaeobotanical
remains, more radiocarbon dates, and better views of the
typologies. If Tlaloc is willing, and we are spared heavy
rain, then we should be able to go even deeper into PaleoIndian deposits. We will excavate areas on top of the bluff
that will put the later Archaic and the Late Prehistoric
into proper context; we know the evidence is there, in
abundance, but the collector’s pits brought forth lots of
points—and there is much more than that to learn. Our
work will provide paleobotanical data, faunal remains, and
doubtless other indications of trade in addition to the conch
and obsidian that have already been noted.
There is much to be learned from excavations at Eagle
Bluff. I am excited about the possibilities and certainly looking forward to working with you. Look for me under the
best shade tree, trying to look like I know what is going on.

Calling All Members!
Hondo & Calvert Site Have Much to Offer
TAS members are invited to attend 2010 Field School at
a scenic and important hill country archeological site, coupled
with a fine campground located in beautiful Medina County
near the friendly city of Hondo about 40 miles west of San
Antonio. The primary Field School site is about 19 miles north
of the city. We will camp at the Medina County Fairgrounds
and we have a HUGE livestock barn at our disposal where
we will have our programs, eat our meals and socialize. Our
laboratory will also be located in the building.
Our campground is less than three miles from downtown
Hondo on FM 462. From U.S. Highway 90, take the Ave M/
FM462 exit north and continue until reaching the fairground
that is adjacent to the Hondo City Park which has a kid’s playground. The Field School will be located at the Calvert Site,
approximately 16 miles north of our campground on FM 462.
As mentioned in the Winter Newsletter, the distinguished
Dr. Tom Hester will be our Principal Investigator at the
Calvert Site. There will be an opportunity for some historic
archeology in Castroville plus some site testing to be done in
the Bandera Falls region. The Calvert Site is located on the
banks of Hondo Creek and, besides the archeology; the view
along the creek is quite scenic.
Highway 90 offers motels, restaurants and fast food places as well as shopping as it passes through Hondo. Lodging
can be secured at a new Best Western, 830-426-4466, Executive Inn, 830-426-2535 and America’s Best Value Inn, 830426-3031. All are located on Hwy 90. For those with RVs,
there is the Quiet Texas RV Park, 830-931-5777. This park is
about 4.5 mi. from the campground and offers Wi-Fi. There

Inside the really huge Livestock barn. (Photo/C.Spock)
is also the Ramblin’ Wreck RV site, 830-426-3882 which is
about 1.5 miles from the campground. A third RV Park is the
Countryside, along Hwy 90 and the railroad, 830-426-5666.
The city of Hondo has provided us with hot water showers
that are located next to the municipal airport, about one mile
from the campground. There are 12 shower points, six for each
gender. Cell phone service from the campground is very good
and for emergencies, the county sheriff’s office is 820-9314020. More information on what Hondo has to offer can be
found by visiting the Chamber of Commerce website, www.
hondochamber.com. Also, be sure and check out the TAS website, www.txarch.org for more information about this and past
Field Schools. Be sure your membership is up to date so you
can participate in all this outstanding Field School has to offer!

Outside the Livestock Barn, our central gathering area.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

7

Youth Group Changes for the 2010 Field School
Douglas K. Boyd

TAS, we have a problem. Over the past few years,
the youth group has become a victim of its own success,
and we need to take action to fix it. The problems are
simple—the numbers of kids have grown too large while
the number of qualified adults willing to help out is too
low. We generally have plenty of adults who help out,
but we usually only have a handful who have enough archeological experience to serve as crew chiefs and teach
archeology. The result of this imbalance is that the overall
quality of the youth program has dropped somewhat.
What has suffered is our ability to sponsor a fun-filled
educational experience and still provide lots of one-onone communication and close supervision.
Part of the problem has been the success we have had
in promoting the youth group in the local communities
where we have field school. Last year at Perrtyon, for
example, we had too many kids digging in too few units,
but didn’t have enough knowledgeable adult supervisors
to open more units and spread out the kids. On several
days we had more than 70 kids and 25 adults, with never
more than 10 adults with any significant archeological
experience. I ended up spending almost all my time
trouble-shooting archeological issues (e.g., problems
with excavation levels and corrections to paperwork) and
dealing with the normal chaos that comes along with that
many people. I got to spend very little time working with
one or two kids, demonstrating archeological techniques,
or discussing the prehistoric peoples whose remains we
were studying.
The bottom line is a philosophical one. The TAS youth
group should not be just about the numbers. We would
rather offer a quality experience to 25 kids who really care
about archeology and want to learn than offer a mediocre
experience to 100 kids, some of whom do not want to be
there. In short, the youth group directors (myself, Diedre
Hood, and Neal Stilley), the field school committee, and
the education committee all agree that we need to make
some changes. Here is what we have agreed to do:
1. TAS will make a commitment to assign more
experienced adult supervisors—at least crew chief
level or higher—to the youth group. Our goal is
to have at least 1 trained adult for every 5 kids

8

✦

Spring 2010

on site. This is hard to do sometimes, especially
when we don’t know the final enrollment numbers
until right before the field school starts. But it is
something we must do as effectively as possible.
Our ideal adult supervisor is someone with a high
tolerance for noise and confusion, who enjoys and
works well with kids, and likes to come for the
entire field school. (We may be soliciting folks).
2. We still want to encourage local participation and
TAS will continue to advertise the field school to
the local community, but we will do it differently.
All local registrants must pay the full registration
fees and will be required to join TAS. However,
TAS will seek out local individuals who will
do their own fund raising. TAS can assist these
people in finding local sponsors who are willing
to make contributions to help defray the group’s
cost of attending field school. If a local sponsor
is willing to donate money to help the group out,
TAS will agree to advertise for the sponsor at the
field school camp. But bear in mind that the main
responsibility for fund raising will be at the local
level and not fall on the TAS.
3. TAS will stop requiring that each parent or sponsor
of a child to work with the youth group for one
day. This simply does not help us, and in the case
of the newcomers, the parent/sponsor who visits
for one day really can’t assist us very much. Pat
Mercado-Allinger has also noted that this requirement detracts from the educational experience of
the newcomers. But please… do not misunderstand what we are saying here. Any parent/sponsor
who wants to participate in youth group with their
child is more than welcome to do so! We especially want to encourage any adults—experienced
or not—who are willing to work with the youth
group for the duration of the field school. Any
adult who is there for 3 to 7 days is an asset. They
learn our system and become teachers at various
levels. What we do not need is a rotating schedule
where inexperienced adults are cycling in and out
for only one day throughout the field school.

Youth Group Attendance at TAS Field Schools
Douglas K. Boyd

Archeologists love to look at data, and a quick look at
the numbers of youngsters participating in the annual field
school is interesting indeed. These two graphs illustrate
some trends in the youth and adult attendance during the
last nine field schools:
2001 1st year at Gault site. Youth worked WilliamsBuck Homestead (41WM272)
2002 2nd year Gault site. Youth worked Williams-Buck
Homestead (41WM272)

Graph 2: Comparison of Youth and Adult
Attendance at TAS Field Schools, 2001-2009
600

500

400

300

200

100

0
2001

2003 1st year at Presidio San Saba (41MM1)

2002

2003

2004

2005

Number of Youth

2006

2007

2008

2009

Number of Adults

2004 2nd year at Presidio San Saba (41MN1)
2005 1st year at Stallings Ranch (41LR297)
2006 1st year at Stallings Ranch (41LR297)
2007 3rd year at Presidio San Saba (41MN1)
2008 1st year at Perryton. Youth worked at Chill Hill
(41RB132, Area C)
2009 2st year at Perryton. Youth worked at Chill Hill
(41RB132, Area C)
Graph 1 shows the highest and lowest daily number of
youth present during the seven days of each field school
(first Saturday to last Friday). The adult supervisors are

Graph 1: TAS Youth Group Attendance
at Field Schools, 2001-2009
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Lowest Daily Number

2006

2007

2008

Highest Daily Number

2009

not included in these counts, and the occasional rain days
when we did not work are excluded. With two exceptions,
the youth data are based on actual roll call counts taken
each day. The exceptions are 2001 and 2004 field schools,
which use data from the official field school registration
because the roll call sheets had disappeared.
Graph 2 shows the total number of field school participants for the last nine years, divided into adults and youth.
The percentage of youth, out of all field school participants,
has ranged from a low of 8.8 percent in 2001 to a high of
21.0 percent in 2007. For the last five years, the kids account for between 14 to 21 percent of all the field school
participants, and these numbers do not include the adult
supervisors who help out. When the adults are added in,
the total size of the youth group is 5 to 7 percent higher
and accounts for between one-fifth and one-fourth of all
field school participants in the last five years.
With the exception of the 2005 and 2006 field schools,
which had comparatively fewer participants overall, the
total number of youth participants has increased in recent
years. This biggest jump is due primarily to the efforts
to bring in local youth during the last three field schools.
These efforts have been worthwhile, certainly, but perhaps
a little too successful. Managing the youth group becomes
extremely challenging when the attendance gets to be in
the 50 to 80 range!

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

9

Education Committee Funds Upcoming
Outreach Activities
Robin Matthews TAS Education Committee Chairman
The Education Committee is expanding its outreach
program by holding workshops for teachers in selected
school districts. In February, TAS Education Committee Chairman Robin Matthews planned one session with
middle school and high school social studies teachers from
the Austin ISD.
“There were 24 teachers at our session and they were
very interested in learning how to incorporate archeology
in their lessons. None of the teachers had ever heard of TAS
until this meeting.” Each teacher also received handouts
and hands on activities. The Gault School of Archeological
Research was involved in this workshop session and Dr.
Clarke Wernecke showed the Gault Site DVD with comments. The Education Committee is currently planning
teacher workshops in San Saba, San Marcos, and Hondo.

There will be a return of the popular “First Friday
Night” teacher workshop to allow new teachers a chance
to meet and learn a little about what to expect at Field
School. There will be another short video about archeology and perhaps a short workshop session. Last year each
teacher received a copy of the Gault Site DVD and this
will be repeated again.
The Education Committee received a $5,000 grant
from the Texas Historical Foundation to help TAS sponsor teacher and scout workshops and to help disseminate
the Gault DVD. This grant will also allow TAS to have an
exhibit booth at the big Gifted and Talented convention as
well as the social studies convention. TAS will also present
a session at each of these conventions.

The McSween Site
One of the sites being studied at the upcoming TAS field
school is the McSween Site, located in Bandera County. The
site was originally recorded (as 41BN113) by C.K.Chandler,
a long time member of both TAS and the Southern Texas
Archeological Association (STAA). C.K. was known as a
prolific recorder of sites, and also categorized and published
articles on many privately-held archeological collections.
Located on a terrace of the Medina River, the site occurs in
a shady, heavily wooded area within a few hundred meters
of a major, permanent spring. This spring has maintained an
impressive volume of flow even in conditions of exceptional
drought, as was the case last year.
The site was occupied over an impressive range of time,
as shown by the artifacts currently held in the landowner’s
artifact collection. Based on what we know now, timediagnostic artifacts show that the site was occupied through
much of the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods, perhaps
from 4,000 BC to AD 1500, give or take. Our knowledge
of McSween Site chronology may well change as more
information comes to light.

10

✦

Spring 2010

The site has considerable depth of deposit. A Montell
dart point exposed by looting was observed in association with an occupation layer at 1.35 to 1.6 meters below
surface. Two undated occupations rest above this Montell
zone, and there is likely a deeper occupation as well, at
about two meters below surface. One or both of the upper
occupations at the McSween Site may be associated with
at least two burned rock middens observed at the site, and
there is a good possibility that an infilled small shelter or
cave is also present.
The site is characterized by well-preserved animal remains (in the form of bones and shells), and it appears highly
likely that carbonized plant remains will also be encountered. We hope that by testing near (but not within) the two
burned rock middens, well-preserved features (i.e. hearths,
earth ovens, and other evidence of intact site structure and/
or distinctive activity areas) will be discovered. Much of
the site appears to be intact and in good condition having
escaped destruction by looters and will be able to provide
useful information.

Creating New Opportunities and New Stories
A Request to Support the TAS Diversity Scholarship Program
Nedra Lee
On June 9, 2007, I arrived in Menard, Texas with a one
(wo) man tent. My clothes (nearly two weeks worth) were tightly rolled in a large backpack, and my car was filled with water,
fruit and granola bars. I had boots for surveying; comfortable
sneakers to dig in; and a new trowel and other necessary tools,
which were provided by the Texas Archaeological Society
(TAS) since I was a recipient of a Field School Scholarship.
Despite all of the stuff I hauled from Austin, I immediately
recognized that I was unprepared for a week of camping near
the Presidio San Saba. I forgot to bring a bathing suit. I did
not have any beer. I had too many clothes. I did not know how
to set-up my tent. And, it was too small—having just enough
room for me to lie down and sleep! I spent two hot nights in its
close confines and eventually ended up driving roughly thirty
miles to nearby Junction, Texas to get more appropriate sleeping and camping supplies.
This story remains a source of humor for me and the
friends that I made at this field school. However, it is an important lesson on the significance of the TAS field schools and the
necessity of the Multicultural Program’s Diversity Scholarships
to helping underrepresented groups learn more about Texas
archaeology. From a week’s time, I developed an interest in
Texas history, gathered the courage to sleep outside and learned
how to set-up a tent. Most importantly, the archaeological
training I received in Menard has complemented collaborative
work that I’ve done with the Texas Historical Commission and
encouraged me to conduct my doctoral research on an African
American post-Emancipation era farmstead in conjunction with
Doug Boyd, Jennifer McWilliams and Aaron Norment—all
long-time TAS members and dedicated Texas archaeologists.
The Diversity Scholarship program helps promote the
practice of a more inclusive archaeology by helping racial/
ethnic minorities, low-income individuals and other historically
disenfranchised peoples actively participate in the recovery
and documentation of the Texas past. Individuals of African
and Latino ancestry have specifically struggled to gain entry
into archaeology, frequently citing outright and indirect acts of
discrimination and financial challenges as the biggest obstacles
to their participation in the field. As a result of their minimal
presence, archaeology has often suffered from the lack of
multiple historical perspectives and battled with ways to make
more accurate representations of the past.
Multicultural initiatives like the TAS Diversity Scholarship
program are a grassroots approach to ameliorating these issues.
To be specific, contributions to the Diversity Scholarship

Diversity Scholarship recipient Nedra Lee at work during
her first TAS field school, Menard ’07. (Photo/B.McKee)
program provide the means for underrepresented individuals to
(1) receive affordable training in archaeological field methods
through field schools and academies; (2) obtain the basic
tools to continue working or pursuing an interest in the field;
(3) visit new and lesser known sites in Texas history; and (4)
participate in fun activities like camping and swimming. For
many underprivileged youth, the TAS Diversity Scholarship
program can also provide the means for some to have their
first introduction to archaeology, exposing them to a new
profession or others in areas such as geology, art history and
historic preservation. Furthermore, the recovery of arrowheads,
faunal remains, buttons, glass and ceramic fragments makes
the past tangible and illustrative of how history can be
made in numerous ways. Most importantly, for individuals
belonging to groups largely excluded from popular historical
narratives, participation in TAS activities can demonstrate how
archaeology can be used to recover forgotten or neglected pasts.
The TAS Diversity Scholarship Program is essential to our
efforts to increase and diversify our membership as well as to
inform the community of its archaeological heritage and values.
Support for this program paves the way for the introduction
of new people, sites and historical and cultural experiences in
Texas archaeology. It also fosters an appreciation for a Texas
history that encompasses the state’s rich prehistoric past, bold
aspiration for statehood and inglorious attempts at guaranteeing
racial and social justice for marginalized peoples. Over the span
of four years, TAS has played a significant part in my professional and personal development. Please support the Diversity
Scholarship program so another can say the same.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

11

2010 Lithics Academy
By Beth and Jim Stenstrom and Gerri and Howard Crockett

Our Lithics Academy, 2010, held the weekend of February 20 & 21, in Kerrville, Texas, was a great success, with
35 participants, five TAS Academy Committee members, and
twelve HCAA volunteers. The Kerrville American Red Cross,
located at 333 Earl Garrett Street, which is directly behind
the Kerr County Courthouse, provided excellent facilities for
our meeting, with a built in projector system, full kitchen, two
separate classrooms, and a perfect spot for Dr. Cary Voss to
demonstrate his knapping. Dr. Harry Shafer kept everyone
captivated in the classroom, with his presentation and the
various hands on activities!
Enthusiastic participants, from ages 12 to 83, watched
both Dr. Shafer and Dr. Voss intently, and asked numerous
questions! Everyone seemed to be enjoying themselves and
learning a lot. Short breaks provided time for socializing and
for purchasing various items from both TAS and HCAA.
The HCAA “snake sticks” seemed to be a really hot item, as
people were scooping them up! Our HCAA hosts provided
great meals and snacks, which everyone appreciated!
This academy included multi-generational members
attending, with two father daughter teams, Lang and Emma
Casebier, and Wesley and Holly Jarvis, and one grandmother,
mother, and granddaughter team, Claire Younkin, Susan Seibert, and Katie Seibert. We also had a husband and wife team,
Mike and Marie Woods!
Many thanks to HCAA President Stephanie Ertle, and to
the wonderful HCAA volunteers who showed up smiling and
eager to help! HCAA volunteers included John Forister, Ed

Rendon, Dorothy Grayson, Rudi and Jan Winzinger, Bryant
Saner, Kay and Woody Woodward, Bob Ogle, Terry Farley,
Jose Contreras, and John Benedict! You all made our jobs easy!
Lithics is about how stone tools are made and used.
After taking this academy, participants are able to better understand what it is they are looking at when they find pieces
of arrowheads or other stone tools out in the field. As Dr.
Shafer warned them, they will never look at a rock the same
way again!

First mother/granddaughter/grandmother trio to attend
an Academy! Susan and Katie Seibert and Claire Younkin
(Photo/B.Stenstrom)

Dr. Cary Voss demonstrates his flintknapping skill to Lithics
Academy attendees. (Photo/B.Stenstrom)

12

✦

Spring 2010

Lithics Academy instructor, Dr. Harry Shafer, in a teaching
moment with rapt attendees. (Photo/H.Crockett)

Sul Ross Offers 2010 Field School
The 2010 Sul Ross State University Archaeological
Field School will be held from June 1–July 1, 2010 on the
Nature Conservancy’s Independence Creek preserve in
Terrell County, southwest Texas.
This six credit hour course teaches archaeological field
techniques to undergraduate and graduate students. You
will be working side by side with experienced, professional
archaeologists. Their teaching methods will help you learn
and develop field techniques that include mapping, profiling,
survey, and excavation. The fieldwork is augmented by an
intensive program of guest lectures, field trips, discussions,
and laboratory work. All food is provided, with breakfast
and dinner prepared by a camp cook, and accommodations
at a ranch house and lodge. Expect warm to hot temperatures—shade set ups will be used during the excavations.
The Nature Conservancy’s preserve is located north of
Dryden and is situated along a major tributary of the Pecos
River. This is an exceptional setting of particular interest
because it is situated at the transitional boundary between
archaeological regions—the Lower Pecos and the eastern
Trans-Pecos. A portion of the field school will involve excavation of a substantial midden deposit that includes the
remains of at least one bison. Students will also participate

Students at work: 2009 CBBS Field School.

in pedestrian survey, site recording, and subsurface testing
of additional sites.
Generally, the field school will consist of five 5-day
sessions (Monday to Friday) with weekend breaks. However, some flexibility may be exercised to accommodate
weather and fieldtrip logistics. The Independence Creek
preserve has ample accommodations, including bunkhouse
lodging and individual rooms, kitchen
facilities, laundry, and telephones. At
least three days will be dedicated to
travel to noteworthy archaeological sites
in the area.
Tuition and fees will be $1,166 for
Texas residents and $2,828 for out-ofstate residents. A field school fee of $500
will also be charged to cover the cost
of prepared meals, transportation, and
all lab supplies and equipment. Some
scholarships are available to help cover
the field school fee. The application/
registration deadline is May 30th.
For more information, visit www.
sulross.edu/cbbs/fieldschool.php or contact Susan Chisholm at the Center for Big
Independence Creek preserve in Terrell County is the location
Bend Studies, Sul Ross State University,
of the 2010 CBBS Field School.
(432) 837-8179, schisholm@sulross.edu.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

13

Call for Papers
For 81st Texas Archeological Society Annual Meeting
October 22-24, 2010
Omni Bayfront Hotel, Corpus Christi, Texas (361) 887-1600 TAS code:1450 0809 629
Corpus Christi—The Conference theme is Archeology without Borders.
You’re invited to join friends and colleagues for the 81th annual meeting of TAS. We hope to encourage colleagues south
of the Rio Grande to attend and share their research with us. Papers and posters will be featured in sessions Friday afternoon
and all day Saturday. The Public Forum and Career Social will attract regional visitors. Meetings and awards will honor many
who have contributed to the Society and Texas archeology.

Call for Papers, Symposia and Posters
This is the first call soliciting paper abstracts, symposia, and poster displays to be presented at the conference. Authors
will be notified in mid-September if their paper has been accepted (please note deadlines provided below). All presentation
rooms will be equipped with PowerPoint projectors. Presenters requiring a slide projector or overhead projector must make a
special request to the Program Co-Chair.

Check List for Presenters
To sharpen conference standards and stimulate session impact, the Program Co-Chairs recommend these guidelines for
paper and symposia presentations.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Have something to say (purpose)
Remember, less is more (concise information)
Emphasize the take-home message (three key points)
Have logical sequence (it’s a story)
Use visuals effectively (one per minute)
Practice and time your presentation
Talk to the audience (don’t read verbatim) Use note
cards or an outline if necessary.

8.
9.

Acknowledge contributions from others
Bring copies of your conference paper for distribution. Many people request papers to continue discussions and disseminate current research.
10. Submit poster presentations for data that lends itself
to on-going discussion.

Individual Papers: Titles and Abstracts are due by September 1, 2010.
Symposia: Titles and Abstracts are due by August 15, 2010.
Poster Presentations: Titles and Abstracts are due by September 1, 2010. Poster presentations are encouraged for those interested in continuing discussions. A time for presenters to be available for discussion will be scheduled in the program.
Abstracts must include the following information to be considered: Type of submission (Paper/Symposium/Poster); Title;
Authors and Affiliations (with contact Phone numbers and emails); and Abstracts (150 words maximum; longer abstracts
will be rejected or returned for correction). Abstracts should be submitted to the Program Co-Chair, Dr. Robert P. Drolet, via
email to papers@txarch.org or sent to:
Dr. Robert P. Drolet, Corpus Christi Museum of Science and History, 1900 N. Chaparral, Corpus Christi, Texas 78401.

Silent Auction
Support TAS by sending and bringing items for the Silent Auction. This is an important fund-raising event for TAS. We
already have books from the collection of Ruth Marie and are looking for many more books and objects. Send items to Dalia
Castro, 2930 River Crest, Corpus Christi, TX 78415

14

✦

Spring 2010

Lower Pecos Canyonlands
June 7th–July 8th, 2010
Join Dr. Steve Black, Assistant Professor in the Department of Anthropology at Texas State University-San Marcos,
for five weeks of hands-on training in archaeological field methods in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands of southwest Texas,
a remote area with an unparalleled 13,000-year record of hunter-gatherer life found in rock shelters with extraordinary
organic preservation and vivid rock art, as well as in an intriguing and little-known array of upland settlement features.
Field school activities will include field research and training, lab work, lectures, discussion, experimentation, site tours,
and canyonland exploration. Also, visiting scholars will offer specialized training sessions.

Students will learn:
Site survey and recording in the canyons and adjacent uplands
•

Excavation methods including grid and alternative recovery systems, note-taking, and drawing

•

Feature documentation using conventional and digital techniques

•

Mapping using total stations, GPS, and compass and pace

•

Research design and methodology

•

Experimental approaches

•

Laboratory processing of artifacts, samples, and digital data

This undergraduate archaeological field school is offered through the Department of Extension Studies at Texas
State University for 6 hours credit.
Accommodations: Students will stay at the SHUMLA campus/field camp overlooking the Pecos River. Food, lodging,
and transportation provided. Cost of the field school is $2,250. Additional Information: sblack@txstate.edu, 512-2457862, & www.txstate.edu/anthropology/

TAM 2010 Calendar Deadline Is June 17th
Texas Archeology Month (TAM) event sponsors who
would like to have information listed in the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) TAM 2010 Calendar should
submit descriptions by June 17.
In addition to the TAM 2010 Calendar, the THC distributes a selection of materials free of charge to TAM event
hosts. These include a manual called How to Plan and Manage an Archeology Fair, a unit for teachers called “Texas
Archeology in the Classroom,” posters, and brochures. All
these materials are free of charge to TAM event hosts.
Unfortunately, no TAM 2010 grants will be awarded
through the Texas Preservation Trust Fund program.
For more information, visit www.thc.state.tx.us/archeology/aatam.shtml.

Archeology fairs and other events allow families to participate
in a variety of hands-on, educational activities. In this photo, a
Texas Military Forces cultural resources staff member teaches
Camp Swift Oktoberfest participants how to use GPS devices.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

15

TAS Donations
Donors Fund Donations
Michael Aiuvalasit
Patricia Mercado-Allinger
Paul & Missy Anderson
Texas Anderson
Nelda Andrews
Joan Baker
Cynthia Banks
Jed Becker
John H. Benedict Jr.
Velicia Bergstrom
Steve Black
Jay C. Blaine
James & Peggy Blanton
Dawn & Fred Boepple
Ron & Pat Braun
Dan & Cathy Brown
Christine Buckstead
David & Shawn Carlson
Dominick J. Cirincione
Frank Condron
Jose Contreras
Harold D. Courson
Walt & Isabel Davis
Glenna Dean
Susan Dial
Mary Anne Dingus
Julian D. Driscoll
Joe Faulkenberry
Melinda Fisher
John & Judy Forister
Lou & Margie Fullen
Karen Fustes
Bev Gordon
Sue Gross
R. C. & Bea Harmon
Jet Hays
Jay & Linda Hornsby
Brett Houk
Dave Hughes
Ron & Brenda Jackson
Morris Jackson
Bryan Jameson
Al Johnson
Anne Jolliff
Wm & Cathy Kidd

16

✦

Spring 2010

Sheldon Kindall
John Kothmann
Clint& Karen Lacy
Ann E. Lang
Chris Lintz
Alvin Lynn
Steve & Melissa May
E. Thomas Miller
W. E. Moore
Suzanne Patrick
Timothy K. Perttula
Susan Plantowsky
Mike Quigg
Larry K. Ripper
Sandra E. Rogers
Martha Rolingson
Kirk Sampson
Jack R. Seals
Bill Setzler
Mike Shannon
Bob & Doris Sherrick
Frank R. Sloan
Cindy Smyers
Paul P. Steed, Jr.
H. Chris Stokes
Dee Ann Story
Pam & Phil Stranahan
Tim Sullivan
Matthew Taylor
Monty Weddell
Brenda B. Whorton
Doug Wilkens
Barbara Williams
Mary L. Williamson
Tad Wooten
Endowment Fund Donations
James & Peggy Blanton
Robert & Ann Crosser
Glenna Dean
Eloise Gadus
Sue Gross
D. W. & Jane Gulley
Jay & Linda Hornsby
Wm. & Cathy Kidd
Steve & Melissa May

E. Thomas Miller
H. Chris Stokes
Tim Sullivan
Tess Weaver
Scholarship Fund
Donations
Marie Archambeault &
Waldo Troell
Christine Buckstead
Leslie Bush
Mary Anne Dingus
Sue Gross
Jerry & Deana Grubis
Jet Hays
Margaret Howard
Doris Howard
Paul Lukowski
Carol Macaulay
Robert Marcom
Marilyn Martin
Brownell Roberts
Joe Rogers
Anne & Joe Sanchez
Timothy Sullivan
Bret Williamson
Premium Memberships
Patron
Thomas J. & Margie Long
Supporting
Ona B. Reed
Robert L. Richey
Mickey Burleson
Plainview
Victor Galan
Contributing
Deborah & David Allard
Tom Beasley
Leland Bement

Colin & Lynn Bludau
Janice & Neel Carter
Cecil & Emma Casebier
Jerry & Jonelle MillerChapman
L. Kirk & Krista Courson
Sharon & Elbert Derrick
William C. Foster
R. C. & Bea Harmon
Gerald K. Humphreys
Ron & Brenda Jackson
Bryan Jameson
Dean Lester
Charles R. Lewis
Roger Moore
Susan Plantowsky
Sandra E. Rogers
Jerry Sadler
Bill Setzler
Alison Small
Don Speck

Generous donations to the Donors’ Fund have
been received from:
Kerza & Elton Prewitt in honor of Jim & Dot Ward
Karl Kibler in memory of Bob Burleson.
Sharon Menegaz in memory of Bob Burleson.
Teddy Lou Stickney in memory of Donald Turner.
Panhandle Archeological Society in memory
of Roberta (Bobbie) Speer.
Warren & Katherine Turner Pearson in memory
of Donald Turner.
A generous donation to the TAS Endowment Fund
has been received from
Kerza & Elton Prewitt in memory of Beth and E. Mott
Davis.
The TAS is grateful for the following donations:
A donation in honor of Jesse Todd has been received
from the Rolling Plains Chapter of Master Naturalists.
Marybeth Tomka donated the newest version of Microsoft
Office to the TAS Business Office.

New Members
Penny Adams
Laura & Jodi Allen
Jennifer Anderson
Kathy Berry
Fred & Dawn Boepple
Penny Bryant
Jonathan Budd
Lester E. & Suzanne BrandtCarroll
Rhiana Casias
Thomas Chapman
Trey & Carrie Clark
Mary Ann & Byron Compton
Chad & Lindsay Crowell
Jose Gonzalez Davila
Robert C. Dean
Christian Diller
Waynette Dolan & Jan
Baldwin
Benjamin Dwyer
Debra Eller
Dr. Robert & Alice Fitzgerald

Jennifer Franklin
Gary Goolsby
Brittney Gregory
Bobbi Gryger
John Hahn
John C. Hammer
Matthew Harwood
Roger Hashem
Jan K. Huffstetler\Molly
Humphreys
Rebecca Izen
Candice Jackson
Ronald Jones
Miles Joplin
Melissa Keane
Donald Keith
Myrna Langford
Julia Luedtke
Mary Matthews
Lou Ellen McGinley
Garry Merritt
Kevin & Ginger Nelson

Lee & Emily Parker
Scott Pletka
Tim Riley
San Antonio Missions
NHP/NPS
Karynn Schmidt
Daniel Scott
Susan & Katie Seibert
Robert Z. (Zac) Selden, Jr.
David Sims
Jefferson P. Spires
Andrea Stahman
Nicole Stevens
Sarah Stolte
Jean Tombaugh
Jessica Turner
Bill & Barbara West
Vince West
Laura & Jack Whitman
Nancy Wirth
Claire S. Younkin
Charles Zeeck

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

17

Recently Departed…
Dave Brown, 1937-2009
Friend of many Texas archeologists, Dave married Linda
Harris, daughter of King Harris. He worked in field archeology until he began teaching at Texarkana College in 1974,
where he eventually taught for 30 years. Dave had a wide
range of interests and retained an interest in archeology,
mainly regional Caddoan/historical archeology.
Dr. David D. Kuehn passed away during January, in El
Paso, his home. He was a dedicated archeologist and geomorphologist working most recently in southeastern New Mexico
and west Texas. An active researcher and mentor, David will
be missed by colleagues, co-workers and friends.

He returned to his alma mater for graduate school and he met
and married Glendora (Gleny) Thielan.
After graduate school, Bill was offered the position as
Curator of Anthropology and Research Scientist at the Texas
Memorial Museum in Austin, and he accepted. Three years
later, Bill became Director, a position he held for 21 years.
“Dr. Newcomb considered museums unique and educational
institutions. During Dr. Newcomb’s directorship the Museum’s study collections were substantially expanded and

Keith Landreth was a Ft. Bliss Environmental Division
Chief Archeologist who helped develop a cultural resource
program at Ft. Bliss. He had the respect and friendship of
many friends in Texas archeology. Keith passed away January 7, 2010.

William W. Newcomb, Jr. 1921-2010
Bill Newcomb, Professor Emeritus of Anthropology at
the University of Texas and long-time Director of the Texas
Memorial Museum, died peacefully February 8th in Austin,
where he made his home for the past 56 years.
Bill was born in Detroit, Michigan and grew up in Ann
Arbor where he received his B.A degree from the University
of Michigan before being called into service with the Army.
From 1943 through the end of World War II, he served his
country in General Patton’s Army, earning three battle stars.

Tom Campbell, Bill Newcomb, and Glen Evans shown
together at a social occasion at Texas Memorial Museum.

18

✦

Spring 2010

A young Bill Newcomb in 1949.
each item was professionally catalogued. The Texas Memorial
Museum was also constantly in the process of being converted
into the campus museum that he had envisioned. He wanted
the Texas Memorial Museum ‘to tie together fields of knowledge formally separated in the classroom but inseparably
linked in nature.’ “Many of you will also be familiar with
Bill’s writings such as “The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times” and the major rock art tome he coauthored with Forrest Kirkland, “Rock Art of Texas Indians.”
Bill’s wife Gleny lost her life in 1997; in 2001 he married family friend Dorothy Evans, daughter of Glen Evans.
Bill is survived by wife Dorothy, daughter Mary, son William Andrew, and three grandchildren. Services were held
February 12th at Texas Memorial Museum. Memorials may
be made to TMM or the charity of your choice.

Membership in TAS
I agree to abide by all terms and conditions of the TAS Bylaws and all Federal and State antiquities laws or
regulations. Completion of this membership form and payment of dues indicates the member’s agreement
with the goals and mission of the Texas Archeological Society.
PLEASE PRINT: __ New membership

__ Renew membership

Year ______ TAS operates on a calendar year.

Name __________________________________________________________ E-mail____________________________
Address ________________________________________________________ Telephone _______________________
City _______________________________ State _______ Zip ____________ Texas County____________________
Please check membership level desired.
Individual: $60.00
Family: $70.00
Student to age 25 $40.00
Association/Society: $55.00

Contributing: $100.00
Supporting: $250.00
Patron: $500.00
Institution: $100.00 Libraries, Universities &
Museums

BUSINESS LEVELS
Plainview: $250
Folsom: $500.00
Clovis: $1000.00

Make checks payable to “TAS” or Texas Archeological Society
DUES Enclosed
$________________
If you wish to renew by credit card, please visit our web site at www.txarch.org
(out of USA add $20 postage)
Please mail to:
Texas Archeological Society
Center for Archaeological Research
One UTSA Circle
San Antonio, TX 78249-0658

Optional Contributions
Donor’s Fund (for research & publication)

$________________

Endowment Fund (for program support)

$________________

Other Donation _________________________

$________________

TOTAL ENCLOSED

$________________

So Much in One Weekend!
By Doug May
The 2010 TAS Ceramics Academy was held in the
beautiful town of San Marcos on February 6th and 7th.
The meetings were held in the Anthropology Department
at Texas State University, and were taught by Dr. Harry
Shafer. Dr. Shafer’s lectures were detailed and engaging,
leaving all students with no doubt that the study of ceramic
artifacts within the archeological record is a systematic and
scientific discipline. Students learned of the chronological
changes in pottery technology, as well as geographic and
cultural factors that influence ceramic form and function.
It would not seem possible to convey so much information
in one weekend, but Dr. Shafer managed to do so while
leaving the audience hungry for even more.
The lectures were supplemented by several handson activities. Students learned to identify different
ceramic sherds and sort them for analysis. There also
were demonstrations by Chuck Hixson displaying ways
ceramics may have been permanently decorated using

materials and technologies available locally to prehistoric
peoples. The students even had an opportunity to make

Ceramics display at the Academy. (Photo/D.May)
Continued on back page

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

✦

19

Texas Archeological Society
CAR at UTSA
One UTSA Circle
San Antonio, Texas 78249-0658

NONPROFIT ORG.
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
AUSTIN, TEXAS
PERMIT NO. 1187

ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED

TAS Ceramics Academy
Continued from page 19

simple pinch-pots out of clay. All involved developed a deeper
appreciation for the work required to make pottery, and are now
much better prepared to participate in future Field Schools and
other archeological pursuits.
Of course, not all of the weekend was about business. It
was an opportunity for TAS members to meet old friends they
had not seen since Field School, and to make new friends. The
Academies always give members a chance to visit new towns

Examining sherds at Ceramics Academy. (Photo/C.Spock)

and spend time with others who share an interest in archeology.
Not only does it serve as a good introduction to ceramics for
new TAS members, but there is also plenty of information for
experienced members looking to further their understanding of
the importance of ceramics to archeology.
Dr, Harry Shafer monitors his PowerPoint presentation at the
recent Ceramics Academy in San Marcos.
(Photo/C.Spock)

