The Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society

Volume 55, Number 2

Spring 2011

Just the Facts: Taking a Look at the Evidence
Preparing for the 2011 TAS Field School, Hondo
Thomas R. Hester, Principal Investigator
In the last issue of this newsletter (Winter 2011), I
reviewed some of our excavation goals for the 2011 field
school. Summaries of the 2010 excavations, including
descriptions and photographs of each excavation area, appears
in the Fall 2010 issue of the newsletter. So, rather than risk
repeating myself, time after time, in these pages, I have taken
a different tack in this article. Like Sgt. Joe Friday, we are
going to look at the facts—the various kinds of archaeological
evidence that was found at Eagle Bluff (41ME147) in 2010.
These data help us in our overall planning for 2011.
Additionally, and traditionally, the 2011 field school
headquartered in Hondo, fieldwork in Historic archaeology
will be offered, as will participation in the two surveys currently planned. And, if you want to be involved in the field
laboratory, this opportunity will also be available.

Next, the Malad source in southern Idaho is found in various
parts of the state, part of a north-south Plains trade system
(or as the data show, the “IH-35 corridor and off ramps”). In
the Rio Grande Valley, several sources from central Mexico
are recognized mostly associated with Postclassic Huastecan
trade. There is a cluster of specimens, along and just south of
the Edwards Plateau that come from farther west—in Jalisco
and Queretaro states. The earliest obsidian artifact in Texas,
a Clovis base from 41UV2 (Kincaid Rockshelter) is from
a source in Queretaro. At 41ME132 (18 miles southeast of
41ME147), an obsidian flake was excavated (no context) and
sources to the Ojozarco, Guanajuato source.
The Southern Texas Archaeological Association found 1
obsidian flake at Eagle Bluff during their testing operations.
This artifact, TOP 229, was sourced to the San Isidro, Jalisco

Through the Glass, Darkly
Those TAS members who have read publications of
mine over the decades know that I have an enduring interest
in the geological source analysis of obsidian (volcanic glass)
that occurs in archaeological sites in Texas. Source analysis,
usually accomplished through x-ray fluorescence and neutron activation, has been important in archaeology since the
late 1960s. Of course, techniques have improved and others
have been added. The geologic source samples from western
North America and Mesoamerica have been more extensively
researched, making assignments to a particular source much
more reliable. Since 1971, I have been working with several laboratories to obtain the trace element data that makes
source identification possible. In Texas, obsidian is quite
rare (except in the Panhandle and Far West Texas), but the
sourced specimens indicate that sources found in the Jemez
Mountains of northern New Mexico are the most common.

Figure 1. Obsidian flake from Area 1. Lot 282a. Length, 10 mm.
Continued on page 3

Inside

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
ETHICS
• Members of TAS must abide by all terms and
conditions of the TAS bylaws and all Federal
and State antiquities laws or regulations.
• TAS does not condone the practice of buying
or selling artifacts for commercial purposes.
• TAS does not condone the disregard of proper
archeological field techniques or the willful
destruction or distortion of archeological data.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Britt Bousman, President
Bryan Jameson, President Elect
Joe Rogers, Immediate Past President
Paula Vastine-Norman, Secretary
Marybeth Tomka, Treasurer
Timothy K. Perttula, Publications Editor
Tamra Walter, Publications Editor Elect
Jonelle Miller-Chapman, Newsletter Editor

All in One Field School Experience

8

Meet Me in Hondo!

9

Call for Papers

10

TAS Annual Meeting in Ft. Worth

11

Silent Auction

11

Dee Ann Story

12

New Radiocarbon Dates from Caddo Centers

14

18th East Texas Archeological Conference

16

Bill Young

16

TxDOT—Roadside Chat

17

Announcements

Back Page

ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR: Laura Beavers
Send all membership inquiries, changes of address
and other business to the TAS Business Office:
Texas Archeological Society
Center for Archaeological Research
One UTSA Circle
San Antonio, Texas 78249-0658
(210) 458-4393
FAX (210) 458-4870 (call first)
tasinquiries@txarch.org
http://www.txarch.org
Office hours are Tuesday and Thursday from
9 A.M. to 2 P.M. During other hours please leave a
message on the answering machine.
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
Quarterly Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society
Editor: Jonelle Miller-Chapman
11201 Pickfair Dr.
Austin, TX 78750-2525
(512)257-0618
millerjo@austin.rr.com
Opinions, unless otherwise stated, are those of the
editor and contributors and do not necessarily reflect
the policies of the Society.
COPYRIGHT © 2011 by Texas Archeological Society
All rights reserved. ISSN 0082-2949
Printed at Ginny’s Printing in Austin, Texas

Ellen Sue Turner and Thomas R. Hester give permission
to the Texas Archeological Society to use a reproduced
image of the Marshall point, p. 150, in A Field Guide to
Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians, 2nd ed., as part of the TAS
logo. Illustration by Kathy Roemer.

2

✦

Spring 2011

Newsletter Deadlines
Summer, May 31st, Tuesday • Fall, August 29th, Monday •
Winter, December 1st, Thursday

Calendar
May 23-27—NPS Archeological Prospection Workshop,
Brownsville
May 27-30—ARARA Annual Conference, Idaho Falls
June 11-18—TAS Field School, Hondo
October 26-29—69th Annual Plains Anthropological
Conference, Tucson
October 27-30—TAS Annual Meeting, Ft. Worth

TAS Board Meetings, 2011
April 23—Mayborn Museum, Baylor University
June 12—FS, Hondo Fairgrounds Livestock Barn
September 24—CAR, UTSA, San Antonio
October 21, 23—Ft. Worth Sheraton, Downtown

Just the Facts
Continued from page 1

source in western Mexico—unknown in Texas until this
specimen was analyzed. Last year, the 2010 field school at
Eagle Bluff recovered two more obsidian flakes from Area 1. A
tiny specimen (Fig.1) was in backdirt; another flake came from
level 1. Both were sourced (University of Missouri Research
Reactor, Dr. Michael Glascock) as also being from San Isidro,
Jalisco. One of the specimens is currently being analyzed by
neutron activation analysis, to refine the sourcing data.
The San Isidro source is 750 airline miles from 41ME147.
We do not know, of course, what led to this type of obsidian
reaching the site. Perhaps it was a single artifact or a single
cobble, from which all 3 flakes derived.
In 2011, it would be a tremendous accomplishment to
find one or more additional obsidian flakes in situ, and be
able to link it to a dateable context. Keep a sharp eye out in
your units and on your screens!

Archaic. Some await excavation and recording when the field
school resumes this year. At present, we have a view of the
late part of the Early Archaic. Diagnostics in the “upper” part
of this sequence consist of La Jita points (Fig. 3), radiocarbon
dated at other sites around 4000-4800 B.P. Below are Early
Triangular points (Fig. 4), some exhibiting a considerable
amount of reworking. We expect to excavate additional, and
earlier, Archaic occupations and below them, Late Paleoindian. More details about the 2010 finds in Area 1 are in the
Fall 2010 Newsletter, pp. 3-4.

Mysteries of the Early Archaic
In 2010, excavations at Area 1, supervised by Tiffany
Osburn, began to expose a number of hearths and cooking
basins (and maybe an earth oven or two) dating to the Early

TEXAS

A
Mexico

Figure 3. La Jita Point from Area
1, 2010 Excavations.

From Heat to Symmetry: Incised Stones

a

tec
as

Hu

B

Figure 2. Obsidian Source for 41ME147 Artifacts. A,
41ME147; B, San Isidro, Jalisco.

Another “mystery,” although of later times, is the
fragment of a limestone shaft-straightener, which came
from previously-dug, disturbed deposits in part of Area 1.
It is roughly half of a shaft-straightener (Fig. 5), with the
characteristic deeply incised lines and evidence of repeated
heating—the latter eventually leading to its fragmentation.
This Area 1 specimen, if complete, may have resembled the
shaft-straighteners shown In Figs. 6 and 7, with the incised
lines on either side of a groove. However, in both south Texas
Continued on page 4

Texas Archeology

✦

3

Just the Facts
Continued from page 3

Figure 4. Early Triangular Points from Area 1,
2010 Excavations.

Figure 6. Complete Shaft Straighter from Real County,
Texas. Collected by Vane Huskey; curated at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory.

Figure 7. Complete Shaft Straightener from Edwards County,
Texas. Note that it is heat fractured at the groove, breaking
the artifact into two pieces. From K. Brown and R. Leneave,
La Tierra, 1987.

Figure 5. Shaft Straightener Fragment from Area 1,
2010 Excavations.
and in the Southwestern Edwards Plateau, some of these loafshaped limestones have only the incised lines, a friction point
for positioning the wooden shaft to be heated. Ethnographic
data from California and from the American Southwest has
demonstrated the use of heated shaft-straighteners to get the
bends of cane used for arrowshafts. I will refer any skeptics
(and I know you are out there, thinking about “calendar”
rocks) to the writings of Alfred L. Kroeber, and let said
skeptics argue with writings of the father of American

4

✦

Spring 2011

anthropology. Because there are none of these artifacts from
dated contexts in our region, we do not know if they are
Late Prehistoric, for arrow shafts, or perhaps Late Archaic
innovations. It is likely this problem will not be solved in
Area 1, since the Late Prehistoric through Middle Archaic
deposits were largely disturbed by earlier untrained digging.
Hope remains for Area 2 and Area 3.

Finding It All: Area 2
It is a very humid day at 41ME147, and once again I
engage in archaeological spin, while talking to supervisor
Brad Jones about the thickness of a sterile stratum near the top
of units in Area 2. The crews were restless and discouraged.

It’s not very thick… your folks will be out of it any
time… the artifacts will spring from the earth once this
is finished… do not be forlorn. Well, I’ll check back
with you tomorrow, Brad, as I have to get down to Area
4 where that rich Toyah encampment is being exposed.

Brad’s crews, after all, had recovered in Level 1 a single
cartridge casing (Fig. 8), coming from a rimfire weapon.
Knowing the depth of the crews’ desperation, I immediately
attributed it to the Cow Camp Massacre which happened on
the same spot in 1866. As I related in the in the Spring 2010
Newsletter (p. 1), three boys, aged 12-19, were searching for
stray cattle, when their camp was discovered one morning by
a group of Indians who were watering their horses in Hondo
Creek below. In the ensuing fray, the 12-year old was killed,
another boy abducted, and the oldest escaped. They had a
pistol with them, but only one cartridge remained as one
of the boys had shot up the others in target practice the day

Figure 9. Dart Points from Area 2, 2010 Excavations. Left to
right, Kinney, Pedernales, Frio, Fairland (?), Ensor.

More importantly, as already documented in Winter 2010
Newsletter, Brad and the Area 2 crews will continue the excavations that have so far yielded a nice sequence of artifacts,
along with small cooking features and other materials (Fig.
8). The units reached a depth of just over 1 meter and were in
Middle Archaic contexts. The site deposits in Area 2 extend
down another 3-4 meters, and much is still ahead. It is likely
that Area 2 will provide the best preserved chronological
column for Eagle Bluff.

Facing Fire-Cracked Rock: Area 3
The highly successful work of the youth program, overseen
by Doug Boyd, was indeed a high point of the 2010 season at
Eagle Bluff. An impressive Late Prehistoric deposit consisted

Figure 8. .44 Henry Cartridge Casing from Area 2,
2010 Excavations.
before. And during their flight through the countryside, that
one bullet mis-fired. It turns out that the cartridge casing is
from a .44 Henry, developed in 1860 and used some in the War
of Northern Aggression. The weapons system spread widely
after 1865, the cartridges often adapted to pistols and other
rifles. They were not very accurate and they didn’t always
work. Still in the 1860s in south central Texas, both ranchers
and Native American raiders would have had them. By the
1870s, as Custer discovered too late, the .44 Henry guns
and cartridges were common among the Sioux. The careful
research done at Little Big Horn shows the .44 Henry casings
to be almost entirely used by the Sioux, and the archaeologists
noted that there were many mis-fired cartridges amongst those
they documented. Brad intends to do more work this year
regarding the 1866 event. This will include metal-detecting
and reconstructing the landmarks around the encounter.

Figure 10. Dart and Arrow Points from Area 3, 2010 Excavations.
Left to right, unfinished Perdiz, Perdiz with snapped stem;
rectangular stem arrow point; Montell; rectangular stem arrow
point. Courtesy, Doug Boyd.
Continued on page 6

Texas Archeology

✦

5

Just the Facts
Continued from page 5

Figure 11. Dart Points and Bifaces from Area 3, 2010 Excavations. Left to right: Montell, Lange?, distal biface, Frio,
damaged corner notched (Lange or Castroville) Courtesy of
Doug Boyd.
of extensive Toyah Horizon materials in upper levels, with
Scallorn and Edwards points below. Materials of from Late
Archaic occupations were found to depths of about 80 cm (Fig.
10). Arrow points with “rectangular” stems were recovered,
perhaps variants of Perdiz or even something else (Fig. 11).
In 2011, the row of Porta-Potties at the east end of Area
3 will have to find a new home, and rerouting of the road is
likely, as the area is above a large burned rock concentration, perhaps an earth oven. Other burned rock features were
exposed nearby in 2010 (see the Fall 2010 newsletter) dating
to Late Archaic times. We should learn a great deal about the
spatial aspects of the Middle Archaic at Eagle Bluff, given the
large area being excavated by the Youth Program.

Figure 12. End Scrapers from Area 4, 2010 Excavations.
Specimen on right made on a blade. Associated with the
Toyah occupation. Courtesy, Bryan Jameson.

Tracking the Toyah: Area 4
A highly concentrated Toyah Phase occupation was
partially exposed at the 2010 field school, watched over carefully by Bryan Jameson, Dr. Harry J.Shafer, and Art Tawater.
There are well preserved faunal remains, including many of
bison size, though heavily processed, but with other elements
of the Toyah diet also represented. Area 4 is likely one of
the best preserved Toyah camps yet excavated in the region,
and we have to maximize the opportunities that this situation
provides. The spatial configuration of the camp may well be
revealed, and some locales are already evident. Notable is the
work area found in 2010, with a clustering of end scrapers
(Fig. 12) and animal bones. The large number of potsherds
has already demonstrated an apparent diversity extending
beyond the “bone tempered” category (Fig. 13). We plan for
broader horizontal exposure of the Toyah, and the excavators
will not be concerned with deeper, “vertical” excavations.

6

✦

Spring 2011

Figure 13. Views of Ceramic Sherds from Area 4, 2010
Excavations. Associated with the Toyah occupation.
Courtesy, Bryan Jameson.
Careful excavation and precise recording will provide further
illumination of this occupation.

Site Surveys in 2011
Two major survey efforts are planned. One will focus on
the Oefinger ranch 6-7 miles south of Eagle Bluff. A brief tour
of parts of the ranch observed three sites, including one large
area with chert nodules that had been tested, or had flakes
removed for use elsewhere. One Toyah Horizon polyhedral
blade core was noted (Fig. 14). One of the very important

studied. In the little settlement of Quihi, about 6 miles east
of the Hondo TAS headquarters and camp, there are several
of the old (1840s-1860s) Alsatian-style stone houses or house
complexes that would merit fieldwork (Fig. 15). Likely, one
will be chosen and provide the opportunity to recover material
remains from the early occupation of the area.

Figure 14. Polyhedral Blade Core from Site 3 on Oefinger
Ranch. This ranch is slated for site survey in 2011.
facets of this survey will be to record and study the range of
site types that are literally just off the edge of the Balcones
Escarpment, and in a zone that is transitional in terms of vegetation (get ready for mesquite as well as cedar). Furthermore,
the 2011 survey can be combined with the site data recovered
from the Calvert Ranch survey in 2010, as well as the Hill
County State Natural Area survey in 2010 and 2011, and site
recording done in the Quihi area in 2004 and later. Ron Ralph
is set to supervise the Oefinger ranch survey.
Luis Alvarado will direct the TPWD Archeology Survey
Team and is making preparations for the 2011 TAS Field
School Survey at Hill Country State Natural Area. This year’s
survey will focus on the north half of the park where selected
sites and areas will be tested and recorded. An exciting change
for this years’ survey is that site recording is going all digital! Survey crews will utilize GPS units to record artifacts,
features, site boundaries, and site locations. In addition,
newcomers will be offered a one-day training providing an
introduction to western Edwards Plateau archeology, focusing
on culture history, artifacts, and features. A survey handbook
that includes geology and soil maps for Hill Country State
Natural Area and basic information on artifact identification,
soil hand testing, topographic map symbols, and UTM recording will be made available. The survey terrain is rugged and
shovel testing can be demanding, so consider your physical
condition before signing up.

Historical Archaeology
The excavations at Castroville are finished, along with
the ice tea-on-silver trays for the weary afternoon TAS crew
members. At present, there are several opportunities being

Figure 15. Example of Pre-Civil War Stone House in Quihi.
A similar locale will be the focus of 2011 Historic fieldwork.
Courtesy, Preservation Texas 2006.
It was once on the main road from San Antonio to El Paso,
and the water in Quihi Lake and nearby waterholes were sought
out by military expeditions. The Quihi settlement in the 1840s
struggled under pressure of Indian raids and getting agricultural
practices established. Many of the old homes have fallen down,
while others have been restored in excellent fashion, and serve
as homes today. It should be exciting to get a view of the life
of these pioneers. We have an alternate site, depending on the
number of participants in the Historic archaeology program.
This is an 1850s ranch complex located just north of Hondo.
The legend of the name “Quihi” is an important one to
its residents. It was “translated” many years ago as referring
to the “Mexican eagle” or caracara. Two problems there: the
caracara only became common in the area a few years ago.
Secondly, my colleague Al McGraw pointed out to me, in
2005, that a translation of an account written by Jean Louis
Berlandier in 1834 (long before settlement there) related that
the Comanche word puij or puip was used to refer to what is
now Quihi Lake. Loosely translated, it probably refers to the
presence of ducks. Just below in the account, the Comanche
used another word, cuzoni or cuyoni to denote that flocks
of turkeys spent the night next to the lake. Nary a caracara
around. But as a guest in downtown Quihi in June 2011, just
remember that Quihi means “Mexican eagle!”
The field school in 2011 offers all sorts of choices for
archaeological participation by TAS members. It will be
exciting at Eagle Bluff, I am certain. Get to the Hondo City/
County Park early if you want to camp under the big oaks.
I’ll be at the Best Western.

Texas Archeology

✦

7

All in One Field School Experience
May Schmidt
How would you like to see ALL the artifacts from ALL
the sites? Work in a shaded area with a cool breeze? Enjoy all
the comforts of home including running water, flush plumbing
and electricity? Come work in the lab with Jonelle and May.
We have colorful new sorting trays and we’ve been promised
the use of some very nice worktables. Many hands make light
work and we expect to get a lot more done this year than last.
Come join us for archeology at its best!
Progress on last year’s artifacts: A number of TAS members have been busying themselves processing last year’s
artifacts. Among them are Bryan Jameson, Jonelle MillerChapman, May Schmidt, Jean Hughes, Jennifer Anderson,
and Alice Stultz. We are through washing all last year’s work
and about half way through the cataloging process. If you are
in the Austin area and can help out at TARL (weekdays only),
let May (512-478-4898) or Jonelle (512-257-0618) know and
we will include you! We would like to finish all of last year’s
work before beginning the 2011 items. See you in the lab!

A crew of lab workers processing artifacts from
Eagle Bluff and Castroville.

Charlie Gordy and Bryant Saner at work
in the Livestock Barn Lab.

Grace Tuttle and Deanna Grubis in foreground, at work on
2010 artifacts while enjoying a steady, cool breeze.

Editor’s Note
In the Awards Presentation article by Boyd that appeared in the Winter 2011 newsletter, the last two paragraphs
on the bottom of page 7 contain some factual errors regarding the Lifetime Achievement Award. The article describes
a single “Lifetime Achievement Award” and states that this award has only been given once to the Dr. E. Mott Davis.
This is incorrect. It was the “Cyrus Ray Lifetime Achievement Award” that was given to Dr. Davis in 1997, and this
was intended as a one-time only award to honor Dr. Davis. However, the society does have another “Lifetime Achievement Award” that was created as an ongoing award to honor any deserving TAS member. The first and only TAS
Lifetime Achievement Award was in fact presented to Dr. Dee Ann Story in 2008. The editor and author regret that
we did not catch this egregious error. We especially extend our apologies to the family of Dr. Story for our mistake.

8

✦

Spring 2011

Meet Me in Hondo!
We will be back in Hondo for our Field School Campground. As last year, we will utilize both the spacious Medina
County Fairground and the adjacent shady Hondo City Park,
which should provide enough shade from the large live oaks
to accommodate all our campers. For those who are attending
for the first time, the campground is about three miles from
downtown Hondo on FM 462. From U.S. Highway 90, take
the Ave M/FM462 exit north and continue until reaching the
Hondo City Park and county fairgrounds.
Every year we attempt to schedule interesting and informative speakers for our evening programs at Field School,
and this year will be no exception. Also, we are already lining
up entertainment for our recurring Tuesday afternoon party.
The TAS Field School offers a great opportunity to meet
new friends and get reacquainted with everybody. The city
of Hondo will again provide us with hot water showers at the
nearby Hondo Recreation Center located next to the municipal
airport, about one mile from the campground.
The Eagle Bluff Field School Site is 16 miles north of the
campground on FM 462. This site is on the banks of Hondo
Creek and the area is quite scenic. Bring your bathing suits for
a refreshing dip in clear Hondo Creek after daily excavations.
Dr. Tom Hester will continue as our Principal Investigator at
Eagle Bluff and his article in this newsletter describes the
archeological excavations that will be going on. There is some
excellent archeology available for everyone.
Highway 90 in the friendly city of Hondo offers motels,
restaurants and fast food places as well as shopping. Lodging

Field School attendees enjoying a social evening in camp.

can be secured at the Best Western, 830-426-4466, Executive
Inn, 830-426-2535 and America’s Best Value Inn, 830-4263031. All are located on Hwy 90. For those with RVs, there
is the Quiet Texas RV Park, 830-931-5777. This park is
about 4.5 mi. from the campground and offers Wi-Fi. There
is also the Ramblin’ Wreck RV site, 830-426-3882, which is
about 1.5 miles from the campground. A third RV Park is the
Countryside, along Hwy 90 and the railroad, 830-426-5666.
Cell phone service from the campground is very good
and for emergencies, the county sheriff’s office is 830-9314020. More information on what Hondo has to offer can be
found by visiting the Chamber of Commerce website, www.
hondochamber.com. Also, be sure and check out the TAS
website, www.txarch.org for more information about this and
past Field Schools.

Hondo Creek at Eagle Bluff. (Photo/John Forister)

Texas Archeology

✦

9

Call for Papers
82nd Texas Archeological Society Annual Meeting
October 28-30, 2011
Sheraton Fort Worth Hotel, 1701 Commerce Street, Fort Worth, Texas 76102
It’s time; once again, to invite the TAS membership back
to Cowtown, and the western heritage that well represents our
Lone Star State. Please join your friends and colleagues for
the 82nd Annual Meeting of TAS. Papers and posters will
be presented on Friday afternoon and all day Saturday. The
Public Forum and Career Social will be attended by many
regional visitors. Meetings and awards will honor many who
have contributed to our Society and to Texas archeology.

Call for Papers, Symposia, and Posters
This is the first call soliciting paper abstracts, symposia,
and poster displays to be presented at the conference. Authors
will be notified in mid-September if their paper has been
accepted (please note deadlines provided below). All presentation rooms will be equipped with PowerPoint projectors.
Presenters requiring a slide projector or overhead projector
must make a special request to the Program Chair.

Check List for Presenters
To sharpen conference standards and stimulate session
impact, these guidelines for paper and symposia presentations
are recommended.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Have something to say (purpose).
Remember, less is more (concise information).
Emphasize the take-home message (three key points).
Have logical sequence (it’s a story).
Use visuals effectively (one per minute).
Practice and time your presentation.
Talk to the audience (don’t read verbatim). Use note
cards or an outline if necessary.
8. Acknowledge contributions from others.
9. Bring copies of your conference paper for distribution. Many people request papers to continue discussions and disseminate current research.
10. Submit poster presentations for data that lends itself to
on-going discussion. A time for presenters to be available for discussion will be scheduled in the program.
Individual Papers
Titles and Abstracts are due by September 1, 2011.

10

✦

Spring 2011

Symposia
Titles and Abstracts are due by August 15, 2011.
Poster Presentations
Titles and Abstracts are due by September 1, 2011.
Poster presentations are encouraged for those interested in
continuing discussions. A time for presenters to be available
for discussion will be scheduled in the program.
Abstracts must include the following information to be
considered: Type of submission (Paper/Symposium/Poster);
Title; Authors, and Affiliations (with contact Phone numbers and emails); and Abstracts (150 words maximum;
longer abstracts will be rejected or returned for correction).
Abstracts should be submitted to the Program Chair, Dr. S.
Alan Skinner, via email to papers@txarch.org or sent to:
Dr. S. Alan Skinner, TAS Program Chair
A R Consultants
11020 Audelia Road C105
Dallas, Texas 75243-9085

Changes, Additions, Corrections
to the TAS 2011 Committees
Region 2 Regional Director Louis “Pinky” Robertson, 1980 NE 1001, Andrews, TX 79714-9154,
432-523-3015 H, pinkyr@suddenlink.net
Academy, David Yelacic, 128 Nance St., San Marcos, TX 78666, 210-722-1201, dyelacic@txstate.edu
Annual Meeting, Bryan Jameson, 277 PR 2132,
Meridian, TX 76665-2999, 254-435-2797, bryanjameson@hughes.net
Merchandising, Ron Jorgenson, 7605 Breecourt
Manor Way, Austin, TX 78739, 512-288-7099, jorgensonronald@att.net
Public Outreach/Membership, Carol Macaulay,
277 PR 2132, Meridian, TX 76665-2999, 254-4352797, carol_macaulay@baylor.edu

Fort Worth—Official Headquarters for 82nd
TAS Annual Meeting
The 17th-largest city and still growing rapidly, Fort
Worth is a destination redefined. Home of many new and
renovated hotel offerings, hundreds of restaurants and
exciting tourism venues are enhancing the City’s reputation as one of the premier travel destinations in the nation.
Named the # 4 value friendly destination in the United
States by Hotwire.com, Fort Worth attracts over 5.5 million
visitors per year. This year don’t just plan to attend do our
Annual Meeting, spend some time doing Cowtown. Our
Annual Meeting location this year is at the Sheraton Fort
Worth Hotel and is conveniently located downtown. No
other city boasts such an unmistakable mix of preserved
Western heritage and unrivaled artistic offerings. Allowing
lots of places to see and do during your stay; and can get
you there via a free shuttle or trolley courtesy of the hotel
and city. Much more information will be coming your way
about this outstanding hotel, its amenities and our 2011
Annual Meeting schedule in the Summer TAS Newsletter.
In only a few days, you can enjoy an enormous range
of experiences—from art to animals, from cowboys to
culture, from longhorns to longnecks and from dance halls
to Bass Hall. Take time to see the artistic masterpieces of
the Fort Worth Cultural District, home of places like
the Kimball Art Museum, Sid Richardson Western Art
Museum, Amon Carter Museum of American Art and many
others. Explore the true American West in the Stockyards
National Historic District. Want to find out more about

our real cultural heritage? Visit the Texas Cattle Raisers
Museum and the National Cowgirl Museum to experience
what ranching history and life was really like years ago.
Stroll through the brand new Museum of Living Art at the
Fort Worth Zoo. Seek the out of this world exhibits at the
new Fort Worth Museum of Science and History. And that’s
just the beginning of what you’ll experience in Fort Worth.
One area that you simply cannot miss, and if seeing nothing
else during your stay, allow some time to shop, dine and
explore in the 24-block Sundance Square one of the most
exciting downtown areas in the nation. All this located just
outside the doors of our hotel.

Silent Auction
Support TAS by sending and bringing items for
the Silent Auction. This is an important fund-raising
event for TAS. Think of this event as an archeological recycling center for items you once needed, but
no longer do. Remember too, that items do not have
to be archeology related, but might be very desirable
by other society members. It’s all about supporting
TAS; this year please start your search early. Send
items to Gen Frix, 5724 Acapulco Dr., North Richland Hills, TX, 76180-6112

Texas Archeology

✦

11

Dee Ann Story
Dr. Harry Shafer
Dee Ann Story, a renowned Texas archaeologist, died
December 26, 2010 at the age of 79 in Wimberley, Texas
after a lengthy and courageous battle with cancer. She was
born to Emma and Eugene Suhm in Houston on December
12, 1931, and was preceded in death by her husband Hal
Story whom she married in October 1961, her parents, and
her sister Beverly Morgan. She is survived by four nephews:
Clayton Morgan, Tim Morgan, and Matt Morgan of Austin,
and Russell Morgan of Houston. Her pets were like her
children. Creature, a rescued blue jay, and dogs—Humphrey,
Ginger, a Doberman Pincher named Bridget, and her surviving pet Callie—were all constant companions. She lived
most of her adult life in Austin and retired to Wimberley
in 1987.
Dee Ann attended Texas Women’s University in Denton
and completed her undergraduate degree in anthropology at
The University of Texas at Austin in 1953. She was awarded
her Master’s degree from the same institution in 1956. Dee
Ann received her doctoral degree in anthropology from the
University of California at Los Angeles in 1963. While at the
University of California, she worked with Jesse Jennings at
the Glen Canyon Archeological Project; at Glen Canyon she
served as an assistant director doing fieldwork and directing the
laboratory. She became assistant director of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project at The University of Texas at Austin in
1962. She was a lecturer in the Anthropology Department at
The University of Texas from 1963 to 1965, Assistant Professor
from 1965 to 1972, Associate Professor from 1972 to 1978, and
became Full Professor in 1978. In 1987, she became Professor
Emeritus in 1987. She also served as the Director of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory from 1965 to 1987. Dee
Ann, as she was known among her friends and colleagues,
and Dr. Story among her many students, had an accomplished
career in archaeology, teaching and publishing many articles
and monographs on Texas archaeology. She also directed many
major archaeological and research projects in Texas for which
she received numerous honors of recognition.
Her main archaeological interests were the ancestral
Caddo culture of east Texas and later the Archaeological
Conservancy. She was a member of national and regional
professional societies, among them the American Anthropological Association, Society for American Archaeology,
Society for Historical Archaeology, Plains Anthropological
Society, Arkansas Archeological Society, and Texas Archeo-

12

✦

Spring 2011

Dee Ann Story and Frank Schambach at the 1987 Caddo
Conference. (Photo/Charlie Bollich)

logical Society. She served on the board of the Archaeological Conservancy. She was awarded the Curtis D. Tunnell
Lifetime Achievement Award, the Excellence in Archeology
Award, and the Award for Historic Preservation, all from the
Texas Historical Commission. She was a past president and
a Fellow in the Texas Archeological Society where she also
received the Lifetime Achievement Award. Other awards
of recognition came from the Archaeological Conservancy,
Betty Lee Wright Awarded fro Democratic Leadership from
the Wimberley Democrats, Houston Archeological Society,
and the Society for American Archaeology for Outstanding
Contributions.
As a teacher and mentor, Dee Ann made profound impacts
on the lives and careers of her masters and doctoral students.
She chaired the committees of many of Texas’ leading archaeologists, taught courses in basic anthropology and archaeology,
and taught field methods in archaeology. Like any outstanding
teacher, mentor, and educator, her guidance and influence
changed the lives and career directions for many of her students
who have gone on to other universities and agencies across the
country carrying on her remarkable legacy.
Dee Ann moved to Wimberley upon retirement and
became active in the Wimberley Institute of Cultures, Wimberley Players, and Wimberley Democrats. A visit with her
after retirement would invite stories of her world-wide travels
accompanied by dear friends Lila Knight and Ann Dibble that

took her to every continent. She visited Antarctica, Greenland,
Peru and Chile, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, China,
Greece, Italy, Mexico, Galapagos, India, Bhutan Tanzania and
Kenya where she pointed out a couple of archeological sites
to friends at the tent camps.
At the time Dee Ann entered the field of archaeology, it
was dominated by men with very few women. Despite this
imbalance, she not only persevered but became a distinguished
archaeologist and scholar, and she opened the door for many
more young women to go the field and become professional
archaeologists as well. As Mike Collins stated at her memorial
on February 5th at Wimberley, she was one of the guys. When
working in the field, Dee Ann worked in the pits, becoming
saturated with red clay like everyone else, and she stretched the
work time from daylight until late afternoon. Then, she would
lean back, drink beer, and laugh with all the others in the evenings. As Margaret Jodry said at the same memorial gathering,
she was one of the gals too. Dee Ann’s work ethic was legendary
and it rubbed off on all of her students. Her students gained a
sense of pride and discipline, and she taught us all how to present
ourselves as professional archaeologists. She connected with her
students in a way that gained her their utmost respect and admiration, truly a teacher’s teacher. Her contributions to the Texas
Archeological Society, Texas archaeology, The Archaeological
Conservancy, and to the lives of her former students and friends
in Wimberley will stand as her lasting legacy.

1962

“The White Site: An Historic Indian Burial in Yoakum
County, Texas.” Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 32:85-119.

1962

(with LeRoy Johnson, Jr. and Curtis D. Tunnell) “Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich,
Footbridge, and Oblate Sites.” Texas Memorial Museum
Bulletin 5.

1962

(with Edward B. Jelks) Handbook of Texas Archeology:
TypeDescriptions; A Cumulative Compedium of Type
Descriptions. Published jointly by the Texas Archeological Society (Special Publication No. 1) and the Texas
Memorial Museum (Bulletin No. 4), Austin.

1963

(editor with R. K. Harris) An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Forney Reservoir, Collin, Dallas,
Kaufman, and Rockwall Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project and the Dallas Archeological
Society, Austin.

1964

(with Harry J. Shafer and J. Dan Scurlock) An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources
of Belton Reservoir, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas;
1962. Miscellaneous Papers Texas Archeological Salvage Project, 1, Austin.

1965

(with Harry Shafer) “1964 Excavations at Waco Reservoir, McLennan County, Texas: The Baylor and Britton
Sites.” Miscellaneous Papers, Texas Archeological Salvage Project, 6.

1965

“The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson
and Kaufman Counties, Texas.” Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 36, 163-257.

1966

“Introduction: and Archeological Background.” In
Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad
Reservoir Area. Report submitted to National Science
Foundation, June 1966, 1-30.

Publications
1954

(With Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks) “Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.” Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.

1955

“Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas.”
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 26:7-54.

1967

1956

Archeological Excavations at the Collins and Smith
Sites, Travis County, Texas. Master’s thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.

(with Byron Barber and others) “Indian Artifacts: Pottery
Vessels.” In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society;
The Gilbert Site, 37:112-187.

1968

Archeological Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf
Coast Sites. State Building Commission, Archeological
Program Report No. 13.

1976

The Archaic of East Texas. In Thomas R. Hester, The
Texas Archaic; A Symposium, Center for Archeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Special Report, No. 2, 46-59.

1957

“Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County,
Texas.” The Texas Journal of Science IX:26-58.

1959

“The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology.11.
The Texas Journal of Science XI:218-250.

1960

“Extended Survey of the Right on the Glen Canyon.”
In 1959 Excavations in the Glen Canyon Area (edited
by William Lipe). University of Utah Anthropological
Papers, 39:163-284.

1977

(with S. Valastro, Jr.) “Radiocarbon Dating and the
George C. Davis Site, Texas.” Journal of Field Archeology, Vol. 4, No. 1, 63-89.

1960

“Cataloguing Archeological Collections.” Utah Archaeology 6:5-10.

1978

1960

“A Review of Central Texas Archeology.” Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958):63-107.

Some Comments on Anthropological Studies Concerning the Caddo. In Essays in Honor of R. K. Harris.
Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Reports of
Investigation; 3, pp. 46-68. SMU Press.

1961

The Beidleman Ranch Site: An Early Man Kill Site in
Stonewall County, Texas.” Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 31:207-212.

1981

An Overview of the Archeology of East Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 26:139-156.

Continued on page 15

Texas Archeology

✦

13

New Radiocarbon Dates from Two Caddo
Mound Centers in East Texas
Mark Walters and Timothy K. Perttula

Introduction
The Jamestown (41SM54) and Boxed Springs
(41UR30) sites are prehistoric Caddo mound centers in the
Sabine River basin in East Texas. The Jamestown site has
seven or eight earthen mounds, while the Boxed Springs
site has four mounds.
Both sites are poorly dated, due primarily to limited
investigations over the years since they were first recorded,
and the absolute ages of the Caddo occupations at each site
are not well known. Archeological investigations in 2009
and 2010 at both sites (Perttula 2011; Walters and Perttula
2010 were fortunate enough to obtain samples of charred
organic materials from Caddo house and pit features that was
suitable for radiocarbon analysis, and this article reports the
results of three new radiocarbon dates from the two sites.

Radiocarbon Dates from Sites
At the Boxed Springs site, hand excavations of several
units on a natural rise on a landform that juts out towards

the Sabine River and its floodplain encountered pit and
post hole features. The first date, with a 2 sigma calibrated
age range of AD 970-1120, comes from charred hickory
nutshell in a shallow (21-40 cm bs) basin-shaped pit (Feature 6-2). The second date is on charred maize cupules
and glumes from a post hole feature (Feature 6-2A) that
cut through the basin-shaped pit, and clearly postdated it.
The two sigma calibrated age range of the maize is AD
1050-1260, with the most likely calibrated age range being
AD 1140-1260 (see Table 1). The material culture remains
recovered in past and present archeological investigations
at the Boxed Springs site, including Homan and Alba arrow
points, a diverse assemblage of engraved Caddo ceramics,
Coles Creek Incised, Crenshaw Fluted, and Hollyknowe
Ridge Pinched vessel sherds, had suggested that the Boxed
Springs Caddo occupation dated to ca. AD 980-1250. The
two new radiocarbon dates provide confirmation of the age
of the Caddo occupation.
The 2009 documentation of a profile in Mound A at
the Jamestown Mound Site (41SM54) yielded charred

Table 1. Radiocarbon Dates from the Jamestown and Boxed Springs sites.
			
Sample
Conventional
Site
No.
Age (B.P.)

1-Sigma
Age Range
(A.D.)*

Two-Sigma
Age Range
(A.D.)*

Intercept
(A.D.)

Jamestown (41SM54)
Beta- 287699
540 ± 40
1400-1430
				

1310-1360
1390-1440

1410

Boxed Springs (41UR30)
Beta-288475
1020 ± 40
990-1030
				

970-1040,
1100-1120

1020

Beta-288476
850 ± 40
1160-1230
				
				

1050-1090,
1130-1140,
1140-1260

1210

*samples calibrated using IntCal04

14

✦

Spring 2011

Continued on page 15

material that was suitable for radiocarbon dating (Walters
and Perttula 2009:16-17). The sample was obtained from a
burned house floor; the middle of at least three burned/buried floors that was visible in the profile wall. The sample
of plant material was submitted for identification prior to
radiocarbon dating (Bush, this report). The date, with a 2
sigma calibrated age range of AD 1310-1440 with the most
likely calibrated age range being AD 1310-1360, was from
charred hickory nutshell.
In addition to the plant remains, the sample yielded
a plain grog-tempered sherdlet and 1.9g of silica froth.
Silica froth has been found in association with burned
grass-covered structures in other contexts (Jurney and
Bergstrum 2001:1-7). Artifacts from past investigations
at Jamestown point to a Middle Caddo (AD 1200-1450)
occupation (Perttula and Walker 2008:1-23). Most common were grog-tempered sherds, including fine wares
with diverse engraved elements and red-slipping. The low
percentage of brushed utility wares (4.1%) would indicate
that Jamestown was occupied in the earlier portion of the
Middle Caddo Period.

Acknowledgements
Funding for the Jamestown Mound Site date was provided by the Texas Archeological Society Donors’ Fund
and The Archaeological Conservancy.

References Cited
Jurney, D. H., and V. Bergstrom
2001 Silica Froth: An Indicator of Thatch Architecture. Journal
of Northeast Texas Archaeology 15:1-7.
Perttula, T. K. (assembler)
2011 Archaeological and Archaeogeophysical Investigations
at an Early Caddo Mound Center in the Sabine River
Basin of East Texas. Special Publication No. 15. Friends
of Northeast Texas Archaeology, Austin and Pittsburg.
Perttula, Timothy K. and Chester P. Walker
2008 The History of Archaeological Investigations and
Geophysical Survey at the Jamestown Mound Site
(41SM54), an Archaeological Conservancy Preserve in
Smith County, Texas. Archaeological & Environmental
Consultants, LLC and Archaeo-Geophysical Associates,
LLC, Austin.
Walters, M. and T. K. Perttula
2009 Recent Documentation of a Profile in Mound A at the
Jamestown Mound Site (41SM54), Smith County, Texas.
Texas Archeology (Newsletter of the Texas Archeological
Society) 53(3):16-17.

Dee Ann Story
Continued from page 14

1981

(Editor) Archeological Investigations at the George C.
Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas, Summers of 1979
and 1980. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
Occasional Papers, No. 1.

1982

(Editor) The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas,
Vol. 1: Texas Antiquities Permit Series, No. 7, Texas
Antiquities Committee, Austin.

1984

A Review of the Investigations at Cedar Grove. In
Cedar Grove: An Interdisciplinary Investigation of a
Late Caddo Farmstead in the Red River Valley, edited
by N. L. Trubowitz, pp. 278-280. Research Series, no.
23, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf
Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric Food Production in North
America, edited by Richard I. Ford, pp. 19-56. Anthropological Papers, Museum of Anthropology, University
of Michigan, No. 75, Ann Arbor.

1985

The Walton Site: An Historic Burial in McLennan
County, Texas. Central Texas Archeologist 10:66-96.

1990

(with Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha Doty
Freeman, Jerome C. Rose, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W.
Olive, and Karl J. Reinhard) The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain: Volume 1. Arkansas
Archeologial Survey Research Series No. 38. Fayetteville.

1993

Riddles of the Past: the Archeology of Hays County. Hays
County Historical Commission, Wimberley, Texas.

1997

Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site,
Cherokee County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:1-103.

1998

The George C. Davis Site: Glimpses into Early Caddoan Symbolism and Ideology. In The Native History
of the Caddo: Their Places in Southeastern Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by T. K. Perttula and J.
E. Bruseth, pp: 9-46. Studies in Archeology 30, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Texas Archeology

✦

15

18th East Texas Archeological Conference
Mark Walters
The 18th East Texas Archeological Conference (ETAC)
was held February 12, 2011, at the Ornelas Activity Center
on the University of Texas at Tyler campus in Tyler, Texas.
This year’s ETAC was dedicated to the life and memory of Dr.
Dee Ann Story, (1931-2010), who recently passed away, but
made many long-lasting contributions to East Texas archeology, especially Caddo archeology.
Conference arrangements included local organizers:
Mark Walters, Dr. Thomas Guderjan, and Dr. Timothy K.
Perttula as program chair. There were a number of conference sponsors, including: Archeological & Environmental
Consultants, LLC
East Texas Archaeological Society, Friends of Northeast Texas Archaeology, PerttulaCaddoArchaeology.Com,
Stephen F. Austin State University, Gregg County Historical
Museum, The University of Texas at Tyler and College of
Arts and Sciences.
The ETAC program had presentations (including one poster)
on a wide variety of archaeological topics in East Texas, highlighted by the keynote speaker, Dr. Harry Shafer, who spoke on
The Legacy of Dee Ann Story: Highlights and Caddo Archaeology at the George C. Davis Site. Other papers included:

•

Jesse Todd, A Comparison of Turtle Use from Five
Early Caddo Sites at Lake Chapman, Delta County,
Texas

•

Norris White. Jr., THC Preservation Fellows 2010
Internship at Caddo Mounds State Historic Site

•

Jeffrey S. Girard, The Powell Collection: Artifacts
from a Titus Phase Burial in Titus or Cass County,
Texas

•

Leslie Bush, An Update on Caddo Plant Research
in East Texas

•

Jim Tiller, The Shreveport Caddo, A Timeline

•

Tom Middlebrook and Morris K. Jackson, The Discovery and Initial Investigation of the Original Site
of Mission Concepcion in East Texas (1716-1730)

•

Tom Middlebrook, Morris K. Jackson, and George
Avery, The Mayhew Site (41NA21) Revisited

•

John King, The Caddo Borderlands of East Texas
and Western Louisiana: European-Indian Interaction between the 17th and 19th Centuries

Bill Young
The TAS 2010 Golden Pen Award recipient Bill Young,
passed away on December 17, 2010, in Corsicana, TX.
His wife Bobbie Jean Young, two daughters and a son, two
grandchildren and two great-grandchildren, as well as their
families survive him.
Bill was a passionate avocational archeologist who was
one of the original thirteen archeological stewards for the
Texas Historical Commission. He was a member of the Dallas
Archeological Society and the Tarrant County Archeological
Society as well as TAS. For a decade, Bill was a columnist
for the Corsicana Daily Sun, contributing over 500 articles.
His articles informed readers of local history and he also
sought to inform the public about local and regional Native
American prehistory. He wrote to educate the public about
antiquities laws and the detriments of looting and vandalism
of cemeteries. Bill’s direction of the research, mapping, and
recording of over 150 cemeteries is an outstanding accomplishment. He contributed greatly to surveys and excavations

16

✦

Spring 2011

at Tennessee Colony Lake, Joe
Pool Lake, Aquilla Lake, and
Richland-Chambers Lake, as
well as numerous projects in the
metroplex area.
Bill was an expert on prehistoric Native American tool
technology and many sought
his opinion. Look for an article
about East Texas Dart Point
Styles written by Bill and Tim
Perttula soon to appear in an
upcoming edition of BTAS.
Bill Young, 1939–2010.
Texas will certainly miss
this columnist, historian, archeologist and dynamic popular
speaker. Memorials may be made to the Navarro County
Historical Society at 912 W. Park Avenue, Corsicana, TX
75110.

TxDOT—Roadside Chat. . .
Introduction
This article provides an update on select activities
conducted by TxDOT archeologists. TxDOT archeologists
review hundreds of projects every year, and we’ve selected
some of the highlights of this work. In this installment, we
offer additional details about data recovery excavations at
41DL436 and introduce an additional source of information
about TxDOT projects.

Data Recovery at 41DL436
In the previous article, we briefly summarized the archeological fieldwork accomplished at site 41DL436. As you will
recall, the site is located along Fish Creek in southwestern
Dallas County. With Dr. James Abbott from the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) serving as geoarcheologist,
Environmental Communications Inc. (EComm) completed
data recovery field investigations, under the direction of Dr.
Nick Trierweiler (PI) and David Nickels (PA). Analysis and
reporting for the project is ongoing. This account summarizes
Dr. Abbott’s geoarcheological observations made during the
data recovery fieldwork.
Site 41DL436 occurs on the floodplain of Fish Creek in
the City of Grand Prairie. Fish Creek is a moderately-sized
tributary of Mountain Creek in the Trinity River drainage.
Previous work at the site by Hicks and Company and by
TxDOT revealed that the site consisted primarily of localized
burned zones and common animal remains stratified in several
meters of relatively recent stream alluvium. Although traditional classes of artifacts—such as lithic tools, lithic debitage,
ceramics, and burned rocks—were scarce or absent, the site
has good potential to address important questions about prehistory. This potential derives from the robust character of the
faunal assemblage and the high integrity of the stratigraphy.
Geoarcheological work documented three informal allostratigraphic units in the excavation block, which were designated
Unit 1, 2 and 3 (from oldest to youngest).
Unit 1 is capped by a relatively thick, dark, clayey soil
(Paleosol B) that is correlated with the West Fork soil, a thick
cumulic floodplain soil that typically caps the late Holocene
Pilot Point alluvium described by Ferring (1994; 2000).
Paleosol B formed on a low-energy floodplain. Prehistoric
groups briefly and repeatedly occupied this area. Their activities left a succession of ephemeral campsites characterized
by burned zones, animal bone, mussel shell, and occasional
burned rock features overlooking a channel at least two meters

deep. Although few radiocarbon ages have yet been processed,
the deepest sample collected from Unit 1 (elev 96.47 m) suggests that the sediments comprising this unit began accumulating by 1090 ±25 BP (UGAMS 7841). No lower boundary
was defined for Unit 1. The bottom of Unit 2 defines the upper
boundary of Unit 1 on the floodplain.
Unit 2 comprises a sequence of distinctly stratified silty,
clayey and sandy deposits laid down in the channel and on
the adjacent floodplain surface during an avulsion sequence
that shifted the channel to its current location north of the
site. This sequence, which varies from approximately 75 cm
to more than 2 m in thickness, contains a number of discrete,
interstratified cultural lenses and burned zones. The archeological material attests to the continued, intermittent use of
the area. A thin cumulic soil (Paleosol A) that was dated at
390±25 BP (UGAMS 7840) caps the unit.

Unit 3 is bounded by the upper surface and the contact
with Paleosol A, and is anywhere from approximately 75 cm
to 150 cm thick. It consists of laminated and ripple bedded
silts and clays with occasional thin beds of fine sand. Soil
processes have largely homogenized the upper 50 cm of the
unit. Interestingly, although the radiocarbon age on the underlying unit is nearly of historic age, the only projectile point
recovered during data recovery was found shallowly buried
in this more recent unit. More radiocarbon data is needed to
fully understand the sequence.
In summary, investigations at 41DL436 have revealed
evidence of a series of ephemeral prehistoric floodplain
occupations spanning approximately the last millennium, and
Continued on page 19

Texas Archeology

✦

17

The following member has
renewed at the Supporting
Level
Ms. Eddie Pevehouse

The following member has
renewed at the Plainview
Business Level
Victor Galan

The following members have
renewed at the Contributing
Level:
Larry Barnard
Tom Beasley & Family
Richard & Mary Ruthe Carter
Janice & Neel Carter
Jonelle Miller-Chapman & Jerry
Chapman
Rebecca & Michael Clark
Aina Dodge
Julian Driscoll
Thomas E. Ewing
Melinda (Lindy) Fisher
Joe Hall
R. C. & Bea Harmon
Gerald K. Humphreys
Ron & Brenda Jackson
Nancy Kenmotsu
Dean Lester
Charles R. Lewis
Eugene Thomas O'Brien & Family
Johnney & Sandra Pollan
Robert L. Richey
Sandra Rogers
Anne & Joe Sanchez
William Setzler
Don Speck
Marietta Tretter
Paula Vastine Norman

Donations in Memory of Dee
Ann Story Have Been Received
From:
Elton & Kerza Prewitt
Teddy Lou Stickney

The following members have
made contributions to the
Donors’ Fund:
Joan Baker
Cynthia Banks

18

✦

Spring 2011

John Benedict
Steve Black
Jim & Peggy Blanton
Patrick Boardman
Leslie Bush
Rebecca & Michael Clark
Kirk & Krista Courson
Brett & Meg Cruse
Sharon & Elbert Derrick
Lyndsay DiPietro
John Fioroni
Melinda Fisher
Carolyn Gritzmaker
Curt & Helen Harrell
Patti Haskins
Jay & Linda Hornsby
Wm. & Cathy Kidd
Christopher Lintz
Wendy Lockwood
Alvin Lynn
Andrew Malof & Michael Williams
Melissa & Steve May
Paul McGuff
E. Thomas Miller
Peter Nichols
Patricia Perkins
Timothy K. Perttula
Susan Plantowsky
Mike Quigg
Sandra Rogers
Martha A. Rolingson
Rolla Shaller
Lance Shoffner & Family
Paula Vastine Norman
Mark Walters
Gail Wilcox

The following members have
made contributions to the TAS
Endowment Fund:
Joan Baker
Bay Side Historical Society
Jim & Peggy Blanton
Patrick Boardman
Fred & Dawn Boepple
Kirk & Krista Courson
Carla Cox
Rrobert E. Crosser
Lyndsay DiPietro
John Fioroni
Curt & Helen Harrell
Jay & Linda Hornsby
Wm. & Cathy Kidd

John & Susan Mehner
E. Thomas Miller
Patricia Perkins
Timothy K. Perttula
Susan Plantowski
Lance Shoffner & Family
Frank R. Sloan
Judy Van Cleve & David Gage
Paula Vastine Norman

We Welcome the Following
New Members:
Museum of the Coastal Bend
Carrie Akard & Family
Elora Danan Alexander
Eileen Berger
Sofie Caruso
Amanda Castaneda
Tracy Connell
Bill Cox
Carla Cox
Jeffry Crisp & Family
Roger DeYoung
John Fulmer
Patrick Gainey
Carolyn & Aaron Gritzmaker
Marilyn Guida
Susan Hawes
Ashleigh Knapp
Jamie Leigh-Powell
Melanie Magdalena
Martha Markin
Laura Mauelshagen
Julie McGilvray
John Milford
Matt & Sarah Mladenka
Carol Montedonico
Elizabeth Nelson
William Perdue
Veronika Regenbrecht & Family
Jamie Ross
Haley Rush
Karen Sewell
Lance Shoffner & Family
Laura Short
Belisario & Elisabeth Silva
Susan Smith
Cidnye Stott
Nolan Eric Talkington & Family
Carol M. Wilson
Donald & Janet Wilson

Membership in TAS
I agree to abide by all terms and conditions of the TAS Bylaws and all Federal and State antiquities laws or
regulations. Completion of this membership form and payment of dues indicates the member’s agreement
with the goals and mission of the Texas Archeological Society.
PLEASE PRINT: __ New membership

__ Renew membership

Year ______ TAS operates on a calendar year.

Name __________________________________________________________ E-mail____________________________
Address ________________________________________________________ Telephone _______________________
City _______________________________ State _______ Zip ____________ Texas County____________________
Please check membership level desired.
Individual: $60.00
Family: $70.00
Student: $40.00
Association/Society:: $55.00

Contributing: $100.00
Supporting: $250.00
Patron: $500.00
Institution: $100.00 Libraries, Universities &
Museums

BUSINESS LEVELS
Plainview: $250
Folsom: $500.00
Clovis: $1000.00

Make checks payable to “TAS” or Texas Archeological Society
DUES Enclosed
$________________
If you wish to renew by credit card, please visit our web site at www.txarch.org
(out of USA add $20 postage)
Please mail to:
Texas Archeological Society
Center for Archaeological Research
One UTSA Circle
San Antonio, TX 78249-0658

Optional Contributions
Donor’s Fund (for research & publication)

$________________

Endowment Fund (for program support)

$________________

Other Donation _________________________

$________________

TOTAL ENCLOSED

$________________

Roadside Chat
Continued from page 17

situated on a tributary of the upper Trinity River. As is commonly the case throughout this region, cultural material associated with these floodplain occupations is relatively sparse,
suggesting that they were probably the locus of specialized
activities rather than generalized campsites. However, unlike
many floodplain sites, definable occupation surfaces are common and stratigraphic integrity is high at 41DL436. Analysis
of the collection is ongoing, and has considerable potential to
provide insight into the enigmatic nature of prehistoric human
behavior at floodplain sites in the upper Trinity basin during
the Late Prehistoric period.

References Cited
Ferring, C. R.
1994 Late Quaternary Geology of the Upper Trinity River
Basin, Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Texas at Dallas.
2000 The Late Quaternary Geology and Prehistoric Archaeology of the Grand Prairie and Cross Timbers Portions
of North Central Texas. Guidebook to the 13th Annual
Field Trip of the South-Central Cell of the Friends of the

Pleistocene. Department of Geography and Center for
Environmental Archaeology at the University of North
Texas, Denton.

TxDOT Project Webpage
We would also like to call your attention to a recent
change implemented on the TxDOT web site. The Archeological Studies Branch at TxDOT has developed a web page from
which to access information about projects of potential interest. The primary purpose of the site is to identify consulting
parties in partial satisfaction of our Section 106 responsibilities. Our plan is to update the site and provide announcements
when we propose new findings regarding archeological sites
that may be affected by our projects. The following link leads
you to the introductory page. From there, additional links are
available to access specific project descriptions, proposed
findings, and recommendations.
Go to: http://www.txdot.gov/business/contractors_consultants/environmental/archaeological_sites.htm
We have also posted a partial list of data recovery reports
available for electronic distribution. This list will also be
updated in the future.
Please take a look and let us know what you think. You
can provide feedback on the site or on specific projects by
email to: Sharon.Dornheim@txdot.gov.

Texas Archeology

✦

19

NONPROFIT ORG.
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
AUSTIN, TEXAS
PERMIT NO. 1187

Texas Archeological Society
CAR at UTSA
One UTSA Circle
San Antonio, Texas 78249-0658

Address Service Requested

Announcements
October 26-29, 2011
The 69th Annual Plains Anthropological Conference will be held in Tucson, Arizona at the Marriott University
Hotel on October 26-29. For more information contact: María Nieves Zedeño (University of Arizona) by e-mail at mzedeno@
email.arizona.edu or visit the conference website at www.arizona.edu/mzedeno/plains
✦

✦

✦

2011 Texas Archeology Month Calendar on Hold
As of early March, when this announcement was written, the impact of the proposed state budget (House Bill 1/Senate
Bill 1) on the Texas Historical Commission (THC) was uncertain.
Because of this, the production of the 2011 Texas Archeology Month (TAM) calendar was placed on hold in February, when
the THC Archeology Division would normally announce the summer
deadline for submitting calendar information. Despite this uncertainty,
we encourage organizations and institutions to organize local TAM
observances in October. We will update TAM event hosts who are on
our email contact list when we have more information.
✦

✦

✦

New T-Shirts !
Wow! Look at our new T-shirts! This year’s design is on a cinnamon
background. The TAS man image is taken from the 1958 BTAS cover.
This image was reproduced from actual rock art, and I’m sure most of
you will want to order one of these beauties when you sign up for Field
School.

