The Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society

Volume 53, Number 4

Fall 2009

Come Early, Stay Late!
Shumla and the City of Del Rio Welcome You to the TAS 80th Annual Meeting
Make your plans now!!! The 80th Annual Meeting of the
Texas Archeological Society will be held in Del Rio, Texas,
October 23–25, 2009. Come early and stay late!! Tours to several rock art sites are scheduled on both Thursday afternoon
and Sunday morning. Be aware, access to these sites requires
physical stamina and the ability to climb steep slopes. More
on these trips later. Events will be held at both the Ramada
Inn Del Rio and the Del Rio Civic Center two blocks from the
hotel. There is plenty of parking available at the Civic Center
for those who want to drive.
If the tours aren’t enough to entice you, Dr. Jean Clottes
will be one of the participants in the Friday night Public
Forum and is speaker for the Saturday night banquet. Jean
Clottes, PhD (Doctorat d’Etat), Prehistory, has directed scientific research at some of the most important Paleolithic decorated caves (caves with prehistoric paintings or engravings)
including Chauvet, which contains the oldest cave paintings
known in the world. His scientific concerns are now mostly
related to prehistoric rock art, in particular to its preservation
and recording, dating problems, the study of its archaeological context, and the problems of epistemology and the search
for meaning.
Professor Clottes held several positions prior to his retirement in July 1999 including Director of Prehistoric Antiquities for Midi-Pyrénées, General Inspector for Archaeology
at the Ministry of Culture, and then Scientific Advisor for
prehistoric rock art. He has published or edited 24 books and
more than 400 papers. Five of his books, along with numerous
papers are published in English including: The Cave Beneath
the Sea (Harry Abrams, 1996); The Shamans of Prehistory,
with D. Lewis-Williams (Harry Abrams,1998); World Rock
Art (Getty Foundation, 2002); Chauvet Cave: the art of earliest times (ed.) (The University of Utah Press, 2003); and Cave
Art (Phaidon, 2008). This is a rare opportunity to meet one of
the world’s leading experts on rock art.

Dr. Jean Clottes listens as Dr. Carolyn Boyd discusses
the rock art panel in White Shaman Shelter.
The other speaker during the Friday night Public Forum
is Dr. Carolyn E. Boyd. Dr. Boyd is the Executive Director
and co-founder of SHUMLA, an archeological research and
educational nonprofit corporation formed to connect people
of all ages with the land and their cultural heritage. She serves
as an Adjunct Professor at Texas State University and as a
Research Fellow at the Center for Arts and Symbolism of
the Ancient Americas in San Marcos, Texas, and the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.
Dr. Boyd received her doctorate in archeology from Texas
A&M University based on her analysis of the 4,000 yearold rock art of the Lower Pecos River Region of southwest
Texas and northern Mexico. Her background as an artist has
provided her with a unique perspective to recognize these

www.txarch.org

Continued on page 3

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
ETHICS
• Members of TAS must abide by all terms and
conditions of the TAS bylaws and all Federal
and State antiquities laws or regulations.
• TAS does not condone the practice of buying
or selling artifacts for commercial purposes.
• TAS does not condone the disregard of proper
archeological field techniques or the willful
destruction or distortion of archeological data.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Grant Hall, President
Joe D. Rogers, President Elect
Laurie Moseley, Immediate Past-President
Paula Vastine-Norman, Secretary
Marybeth Tomka, Treasurer
Timothy K. Perttula, Publications Editor
Jonelle Miller-Chapman, Newsletter Editor

TAS Silent Auction & Prize  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Bienvenidos a México . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Careers in Archeology Social . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Recent Investigations at a Late Prehistoric
Bison Hunting Encampment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Teacher Workshops at Field School  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Golden Opportunity Girl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Center for Big Bend Studies Conference . . . . . . . . . 12
Texas Archeology Academies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
20th Annual Texas Archeology Celebration . . . . . . . 13

Send all membership inquiries, changes of address
and other business to the TAS Business Office:
Texas Archeological Society
Center for Archaeological Research
One UTSA Circle
San Antonio, Texas 78249-0658
(210) 458-4393
FAX (210) 458-4870 (call first)
tasinquiries@txarch.org
http://www.txarch.org

New Texas Beyond History Exhibits  . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

Office hours are Tuesday and Thursday from
9 A.M. to 2 P.M. During other hours please leave a
message on the answering machine.

Comanche Artifact Donation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
Quarterly Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society
Editor: Jonelle Miller-Chapman
11201 Pickfair Dr.
Austin, TX 78750-2525
(512)257-0618
		 millerjo@austin.rr.com

Newsletter Deadlines

COPYRIGHT © 2009 by Texas Archeological Society
All rights reserved. ISSN 0082-2949
Printed at Morgan Printing in Austin, Texas

Ellen Sue Turner and Thomas R. Hester give permission
to the Texas Archeological Society to use a reproduced
image of the Marshall point, p. 150, in A Field Guide to
Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians, 2nd ed., as part of the TAS
logo. Illustration by Kathy Roemer.

✦

TAS Officer Nominations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR: Pam Wheat-Stranahan
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR: Laura Beavers

Opinions, unless otherwise stated, are those of the
editor and contributors and do not necessarily reflect
the policies of the Society.

2

Inside

Fall 2009

Texas Archeology Academy Registration . . . . . . . . . 14

Ralph D. Vinson  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Elmer Kelton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
New Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Art & Archeology Exhibit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
TAS Membership Report  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

Winter, December 1

Calendar
October 23-25—TAS Annual Meeting, Del Rio
January 16—STAA Quarterly Meeting
March 17-20—52nd Annual Caddo Conference, Tyler
March 26-29—ARARA Annual Conference, Del Rio
April 14-18—SAA Annual Meeting, St. Louis
All members are welcome to attend
TAS Board Meetings

Annual Meeting
Continued from page 1

paintings as planned compositions, not random accumulations
of images over time. Her expanded dissertation, Rock Art of
the Lower Pecos, was published in 2003 and is considered an
important contribution on rock art interpretation.
Dr. Boyd teaches Field Methods in Rock Art, a threeweek field school offered each May through Texas State
University, gives numerous lectures around the country, serves
on several graduate committees, and continues her rock art
research in the Lower Pecos. You don’t want to miss the discussion of her ongoing research in the region.
Following the Public Forum the annual artifact identification session will give folks the opportunity to have items they
bring with them identified.
There’s more. A number of excellent symposia have been
submitted for the program, and abstracts for fascinating individual papers and poster presentations have been received as
well. In fact, so many papers have been submitted that there
will be two concurrent sessions Friday afternoon from 2:00
until 5:20 p.m.
If all that isn’t enough, special items for the silent auction and for a special door prize, have been made/donated by
the generous citizens and businesses of Del Rio and Ciudad
Acuña, Mexico. Both fascinating cities look forward to
the TAS visiting the area to discover their unique cultures.
There are interesting shops in both cities for your shopping
pleasure. Remember, if there’s any chance you will cross
into Mexico, BRING YOUR PASSPORT!! You will not be
allowed to return to the United States without one. In addition to border crossings, there are Border Patrol checkpoints
on all roads leading out of Del Rio. Every car leaving Del
Rio must eventually go through one of these posts. Please
be courteous, these folks and the drug-sniffing dogs working
with them are performing their jobs professionally, and helping keep our border safe.
While in the region, try to make time to take a selfguided tour of historic Del Rio or visit some of many local
attractions such as the Whitehead Museum, Val Verde winery, Lake Amistad and Dam, Fate Bell Shelter in Seminole
Canyon State Park and Historic Site, the Fort Clark Guardhouse Museum in Brackettville (http://www.fortclark.com/
fortclarksprings/index.htm) and the Judge Roy Bean Visitors
Center in Langtry.
SHUMLA is hosting this meeting as an opportunity for
the Society to encourage new membership in a region that
has spectacular archeological sites but few TAS members!
Take advantage of the occasion and, and if you are in good
physical condition, visit Panther Cave, Satan Canyon, or
White Shaman Shelter on one of the scheduled tours. The size

of each group is limited, so register early and reserve your
space. When you check in at the registration desk you must
sign release forms. Be prepared to leave Del Rio at least one
hour before the stated tour time. This is the case whether you
are traveling to either White Shaman Shelter or Panther Cave,
or are part of the groups led to the departure site for the Big
Satan Canyon tours.
Information about the tours with pictures of the climbs
involved, are on the TAS Web site (http://www.txarch.org/
Activities/AnnualMeeting/am2009/tours.php).
Here is the preliminary schedule for the meeting.
Thursday, October 22, 2009
Registration: 12:00–7:00 p.m.; Ramada Inn Lobby
Tours: sign required release forms at registration desk;
depart Del Rio at least one hour before scheduled tour time
1:00 p.m. Panther Cave
2:00 p.m. Satan Canyon
3:00 p.m. Panther Cave
Friday, October 23, 2009
Registration: 12:00–7:00 p.m.; Ramada Inn Lobby
Book Sales & Exhibits room set-up: 9:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m.;
Civic Center—Kennedy Room
Silent Auction room set-up: 9:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m.; Civic
Center—Chamber Boardroom
Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA): 9:00 a.m.–12:00
p.m.: Civic Center—Cottonwood Room
Texas Historical Commission’s Archeological Stewards:
1:00–2:00 p.m.; Civic Center—Red Oak Ballroom
TAS Executive Committee: 3:00–3:30 p.m.; Civic Center—
Red Oak Ballroom
TAS Board Meeting: 3:30–4:30 p.m.; Civic Center—Red
Oak Ballroom
Concurrent Sessions: 2:00–5:20 p.m.; Civic Center—
Cottonwood and Mesquite Rooms
Public Forum: 7:00–8:45 p.m.; Civic Center—Red Oak
Ballroom
Artifact Identification: 9:00–10:30 p.m.; Civic Center—Red
Oak Lobby
CTA-sponsored Social: 9:00–11:00 p.m.; Civic Center—
Red Oak Lobby
Continued on page 4

Texas Archeology

✦

3

Annual Meeting
Continued from page 3

Saturday, October 24, 2009
Registration: 7:00 a.m.–2:00 p.m.; Civic Center—Red Oak
Lobby

Special Notice!

Concurrent Sessions: 8:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m.; Civic Center—
Cottonwood Room, Mesquite Room, Red Oak
Ballroom

Response to the Call for Papers has been almost overwhelming! In order to accommodate the
74 abstracts submitted, papers will begin right after
lunch Friday with two concurrent sessions. Three
concurrent sessions will be held from 8:00 a.m.
through 5:20 p.m. Saturday. Come early, stay late,
and let us all have a great time in Del Rio!
Thank you from the Program Committee:
Elton Prewitt, Chair
Joe Labadie
Stephanie Mueller

Luncheon/Business Meeting: 12:00–1:30 p.m.; Civic
Center—Red Oak Ballroom
Book Sales and Exhibits: 8:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m.; Civic
Center—Kennedy Room
Silent Auction: 8:00 a.m.–4:00 p.m.; Civic Center—
Chamber Boardroom
Cash-bar Social and Banquet: 6:00–10:00 p.m.; Civic
Center—Red Oak Ballroom
Sunday, October 25, 2009
TAS Executive Committee: 7:30–8:30 a.m.; Civic Center—
Chamber Boardroom
TAS Board Meeting: 8:30–9:45 a.m.; Civic Center—
Chamber Boardroom
Tours: sign required release forms at registration desk;
depart Del Rio at least one hour before scheduled tour time
8:30 a.m. Panther Cave
9:00 a.m. Satan Canyon
9:00 a.m. White Shaman Shelter
10:30 a.m. Panther Cave
12:00 p.m. White Shaman Shelter

As indicated in the schedule above, there will be two
events held by the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA).
Friday morning the CTA will hold its fall meeting from 9:00
a.m. until noon; and Friday evening, following the Public
Forum, it will host the annual Careers in Archeology social
beginning at 9:00 p.m. As always, the social will have snacks
and a cash bar.
In addition, there will be a meeting of the Texas Historical Commission’s Archeological Stewards from 1:30 until
2:30 p.m. on Friday.
Everyone involved with planning this meeting is looking
forward to your visit to Del Rio. See you there!!!

TAS Officer Nominations
The TAS 2009 Nomination Committee wishes to submit the following names for consideration:
President-Elect
Secretary
Treasurer
Publications Editor
Nominating Committee Chair

Britt Bousman
Paula Vastine-Norman
Marybeth Tomka
Timothy K. Perttula
Nick Morgan

Region II Director
Region V Director
Region VII Director

“Pinky” Robertson
Don Keyes
Trudy Williams

I want to thank the Committee, Dr. Stephen Black and Ms. Kerza Prewitt for their hard work.
Yours truly,
Gladys Swanson, Nomination Committee Chairperson

4

✦

Fall 2009

2009 TAS Silent Auction and Grand Door Prize
As you pack your bags for the Annual Meeting in October,
don’t forget to include a generous supply of acquisitive urge.
The Silent Auction and chances to score a very unique
door prize are already on the books for the 2009 Annual Meeting in Del Rio, and they are guaranteed to tempt even the most
complacent, casual shopper. Many Del Rio merchants and artists have already pledged or surrendered gift items as evidence
of community support for the first-ever such event here.
Award-winning Del Rio quilter Sara Castle has crafted a
quilt entitled “Rock Art” as her contribution. Event organizers
have chosen to offer chances to win this richly-colored fabric
art as a premier door prize. Castle’s theme is manifest in patterns of vibrant colors depicting rock strata, ancient cave paintings, fossils and contemporary Native American patterns.

Of the Silent Auction donations thus far,
here are a few examples:
• Whitehead Memorial Museum Director Lee Lincoln
donated a 4'x6' Val Verde County-themed wool throw,
one of the most popular items from the museum store.
• Del Rio City Engineer and master flint-knapper Bob Parker will present a finely-crafted replica point or blade.
• Hilda Aguirre, owner/manager of Always Simply Beautiful donated a children’s pyramid pillow with a festive
appliquéd lion.

From her quilting studio on the bluffs high above Lake
Amistad, quilting artist Sara Castle checks the progress on
her donation to TAS, entitled “Rock Art.” The 5'x5' throw will
be offered as a door prize to a lucky purchaser of a chance
ticket. (Photo/Bill Sontag)
• The Emporium in historic downtown presents a gift basket of Texas condiments, preserves and coffees. Owner/
managers Betty and Jim Sanders have our thanks.
• Del Rio City Councilwoman Lisa Cadena Craig, owner/
manager of Milagros Del Rio, also in downtown, has offered up a very fine, brilliantly-colored Talavera plate.
• A watercolor painting has been donated by Del Rio artist
Pam Bunch, winner of numerous juried shows throughout
Texas.
• Del Rio internal medicine physician Emile G. “Doc” Abbott has donated one of his fine art photo prints of rock
art features in the Lower Pecos region.
• Through Amistad National Recreation Area Superintendent Alan Cox, Big Bend Natural History Association
is slated to donate a regional educational gift from the
park’s visitor center book store.
• Roberts Jewelers owner/manager Jeannie Roe donated a
silver flask covered with fine suede leather.
• Texas A&M University Professor Emeritus Harry Shafer sent 15 titles of books pertaining to archeology and
anthropology.

Lisa Cadena Craig, owner/manager of Milagros Del Rio, 756
S. Main St., in downtown Del Rio shows off the Talavera plate
donated to TAS from her extensive collection of fine Mexican
pottery, furnishings and décor. (Photo/Bill Sontag)

These are a smattering of what Silent Auction shoppers
will find. We ask that everyone remember the proceeds all
go to help TAS continue its quest to support archeology and
public awareness of its rich heritage in Texas.
We look forward to auction items brought to the meeting
by TAS members and friends, and would like to have as much
advance knowledge of such items as possible. Information
may be provided to TAS Silent Auction Coordinator Kim
Canseco via e-mail, kcanseco@stx.rr.com.

Texas Archeology

✦

5

¡Bienvenidos a México!
Kim Canseco
TAS Local Arrangements Committee Volunteer
While in Del Rio for the TAS Annual Meeting consider a
trip across the border to Ciudad Acuña. Enjoy the quaint shops
and restaurants along Hidalgo and Madero Streets. Walk
Benjamin Canales Plaza and experience its cultural flavor and
historical importance. The curio shops, restaurants, pharmacies and liquor stores are always favorite stops for visitors.
Our friends and merchants in Acuña welcome you and
are “a sus ordenes” (at your service). Dollars and credit cards
are accepted. The same amount of caution should be used as
when you travel to any new city or country. There are two,
easy-to-satisfy absolutes about going to Mexico.
1. Have your U.S. Passport or Passcard with you as you will
need to show this as you return through U.S. Customs.
2. Do NOT carry any weapons or ammunition across the
bridge.
You can feel comfortable strolling within the shopping
district (the streets mentioned above and their connecting
cross streets) near the international bridge and returning to
Del Rio at a reasonable hour. You may take a taxi to Acuña
from your hotel, or you may drive your vehicle and park in
the parking lots on or near Hidalgo Street. You may also park
in a lot near the bridge on the U.S. side, and hike across. The
shopping and dining district is within easy reach (two blocks)
after crossing the bridge. If you drive, check to make sure your
car insurance covers you in Mexico.

Patio furniture, terra cotta pots and planters, a colorful fountains
along the path to El Patio gift shop show off the craftsmanship
of owner/rancher/civic leader Roberto Garza Crosby. (Photo/
Bill Sontag)

6

✦

Fall 2009

The famed and historic Hotel Crosby dining room is immediately
adjacent to the equally colorful and far more rustic Crosby’s
Bar. Acuña restaurants feature affordable, delicious food as
well as many varieties of top Mexican and American beers and
margaritas. (Photo/Bill Sontag)
The bridge toll going into Mexico is $2.50, and to return
to the U.S. the toll is just under $2.00 (this varies with the
peso/dollar exchange rate—which is now approximately 13
pesos to 1 U.S. dollar). Remember, U.S. citizens must have
a passport or passcard to return to the U.S. through the Portof-Entry.
¡Buen viaje!

A friendly sales assistant prepares new merchandise for display
at La Galleria on Hidalgo Street in Acuña. Owner/manager
Diana Ramon is known for her civic leadership and interests
in education in Acuña and Del Rio. (Photo/Bill Sontag)

Don’t Miss the 5th Annual CTA-TAS
“Careers in Archeology” Social!
Please join us on Friday, October 23, 2009, from 9:00-10:30pm
(after the Public Forum) at the TAS Annual Meeting, Civic Center, Del Rio, Texas.
The Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) and the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) (organized
by the Membership Committee) have joined forces to provide the students, TAS members, CTA
members, and the general public opportunities to meet with professional archeologists and learn
about potential archeology careers and to check out what’s happening in Texas archeology and
cultural resource management (CRM) around the state.

Cash bar and free hors d’oeuvres included!!!
(generously provided by the CTA)
If you have any questions or would like to sign up to participate in the Social, please
contact Tiffany Osburn (512) 463-8883 tiffany.osburn@thc.state.tx.us

Rock Art Recording Date Announced
The TAS Rock Art Task Force has scheduled an upcoming
recording session near Big Bend National Park. The site is
on private land. Recording rock art will be done in a large
pictograph-filled area with many over-painted icons. This
promises to be an interesting site to record and it has several
cultures represented in the pictographs.
If you’re thinking of attending or if you want more information, please contact Teddy Lou Stickney. Her land phone
is 432-682-9384, cell phone is 432-559-2380 or email her at
stick711@sbcglobal.net She plans to arrive in Study Butte
on December 27th with work beginning the following day and
continuing through January 2nd. The registration fee is $50;
watch the TAS web site for further details.
✦

✦

already planned with some speakers already scheduled. Check
the TAS website for more information, or contact Region 4
Director Barbara Chadwick at jvalleytex@yahoo.com.

✦

The East Texas Archeological Society held its first
meeting of the 2009-2010 year on Thursday, September 17
at 7:00PM in the Ferguson Building on the SFASU campus.
They were honored to have Jeff Girard, Northwest Louisiana Regional Archeologist from Natchitoches, speak on the
subject of Caddo archeology. TAS is excited about the ETAS
reorganization and their move forward in support of Texas archeology. The group has a year of meeting dates and locations

A 2008 evening Sing-Along with Ralph surrounded by
fellow troubadours Nick Morgan, Steve Hayes,
Robin Matthews and Wesley Jarvis.

Texas Archeology

✦

7

Recent Investigations at a Late Prehistoric Bison Hunting
Encampment in the Canadian River Valley of Texas
Scott D. Brosowske, Courson Archaeological Research
As the cool mornings of fall have already arrived here in
the panhandle, we are still attempting to complete many of
the field related tasks begun in June during the 2009 Texas
Archeological Society (TAS) field school. Unfortunately, we
have not been able to tackle any of the unfinished excavations
that still remain at Chill Hill, Evan’s Supply Depot, Archie
King I and II, and Cross L. Since the field school our entire
staff has kept busy processing the nearly 4200 liters of soil
collected for flotation, and more recently, finishing up the
washing, sorting, and cataloging of artifacts from Cross L and
Chill Hill. Currently, we have not yet been able to assemble
summaries regarding the work completed at the numerous
sites investigated at the field school this past summer. However, we have just completed the washing and cataloging all
of the materials recovered from Cross L. As such, this site is
currently the best understood of all of the sites investigated
during the 2009 field season. The following brief article will
concentrate on the results of excavation and initial analysis of
cultural materials recovered from Cross L, a Late Prehistoric
period bison hunting encampment. Later, as additional work
is completed, additional summaries will be provided for the
other sites investigated during the 2009 TAS Field School.
As noted in previous articles, the Cross L (41RB140) site
is a Late Prehistoric period bison hunting encampment. This
site is situated atop and down the east slope of a low dividing
ridge separating two unnamed tributaries to Patch Creek. The
latter joins the Canadian River approximately 15 km south of
the site. Cross L is about 160 meters long by 75 meters wide.
Cultural materials are scattered across the entire site, but are
most densely concentrated along the east slope where rodent
activity has exposed midden materials below a 20 cm cap of
aeolian material (see Figure 1).
Field investigations were first conducted at this site with
a testing program during the 2008 TAS Field School. The results of testing provided a great deal of information regarding
the horizontal and vertical distribution of cultural materials at
the site. Using this information, a two-by-ten meter excavation
block was laid out prior to the 2009 field season on the east
facing slope of the site that contained the thickest and best
preserved midden deposits.
A few days after the field school began it became readily
apparent that we would not be able to completely excavate
the shallow, yet dense midden deposits contained in this
block. As such, Susan Vehik and Art Tawater, the co-principal

8

✦

Fall 2009

Figure 1. Looking North at Cross L Excavation Block.
investigators at this site, elected to reduce the excavation block
to a one-by-ten meter unit beginning at level 3. Even with this
reduction in block size we were still unable to reach sterile
deposits in most areas by the end of the field school (i.e., Level
5). Combined, a total of approximately 5.25 m3 of matrix has
been excavated in 2008 and 2009.
By limiting excavations to the midden deposits contained
on the eastern slope of the site we did not anticipate encountering any residential structures. This prediction was borne out
by the excavations completed this summer. In fact, other than
the abundant trash debris that was encountered, no hearths,
roasting pits, storage facilities, or any other cultural features
were documented. Faunal remains were by far the most common artifact class recovered. A total of 23.7 kg or 52.2 lbs
of bone have been recovered during the 2008 and 2009 field

seasons. Other items recovered included burned caliche, fire
cracked boiling stones, chipped stone tools and debitage, and
a few ceramic sherds. No bone tools, ornaments, or items of
marine shell were recovered.
Once the faunal analysis is completed for Cross L a great
deal of information regarding the hunting and processing
strategies incorporated by the occupants of the site will be
gleaned. Nonetheless, several basic trends can be discerned
at this time. First, as the distance between bison kill and
camp sites increases, bulkier portions of animals with lower
meat, marrow, or grease utility, such as skulls, pelves, and
vertebral columns, are less likely to have been transported
back to camps. These elements, along with all other portions of the animal, are well represented at Cross L. This
suggests that in at least some instances bison were killed in
close proximity to the site and were transported back to the
site for further processing. Second, it is apparent that two
different types of processing strategies were incorporated
by the occupants of Cross L. In some cases, the extent of
processing was limited to the removal of marrow from long
bone elements. In other cases, bone elements were further
reduced into small fragments and boiled for the removal of
bone grease. The frequent occurrence of fractured quartzite
boiling stones from excavated contexts is also indicative
of bone grease production at the site. Until the numerous
mandibles from the site are aged to determine seasonality for
the site, it is not clear whether the variability in processing
observed is related to occupation during different times of
the year or some other factor.
Interestingly, bison scapulae and tibiae are present, and
like all of the other elements, were also processed for marrow and bone grease. These two elements are commonly
used by horticultural societies for the production of farming
implements, namely hoes and digging sticks. As such, these
elements are typically culled during processing and transported back to permanent villages for tool production. That
the scapulae and tibiae were not culled at Cross L, but were
processed like all of the other elements suggests that the oc-

cupants of this site did not have a horticultural component in
their economy.
That bison hunting and processing were the primary activities conducted at Cross L is also well supported by the chipped
stone assemblage. A total of 65 complete or partial arrowpoints
were recovered during testing and block excavation (Figure
2). Of these, 44 were complete enough to identify (Table 1).
Projectile points appear to occur in higher frequencies in the
uppermost levels. This is a result of the fact that the excavation
block for the first two levels consisted of a two-by-ten meter
unit. Later, beginning at level 3, the block was reduced to a
one-by-ten meter unit. In other words, the size of the block was
reduced by one-half. Also, the limited numbers of projectiles
recovered from levels 4 and 5 occurs because few units were
excavated below level 3 before the field school ended.
As we saw during our testing in 2008, Late Archaic and
Early Ceramic projectile points were again recovered during

Figure 2. Arrowpoints Recovered from Cross L in 2009.

Table 1. Identifiable Arrowpoint Types Recovered from Cross L in 2008 and 2009.

Level

Corner Notched
Dart Points

Corner
Notched
Arrowpoints

Washita

Harrell

Fresno

Totals

1

2 (14.3%)

1 (7.1%)

5 (35.7%)

0 (0%)

6 (42.9%)

14

2

0 (0%)

4 (23.5%)

5 (29.4%)

1 (5.9%)

7 (41.2%)

17

3

1 (12.5%)

0 (0%)

4 (50.0%)

0 (0%)

3 (37.5%)

8

4

0 (0%)

2 (66.7%)

1 (33.3%)

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

3

5

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

2 (100.0%)

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

2

Total

3 (6.8%)

7 (15.9%)

17 (38.6%)

1 (2.3%)

16 (36.4%)

44

b

a

a

One specimen represents a dart point reworked into a drill

Continued on page 10

Texas Archeology

✦

9

Recent Investigations
Continued from page 9

excavations in 2009. Altogether, these included seven corner
notched arrowpoints and three reworked corner notched dart
points recovered during testing and block excavation. Seven
or 70% of these projectile points were recovered from levels
1 and 2 and were intermixed with five Washita, one Harrell,
and six Fresno points. As was suggested in an earlier newsletter article, given the vertical distribution of the Washita,
Fresno, and Harrell arrowpoints, types that are typical of the
Middle and Late Ceramic periods and are most numerous
(i.e., 77% of the arrowpoint assemblage), it is believed that
the earlier point styles present reflect items scavenged from
a nearby Late Archaic and Early Ceramic period site called
C-C (Figure 3).
Evidence for hide processing is also well represented at
the site with the recovery of at least 15 exhausted or broken
distal endscrapers (Figure 4). Other types of chipped stone
tools are rare, but include two drills and two partial Harahey
knives. Given that butchering was a major activity conducted
at the site it might seem unusual that so few knives were recovered. However, since Harahey knives were resharpened in
a manner to extend their use-lives (i.e., by alternate beveling),
it is probable that these tools were heavily curated and only
discarded when broken or exhausted. Indeed, evidence for
extensive tool rejuvenation is well represented at the site by

several thousand resharpening flakes recovered during water
screening through 3 mm mesh.
Although a detailed lithic analysis remains to be completed for Cross L, chipped stone raw materials are clearly
dominated by Alibates silicified dolomite (+/- 80%). Cortex
present on specimens indicates acquisition from both bedrock and locally available secondary gravel sources. Other
raw materials recovered are locally available and include
quartzites and cherts procured from the Ogallala formation.
In contrast to the nearby Archie King Ruins, McGarraugh
Ranch, Chill Hill, and Killer sites, obsidian artifacts are
noticeably rare. Only two examples, a projectile point and
a miniscule flake, have been recovered during two years of
excavation.
Compared to other sites in the region that also contain
Washita, Harrell, and Fresno arrowpoints, Cross L has very
few ceramics. Combined, a total of 54 sherds were recovered
in 2008 and 2009. The exteriors of sherds are characterized
by unmodified or partially smoothed cordmarking. The tempering agents in sherds examined thus far have consisted of
either sand or scoria or combination of both. Two rim sherds,
both from the same vessel, were recovered and represent a
large bowl or conical-shaped vessel. This vessel type is quite
unusual for the region.

Figure 3. Looking East Across Tributary Stream from Cross L to the C-C Site.

10

✦

Fall 2009

Figure 4. Distal Endscrapers Recovered from Cross L in 2009.
In closing, the Cross L site clearly represents a Late
Prehistoric bison hunting encampment and processing locale.
This interpretation is supported by a material assemblage that
is dominated by processed bison bone, chipped stone tools
associated with hunting and processing, and heat fractured
boiling stones. The presence of Washita, Harrell, and Fresno
arrowpoints, distal endscrapers, and beveled knives suggest
that the site was occupied sometime during the Middle or
Late Ceramic periods. However, until radiocarbon dates are
obtained later this fall we will not be able to precisely determine the age of the occupation at Cross L.
Overall, we were very pleased with the progress that was
made at the site this summer. We would like to thank the dedicated crew that labored in the hot sun at Cross L (Figure 5). You
guys did an excellent job carefully exposing and documenting
a portion of the bison bone bed at this amazing site!

Figure 5. The 2009 Cross L Field Crew with the Canadian
River Valley in the Distance.

Teacher Workshops Huge Success at Field School
The TAS Education Committee sponsored four workshops
for teachers during the 2009 Field School. We tried something
new this year and called it “First Friday Night.” This was
designed to be a short workshop on the Friday night before
FS actually starts and an opportunity for teachers to meet
each other. Seventeen teachers were present as well as about
twenty-five other TAS members. The main event was showing
of the twenty-minute video “An Adventure in Time—The Gault
Project.” Each teacher was given a copy of the DVD.
May Schmidt also did an introductory activity called
“Thinking Outside the Box,” a way teachers can challenge
students to identify both old and recent artifacts.
Dr. Paul Smith conducted a flintknapping workshop and
gave each teacher a knapping kit. It was a great hands-on
experience and only five people needed bandages... Paul being one of them!
Neal Stilley conducted a workshop on fire-making and
showed several different tools including the Shumla notch
(which he discovered), bow drill with flywheel, thumb leather
attachments to fire drill, and he had teachers on their hands

and knees trying to make fire.
Robin Matthews conducted an activity that involved
teachers using compass coordinates and maps produced by
2008 Field School teachers, to locate hidden items. Robin
also taught all the teachers how to use the atlatl and had a
dart-throwing contest. The winner was teacher Carol Stoval
who won a box of teaching supplies.

Neal Stilly demonstrating
bow drill and flywheel
firemaking tool at teacher
workshop. (Photo/Ann
Matthews)

Texas Archeology

✦

11

Golden Opportunity Girl
Temperance Aquistapace
In June of 2009 I attended the Texas Archeological
Society field school that was held in Ochiltree County, Texas.
I was fortunate to be able to attend this event on a Collegiate
Scholarship, and the experience will be unforgettable.
During the Field school I learned many things about my
chosen career, the enthusiasm of non- professionals, and the
meaning of Panhandle storms. On the first day of the FS I
met several people that were not only helpful but wanted to
talk about past experiences as well as what was possible for
the 2009 school.
My knowledge of archaeology had thus far been limited
to pedestrian survey, lab work, and classroom instruction, and
unfortunately I had not worked with lithics or ceramics. I discovered after the orientation meeting that I know some of the
lithics. Then I stopped to watch a flint-knapping seminar going
on and I feel that I have a much better grasp of what I see on
the ground when I am surveying. I was also able to observe and
handle many different flakes, points, knives, and to my amazement a dart point. It was nice to be able to talk with the PI’s
and get some of my questions answered. I also had a chance to
look at some of the ceramics first hand and to get the thrill of
finding these bits of the past in my floatation tubs. To me it was
almost as exciting as finding bits of bone. Before the FS I was
mostly working with animal bone, identifying and inventorying
the collection currently stored at Wichita State University. This
gave me a limited amount of knowledge concerning many other
aspects of archaeology that I will need in the future.
I attended several of the events held at field school this
year. One was a presentation by Dr. David Hughes, and while
I am his student, there were many things he spoke about that
I was not privy to. It was a wonderful overview of the work
done by TAS and a great way to say thank you to Mr. And
Mrs. Courson for their generosity.
I met many people from a vast diversity of backgrounds,
which included graduate and undergraduate students, PhDs and
pre college teachers as well as many non-professionals from a
great many professions. It was during this time that a couple of
the middle school teachers that I met determined that I would
make a wonderful teacher, and while I was working the floatation tanks we had a great many student visitors. It was during
these moments that I have decided I may go that route and teach
younger kids then possibly move up to the college level.
I know I have gone on about the people but I don’t
think I have ever met so many people of not only like minds
but were also willing to share their knowledge. I was very
fortunate to have attended this field school and to have met

12

✦

Fall 2009

Scholarship recipient Temperance Aquistapace worked
enthusiastically at the flotation station all week.
so many phenomenal people. I will come again next year;
without a doubt this has been the best experience that I have
had in many years!

Center for Big Bend Studies
16th Annual Conference
November 13–14, 2009
Sul Ross State University
Alpine, Texas
University Center
• Over 30 presentations on the history, archaeology,
and culture of the Big Bend and northern Mexico
• Friday night banquet with dynamic speaker Dr. John
Hart from the University of Houston on “The Quest
for Silver in the Sierra Madre”
• Complimentary Conference Social for registrants
• Vendors of books, apparel, and more
• For more information or to register, call 432/837-8179
or visit www.sulross.edu/cbbs/.

Texas Archaeology Academies 2010
Lynn Yakubik, Chair, Academy Committee
Looking for a way to expand your knowledge of archaeology? Have an interest in stone tools or pottery? Did our
Archaeology 101 academy leave you hungry for more? Look
no further—here are the offerings for 2010!
We begin with our popular Ceramics: The Stories Found
in Pottery Academy, held in San Marcos at the Texas State
University campus on February 6-7, 2010. Led by Dr. Harry
Shafer, with a demonstration by Chuck Hixson, this academy
will show you the importance of ceramics in terms of chronology, dating, technology, trade and exchange, subsistence,
social and political identities. Hands on exercises will enable
students to recognize and sort sherds to answer questions
about ancient lifeways.
Lithics is back! After a year off, we will hold a Lithics:
Reading Stone Artifacts Academy in Kerrville on February
20-21, 2010. Exercises include hands on experience recognizing and analyzing stone artifacts, along with distinguishing
wear patterns and functional uses. Participants will learn why
stone artifacts are important, how they are produced and used,
and how stone tools contribute to the archeological record.
The academy will be taught by Dr. Harry Shafer with assistance from flintknapper Cary Voss, who will explain how the
archaeological record is formed as he demonstrates stone tool
manufacture techniques.
Our newest academy this year is called Geoarchaeology:
Recognizing and Evaluating the Archaeological Potential of
the Landscape. Get ready to trek over some rough terrain on
archaeologically rich Ft. Hood with Charles Frederick and
Karl Kibler as they teach you how landscape settings influence

site context, visibility and preservation. Hands on exercises
will offer participants the opportunity to see what can be
learned from the geography of Texas. This academy will be
held in March; as of the newsletter deadline, no firm date has
been established. As much as being chased around by troops
on maneuvers would lend an “Indiana Jones”-like appeal, we
at TAS prefer to wait until the Army sets the Training Holiday
dates for 2010 to schedule. Look on the website or find an
Academy Committee member at the Annual Meeting to find
out the dates!
All workshops are intended for anyone interested in
archeological topics. Avocational archeologists experience
new dimensions of expertise; professional archeologists
benefit from review; undergraduates, graduate students and
educators may receive credit for the classes. The goal of Texas
Archeology Academies is to show how archeology is done
and why we do it.
Fees are $100 for members and $160 for non-members
(includes membership fee). Student membership fees are also
available. Fees include a CD manual, lunch and snacks during
the class sessions. TAS is a provider of professional development accredited through SBEC. Credits may be received by
teachers attending classes.
Register online or by mail (over). See www.txarch.org ,
Texas Archeology Academy or call 1-800-377-7240 for more
information.
To learn more about Student Scholarships and Scholarships awarded by the Diversity Committee, see http://www.
txarch.org/scholarships/index.html

Texas Historical Commission Launches 20th Annual Texas Archeology Celebration
In October, communities in virtually every corner of
the state will participate in one of the biggest state celebrations of archeology in the country—Texas Archeology
Month (TAM).
Sponsored by the Texas Historical Commission (THC)
since 1989 as part of its mission to preserve the state’s
archeological resources and increase the appreciation of
scientific archeology, TAM draws thousands of Texans each
year to a wide range of educational and fun-filled events.
To help groups who are organizing TAM events, the
THC’s Archeology Division provides free materials that

include the TAM Calendar of Events (printed and online
versions), the TAM poster, a 40-page manual called “How
to Plan and Manage an Archeology Fair,” and brochures
on a variety of archeological topics. To order materials,
contact Donna McCarver at 512.463.6090 or donna.mccarver@thc.state.tx.us.
TAM event coordinators who would like to post their
event descriptions on this year’s online calendar may
send information to the THC through October 26. To post
information, contact TAM Coordinator María de la Luz
Martínez at 512.463.9505 or marialuzm@thc.state.tx.us.

Texas Archeology

✦

13

REGISTRATION
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY ACADEMY 2010 REGISTRATION
More information and online registration is available at www.txarch.org
Name _____________________________________________________________
Address ________________________City_______________State_____Zip______
Phone: Home _______________________

Business______________________

Email for confirmation _________________________________________________
CIRCLE THE ACADEMY SESSION THAT YOU WISH TO ATTEND
Location

Topic

Dates

Registration Deadline

San Marcos

Ceramics

Feb. 6,7

Jan 25

Kerrville

Lithics

Feb 20, 21

Feb 6

Ft. Hood/Killeen

Geoarchaeology

March ? TBA

Mar 1

Academy hours are Sat 9-5 and Sunday 9-3.
FEES
TAS member 2010
$100
Non-member 2010 (includes individual membership )
$160
Student to age 25 non member (includes membership)
$140
total fee enclosed ______
Cancellations after the deadline are non-refundable. TAS will fill cancellation vacancies from a waiting list.

CREDIT CARD AUTHORIZATION FORM (please print)
Name as it appears on Credit Card, please print
__________________________________________ Ph. No.______________
Billing address_____________________City______________State____Zip_________
VISA____ MC ____ Card #___________________________ Exp. Date______
Authorized signature_______________________________________________
CHECKS

Payable to Texas Archeological Society – academy

MAIL registration form & payment to:
Texas Archeology Academy – Beth Stenstrom,
31410 Wild Oak Hill, Fair Oaks Ranch, TX 78015
ONLINE registration and more information at www.txarch.org
Questions: call 1-800-377-7240

14

✦

Fall 2009

New Exhibits on TBH Highlight Discoveries
on Edwards Plateau, Grand Prairie
By Susan Dial
Recently reported investigations in Edwards County and
McLennan County by two Austin cultural resource management firms have resulted in new public education outreach
exhibits on Texas Beyond History: the Varga Site, excavated
by TRC Environmental Corporation, and Waco Lake sites,
excavated by Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Sponsored by the
Texas Department of Transportation and the U.S. Corps of
Engineers, respectively, these exhibits exemplify the benefits of collaboration and online publication to make new
research accessible to both the archeological community
and the general public. In addition to featuring significant
findings from the projects, each exhibit is distinctive in
tackling a key question frequently asked of archeologists:
“How do you know that?” and “What was it like to live in
prehistoric times?”

The Varga Site: What We Can Learn from
Technical Analyses of Archeological Remains
www.texasbeyondhistory.net/varga
This five-section exhibit highlights findings from a small
stream-side campsite in Edwards County near the edge of
the Balcones Escarpment. Over a roughly 6,000-year period,
hunting and gathering peoples periodically returned to this
seemingly inhospitable environment to acquire a variety of
resources for their food, shelter and tools. Traces of their
camps were preserved in flood deposits over time, and these
remains were uncovered by archeologists after a modern flood
destroyed the highway crossing over the creek.
In an illustrated interactive section, the exhibit zeroes
in on the “hows” and “whys” of different technical analyses
that were conducted on samples from the Varga site and the
information that can be gleaned. Covered are analyses of
macrobotanical remains, fatty acids, phytoliths, pollen, as
well as petrographic analysis of pottery, raw clays and soils,
neutron activation analysis of pottery and stone, use-wear
analysis of stone tools, and radiocarbon dating of organic
remains. A considerable amount of detail about the methods
used in these studies is included in order to show that it is
not a simple process to extract meaningful information from
the bits and pieces recovered from archeological sites. This
is an attempt to answer the frequently asked question, How
do you know that?

The exhibit was written by Mike Quigg and Paul Matchen
of TRC Environmental Corporation of Austin. The Texas
Department of Transportation (TxDOT) sponsored the archeological investigations as well as this exhibit, as a public
education outreach component of that work.

Before Waco Lake: Prehistoric Life
Along the Bosque River
www.texasbeyondhistory.net/waco
Archeologists from Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted investigations at the Britton, McMillan, and Higginbotham
sites in McLennan County as was warranted by a proposed
plan to raise the conservation pool of Waco Lake (or Lake
Waco, as it is also known). Prehistoric Life along the Bosque
River tells the story of how hunting and gathering peoples
during the Late Archaic period met the daily challenges of
life through the use of several key resources found throughout
their environment. To reconstruct the past and tell this story,
a variety of models and theoretical approaches were used
by researchers to help link excavated remains with human
behavior. Examples of these research approaches and how
they were painstakingly applied to evidence from the Waco
Lake sites are included to give viewers an idea of how data
are interpreted. The colorful interactive section, “What Was
It Like?” is based on excavated remains of the campsites and
provides viewers the opportunity to learn more detail about
the five key resources used in Late Archaic times: fuelwood,
freshwater mussels, deer, stone, and plants, particularly geophytes (plants that have edible underground parts, such as
bulbs, roots, or tubers).
This exhibit is based on the 2008 report of the Waco
Lake investigations by Gemma Mehalchick and Karl Kibler
of Prewitt and Associates, Inc. The project was sponsored by
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District, and
the TBH exhibit is a public education outreach component of
that work. (See Credits and Sources sections of both exhibits
for full credits.)
In addition to funds provided by the sponsoring agencies,
donations from the Texas Archeological Society, the Council
of Texas Archeologists, and the Southern Texas Archaeological Association, and contributions from their members, helped
make these exhibits possible.

Texas Archeology

✦

15

Ralph D. Vinson
by Katherine Turner-Pearson
The Texas Archaeological Society lost one of its long
time members, and the archaeological world lost one of
its most dedicated volunteers, when Ralph D. Vinson
passed away July 3, 2009 at the age of 87 at his home in
Whitney, Texas.
A fixture at field schools and the Annual Meetings,
Ralph was a member of the TAS for 39 years, driving
through the back-roads of Texas in his distinctive truck with
its custom-made camper top, to get to every event. Of course
he did get lost a few times, but would laugh about it later. It
seems there was never a location too far for him to travel if
archaeology was involved. At the field school Ralph would
always work hard all day at the site, and then have the energy
to belt out a few tunes at the camp sing-a-long after dinner,
fascinating us with the number of obscure songs he knew.
He shared with the other campers a rich cultural history of
folk and gospel songs that are all but lost to us today.
He was a very active member of the Central Texas
Archaeological Society in Waco, attending the monthly
meetings and field days at local archaeological sites. He
was a wealth of information about the archaeology of the
central Texas area. While not archaeology, Ralph’s tireless
hours of work at the Waco Mammoth Site were honored just
a couple of weeks before his death, when the president of
Baylor University named him a Founding Member of the
Mayborn Museum Complex, one of only eleven such honors
ever bestowed. The museum is not sure exactly how many
hours Ralph volunteered, as he never cared if he signed in
each day and got credit, but they know it is over 14,000
hours, and he put in thousands of hours more working at the
museum with the archaeological collections. The Mammoth
Site will soon be a Federal Park, and many feel that it would
not have been possible without Ralph’s unselfish giving of
his time in order to get so much of the site excavated.
Ralph was father of four sons, five grandchildren, and
three great-grandsons. He was a rather quiet man when he
wasn’t singing, and many TAS members might not be aware
that Ralph had a degree in Art and History, and was a football
coach before retiring in 1973. But that path was interrupted
by World War II, where Ralph served as a staff sergeant in
the Army Air Corps 461st Bombardment Group.

16

✦

Fall 2009

In a major air fight
during the war, Ralph’s
plane was shot down,
and he became a German POW in Stalag IV in
Poland for seven months.
One night at a TAS Field
school he told some of
us about that experience,
and all who were lucky
enough to hear his story
Ralph Vinson at the 2006
listened in complete siTAS Field School.
lence, and left for their
(Photo/Sonny Wheeler
tents that night with a bigger appreciation for Ralph and his fellow soldiers. Ralph
could still remember every detail of that day including
every hole in his plane, the way the engines burned out,
the crash landing, and his capture. Another soldier on the
plane was killed. Ralph talked about being marched three
times across Germany, about what it was like to be truly
hungry, and what it is like to be truly cold.
Not all his recollections of the POW camp were so
dramatic, and some of his stories were quite entertaining.
One of the stories he told us at a TAS field school explained
the tin cup he used at the margarita party every year. The
cup was old and obviously made from an old tin can with
the top cut off. It sported a handle carefully made of old
wire that had seen many a hand holding it. According to
Ralph, at his first meal at the stalag he was handed a can
of beans and a spoon. After he ate the beans, he could not
find a trash can so he tossed the can down on the ground.
One of the other prisoners quickly picked it up and handed
it back to him and said, “oh no, you don’t understand… that
will be the only time you will get a can and spoon. This
will be your bowl and spoon from now on.” He later found
some old wire in the camp for the handle. When Ralph was
rescued, he kept the can-cup and used it for happier times,
like the margarita party with his friends.
Ralph laughed as he explained that while being held
in a cage in solitary confinement, he found an old piece
Continued on page 17

Adios Elmer, and happy trails…
Regional novelist Elmer Kelton, 83, died in San Angelo
on August 22, 2009. A cowboy’s son, Elmer was born in
Andrews County and grew up on the McElroy Ranch in
Upton and Crane counties. He was more comfortable in
front of a typewriter or word processor and received a
Bachelor’s degree in journalism from the University of
Texas after serving in Europe during World War II.
Kelton married Anna Lipp of Austria in 1947, and then
in 1949 began a 15-year career in agriculture journalism at
the San Angelo Standard-Times. Next he became editor of
the Sheep and Goat Raiser magazine in 1963 and associate editor of Livestock Weekly in 1968, retiring in 1990.
All the while he maintained another career as a freelance
writer beginning with short stories, progressing to novels,
non-fiction books, and countless magazine articles.
As a writer of western literature, Elmer wrote about
people, not heroes. Being a genuine, unaffected, kind and
gentle man who made you want to hunker down and listen
to his stories, his voice, and his wisdom, Elmer went beyond being just a respected livestock journalist. The Western Writers of America voted Kelton “Best Western Author
of All Time” and gave him its Spur Award seven times.
Four of his books won the Western Heritage Award from

the National Cowboy Hall
of Fame. After writing
more than 40 books, he
recently finished his last
book, “Texas Standoff,”
due out next year. Another novel, “Other Men’s
Horses,” will be released
November 1st.
Kelton is survived
by his wife of 62 years,
Elmer Kelton signing books
Ann, three children, four
in 2007.
grandchildren and their
children. His last public
appearance, “A Toast to Elmer Kelton,” was held in May
at the Ft. Concho Commissary where he was given a small
replica of a statue soon to be made in his honor. The statue
depicts Elmer standing next to a split rail fence, wearing
the ever-present cowboy hat. Those wishing to make a gift
towards completion of this statue may send donations to
the Tom Green County Library’s Elmer Kelton statue fund,
the San Angelo Area Foundation at 2201 Sherwood Way,
Suite 205, San Angelo, Texas.

of wire and fashioned a long hook. When the guard left
to make his rounds, he was able to use the hook to open
the refrigerator, steal a soda, and drink it before the guard
came back. The joy he still found in his trick was not the
sweet tasty treat he got, but in his ability to pull a fast-one
on his captors. He still found it funny.
In 1992 Ralph was given a series of medals and a
citation from the Greek Government for his service helping
Greece during WWII. According to the citation, Ralph
belonged to the “Fellowship of Ancient and Greek Warriors,”
and it thanked him for his bravery and service.
At the last TAS Field School Ralph attended, he sat
down for an interview about his life for the TAS records.
He ended his interview by saying that there was a time
when people did not talk about the war, and their experiences. But that now, “[you] feel like you need to talk. You
know people gotta know what it’s like. People don’t know
what war’s like anymore.” Thanks to Ralph, some of us
now have a much better understanding.

Recent Deaths
Hester, Jim Tom, died on August 2, 2009 and Mattie Hester
died on June 28th. These two fine folks were the parents of
TAS former president, Fellow, and many times Field School
P.I. Dr. Tom Hester of Utopia, Texas.
Kelton, Elmer, age 83, died August 22 in San Angelo.
Kohnitz, Harvey F. Jr., died July 17, 2009 at age 88. He was
an outstanding avocational archeologist, TAS member, and
founding member of STAA.
McPhail, James H. age 84 and a 39 year member of TAS
died in Austin, Texas, on July 2, 2009.
Van Der Veer, Van, died March 15, 2009, in San Antonio. Van
was a former TAS member and a founding member of STAA.
His wife Shirley survives him.
Vinson, Ralph, age 87, died on July 2, 2009 at home in
Whitney.

Texas Archeology

✦

17

The Texas Archeological Society
Welcomes the Following New Members
David Atkins
Judd Burton & Family
Rebecca & Michael Clark
Brandy Clark & Jimm Walker
Jennifer & Kimberly Crowder
Jerry R. Elmore, Jr.
Carlee Evans
John Fioroni
The Gault School of Archaeological
Research
Michele Goodson

Lori & Richard Gouge
Joshua Haefner
Dale Hanson & Family
Cynthia Hughes
Charles Koenig
Janis Lively & Family
Elizabeth Martindale
Mason Miller
Steve & Carol Moore
Daniel Rodriguez
Rosalie Rogers

A Memorial to the TAS Endowment Fund:
Gerald and Sherry Hunphrey in memory
of Bob Burleson
The Following Memorials have been sent
to the TAS Donors’ Fund:
Teddy Lou Stickney in memory
of Van Van der Veer.
Harry J. Shafer in memory of Bob Burleson
The Family of Dorothy Vinson Duncan in memory
of Ralph Vinson.
Ellen Sue Turner in memory of Jim Tom
and Maddie Hester

Chelsea Sims
Lori Sloat
Richard Smajstria
Steve Stoutamire
Margeaux Talley
Karen Taylor
Duke & Monica Weidmann
Roy Weiss
Patrick Wyatt

Contributions to the TAS Donors’ Fund
have been received from:
The Council of Texas Archeologists
Paul McGuff
Contributions to the Scholarship Funds
have been received from:
Anonymous
Council of Texas Archeologists
PBS&J
Geo-Marine
Jet Hays
Llano Uplift Archeological Society
Walt and Isabel Davis
William Self, Inc.

“Art & Archaeology” Juried Art Exhibition
San Antonio Visual Artists Gallery
River Center Mall, Downtown San Antonio
The San AntonioVisual Artists (SAVA) invite the general
public to “Art & Archaeology,” a juried exhibition of artwork,
including paintings, photography, sculptures, and more, by
many local South Texas artists. The exhibition is one of the
official Texas Archeology Month (TAM) state-wide events.
The exhibition will be located at the SAVA Fine Arts Gallery
in the River Center Mall, in downtown San Antonio. The
opening reception will be Thursday, October 1, 2009, from
6:00–8:00 pm. The art exhibition will be open to visitors daily
(Mon.-Sun.) from, 2:00–6:00pm, from October 2–31, 2009.
The event and exhibition is free of charge and open to the
general public. For further information visit the SAVA website: http://www.savisualartists.org; or contact Maureen “Mo”

18

✦

Fall 2009

Brown, curator of the SAVA “Art & Archaeology” Exhibition
at Email: momo4design@yahoo.com.
Event Location:
Sava Fine Arts Gallery, River Center Mall
840 E. Commerce Street, San Antonio, Texas 78205
Bexar County; Website: http://www.savisualartists.org
Event Dates:
10/1 – 10/31/2009
Event Hours: Opening Reception 10-1 (6–8pm);
Exhibition 10/2–10/31 daily (2–6:00pm)

Membership in TAS
I agree to abide by all terms and conditions of the TAS Bylaws and all Federal and State antiquities laws or
regulations. Completion of this membership form and payment of dues indicates the member’s agreement
with the goals and mission of the Texas Archeological Society.
PLEASE PRINT: __ New membership

__ Renew membership

Year ______ TAS operates on a calendar year.

Name __________________________________________________________ E-mail____________________________
Address ________________________________________________________ Telephone _______________________
City _______________________________ State _______ Zip ____________ Texas County____________________
Please check membership level desired.
Individual: $60.00
Family: $70.00
Student to age 25 $40.00
Association/Society: $55.00

Contributing: $100.00
Supporting: $250.00
Patron: $500.00
Institution: $100.00 Libraries, Universities &
Museums

BUSINESS LEVELS
Plainview: $250
Folsom: $500.00
Clovis: $1000.00

Make checks payable to “TAS” or Texas Archeological Society
DUES Enclosed
$________________
If you wish to renew by credit card, please visit our web site at www.txarch.org
(out of USA add $20 postage)
Please mail to:
Texas Archeological Society
Center for Archaeological Research
One UTSA Circle
San Antonio, TX 78249-0658

Optional Contributions
Donor’s Fund (for research & publication)

$________________

Endowment Fund (for program support)

$________________

Other Donation _________________________

$________________

TOTAL ENCLOSED

$________________

Oldest Comanche-Spanish Artifact Donated to
the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
Matthew S. Taylor, Jeff Indeck, and Lisa Jackson, Archeology Department, Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
In June 2009, the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
(PPHM) accepted an artifact of special importance to the
Comanche Nation and the history of the Southern Plains.
A Spanish-Comanche shield, dating to the colonial era, was
acquired due to a generous donation from Sia: the Comanche
Nation Ethno-Ornithological Initiative and the Waite and
Genevieve Phillips Foundation. This significant artifact will
soon be placed on public exhibit at the PPHM. It is remarkable because of its age, excellent condition, and the fact that
it documents the long cultural interaction between Spain and
the Comanche Nation.
According to Bill Voelker, director of Sia, the shield was
probably made in Spain between 1760 and 1780. A thistle
image in the center of the shield was common in La Mancha
during that period. The shield was made of six layers of goat
hide, with each layer stitched to the one next to it. By the
middle 17th century, shields such as this had fallen out of favor
Continued on back page

Figure 1: Left to right, Julie Puckett, Virginia Phillips, Chope
Phillips (representing the Waite and Genevieve Phillips
Foundation), and Bill Voelker of Sia, the Comanche EthnoOrnithological Initiative. Sia documents and preserves the cultural
and spiritual relationship between American Indians and birds.
The shield is at center; note the Comanche bison-hide cover.

Texas Archeology

✦

19

NONPROFIT ORG.
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
AUSTIN, TEXAS
PERMIT NO. 1187

Texas Archeological Society
CAR at UTSA
6900 N. Loop 1604
San Antonio, Texas 78249-0658

Address Service Requested

Preserve Your Heritage

Comanche Shield
Continued from page 19

in Spain due to the increasing lethality of firearms. However,
hide shields were still effective against the bows and arrows
of Spain’s native adversaries in North America.
After transportation from Spain to North America, the
shield passed into Comanche hands after battle with Spanish
soldiers in Yellowhouse Canyon, near modern-day Lubbock,
Texas. Its new owner fitted the shield with a bison-hide cover,
in keeping with Comanche tradition. The cover was made
from the hump section of a bull bison, decorated with feathers,
and personalized with painted designs. Some of the paint is
visible under the right light. The bison-hide cover protected
the Spanish artwork underneath it; the colors are still bright
after 250 years. Three perforations are present on the shield
and may represent bullet impacts. However, only one of them
passed completely through. This suggests the shield was effective against low-velocity arms fire.
After the Comanches were removed to a reservation, the
shield found its way into the antiquities market. It remained
part of a private collection for over 70 years until recently,
when the shield was put up for sale. Through the efforts of
Sia and the Waite and Genevieve Phillips Foundation, the
piece will be permanently curated at the Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum. In June 2009, the shield was delivered to
the PPHM. Bill Voelker and Troy of Sia conducted a waatu,
a blessing ceremony using piñon smoke and feathers. The

The shield with the Comanche cover removed. The original
Spanish design is still bright after 250 years.
ceremony formally transferred custody of the artifact from
Sia to the PPHM.
The Panhandle-Plains Historical Society and the Archeology Department of the PPHM would like to express their
gratitude to Sia and the Waite and Genevieve Phillips Foundation. Plans to exhibit the artifact are underway, but its debut
has yet to be determined. Check the PPHM website (www.
panhandleplains.org) or call 806-651-2244 for updates.

Texas Beyond History ✦ www.texasbeyondhistory.net

