Archaeological Survey of Community Center for City of Cuney, Cherokee County, Texas

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF A PROPOSED COMMUNITY
CENTER FOR THE CITY OF CUNEY,
CHEROKEE COUNTY, TEXAS

Bo Nelson and Timothy K. Perttula
Tejas Archaeology, Pittsburg, Texas

Timothy K. Perttula, Principal Investigator

Antiquities Permit 5536

Letter Report No. 29, March 2010

1

Archaeological Survey of Community Center for City of Cuney, Cherokee County, Texas

2

Abstract
In February 2010, Tejas Archaeology completed the archaeological survey of a
proposed community center construction project in Cherokee County, Texas, for
the City of Cuney. The proposed project includes 1.0 acre in the City of Cuney
city limits. The project area is in the Neches River stream basin.
The pedestrian survey involved a surface inspection of the proposed project
construction area, as well as the excavation of shovel tests in areas within the
proposed project that appeared to have some potential to contain archaeological
sites, and where disturbances could not be readily identified due to ground cover.
A total of 12 shovel tests were excavated during the course of the archaeological
survey, but none of them contained any prehistoric or historic archaeological
deposits. Soils range from only ca. 10-23 cm in depth in the project area.
Given the absence of archaeological sites in the proposed community center
project area, it is our opinion that construction of the proposed community center
by the City of Cuney will not effect any State Archeological Landmarks or
properties eligible for designation, and the project should be allowed to proceed
without further consultation under the Antiquities Code of Texas. No artifacts
were collected during the project, and therefore none are to be placed in a
permanent curation facility.
Introduction
This report presents the results and findings of an archaeological survey of a
proposed community center construction project for the City of Cuney in Cherokee
County, Texas (Figure 1). The proposed project, on land owned by the City of Cuney, is
to consist of the construction of a 40 x 80 foot metal building and a 200 square foot
covered entrance, on a 1 acre tract of land.
The present archaeological survey was done at the request of the City of Cuney,
following their receipt of a November 24, 2009 letter from the Texas Historical
Commission recommending that the project area be surveyed because it was in a setting
that could contain archaeological sites. The proposed community center construction
project is on property controlled by a political subdivision (the City of Cuney) of the state
of Texas, and thus it falls under the purview of the Antiquities Code of Texas, as
amended, and its implementing regulations. Antiquities Permit 5536 was issued by the
Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission to do this work. The pedestrian
archaeological survey was completed on February 15, 2010, by personnel from Tejas
Archaeology. Mr. Bo Nelson served as the Lead Surveyor and Project Archaeologist on
this project. No archaeological sites were identified during the survey, and because no
archaeological materials were recovered during our work, no artifacts will be curated in a
certified curation facility in the state of Texas.

Archaeological Survey of Community Center for City of Cuney, Cherokee County, Texas

Figure 1. City of Cuney proposed community center project, Berryville 7.5’ USGS
Topographic Quadrangle.

3

Archaeological Survey of Community Center for City of Cuney, Cherokee County, Texas

4

Natural and Cultural Setting
The proposed City of Cuney community center construction project is in the
Neches River drainage basin (see Figure 1), in the East Texas Pineywoods. The current
channel of the Neches River is about 1 km to the west.
The project area is situated on an upland ridge (360-370 feet amsl) within the City
of Cuney. A small and intermittent tributary to Jordan Creek flows south not far east of
the project area; Jordan Creek flows north and then west into the Neches River (see
Figure 1). While now mainly in a residential area, and on a tract of land that once held
Cuney High School, and with a well-maintained grass cover, the project area was once
covered with a pine-oak-hickory forest, with more mesic hardwoods along the floodplain
of the Neches River and larger stream tributaries. Upland landforms in the project area
have Eocene-aged Queen City Formation interbedded deposits of sand and clays (Bureau
of Economic Geology 1965).
Soils in the project area consist of a thin (ca. 10-23 cm) reddish-brown
Nacogdoches fine sandy loam, with a red clay B-horizon (Mowery and Oakes 1959:27;
see also Appendix 1). These soils developed under a pine and hardwood-forested cover.
Native Americans settled in the Pineywoods region of East Texas some 12,000
years or more ago, and ranged through its forests, grasslands, and broad floodplains and
wetlands as mobile hunter-gatherers. About 2500 years ago, at the onset of the Woodland
period, these Native Americans (whom are considered ancestral to the Caddo peoples that
lived in the area in later times) began to settle down in recognizable territories, to make
better use of native seeds and tropical cultigens as well as the bountiful nut mast and
white-tailed deer, and practiced the art of ceramics as part of new technologies of food
processing (Perttula 2004).
The vibrant and sophisticated prehistoric Caddo culture developed about A.D. 800
in the region, as well as in adjoining parts of northwestern Louisiana, southwestern
Arkansas, and southeastern Oklahoma. The prehistoric Caddo were prosperous
horticulturists and traders, lived in dispersed sedentary hamlets and villages along wellwatered streams, and were temple and burial mound builders whose construction of
earthen mounds served to mark the sacred ceremonial and religious places of important
priests and chiefs across the cultural landscape (see Story 1990; Schambach 1996), such
as the post-A.D. 1400 A. C. Saunders mound site (41AN19) on the west side of the
Neches River (Kleinschmidt 1982), about 3 km west of Cuney. The Caddo continued to
live in parts of Northeast Texas until as late as 1842, living near, and interacting with, the
European and American colonizers of their land until they moved, or were removed, to
the Brazos River in the 1840s-1850s, and then removed again to Oklahoma in 1859
(Smith 2005).
The City of Cuney was established by freed slaves and farmers just after the end
of the Civil War (Long 1996:446-447). The community became firmly established after

Archaeological Survey of Community Center for City of Cuney, Cherokee County, Texas

5

1902, when it became a flag stop on the Texas and New Orleans Railroad; it was platted
as a town site in 1914. In the early 1920s, Cuney had “two general stores, a blacksmith
shop, several cotton gins, an eleven grade school, a drugstore, and a hotel” (Long
1996:447), as well as churches, sawmills, and a railroad station (see
http://boards.rootsweb.com, accessed February 21, 2010). Most of the town’s businesses
moved to U.S. Highway 175 when the highway was paved in 1929; the proposed
community center is situated just south of U.S. Highway 175. Cuney became the first
incorporated black community in Cherokee County in 1983, and in 1990, its population
was 170.
The most important archaeological research conducted in the general vicinity of
the City of Cuney area of Cherokee County, Texas, was done decades ago. First, in the
1930s, the A. C. Saunders site and other Caddo sites were excavated by The University
of Texas, recovering considerable information on the burial practices and material culture
of 15th to early 18th century Caddo settlements in the upper Neches River basin (Jackson
1936; Guy 1990). There were also extensive late 1930s-early 1940s Works Progress
Administration investigations at the George C. Davis site (41CE19) in Cherokee County
(Newell and Krieger 1949).
Since then, most of the information about the Paleoindian (beginning more than
13,000 years ago), Archaic, Woodland, and Caddo archeological record in East Texas
comes from a disparate group of privately-funded archeological research, including:
avocational archaeological investigations and University of Texas at Austin (Story 1981,
1997) field schools in archaeology at the George C. Davis site (41CE19). There has also
been extensive professional archaeological work at Lake Palestine, the dam of which is
just a few miles north of the City of Cuney (see Anderson et al. 1974; Johnson 1961).
Most recently, Texas Department of Transportation has sponsored archaeological projects
in the Frankston area, in Anderson County (Lohse 2004), and Ahr (1999) has reported on
Texas Department of Transportation investigations of a probable Late Caddo site
(41CE326) exposed along the US 69 right-of-way.
Based on a records search of the Historic Sites Atlas maintained by the Texas
Historical Commission, no known archaeological sites have been recorded within the
limits of the project area. A poorly defined and spatially delineated prehistoric Caddo site
(41CE23) has been recorded in the City of Cuney area, but the available information
indicates the site was south of the highway and only 0.5 miles east of the Neches River.
The nearest and better defined sites are 41CE315-318, with prehistoric and prehistoric20th century historic period components, which were identified during the course of a
transmission line archaeological survey north and northwest of Cuney, and overlooking
the Neches River (Nash et al. 1993).
Survey Methods
The purpose of this archaeological survey was to locate any previously recorded
or unrecorded archaeological sites in the proposed City of Cuney community center

Archaeological Survey of Community Center for City of Cuney, Cherokee County, Texas

6

construction project area. If such archaeological sites were located, we were to consider
whether any of the sites warranted designation as State Archeological Landmarks (SAL).
This report of investigations is prepared in accordance with the guidelines and
standards of the Council of Texas Archeologists and the 1983 Secretary of the Interior’s
guidelines for cultural resource management reports. In it, we provide sufficient
information to allow the Archeology Division at the Texas Historical Commission to
assess the adequacy of the pedestrian survey and to determine the SAL status of any site
investigated within the project area.
The survey methods used for the project consisted of a pedestrian survey of the
entire project area by personnel from Tejas Archaeology. Surface visibility was poor
throughout the project area, generally less than 10% because of the grass cover on the
property. Therefore, the pedestrian survey included shovel testing (using shovel tests
about 35 cm in diameter), where practical, to a maximum of ca. 100 cm below the surface
(the maximum depth reachable by shovel testing) or to the clay subsoil, whichever was
reached first, along with examination of any cut backs, erosional profiles, etc. that existed
within the proposed community center construction area. The clay subsoil was reached at
between 10-31 cm bs in the shovel testing.
All soil matrix was screened in 20 cm levels through 1/4-inch hardware cloth to
recover buried archaeological materials; artifacts recovered in the shovel tests were to be
collected for further analysis and documentation, although none were recovered in this
project. A total of 12 shovel tests were excavated across the project area (see below and
Appendix 1).
Survey Results
The completion of the pedestrian archeological survey, and shovel testing, of the
proposed City of Cuney community center construction project found no archaeological
sites. As previously mentioned, a total of 12 shovel tests were excavated in the proposed
community center project area (see Figure 2), and none of them contained any evidence
of archaeological deposits or pre-1950 archaeological materials. The shovel tests were
placed in areas where disturbances could not be readily identified due to the ground
cover, and where there was some likelihood of encountering intact sediments on the
upland ridge. The shovel tests documented very shallow A- and E-horizon sediments that
ranged from 10-23 cm bs overlying a red clay B-horizon (see Appendix 1). All of the
shovel tests encountered the clay subsoil at depths shallower than 31 cm bs, and in two
shovel tests (ST 3 and 12) the clay subsoil, was encountered at the surface. One shovel
test (ST 4) had a recent clay fill overlying the A/E horizon sediments, and these deposits
are apparently the product of post-1940 construction activities in the project area.

Archaeological Survey of Community Center for City of Cuney, Cherokee County, Texas

Figure 2. Shovel tests 1-12 on the proposed City of Cuney community center project,
Berryville 7.5’ Topographic Quadrangle.
Based on Cherokee County land and property records, the 1 acre tract on which
the proposed City of Cuney community center is to be constructed was once part of a

7

Archaeological Survey of Community Center for City of Cuney, Cherokee County, Texas

8

larger 5.2 acre tract that was the grounds for the Cuney High School built shortly after
1939, and then closed due to desegregation in the late 1960s. Remnants of a collapsed
wood structure south of the project area, and at the same location as a school building
symbol shown on the Berryville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle (see Figure 2), indicate that
the 1 acre project area is situated to the north of, and in front of, the old school building.
No evidence for archaeological deposits or construction features associated with the
Cuney High School were identified in our shovel testing, although a metal washer, a
plastic coat button, and modern glass sherds from beer and alcohol containers were noted
on the surface and in surface contexts in proximity to County Road 3326 along the west
side of the proposed project area.
A 4 ft. diameter concrete and brick water well is present in the northern part of the
1 acre tract (see Figure 2). Since the well lid could not be opened, the depth of the well is
unknown, nor is it known if it contains any water. The water well may be associated with
the old Cuney High School, but we were unable to establish more specifically when the
well was built or used. The City of Cuney intends to avoid and not effect the water well
during the proposed community center construction.
Summary and Recommendations
In February 2010, Tejas Archaeology completed the archaeological survey of a
proposed City of Cuney community construction project in Cherokee County, Texas. The
proposed project, done under Antiquities Permit 5536, consists of a 1.0 acre tract. The
project area is situated in the Neches River stream basin.
The pedestrian survey involved a surface inspection of the proposed 1.0 acre tract,
as well as the excavation of shovel tests in areas of the project that appeared to have some
potential to contain archaeological sites and were also areas where disturbances could not
be readily identified due to ground cover.
A total of 12 shovel tests were excavated during the course of the archaeological
survey, but none of them contained evidence of any prehistoric or historic archaeological
deposits. No archaeological sites were recorded during the archaeological survey,
although a small water well was identified on the property; the City of Cuney community
center construction will avoid and not effect the well. Soils range from ca. 10-23 cm in
depth in the proposed community center project area.
Given the absence of archaeological sites in the proposed community center
construction project area, it is our opinion that construction of the proposed community
center by the City of Cuney will not effect any State Archeological Landmarks. The
proposed project should be allowed to proceed without further consultation under the
Antiquities Code of Texas.

Archaeological Survey of Community Center for City of Cuney, Cherokee County, Texas

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Mr. Jessie Johnson, Mayor of Cuney, and Brenda
Lankford, City Secretary, for the opportunity o conduct this archaeological survey. We
are also grateful for the coordination assistance of Cindy Gutierrez, Program
Administrator for Traylor & Associates, Inc.
References Cited
Ahr, S. W.
1999 A Summary Report on Archeological Investigations at 41CE326: A Late Caddo
Burial Site Inadvertently Discovered along US 69 south of Rusk, Cherokee
County, Texas. Draft report. Archeological Studies Program, Environmental
Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Anderson, K. M., K. Gilmore, O. R. McCormick III, and E. P. Morenon
1974 Archaeological Investigations at Lake Palestine, Texas. Contributions in
Anthropology No. 11. Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1965 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Tyler Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Guy, J. A.
1990 Previous Archeological Investigations. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman,
J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 27-130. 2 Vols.
Research Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Jackson, A. T.
1936 A Perpetual Fire Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 8:134-174.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1961 An Archeological Survey of Blackburn Crossing Reservoir on the Upper Neches
River. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 31:213-238.
Kleinschmidt, U. K. W.
1982 Review and Analysis of the A. C. Saunders Site, 41AN19, Anderson County,
Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Lohse, J. C., with contributions by T. K. Perttula and R. A. Ricklis
2004 Interim Report on Archaeological Testing at 41AN38 and 41AN159, Anderson
County, Texas. Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge and Corpus Christi.

9

Archaeological Survey of Community Center for City of Cuney, Cherokee County, Texas

10

Long, C.
1996 Cuney, Texas. In The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 2, edited by R. Tyler, D.
E. Barnett, R. R. Barkley, P. C. Anderson, and M. F. Odintz, pp. 446-447. Texas
State Historical Association, Austin.
Mowery, I. C. and H. Oakes
1959 Soil Survey of Cherokee County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture,
in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Nash, M. A., G. Sundborg, and J. Hageman
1993 A Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Coffee-Overton 138-kv
Transmission Line Project, Anderson, Cherokee, Henderson, Rusk, and Smith
Counties, Texas. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.
Newell, H. P. and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs No. 5. Published
jointly by the Society for American Archaeology and the University of Texas,
Menasha, Wisconsin.
Perttula, T. K.
2004 The Prehistoric and Caddoan Archeology of the Northeast Texas Pineywoods. In
Prehistoric Archeology of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 370-407. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Schambach, F. F.
1996 Mounds, Embankments, and Ceremonialism in the Trans-Mississippi South. In
Mounds, Embankments, and Ceremonialism in the Midsouth, edited by R. C.
Mainfort and R. Walling, pp. 36-43. Research Series No. 46. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Smith, F. T.
2005 From Dominance to Disappearance: The Indians of Texas and the Near
Southwest, 1786-1859. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Story, D. A.
1990 Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology
of the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D.
Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366.
2 Vols. Research Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series,
Fayetteville.
1997

1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:1-113.

Archaeological Survey of Community Center for City of Cuney, Cherokee County, Texas

11

Story, D. A. (editor)
1981 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County,
Texas: Summers of 1979 and 1980. Occasional Papers No. 1. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Appendix 1, Shovel Test Descriptions
ST 1

0-14 cm, reddish-brown (2.5YR 4/4) sandy loam; 14-18 cm+, red (2.5YR
5/8) clay

ST 2

0-10 cm, reddish-brown sandy loam; 10-15 cm+, red clay

ST 3

0-10 cm+, red clay

ST 4

0-18 cm, clay fill; 18-31 cm, reddish-brown sandy loam; 31-35 cm+, red
clay

ST 5

0-15 cm, reddish-brown sandy loam; 15-19 cm+, red clay

ST 6

0-20 cm, reddish-brown sandy loam; 20-22 cm+, red clay

ST 7

0-17 cm, reddish-brown sandy loam; 17-21 cm+, red clay

ST 8

0-23 cm, reddish-brown sandy loam; 23-26 cm+, red clay

ST 9

0-17 cm, reddish-brown sandy loam; 17-20 cm+, red clay

ST 10

0-10 cm, reddish-brown sandy loam; 10-14 cm+, red clay

ST 11

0-15 cm, reddish-brown sandy loam; 15-18 cm+, red clay

ST 12

0-10 cm+, red clay

