Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

September 30, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report #2012-47: A Cultural Resources Survey of the 1,375-Meter Tennessee
to NGPL Pipeline in Western Refugio County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during an archaeological survey of the Tennessee
to NGPL Pipeline right-of-way on July 27, 2012 (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Tennessee to NGPL Pipeline on large topographic map.

Figure 2. Location of the Tennessee to NGPL Pipeline on Refugio (1979) USGS topographic map.

Background Review
Refugio County History
Although the region was undoubtedly inhabited by earlier cultures, the nomadic Karankawa tribe
apparently established a permanent village in the area that is modern-day Refugio. Although the
village was likely raided by Comanches and Lipan Apaches in the 1800s, the Karankawas sustained
a presence along the Mission River in this area. The first known explorers were Spaniards. Alonso
Álvarez de Pineda sailed along the Refugio coast in 1520. Alvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca and his
fellow sailors were shipwrecked on the coast, and likely camped and traveled with Native Americans
in present-day Refugio County in the mid-1520s (Leffler 1996).
Following the establishment of a presidio and missions in what are now surrounding Goliad and
Victoria counties, Mission Refugio (41RF1) was moved to the modern-day town of Refugio on the
Mission River in 1795 (Dunn 1922; Benowitz 1996; Tennis 2002). However, the mission had little
success in luring neophytes, and in 1830 it was the last Spanish mission in Texas to be secularized.

By that time, a small villa was ensconced around the mission, and large ranches were operating in
the area. By 1831, empressarios James Power and Jemes Hewetson had contracted with the Mexican
government to settle Irish Catholics and Mexicans in the area. However, their promises were less
than expected, and many of the new immigrants came from New Orleans, New York, and other
areas, and not all were Catholic (Leffler 1996).
During the Texas Revolution era, Refugio citizens apparently supported Mexico. However, a pitched
‘Battle of Refugio’ in 1836 resulted in a large number of Texans loyal to the Texas Revolution being
killed or captured. As with most of this area of the Gulf Coast, settlers fled the revolutionary turmoil,
and did not safely return to the area until after 1842 when Mexico gradually ebbed their vengeful
raiding parties. In the mid-1850s, cattle ranching was prevalent, corn was the most important crop,
and the community of Refugio was revitalized, with stores, hotels, and churches. The native
Karankawas were decisively defeated at the Battle of Hynes Bay, and the last documented Comanche
raid took place in 1852 (Leffler 1996).
Residents of Refugio County staunchly supported the Confederacy during the Civil War, and
saltworks near Lamar were repeatedly under attack by the Federalists. Not unlike the surrounding
counties, the Civil War impeded the development of the economy, and contributed to the population
decline in Refugio County. For example, the once thriving community of Refugio was reduced to
a few private homes, the courthouse was in disrepair, and Mission Refugio was in ruins. In
retrospect, the cattle industry brought the area back into relative stabilized prosperity for six decades
following the Civil War. Although cotton was the leading cash crop, in the 1920s, oil and gas led
the economic boom. During World war II, loyal Irishmen in Refugio responded by forming a local
regiment and announced their unit’s commitment to the Texas Defense Guard. Following World War
II, the exploration of oil and gas again periodically spurred the economy of Refugio County through
the end of the 20th century (Leffler 1996). Now in 2012, once again, in the early portion of the 21st
century the oil and gas and industry is spearheading economic and housing development in the
county.
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
As of September 29, 2012 there were 140 archaeological sites recorded in Refugio County. Isolated
occurrences of Paleoindian points suggest that the Refugio County area has been occupied to at least
some extent, over perhaps the past 11,000 years, and more permanent occupations have occurred
within the past 7,000 years. The remnants of prehistoric open campsites have been found at 77
archaeological sites, and 46 sites have prolific quantities of discarded sea shells, so as to be classified
as ‘shell midden’ sites. In addition, 8 sites consist of predominately chipped stone debris, with little
or no fire-cracked rocks, or other evidence of prolonged habitation; accordingly, these have been
classified as lithic scatters. Rumors of prehistoric skeletal remains are common in the Texas Coast
area, and although according to the Texas Atlas only two are listed in Refugio County, prehistoric
cemeteries could be encountered.
Historically, Refugio County is enriched with archaeological sites. These range from the National
Register’s Mission Refugio, to 1950s trash scatters. Those of note include: El Cópano Settlement,
with shell-crete building foundations and two cemeteries; the Plummer House and cemetery from
the 1800s; St. Mary’s of Aransas town site dating to the 20th century; possible site of the early 1800s
Driscoll Inn; site of the “Mexican Watering Hole” with early 1930s ranch buildings; an early 1850s

site that may have been the birthplace of Clara Driscoll; and others (Atlas 2012).
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicated that
no professional archaeological surveys had been conducted within one mile (1,609 meters), and no
archaeological sites had been recorded within one mile of the current project area. However, as
shown in Figure 2, Tierras Antiguas has conducted surveys of the Transco to Tennessee and the
NGPL to Tetco pipelines. In neither case was any evidence of cultural materials observed within one
mile of the proposed Tennessee to NGPL pipeline.
Historic Maps and Aerial Photographs
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the Tennesse to NGPL Pipeline
passes through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. A standard source of
review is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs available at the Perry
Castañeda Library at the University of Texas at Austin. A second standard research source consulted
is a very comprehensive and large collection of old maps and aerial photographs compiled by the
Texas Department of Transportation from dozens of historic archives throughout the state of Texas.
In this case, two historic topographic maps were found. The earliest is a 1918, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (1:125,000) topographic map, and the second is a 1954, U.S. Geological Survey
(1:62,500) topographic map (Maps 2012).
No structures were shown on either of these maps in the vicinity of the current project. However,
these maps are many times incomplete, or not to scale by today’s standards, and that was to be
considered when the pipeline was right-of-way was surveyed for cultural resources. Technically, any
structures older than 45 years are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission,
and this was a consideration when the pipeline was to be constructed.
Soils
The Tennessee to NGPL Pipeline crosses four soil types. However they offer varying depths,
sedimentation and deposition rates. As such, the soils imply the potential for the preservation of
intact cultural resources to exist. Figure 3 shows the soils that are to be intersected by the pipeline,
and typical soil pedons of each are briefly described below (Guckian 1979; Web Soil Survey 2012)
Orelia fine sandy loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (Or) - Nearly level loamy soils formed in calcareous
loamy sediments on uplands
0-6 inches: gray fine sandy loam, neutral
6-14 inches: dark gray sandy clay loam, neutral
14-24 inches: dark gray sandy clay loam, mildly alkaline, few fine black concretions
24-30 inches: gray sandy clay loam, calcareous, moderately alkaline, soft masses and calcium
carbonate concretions
30-60 inches: light gray sandy clay loam, few fine faint yellowish brown mottles, calcareous,
moderately alkaline, concretions and soft masses of calcium carbonates

Papalote fine sandy loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (PtA) and Papalote fine sandy loam, 1 to 3
percent slopes (PtB) - Nearly level to gently sloping and undulating loamy sand formed on uplands
0-11 inches: grayish brown fine sandy loam, neutral
11-16 inches: dark grayish brown clay, mildly alkaline
16-28 inches: grayish brown sandy clay, mildly alkaline
28-39 inches: light brownish gray sandy clay, dark grayish brown and yellowish red mottles, mildly
alkaline, few fine calcium carbonate concretions
39-50 inches: light brown sandy clay, few fine faint grayish and strong brown mottles, moderately
alkaline, calcareous, common soft masses and fine calcium carbonate concretions
Victoria clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (VcA) - Clayey soils formed in calcareous, clayey marine
sediments on nearly level to gently sloping uplands
0-9 inches: very dark gray clay, calcareous, moderately alkaline, few fine calcium carbonate
concretions, vertical cracking to 3/4-inch wide
9-28 inches: black clay, calcareous, moderately alkaline, few fine calcium carbonate concretions,
slickensides, 1/2-inch cracks
28-45 inches: black clay, calcareous, moderately alkaline, few fine calcium carbonate concretions
and masses, slickensides, 1/2-inch cracks
45-72 inches: light brownish gray clay, light brownish gray clay, slightly saline, calcareous,
moderately alkaline, few fine calcium concretions and masses, gypsum crystal seams and pockets
72-94 inches: light gray clay, yellow mottling, moderately saline, moderately alkaline, calcareous,
gypsum and salts seams and pockets

Figure 3. Soils to be impacted by construction of the Tennessee to NGPL Pipeline.

Field Survey Results
A thorough 100-percent pedestrian survey of the surface was conducted along the right-of-way.
Although surface visibility ranged from 95 to 100-percent, no prehistoric or historic cultural
materials were observed. The soils in this area are generally deflated. Animal burrow backdirt piles
were frequent, but a thorough examination of those again revealed no evidence of cultural material.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Based upon the negative findings during this survey, we recommend that construction of the
Tennessee to NGPL Pipeline as it is currently aligned be allowed to proceed as planned, with no
further archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that if any previously
undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development of the pipeline, such finds

should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological
consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited

Atlas 2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed July
20, 2012].

Benowitz, J. M.
1996 Nuestra Señora del Refugio Mission. The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 4, pp. 10721073. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Dunn, W. E.
1992 The Founding of Nuestra Señora del Refugio, the Last Spanish Mission in Texas.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly 25.
Guckian, W. J.
1979 Soil Survey of Refugio County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, Washington, D.C., in Cooperation with the Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.
Leffler, J.
1996

Refugio County. The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 5, pp. 513-516. Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.

Maps
2012

Perry Castañeda Library Map Collection. Refugio 1918, 1954 USACE and USGS
Topographic Maps [Accessed July 10, 2012].

Tennis, C. L.
2002

Archaeological Investigations at the Last Spanish Colonial Mission Established on
the Texas Frontier: Nuestra Señora del Refugio (41RF1), Refugio County, Texas.
Archeological Studies Program Report No. 39. Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin. Archaeological Survey Report No. 315. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Web Soil Survey
2012 Refugio County, Texas. http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx
[Accessed July 10, 2012].

