BRAZOS BEND STATE PARK, FORT BEND COUNTY
April 2, 2010
Author: Ruth A. Mathews, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Cultural Resources
Coordinator, Houston, Texas
Project Description: Investigate area where Park Rangers removed a fence post and
reported historic artifacts in the post hole.
Type of Investigation: Emergency investigation, artifacts discovered while removing
fence post.
Staff: Ruth A. Mathews and Dennis Jones, Resource Specialist at Brazos Bend State
Park and certified Cultural Resource observer
INTRODUCTION
This brief letter report concerns the discovery of historic artifacts in the southwest
quadrant of Brazos Bend State Park (BBSP), Fort Bend County (Figure 1). BBSP is
owned and operated by Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD) State Parks
Division. The historic artifacts were discovered by Park Rangers as they were removing
fence posts along a fence line. Several of the posts associated with the barbed wire fence
were burned during a recent prescribed burn. The fence was erected after TPWD
purchased the park property and is not a historic feature. The historic artifacts were
probably not noticed at the time of the initial fence construction because of limited
ground surface visibility. Usually the prairie is covered with thick vegetation, but as has
been stated the area had been recently burned increasing overall ground surface visibility.
A general inspection of the area around the fence post revealed a light disbursed scatter
of historic glass, metal, and ceramics that covered an approximate 450 m2 (0.11 ac) area.

BACKGROUND
The southwestern quadrant of BBSP is underlain by the Beaumont Formation. A
Pleistocene formation which consists of thick beds of clay, silt, and sand along relic river
channels with mima (pimple) mounds on meander-belt ridges. The immediate project
area has several mima mounds scattered throughout (Figure 2). All of the mima mounds
around the historic scatter have been leveled by activity associated with the development
of agricultural crops.

Historic Trash Scatter Vicinity

Figure 1. Location of Brazos Bend State Park, Fort Bend County and general area of a
historic trash scatter.

2

A review of the Texas Historical Commission Archeological Sites Atlas indicates that
there are no recorded archeological sites in the vicinity of the removed fence post. A
review of a 1930 aerial photograph and a later, 1953 (Photorevised 1980) Damon 7.5’
USGS Quadrangle, show a historic residence roughly 400 m northeast of the proposed
project area and another residence approximately 80 m southeast of the project area.
Remnants of a barn, windmill, and rectangular stock tank still stand at the southeast
residence shown on the 1930 aerial photograph (Figure 2). A manmade “ditch” of
unknown age is approximately 60 m west of the posthole. This canal does not appear to
be visible on the 1930 aerial.

Historic trash scatter vicinity
Standing barn
Farm house that no longer exists

Figure 2. 1930 Aerial Photograph showing location of early farm house at the Standing
Barn. Mima mounds scattered all across the tall grass prairie.
In mid March of 2009, two weeks prior to the discovery of the historic trash scatter by
Park Rangers, TPWD Region 4 Cultural Resource Coordinator metal detected around the
standing barn (Figure 3) in an attempt to determine the age of the structure and associated

3

features (Figures 4 and 5), because park personnel inquired about removing some of the
fence around the barn. Photographs were taken of the barn, other ranch structures and
features, and general area. The photographs and metal artifacts tentatively date the site
between 1920 and 1945. A tentative boundary was determined by metallic anomalies and
visual inspection of the ground surface. The northern boundary of the “Standing Barn
Site” is roughly 60 m (197 ft) south of the southern boundary of the historic trash scatter
site. No trinomial has been given to the barn site. It is currently awaiting further
investigation by TPWD historic structure reviewers. It is not known if the historic trash
scatter and the standing barn site are associated (Figure 6).

Figure 3. Remaining barn structure and namesake of the “Standing Barn Site” - NE.

4

Figure 4. Windmill located SW of standing barn - NW

Figure 5. Stock tank located north of windmill and northwest of standing barn - SSW.

5

METHODS
Ruth Mathews and Dennis Jones, BBSP resource specialist, went to the portal prairie,
south side of park road, east of the park entrance, off of FM 762 to search for the posthole
with the historic artifacts. A large cottonmouth snake was coiled up immediately adjacent
to the hole of the removed post. The day was cool with intermittent sun, and the snake
had apparently crawled out of a relict gopher tunnel adjacent to the posthole. The snake
was removed roughly 100 m (328 ft) southeast of our location.

After the snake had been removed the immediate area around the posthole was surveyed.
Investigators traversed the area on transects that were oriented east to west roughly 10 m
apart until no further surface artifacts could be seen. The area had been recently burned
by prescription fire, and the ground surface was at least 70 percent visible. A tentative
boundary was established by artifact distribution with the addition of a 10 m (32.8 ft)
buffer outside of the last visible artifact. The site area was determined to be 450 m2.

One shovel test was excavated in an attempt to understand the depth of the historic trash
midden. The shovel test was 30 cm (11.8 in) in diameter, and excavated in 10 cm (3.9 in)
arbitrary levels to a depth of 30 cm. Dirt was sifted through 0.64 cm (0.25 in) hardware
cloth to maximize artifact recovery. The shovel test was recorded on a field form that
included: location and depth of the shovel tests, soil profile including soil texture,
structure, and Munsell color, environmental conditions, and artifact content and count by
stratum. All collected artifacts were recorded on an archeological field log and given
numbers by level. The shovel test was back-filled upon completion of the archeological
inspection/recordation process. Photographs were taken of the general area, the shovel
test, and artifacts using a digital format. All photographs and other graphics created by a
sub meter GPS will be downloaded onto an archival quality CD.

RESULTS
Investigators found that historic glass shards, ceramic sherds, and identifiable and
unidentifiable metal fragments were lightly scattered across an approximate 450 m2 area,
with the post hole towards the northwestern end of the scatter area. Only diagnostic glass

6

and ceramic artifacts were collected from the surface. The trash scatter is roughly 80 m
(262.5 ft) north of the Standing Barn Site, the remnants of an early to mid twentieth
century barn, and 200 m (656 ft) east of FM762 (Figure 6).

The shovel test, excavated in order to determine the overall depth of the deposit, was
terminated before finding the lowest level due to density of the artifacts (Figure 7). In the
upper levels purple, glass, shoe leather, ceramics, and many metal fragments were noted,
but only glass, ceramics, identifiable leather features and metal were collected (Appendix
A). After being photographed the metal artifacts were discarded. Many of the artifacts
had been burned, but the soil did not display any burn characteristics; no charcoal and no
dark stain. The shovel test indicates that this is a buried trash midden and not just a
scatter. The surface scatter represents the buried historic trash midden. All of the
collected and otherwise observed artifacts indicate that the dump site may have been
utilized between 1840 and 1950.

SUMMARY
Ruth Mathews and Dennis Jones investigated an area in the southwest quadrant of BBSP
where a fence post had been removed and historic artifacts were discovered in and around
the posthole (Figure 8). After thoroughly walking over the area and excavating one
shovel test the investigators discovered that the scatter represented an historic trash
midden. Solarized purple glass, machine made medicine bottles, and a California Fig
Syrup Bottle tentatively date the earliest use of the site sometime between the late
nineteenth and early twentieth century. Many of the artifacts appeared to be burned but
no visible remnants of a fire other than the recent surface fire could be seen in the shovel
test. It is believed that the historic trash midden may be a secondary deposit. The lack of
organics however, could be the consequence of environment and soils. The presence of
the light surface scatter of historic artifacts may be the effect of agricultural activity,
animal burrowing, or both after the midden had been buried. The proximity of the midden
to the vanished residence suggests that the residence, the standing barn and associated
features and the historic trash midden may all be part of the same site. In order to
determine these associations further investigations are recommended. Until such

7

determinations are made it is recommended that any park related activity in this area be
monitored by the Cultural Resource Coordinator.

Figure 6. Location of Standing Barn in relation to Cottonmouth Site.

8

Figure 7. Shovel Test #1, Level 2 (10 to 20 cm below the modern ground surface).
Notice the heavy ferrous concentrations.

9

Figure 8. General overview of Cottonmouth Site. Dennis Jones, park resource specialist,
is standing at the approximate south edge of the site. The backpack is located at the
shovel test and removed posthole location - SE.

10

APPENDIX A
Brazos Bend State Park
Artifacts Collected from the Cottonmouth Site
COLLECTED SURFACE ARTIFACTS

Milk Glass

Milk glass was occasionally used for fruit and food jars primarily during the late 19th
and early 20th century.
(http://www.sha.org/bottle/closures.htm#External%20Threaded%20screw%20cap)

Whiteware

1820-1910
(A Guide to Historic Artifacts, Thurston Hahn, Coastal Environments, Inc., unpublished
manuscript)

12

Clear Bottle Glass

Machine Made Druggist bottle
Mold seams with bubbles in glass
1880-1918

Actual bottle and how it would appear if it were complete
(http://www.sha.org/bottle/typing.htm#Medicinal/Chemical/Druggist%20bottles)

13

SHOVEL TEST #1, LEVEL 1 (0-10 cmbs)
Collected Artifacts

Clear Bottle Glass

14

Aqua Bottle Glass

“Aqua is a very common color in all types of American made bottles that date
prior to the 1920s back at least to the early 19th century. Thus, no specific type or
class of bottles is more or less apt to have been made with aqua glass. Aqua
bottles became uncommon after the 1920s when colorless glass largely replaced
aqua as the color of choice for bottle users wishing their product to be visible to
the buyer (Miller & McNichol 2002). The one significant exception to this dating
is soda bottles, e.g., the greenish aqua of Coca-Cola bottles. Shades of aqua color
survived in soda bottles long after the 1920s and is still found today where glass is
still utilized for soda containers.
Another notable exception is that many fruit jars were also made well into the
1930s in aqua though colorless glass probably became the majority color by about
1930. Ball fruit jars were made in a distinct "Ball blue" from at least 1909 until at
least the late 1930s and even later for some specialty items (Creswick 1987)). The
picture to the left shows two sizes of Ball's very popular Perfect Mason fruit jar.
This color is light but a more intense blue than blue aqua but does not quite fit
the other color groups described below; thus its coverage here. In 1939, the Ball
Company was making 54.5 percent of all the fruit jars in the U.S. and the Perfect
Mason was one of their most popular lines (Birmingham 1980). This market
domination during the first half of the 20th century explains the commonness of
these fruit jars today and in historical sites from the early 1900s through the
Great Depression” (http://www.sha.org/bottle/colors.htm#Aqua) .

15

SHOVEL TEST #1, LEVEL 2 (10-20 cmbs)
Collected Artifacts

Of the artifacts collected from Level 2 the milk glass, green tinted or aqua glass, wire
nails, purple glass, Pope and Gosser China, and a California Fig Syrup Company bottle
are diagnostic.

16

Level 2 Diagnostic artifacts

Purple Bottle Glass

“Beginning in the 1860's, glass makers in the United States started using
manganese to give glass clarity instead of lead due to lead shortages
created by the Civil War. Glass containing manganese eventually turns a
light purple when exposed to sunlight, a side effect that was unknown at
the time that this practice started. By roughly 1915, most companies in the
United States switched from manganese to selenium to maintain clearness
in their glass. Thus, with a few exceptions, including Heisey, Fostoria and
Imperial, companies that produced this type of glass likely manufactured it
from the 1860's to the years around 1915”
(http://www.life123.com/hobbies/antiquescollectibles/collectibles/american-sun-purple-colored-glass.shtml).

17

Clear Bottle Glass
California Fig Syrup Bottle

“Vintage Clear Colored California Fig Syrup Bottle. CIRCA: 1900-1920 Rectangular
Bottle. Embossed on TWO SIDES ... front & 1 side. The front is embossed with
CALIFORNIA FIG SYRUP CO" & on 1 side of this bottle "WHEELING W VA"
(http://www.goantiques.com/detail,vintage-california-fig,1203873.html).

18

SHOVEL TEST #1, LEVEL 3 (20-30cmbs)
Collected Artifacts

19

Ferrous and Aluminum
Riveted Button

Front

Back

Although the “first riveted buttons were manufactured in 1866”
(http://books.google.com/books?id=Fcc9AAAAIAAJ&pg=PA265&sig=wZbBb6F5r5eUvHyIcNVCK
R4oiKA&hl=en#v=onepage&q=&f=false)
“1872 on August 8, filed patent application for Improvements in Fastening Pocket-Openings
1873 patent 139,121 awarded to Jacob Davis and one half assigned to Levi Strauss & Co.
1873 Levi hires Jacob to oversee production of the riveted pants at the San Francisco plant“
(http://www.ideafinder.com/history/inventions/bluejeans.htm)

20

exterior

Salt Glazed Stoneware
interior

“Americans began producing salt-glazed stoneware circa 1720 in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, and Yorktown, Virginia. By the 1770's, the art of salt-glazed stoneware
production had spread to many centers throughout the United States, most notably
Manhattan, New York. There the Crolius and Remmey families (two of the most
important families in the history of American pottery production) would, by the turn of
the nineteenth century, set the standard for expertly crafted and aesthetically pleasing
American stoneware. By 1820, stoneware was being produced in virtually every
American urban center, with potters from Baltimore, Maryland, in particular raising the
craft to its pinnacle.” (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Stoneware)

21

Clear Bottle Glass
FRONT

BASE

Actual bottle and how it would appear if it were complete
(http://www.theoldbottle.com/shop/item.aspx?itemid=46)
Vintage Colorless Rawleigh's Medicine Bottle.
CIRCA: 1910-1930 Rectangular Bottle. Embossed
on its front with "Rawleigh's","Trade Mark" & "Bottle
Made In USA".

22

