Archeological Investigations Butterfield
Overland Mail Grape Creek Station
(41CK305)
Coke County, Texas

Tom Ashmore

2017

ABSTRACT
One of the most significant periods in West Texas’ Concho Valley was the period of pre and
post-Civil War. This period saw exploding expansion in our country as emigrants made their
way through this area to points further west, mostly New Mexico and California. This brought
about the Butterfield Stage line from 1857 to 1861, as well as settlers, cattle drives and trade
caravans on this same trail. It also brought with it the Indian wars as the tribes such as the
Apache and Comanche viewed this expansion as encroachment on their land so necessary to the
survival of their tribes. As the attacks on settlers and emigrants increased it brought more
military camps and forts to the region. As such, studying the various locations related to these
times is significant to clarifying the people and events of those times.
Grape Creek Station was abandoned in 1861 but still known of until the early 1900s. After that
the memory of its location was lost as those with the knowledge passed on. The general location
was known, but first-hand knowledge was lost. An attempt was made by Roscoe and Margaret
Conkling in the late 1940s as they wrote their now famous 3-book set on the Butterfield Trail,
but they were never able to actually locate the station site and had to rely on the landowner’s
description of the location. Over the years several groups of avocational archeologists and
historians attempted to verify the described location as they hunted the local area, but to no avail.
This studying used new satellite technology to find the actual location and straighten out the
history of this small, but important site in our area.
With the permission of the landowners the on-ground efforts began with metal detecting surveys
of a narrowed down location. Three potential locations within hundreds of yards of each other
were the prime targets. The third location turned out to be the correct one and a more thorough
survey project began in order to tie the archeological artifacts pulled from the ground to compare
against the research and confirm the identification as the Grape Creek Station.

Butterfield Overland Mail Stage

1

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Without the permission of the landowners, Mark and Bryce Thieman, I could never have
attempted this project. Their generosity and trust were key to this study from the beginning. A
special thanks to C.A. Maedgen, my metal detecting and collaborator partner that encouraged me
at every step. Our thanks also go to Evelyn Lemons, Librarian/Archivist at Fort Concho, for
providing maps and historical information from the Fort Concho archives. Her assistance was
invaluable in our research. In fact it was Evelyn that referred a caller to Fort Concho asking
about Grape Creek Station that began this journey and my successful introduction to the
landowners of the property that I had been trying for so many years to access.

Tom Ashmore standing in the Butterfield Trail outside Grape Creek Station

2

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Butterfield Overland Mail…………….……………………….……………. ..5
Grape Creek Station…………………………………………………………...7
Finding The Station…………………………………………………………...10
Archeological Investigation…………………………………………………...17
Artifacts………………………………………………………………………...24
Summary……………………………………………………………………….29
References……………………………………………………………………....31

List of Figures
Figure 1. Celerity Wagon ……………………………………………………….5
Figure 2. Print of a 19th Century Spanish Cowboy riding his mule …………....6
Figure 3. 1858 Butterfield Overland Mail Weekly Schedule …………………..6
Figure 4. Butterfield Overland Mail route ……………………………………...7
Figure 5. East Fork Grape Creek ……………………………………………….8
Figure 6. Waterman Ormbsby…………………………………………………..8
Figure 7. Hand drawn map by Brevet Lieutenant Colonel Strang ……………..9
Figure 8. Trail trace to Grape Creek Station …………………………………...11
Figure 9. Looking down on Grape Creek Station from top of hills …………...12
Figure 10. Looking down from top of hills lower altitude……………………..13
Figure 11. Brevet Lt Col Strang map w/station….……………………………..13
Figure 12. Brevet Lt Col Strang map w/ravines………………………………..14
Figure 13. Butterfield Trail trace coming from south up Grape Creek ………..14
Figure 14. Butterfield Trail trace 90 degree turn to east ………………………15
Figure 15. Depth of the trail depression ……………………………………….16
Figure 16. Trail Depth Measurements..………………………………………...16
Figure 17. Tack/supply shed location and artifacts ……………………..……..17
Figure 18. Hand-forged mule shoe with crack and heavy wear ……………….17
Figure 19. Sampling of footing stones throughout cabin area ………………....18
Figure 20. Drone imagery showing cabin area with footing stones …………...19
Figure 21. Sample of the many nails found at this site ………………………...20
Figure 22. Mortar on stone, slice of mortar, and various chunks of mortar….. .21
Figure 23. Large cut, fire heated limestone block………..…………………….21
Figure 24. Mortar on side and top of large limestone block……………………22
Figure 25. Probable south compound wall shown by flagged nail areas ……....22
Figure 26. Probable north compound wall shown by flagged nail areas ……....23
Figure 27. Outline of entire stage stop with stockade wall……………………..23

3

Figure 28. Artifacts in and around cabin area ………………………………....24
Figure 29. Whiteware dish piece and stoneware stamp………………………..25
Figure 30. Mule harness hardware …………………………………………….25
Figure 31. 50-70 Military cartridge ……………………………………………26
Figure 32. Utensils from M1874 mess kit ……………………………………..26
Figure 33. 44-40 cartridges …………………………………………………….27
Figure 34. Medicine bottle tops ………………………………………………..27
Figure 35. 11 inch Dutch oven lid.……………..………………………………28
Figure 36: Solder top can lid……………………………………………………28
Figure 37. Locations of probable camping artifacts …………………………...28
Figure 38: Grape Creek Station Site today……………………………………...29

East Fork Grape Creek

4

Butterfield Overland Mail
The official government contract for the Butterfield Overland Mail began in September, 1858,
running semiweekly from Tipton, Missouri, and Memphis, Tennessee, to San Francisco,
California and the same in the opposite direction. However, the contract was acquired one year
prior with a stipulation the mail would begin to run for the government within one year. That
year was spent building roads, stations, bridges and everything else needed to complete the
project. . (Butterfield Overland Mail –TSHA) Stages probably began running during that year,
but it is unlikely they were carrying passengers. They may well have been running as part of the
preparation and supplies for the formal opening in September 1858.
The Butterfield Overland Mail schedule called for stagecoaches to pass in each direction twice
per week. The coach was fitted with three seats, and these were occupied by nine passengers. As
the occupants of the front and middle seats faced each other, it was necessary for these six people
to interlock their knees. About all the rest of the coach was full of mail bags. (Butterfield
Overland Mail - Smithsonian)
For the West Texas portion of the trip the wagons were more rugged than the eastern Concord
coaches. They were built especially for Butterfield and were called Celerity Wagons or Mud
Wagons due to their rugged construction.

Figure 1: Celerity Wagon used by Butterfield Overland Mail Company
(Photo Courtesy of the Booth Western Art Museum)

Another unique aspect of the West Texas portion of the route were the mules used to pull the
wagons. They used semi-wild Spanish Mules. Spanish Mules were originally brought from
Spain to Mexico. They were smaller than their larger cousins and the mules we are familiar with
today. They were hardier in this rough and dry country.

5

Figure 2: Print of a 19th Century Spanish Cowboy riding his mule
(Courtesy www.mulesspain.com)

For Grape Creek Station the coaches would arrive Tuesdays and Fridays heading west and
Wednesdays and Saturdays heading east. The entire trip took 24 days in one direction.

Figure 3: 1858 Butterfield Overland Mail Weekly Schedule (Smithsonian National Postal Museum)

6

Grape Creek Station
Grape Creek Station was the first relay station for the Butterfield Stage line heading west after
leaving Fort Chadbourne, Texas. It was one in a series of stations for the stages crossing West
Texas on the way to or from the Pecos River and New Mexico between 1857 and 1861. It was
located on the east side of the east branch of Grape Creek, a spring fed creek running north to
south. Travelers came to the station after a southerly crossing of 30 miles through the dry West
Texas land and over a small set of hills given the name Stone Mountain. Coming from the west
it was the next station after the Johnson’s Station on the Middle Concho River. Although neither
Fort Concho nor San Angelo existed at the time, the location sits just over 18 miles north of
these current locations and 10 miles northeast of the current town of Grape Creek.

Figure 4: Butterfield Overland Mail route

This stage station site was bordered to its west by the east branch of Grape Creek, sitting in a
valley running north and south one mile wide by four miles in length. It is in an active
floodplain along the creek area with low hills to the east and west. The main area of interest is in
an open field that was cleared of cedar and mesquite by the landowner.
In the 1800s this area would have been open prairie. Elevation is 2,190 feet. Grape Creek lies
approximately 200 feet west of the estimated location of the original main building . The site
takes up just under a quarter acre.

7

Figure 5: East Fork Grape Creek

We know a few things about the Grape Creek Station from first and second hand accounts of the
period. The first account came from Mr. Waterman Ormsby, the first and only passenger of the
inaugural run of the Butterfield Overland Mail. Ormsby was a special correspondent for the
Tucson Arizona Herald and rode the entire route in September, 1858. His account of the station
follows:

Figure 6: Waterman Ormsby

“We soon reached it and found it to be a corral, or yard, for the mules, and
tents erected inside for the men, under charge of Mr. Henry Roylan. They had
seen us coming and were herding the mules as we drove up. Their corral was
built of upright rough timber, planted in the ground. They had pitched their
tents inside, for fear of the Indians, and took turns standing guard, two hours
on and two hours off. The station was near Grape Creek, a fine stream, and
also near some fine timber -- two desirable things not to be found everywhere in
Texas.”
Later, a cabin was built outside the corral and the two were enclosed by a wooden picket
stockade wall. We know this from an account by Mrs. Emma Elkins she gave in a 1911 article
of Hunters Magazine (Elkins). Mrs. Elkins lived on Fort Chadbourne at the time of the Indian
8

attack and her account came from the Grape Creek station occupants themselves while Mr.
Pennington was recovering in the Fort Chadbourne hospital.
“One fusillade after another was fired at the house without serious results, the
house being built of split logs and therefore bullet-proof, and the premises
enclosed by a picket fence five feet high.”
Unrelated to the Indian attack the next day was to be closing and abandoning of the
station. The company had given orders to close everything down due to the onset of the
Civil War and at the time of the attack they were already packed to leave. The military
escorted them back to Fort Chadbourne for Mr. Pennington’s recovery and afterward they
moved back to their home in Mason, Texas.

Post Butterfield Stage Period
After the stage station was abandoned in 1861 this was still the main road for all travelers from
east to west through Texas to New Mexico. Up to the late 1800s this road was used by
immigrants heading west, cattle drives, military, ranchers and freighters. Similar to Johnson’s
Station - the abandoned stage station on the Middle Concho River - the “old” Grape Creek
Station became a popular camping spot for travelers headed in either direction. The reason for
this was fairly obvious once you see the location. If you are heading west you would have just
come over a rough set of hills and about an 8-hour day’s travel from Fort Chadbourne. If you
were heading north from either the old Johnson’s Station or in later times, Fort Concho, you
would again have just completed an 8-hour day and would be facing the hills as your next
obstacle. The archeological artifacts recovered from the site support this postulation of this
continuing to be a preferred camp site.

Figure 7: Hand drawn map by Brevet Lieutenant Colonel Strang during transit from Ft Stockton to Ft
Chadbourne 1867 showing “Old Stage St”

9

Ranch Period
The ranching period for this area began in 1899 when John Abe March and his brother,
Napoleon Murph March, purchased 30,000 acres from B.M. Collyns. Collyns purchased the
land from the state of Texas in 1880 according to Coke County records.
There is no indication from either the evidence or family history that this site was ever occupied
by either the March brothers or B.M. Collyns. The March brothers knew of the site and tried to
describe it to Roscoe Conkling during his visit in the late 1940s, but they never actually took
Conkling to the site. There was some confusion by either the conveyance of the site location or
Conkling notes because the site, as described, was misidentified as to the location in Conkling’s
subsequent book. This was confirmed by the fact that an archeology group from Odessa, TX
searched for the site as describe in the Conkling book around the year 2,000, but after extensive
searching their efforts turned up nothing.

Finding The Station
Satellite Imagery Interpretation
The advent of publicly accessible satellite imagery via Google Earth played a crucial role in
finding and interpreting this particular site. First, it helped find it by being able to follow the
Butterfield Trail, something previously unavailable through other means. Even after 156 years
the trail trace is visible to the trained eye.
The reason an historic trail can be traced through satellite imagery is that satellite images can
show slight differences in the vegetation caused by the years of constant use of the trail and then
allowing the vegetation to grow back after the abandoning of the trail. The vegetation will
generally grow back slightly different than the surround area due to the trail having become a
depression which later attracts more soil and water runoff from rains. Bushes and grass tend to
grow slightly healthier in the depressions. In most areas it can be so slight that casual
observation on the ground or even from an aircraft cannot detect it. However, using satellite
imagery, especially with multiple images of the same location using Google Earth’s ‘Historical
Imagery’ tool, can find the trace of these vegetation changes in long wagon trail lines across the
terrain.
The original study began in 2006 to find the second stage station heading west out of Fort
Chadbourne, Johnson’s Station (Ashmore 2006, 2012). The concept is to find the remnants of
the trail leading out of a known location, in this case Fort Chadbourne, and learn to follow the
traces to the next stopping point. This turned into a 10-year study of the trail from Fort
Chadbourne to the Pecos River. (Ashmore 2016)
Determining the exact trace of the trail was incorporated into the research in order to properly
correlate the data of the imagery with accounts by stage passengers or any persons with firsthand knowledge. The final piece is to actually obtain access to property to confirm both the trail
and the site and work it as an archeological project to lay the final piece of the puzzle in place.

10

Comparing First- Hand Accounts with Imagery To Find The Location
The first account that needed to be correlated to imagery interpretation was that of Ormsby and
his portion of the trip from Fort Chadbourne to Grape Creek. In his account he asked the driver
how far it was to the next stage stop.
“How far is the next station?”
“I believe it’s 30 miles.”
“Do you know the road?”
“No.”
“How do you expect to get there?”
“There’s only one road. We can’t miss it.”
There are two wagon trails leading out of Fort Chadbourne. The earlier road was a military road
used to transfer the military from the previous encampment, named Camp Johnston, to Fort
Chadbourne in 1853. A portion of this road has long been believed to be the same road as the
Butterfield Trail. However in 2010 I discovered the Butterfield Trail actually took a more direct
route from Fort Chadbourne south to the Colorado River. (Ashmore 2016) This route to Grape
Creek station measures exactly 30.2 miles, while the older military route to the Colorado River
and then to Grape Creek Station is 31.5 miles.
Additionally, the older military routes winds its way through some fairly rugged country on its
way to the Colorado River, whereas the other route almost parallels the current Highway 277
over a flat prairie. Again, going back to Ormsby’s account:
“Fortunately, our course was a clear straight one, leading across an apparently
boundless prairie.”

Figure 8: Trail trace to Grape Creek Station

11

The trail must cross a rugged set of hills that run northwest to southeast to get over to the valley
Grape Creek runs through. The route leading up to this set of hills and the road climbing up the
east side is well known. The east side is named Butterfield Canyon and the road is cut through
the tough limestone. It is fairly steep getting up. According to Ormsby, because they had to do
with just two mules instead of four the mules stopped halfway up and refused to go any further.
So, the spent the night to let the mules rest and made it to the top in the very early morning hours
while it was still dark. When they reached the top he continues:
“We ascended the hill and discovered the station fire, miles distant – a mere
speck among the trees.”
Again, going back to Google Earth and taking the view he was describing you find the only
possible location he might have been able to see the station fire would have been down a draw
looking west with a very narrow view between the lower hills. That draw is named Butterfield
Draw on all topographic maps.

Figure 9: Looking down on Grape Creek Station from top of hills

12

Figure 10: Looking down on Grape Creek Station from top of hills from lower altitude
(Note that there is only a small viewing window through lower hills)

The next account comes in the form of a map. In 1867 Brevet Lieutenant Colonel Strang made a
journey from Fort Stockton to Fort Chadbourne to assist in preparations of the transfer of the
military from Chadbourne to the new Fort Concho. He made an extremely precise map of his
journey, which included the “old Stage St” on it. By comparing the map against Google Earth
imagery there are several items that match up to the current location. The first is the station in
relation to a set of hills to both the north and south. Setting the two side by side makes a perfect
match. The second is his description of two ravines they crossed after leaving the station
location and heading up the hills as they continued east and north to Fort Chadbourne. Again, it
is a perfect match.

13

Figure 11

Figure 12

That brings us to the trail itself, which can still be seen in satellite imagery. After crossing the
creek coming up from the south the trail is quite prominent as it makes its way north up the
creek.

14

Figure 13: Butterfield Trail trace coming from south up Grape Creek

At one point the trail takes a 90 degree turn to head east up Butterfield Draw and up the hills.
There is only one reason it would take such a sharp turn from the creek and that would be that
the station has to be somewhere near the turn. This revealed the proper search location which
ultimately lead to the finding of the site on the ground.

Figure 14: Butterfield Trail trace 90 degree turn to east (verified by walking the depression)

15

The trail throughout the Grape Creek area left a fairly deep depression in the soft soil. We would
have to drive across the trail each day to get to the site and the vehicle sensors in the front
bumper would be set off each times as we dipped down into the depression, which averaged
seven feet wide and 9.5 inches below the rest of the terrain. At the point we drove through it was
11 – 13 inches deep.

Figure 15: Depth of the trail depression is quite prominent
(Front wheels in middle of trail)

In order to confirm the imagery interpretation we walked the trail and made extensive
measurements. The depression left in the ground is quite obvious in this area, to the point that
we could determine the ruts within the depression. We measured these rut area depths compared
to the surrounding terrain. We additionally confirmed the locations of where the trail crossed the
ranch roads heading both north and south.

Figure 16: Trail depth measurements

16

Archeological Investigation
Butterfield Overland Mail Period
Next to the trail and about 100 yards before the 90 degree turn a very faint outline can be seen in
the one particular satellite image of a circular corral. The circle is approximately 70 feet in
diameter. Within that circle we got our first metal detecting hits. Both from the imagery and the
layout of the artifacts this appears to have been a 20 X 15 foot shed within the corral, probably a
supply and tack shed. The items found were square nails for construction of the shed, various
pieces of metal band, metal tops of containers, small crushed cans, heavy gauge wire, and a piece
of heavier gauge metal with a hand-punched hole in it

Figure 17: Tack/supply shed location and artifacts

Just outside the area we found a hand-forged mule shoe. The mule shoe appears to have been
removed due to wear rather than arbitrarily lost. There were no nails in the shoe and it had
distinct wear and a crack in the middle of the worn area.

Figure 18: Hand-forged mule shoe with crack and heavy wear

17

Spread around the corral area on the surface we found various pieces of bottle glass. Normally,
finding glass bottle fragments in a corral would be unusual. However, Ormsby’s account tells us
that the station residents were living inside the corral in tents on the inaugural journey. They
probably lived in there for quite a bit longer as they built the new cabin.
Their corral was built of upright rough timber, planted in the ground. They had
pitched their tents inside, for fear of the Indians, and took turns standing
guard, two hours on and two hours off.
Later, a log cabin was built outside the corral and the entire area enclosed with a five foot high
picket stockade wall. We know this from an account of Mrs. Emma Johnson Elkins in a 1911
Hunter’s Magazine, published out of Ozona, TX. Mrs. Elkins lived on Fort Chadbourne at the
time and this was an account of an Indian attack on the station that took place the day before they
were to abandon the station from orders of the company. The route was being shut down due to
the start of the Civil War. Although the Indian attack received attention in several publications
afterward, the pertinent portion of her account follows.
One fusillade after another was fired at the house without serious results, the
house being built of split logs and therefore bullet-proof, and the premises
enclosed by a picket fence five feet high.
The first indication of where the cabin resided is based on the great number of cut footing
stones strewn about a fairly small area. All together 41 large footing stones were found on the
surface, with many smaller cut stones of the same type.

Figure 19: Sampling of footing stones throughout cabin area
Similar to the vegetation being changed for the trail, the vegetation that grows back after a
building has blocked out the sunlight for many years is also different than the surrounding
vegetation. This cannot be seen by satellite imagery, but it can be seen by drone imagery and in
18

this case it very clearly showed the right angles making up a three-room L-shaped dog trot cabin
next to the corral. All together 42 large size stones were found on the surface in the area of the
cabin. Some of these were exposed during metal detecting digs. Smaller size stones, also flat
on both sides, were too numerous to count. Note the breezeway of the dog trot is facing the
optimum direction for the predominate wind from the southwest.

Figure 20: Drone imagery showing cabin area with footing stones
In and around the cabin area we found hundreds of metal detection hits. Most turned out to be
square nails of all sizes and flagging these locations confirmed the outline of the building as seen
in the vegetation from above. The smaller nails were probably used mostly for nailing down
hand-cut shakes for the roof, which would explain the larger number found throughout. It can be
speculated that the larger nails were for the main roof beams and probably the door and window
frames since a split log cabin would not require much in the way of nails for the walls.
A few of the smaller nails turned out to be round. This was at first a puzzle, given the probable
period of the construction. Our research, though, indicates round nails were being manufactured
much earlier than previously thought. Several companies began producing round nails (called
wire nails at the time) in New York in the early 1850s. (Nelson)
The top most shoe nail in the photo below is a horse shoe nail which obviously was never used.
The bottom is one of two we found outside the corral area and near the estimated cabin
perimeter. These are mule shoe nails and fit the mule shoe we found perfectly. Additionally,
these two nails were cut, one at 28mm and the other at 27mm. There is a slight bend on the end
of each nail was cut with nail cutters. It is important to note that the nails are in the same
condition as when the shoe was put on. This indicates they were removed by a farrier with the
removal of the shoe. Although it is possible this was done by someone traveling at a later time,
it is much more likely this was part of the standard activity by the station mule tenders while the
stage was running.
19

Figure 21: Sample of the many nails found at this site
Three shovel tests were conducted in the area that would have been considered the
common/dining area, which would be the left room to the dog trot when looking from east side
of the cabin.
Shovel Test #1
50cm x 50cm - middle of cabin room
0 - 20cm: porcelain bottle top, probable deer leg bone, crushed piece of small can, bone handle
wrapping a metal insert (utensil).
20 - 30cm: 1x small square nail, small pieces porcelain glass, mortar, small piece of whiteware
plate, 44-40 cartridge (possible turbation)
30 - 40cm: piece of bottle glass, mortar, small square nails, small medallion with three clamps
(advertising medallion?)
Shovel Test #2
50cm x 50cm – South corner of cabin room
0 - 20cm: mortar, small piece bottle glass.
20 - 40cm: mortar, small piece bottle glass, large square nail
Shovel Test #2
50cm x 50cm - West side of cabin room
0 - 20cm: mortar, 3x small square nails, 1x small round nail, 1x large square nail,
20 - 40cm: mortar, small piece bottle glass
It is notable that no window glass was ever found at this site. That fits with not only the period,
but the fact this cabin was not intended as a homestead site.
The 44-40 was one of three cartridges of this type found at various locations of the site. It is
likely this cartridge was buried deeply during the grubbing operation that went on while clearing
the field on two separate occasions according to the landowners. This would be an artifact from
the post abandonment/camping period.
The large amount of mortar found in the shovel tests and throughout all the digging in the cabin
area is also significant. There is a great deal of it coming out of almost every dug hole in the
area of the cabin. This mortar almost somewhat like a plaster rather than the mortar we know of
20

today. Some unearthed stones were covered in the mortar substance, along with a slice of pure
mortar coming out of the one hole.
It is likely these stones were used to build the fireplaces; one on each end was typical. The
smaller stones, which are all also flat on both sides, were mortared as they were placed. Most
were not exposed to high heat, but we did find fire cracked limestone spread about farther out
from the cabin area. At first we thought this might be remnants of Middle Archaic Indian
encampments since there was abundant evidence of stone tools and a few diagnostic points
throughout the area. However we did find one very large cut limestone block that was fired and
had mortar on it. This was probably one of the main fireplace blocks and this gave a strong
indication that the smaller fire cracked rocks were also part of the inner fireplace construct and
had been spread from the ranch clearing operations. The smaller stones were probably the outer
portion of the fireplace that was not exposed to the high heat.

Figure 22: Mortar on stone, slice of mortar, and various chunks of mortar

Figure 23: Large cut, fire heated limestone block

21

Figure 24: Mortar on side and top of large limestone block
As reported by Mrs. Elkin in her account, after the cabin was built a stockade type wall was
added using a picket wall construct. A faint outline of this wall and the entrance trail from the
main trail can be seen in one particular satellite image. The entrance trail leads up to the cabin. It
appears they extended from the corral to the cabin on each side for the stockade. Flagged nails
tend to support this outline seen in the imagery.

Figure 25: Probable south compound wall shown by flagged nail areas

22

Figure 26: Probable north compound wall shown by flagged nail areas

Figure 27: Outline of entire stage stop with stockade wall

23

Artifacts
Similar to Johnson’s Station, the next station down the line, there are multiple periods
represented in the artifacts found at this location. There are the artifacts that would fit the period
the stagecoach was active and there is the post stage station period, which represents camping for
those using the old stage road.
The artifacts that fit the stagecoach period are limited. This is because the owners were ordered
to pack up and leave the station in the spring of 1861. Within their account of the Indian attack
conveyed by Mrs. Elkins they commented that their wagon was packed and they were to depart
the next morning. After the attack a contingent from Fort Chadbourne was brought back to the
station to render medical aid and assist in transporting them back to the fort. So, we know they
departed and took all their possessions with them. The only artifacts left to find are those they
purposely discarded as trash.
The numerous square nails used in construction of the cabin were obviously of proper period.
Beyond that, most of the items of proper period were found in or very close to the estimated
cabin perimeter. The following shows the artifacts and where they were found.

Figure 28: Artifacts in and around cabin area of probable Butterfield stage period
Also found in an area just in front of the building perimeter were some large pieces of
whiteware. One was an identifiable piece of dish and the other had a partial stoneware stamp on
it. The makers mark is from L.F. Field, Utica, N.Y., produced 1860 – 1870. (Pottery Magic)

24

Figure 29: Whiteware dish pieces and partial stoneware stamp
In addition to the hand-forged mule shoe found near the corral, three items in particular appear to
be mule harness hardware. Those are the harness buckle, harness ring and a hand forged square
head hinge pin for the mule yoke. The buckle and ring were both found within the cabin
perimeter. The hinge pin was found out by the area that would have been the stockade gate for
the wagon to enter. The hinge pin is smaller than most mule yoke hinge pins. This can be
explained by the smaller size of the Spanish mules being used for this portion of the stage route.

Figure 30: Mule harness hardware (artifacts top, examples bottom)

Post Stage Station Period Artifacts
After the stagecoach site was abandoned it continued to be used by travelers. Some of the items
found were obviously from this later period. None of them point to any permanent habitation.
Two military periods of camping were found – Fort Chadbourne and Fort Concho periods. A
50-70 cartridge was found that matched a similar cartridge found at Johnson’s Station on the
25

Middle Concho River in 2006. This was a Berdan-primed, raised-ring center fire cartridge. This
is also identified as UMC Ringed Folded Head. This was the earliest of the .50-70 Government
cartridges. It was a black powder round adopted in 1866 for the US Springfield Model 1866
Trapdoor Rifle.

Figures 31: 50-70 Military cartridge
There are two possibilities for this type cartridge being at these two locations. One is a unit from Fort
Chadbourne and one is a unit from Fort Stockton.
In June 1867 Lieutenant Boehm left Fort Chadbourne with a detachment of 40 men and followed the
Butterfield Trail down to the Middle Concho. They set up what they called ‘Permanent Camp’ at the
location of the original Johnson's Station. Basing out of this location they escorted cattle herds to the
Pecos for a period of one month, at which time they were relieved by G Company of the 4th U.S. Cavalry.
This rotation of company size detachments continued for six months into November 1867, when Fort
Chadbourne finally closed and moved to start up Fort Concho the following month. (Ashmore 2006,
Haley, Taylor)
The other possibility is the unit from Fort Stockton led by Brevet Lieutenant Colonel Strang on his march
to Fort Chadbourne in October 1867. Both these units probably camped at the Grape Creek site, as it is
approximately nine hours by wagon between this site and the next stage site, Johnson’s Station. It should
be noted that a similar cartridge was found at the Johnson’s Station site. (Ashmore, 2006)
The other military artifacts found at this site come from the Fort Concho period. A broken knife and fork
from an M1874 military mess kit was found at two separate locations within the estimated compound
walls but not within the estimated building perimeter.

Figure 32: Utensils from M1874 mess kit

26

This site did not show up in any Fort Concho patrol reports. However, this site was known to be
a temporary camp for soldiers from Fort Concho passing this way. (Danier, Schmidt) It is
unknown how long this building was standing and useable. It could have eventually been
washed away by some of the massive floods reported in the early 1900s or the logs could have
been taken away and repurposed.
Other camping items found appear to be civilian in nature. We know this road was used
extensively after the Civil War by immigrant wagon trains and cattle drives. For the trail drives
the name changed to become the Goodnight-Loving Trail.
The 44-40 was the most popular cartridge of the 1870s. Three were found at this location and
six were previously found at Johnson’s Station. These particular ones were stamped Winchester
(WRC). In one cartridge the primer is missing, but from the other two it appears they were not
fired from the same gun based on the hammer pin indentation comparison.
Except for one 44-40 cartridge the camping items appeared to be outside the building perimeter
and spread around. In addition to the 44-40 cartridge a UMC 12 gauge ‘Club’ shotgun shell was
dug up in the area of the cabin perimeter. The UMC Club double ring was the first in the Club
family of shells. It was a black powder shell and is the first generation of Club shells. It was
produced between 1885 and 1891. (Turtlefoot)

Figure 33: 44-40 cartridges
One of the three medicine bottle tops found matches one of the most common Sarsaparilla
bottles manufactured and most likely dates between late 1890s to early 1900s. (Lindsey) A
second does not appear to be hand blown, making it probably the same general era as the
Sarsaparilla bottle. A third could not be unidentified.

Figure 34: Medicine bottle tops (left bottle is Sarsaparilla)

27

A Dutch oven lid was found in an area that would considered completely outside the compound.
Dutch ovens were the main cooking mode for wagon trains and cattle drives.

Figure 35: 11 inch Dutch oven lid
Closer to the creek we found a solder top can lid. These were common in the 1870 to 1890s, often with
military units. However, it could also have been any camping person of that time period. The lid was cut
off below the seal.

Figure 36: Solder top can lid

Figure 37: Locations of probable camping artifacts

28

Summary
The Butterfield Overland Mail’s Grape Creek Station was located exactly where it was described
by those with first-hand knowledge. And it was also constructed exactly as described. Time,
floods, fires and modern ranching had almost removed all trace of it. Only a close inspection
using new technology and following clues from our long ago travelers could help find this
elusive ghost of the past. To the casual eye there is nothing left and there hasn’t been for a long
time. The owner stated she had ridden up and down this creek as a young girl and had never
known of or seen this site.
Although this primitive station only stood for a little over three years, it had a profound effect on
the opening of the West and tying together our country across vast distances of a harsh and
unforgiving land. Only the hardiest could build something out of nothing while withstanding
everything nature and a hostile Indian nation could throw at them.
For the weary travelers it was a small spot where they could find peace and respite, sitting on the
banks of a clear, spring-fed creek under the shade of lingering pecan trees. I’m sure many who
came to this spot in covered wagons after the station was abandoned stayed more than just one
day, knowing the next part of their journey would be unforgiving.
The location has been lost for the good part of 70 years and it was important to find it and pull
from the ground what small bits of the past we could. We can now let the past go back to sleep
and let the land continue on its path of reclaiming what it owns and what we only borrow and
then return.

Figure 38: Grape Creek Station Site today

29

References
Ashmore, Tom
2016 The Pecos River Horsehead Crossing: Wagon, Cattle, and Indian Tracks
Desert Tracks: Publication of the Southern Trails Chapter of the Oregon
-California Trails Association, June 2016, pp 12, 13)
2016 Confusion about Texas Sections of Butterfield Trail
Desert Tracks: Publication of the Southern Trails Chapter of the OregonCalifornia Trails Association, January 2016, pp 13)
http://cvassanangelo.org/uploads/Butterfield_Trail_splits.pdf (available online)
2012 Butterfield Overland Mail, Johnson’s Station (41IR123)
Transactions of the 47th Regional Archeological Symposium for
Southwestern New Mexico and Western Texas (pp 1 – 16)
2006 Archeological Investigations Johnson’s Station (41IR123) Irion County, Texas
http://cvassanangelo.org/uploads/archeological_investigations_johnson.pdf
(available online)
Barnes, Frank C.
2006 Cartridges of the World, 11th Edition
Gun Digest Books
Butterfield Overland Mail - Smithsonian
Smithsonian National Postal Museum
https://postalmuseum.si.edu/ collections/object-spotlight/PassengersImpressions.html
(available online)
Butterfield Overland Mail - TSHA
Texas State Historical Association
https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/egb01 (available online)
Carlson, Paul H., "Shafter, William Rufus," Handbook of Texas Online,
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/fsh02. (available online)
Cruse, J. Brett
2008 Battles of the Red River War, Archeological Perspectives of the Indian Campaign
of 1874, Texas A&M University Press
Daniel, Wayne and Schmidt, Carol, "Fort Concho," Handbook of Texas Online,
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/qbf11 (available online)
Haley, James Evetts
1952 Fort Concho and the Texas Frontier
San Angelo Standard Times
Elkins, Emma
1911 The Story of Old Fort Chadbourne
Hunters Magazine, Marvin Hunter, July issue, Ozona, TX
30

Lindsey, Bill Historic Glass Bottle Identification & Information Website
Society for Historical Archeology, https://sha.org/bottle/index.htm (available online)
Mules Spain
http://www.mulesspain.com/book.html (available online)
Nelson, Lee H.
1968 Nail Chronology As An Aid To Dating Old Buildings
American Association for State and Local History Leaflet 48, History News, Volume 24,
No. 11, National Park Service
Pottery Magic
http://www.pottery-magic.com/pottery/topics/pottery_marksCL.htm (available onlilne)
Taylor, Glenn
1947 The Early Days of Fort Concho
Tom Green County Historical Society
Turtlefoot Headstamp Project,
http://www.headstamps.x10.mx/umcco.html (available online)
Wright, Lyle H.
1942 The Butterfield Overland Mail. Contributors: Waterman Lilly Ormsby
The Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
.

31

