TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOC~TY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous areas. The Bulletin offers an outlet for the publication of serious research on history, prehistory,
and archeological theory. In line with the goals of the Society, it encourages scientific collection, study, and publication of archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to the members of the
Society. Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Society or editorial staff.

Officers of the Society 1983-1984
President: Roy Dickinson (Wichita Falls)
President-Elect: C. K. Chandler (San Antonio)
Treasurer: C. K. Chandler (San Antonio)
Secretary: Anne A. Fox (San Antonio)
Bulletin Editor (Volume 55): Wayne R. Roberson (Manor)
Newsletter Editor: Beth O. Davis (Austin)
Immediate Past President: Kathleen Gilmore (Dallas)
Directors 1983-1984 (in addition to above): James Couzzourt (Canyon),
Norman G. Flaigg (Austin), Texas Anderson (Houston), Grant D. Hall (San Antonio), Samuel D. McCulloch (Austin), Laurie Moseley (Springtown).

Regional Vice Presidents 1983-1984: Meeks Etchison (Canyon), Westelle
Whitaker (Lamesa), Jimmy Smith (Cleburne), William R. Schurmann (Dallas),
Sheldon Kindall (Seabrook), Jimmy L. Mitchell (Converse), John Rex Wayland
(Corpus Christi), John H. Stockley, Jr. (Quemado), Jim Carpetas (Austin), James
D. Hall (San Angelo), Elizabeth W. Ayer (El Paso).

Memberships and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year. Dues (current 1985) are
as follows: Individual (regular), $15.00; Family, $20; Student, $10; Contributing, $30; Chartered Societies and Institutional, $15; Life, $300. All members of
the Society receive the Bulletin, published annually, and Texas Archeology, a
newsletter issued four times a year. A monograph series, Special Publications,
also is published by the Society. Back issues of the Bulletin are available, and
price lists can be obtained from the Secretary-Treasurer.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to SecretaryTreasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Center for Archeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78285.

,c,

Copyright 1986 by the Texas Archeological Society.

Bulletin of the

TEXAS

ARC HEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY V°~ume55a9S4

Wayne R. Roberson, Editor
Beth O. Davis, Associate Editor
Cover design and layout by Ed Aiken

Published by the Society at Austin
1986 (for 1984)

My gratitude to Beth O. Davis can hardly be expressed fully. She has spent
much time on this volume of the Bulletin, and it would have been delayed further
were it not for her effort.
A special note of thanks goes to William E. Moore and Ronald W. Ralph.
They volunteered to serve as assistant editors, but circumstances prevented me
from fully using their talents. They both reviewed and offered editorial advice on
several articles.
Some traditions of editing the Bulletin have been changed in this volume.
The main change is that of setting bibliographic references in roman rather than
italic type, a custom already established in many scientific journals. Also, reviewers were identified in all cases to the authors, who received a complete copy
of the reviewers’ comments.

Conten
PAPERS
Archeological investigations at the Little Campus Restoration Project,
Austin, Texas
Jack M. Jackson ............................................
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas
Joe D. Hudgins ............................................
A Newly Discovered East Texas Log Courthouse
David H. Jurney ...........................................
La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas
Kathleen Gihnore ..........................................
The Gregg Ranch Site (41HY131), Hays County, Texas
Howard D. Land ...........................................
Analysis of Ceramic Function: a Late Caddoan Example
Anna J. Taylor ............................................
Pictographs of the Red Monochrome Style in the Lower Pecos River
Region, Texas
Solveig A. Turpin ..........................................
A Petroglyph (41TG54) from Tom Green County West-Central Texas
J. A. Jaquier .............................................
Rock Art at Monk’s Cave (41RK84), Rusk County, Texas
Henry F. Ball .............................................

1
29
53
61
73
115

123
145

153
Big Rock: a Woodland and Caddoan Rock-Shelter in East Texas
Thomas H. Guderjan ....................................... 171
An Annotated Index to the First Ten Volumes of the Bulletin of the
Central Texas Archeological Society
William E. Moore and Michael R. Bradle ......................
Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains from the Palm Harbor Site
(41AS80), a Mortuary Site on the Central Gulf Coast of Texas
A. G. Comuzzie, Marianne Marek, and D. Gentry Steele ..........

189

213

REVIEWS
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast, Lawrence E. Aten
Leland W. Patterson ........................................ 251
Living Archaeology, Richard A. Gould
LeRoy Johnson, Jr. ........................................ 254
Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America,
translated by Cyclone Covey
John W. Clark, Jr. ..........................................
Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of the Past 450
Years, Daniel E. Fox
Wayne Roberson ..........................................

259

264

Archeological Investigations at the Little Campus
Restoration Project, Austin, Texas
Jack M. Jackson

ABSTRACT
The oldest building of the former Texas State Asylum for the Blind in
Austin, built in 1858 and 1859, was investigated archeologically in 1982.
The building was briefly home and headquarters to General George Armstrong Custer, who in 1865 was commander of federal occupation troops in
Texas.
Mrs. Custer’s written account of her life in Austin is examined together
with other nineteenth century documentation of the site.
Artifacts deposited from t859 to 1872 in a kitchen area are described
and offered for comparison with artifacts from other Civil War and Reconstruction sites of this type.
The photographic mapping of the original (1859) kitchen floor, the
sampling by excavation of a large nineteenth century cistern, and other aspects of the investigation are described.

INTRODUCTION
This paper presents results of an archeological investigation at the Little
Campus, 41TV611, part of The University of Texas at Austin. The investigation
was unusual because the excavation took place inside a well-dated standing historic structure that was at the time undergoing restoration.
The Little Campus, a collection of buildings that were the original home of
the Texas State Asylum for the Blind, has been part of the main campus of The
University of Texas at Austin since the 1920s. The complex was placed on the
National Register of Historic Places in August 1974 and was designated a State
Archeological Landmark in May 1981. The oldest building in the complex has
often been referred to as the Custer House. This two-story limestone masonry
structure with brick trim was erected in 1858 and t859 (Tillotson 1977:18) by
Abner Cook, the master builder who built the Governor’s Mansion, the John Hancock house, and the Neill-Cochran house, all National Register properties in
Austin. Built to house the Texas State Asylum for the Blind, it did so for 60
years. Although it was only briefly, during the winter of 1865, home and headquarters to General George Armstrong Custer, commander of the federal occupation troops in Austin, this is the era that has surrounded the building with
popular lore.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986for 1984)

2

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Figure 1. Photograph taken in 1865 showing General Armstrong Custer with members of
his staff and family gathered on the front porch of his quarters (now the Arno Nowotny
Building of The University of Texas) at the Texas State Asylum for the Blind. Seated at
left side of door frame is Custer’s father; seated at right side of door is Custer with left
hand at chin; in front of Custer on the steps is Mrs. Elizabeth Custer. Photograph from the
Barker Texas History Center, University of Texas at Austin.

Construction of the Custer House was begun in the spring or early summer
of 1858 and completed in March 1859 (Trustees Report, 1860, quoted in Tillotson 1977:18). The Board of Trustees closed the school in the summer of 1862
because of the distressed financial condition of the Confederate States, but was
overruled by Governor Lubbock, who ordered it reopened. At this time (during

Jackson--Little Campus

3

the Civil War) there were ten students. In March 1864 the trustees "directed that
tallow, wicking and moulds should be purchased so that candles could be made at
the institution, for none could be purchased in the Confederate States." Exigencies of the war finally closed the school on January 7, 1865, when the Board
declared that "owing to the worthlessness of Treasury warrants the wants of the
pupils can not be supplied" (Tillotson 1977:18).
The building remained vacant until November 4, 1865, when General
Custer arrived in Austin. He brought not only 4000 federal troops, but also his
father, brother Tom, and wife Elizabeth Bacon Custer (Figure 1), who has left us
an account of their arrival.
Before we reached Austin, several citizens sent out invitations for us to come to their
houses; but I knew the General would not accept, and, cold as the nights were, I felt
unwilling to lose a day of camp life. We pitched our tents on rolling ground in the
vicinity of Austin, where we overlooked a pretty town of stuccoed houses that appeared summery in the midst of live-oak’s perennial green. The State House, Land
Office, and Governor’s Mansion looked regal to us, so long bivouacking in the forest
and on uncultivated prairies. The Governor offered for our headquarters the Blind
Asylum, which had been closed during the war. This possessed one advantage that
we were glad to improve; there was room enough for all the staff, and a long saloon
parlor and dining-room for our hops during the winter.
There were three windows in our room, which we opened at night; but, notwithstanding the air that circulated, the feeling, after having been so long out of
doors, was suffocating. The ceiling seemed descending to smother us. There was
one joy: reveille could ring out on the dawning day, and there was no longer imperative necessity to spring from a warm bed and make ablutions in ice-water. There
is a good deal of that sort of mental snapping of the fingers on the part of campaigners when they are again stationary, and need not prepare for a march. Civilization
and a looking-glass must now be assumed, as it would no longer do to rough it and
ignore appearances, after we had moved into a house, and were to live like "folks."
Besides, we soon began to be invited by the townspeople to visit them [Custer
1971 : 216-217].
Custer lived in the building for only a brief time; he left Austin on February
4, 1866, barely three months after he arrived. The letters and later writings of
Elizabeth Custer left a lively record of their stay.
After the war, efforts to reopen the Blind Asylum were initiated by Governor J. W. Throckmorton, who appointed a new board in August 1866. The new
Board, "finding the Legislature disinclined to do anything for the institution, resolved to resign" (Trustees Report 1869, quoted by Tillotson 1977:29). The institution was reopened during the winter of 1866 and had 15 students by the following spring. The succession of boards and staffs dismissed and appointed
during the Reconstruction years are detailed by Tillotson (1977:31-35). During
these turbulent years the building remained largely as it was before the war, and
although some frame buildings were added to those already on the grounds, no
significant remodeling of the main building occurred until 1872.

4

Texas Archeological Society

New wing
erected 1872
outbuildings

111111
to kitchen
floor & kitchen fireplaces

Original 1858-59
building

east wing excavation
shown in figure 7

0

i

20

i

I

40

i

80

i

feet

Figure 2. Plan of the building at the Texas State Asylum for the Blind as of 1872. There
were more frame buildings to the west of this building. The area that is shaded but not
crosshatched is the part of the building that has been restored and now known as the Arno
Nowotny Building. See Figure 3. After Tillotson (1977, plate 30).

In the summer of 1872 the first of many modifications to Abner Cook’s
original building was undertaken, at least partially under his direction (Cook was
then a member of the Board of Trustees). Two wings, each 24 by 60 feet and two
stories high, were planned, but construction was delayed until the arrival of the
railroad in Austin, which was expected to lower significantly the cost of lumber
and other materials. When the expansion was undertaken, a large, two-story
wing was added to the north side (Figure 2); classrooms on the first floor and
five girls’ dormitory rooms on the second all opened onto a west-facing gallery
(Trustees’ Report, 1872).

Jackson--Little Campus

0

40

80

|

I
FEET

i

5

Figure 3. Plan of the building at the Texas State Asylum for the Blind as of 1881. From
Tillotson (1977).

The site plan (Figure 2) shows that the new north wing covered most of the
areaway that let light into the kitchen area and probably blocked the flue that
served the kitchen fireplace on the north wall and the first-floor fireplace just
above it. We cannot be certain that the addition of this wing rendered the kitchen
obsolete, but it certainly made it a dark and airless place after 1872. Archeological
data on this addition were destroyed when the wing was demolished in the 1880s
to make way for more elaborate improvements.
The 1880 project, completed in October 1881 (Tillotson 1977:53), affected
the entire main building and greatly changed its exterior appearance. The origi-

6

Texas Archeological Society

Jackson--Little Campus

7

nal roof and cupola were removed, and a brick third floor was added. The east
and west wings were extended (Figures 3 and 4) and given second floors; the
north wing was razed and replaced with a larger structure.
Building continued at the site to provide for an ever-expanding student body.
Whole complexes of classrooms, dormitories, and other facilities were built, and
by the early part of the twentieth century the site had become a warren of courtyards, hallways, and connected buildings. Although they now appear to be a
single structure, three of the high Victorian brick buildings that have been preserved and restored on the site--known for many years as Building H, now
the Employment Center of the University of Texas--were built in 1888, 1891,
and 1900.
When World War I began, the institution, which had been renamed in 1905
the Blind Institute and in 1915 the Blind School, had begun to move its operation
from this site to its present location, a new and larger campus on 45th Street. The
move was hastened when the original buildings of the Blind School were given to
the newly founded School of Military Aviation (SMA) at The University of Texas
in July 1917. Wholesale remodeling was undertaken to adapt the buildings to
wartime military usage. The Trustees of the School complained that the orderly
move to their new campus was hampered by the SMA’s "tearing the buildings
apart" (Tillotson 1977: 171). During this era alphabetical designations were
given to the buildings: the old main building became Building C, and the combination of three Victorian buildings became Building H. These designations
persisted until the University Board of Regents in 1982 renamed Building C the
Arno Nowotny Building.
After World War I, the buildings remained officially under control of the
University, although their use between February 1919 and October 1922 is unclear
(Tillotson 1977: 189). In 1922 the legislature transferred the buildings to the
State Lunatic Asylum as an annex called the Institution for the Senile for housing
senile persons who had become wards of the State. This usage was almost as
short lived as was the use of the site by the Central Texas State Fair, held there
in 1922.
Several legal actions concerning the buildings were brought against the
State Board of Control, and on July 1, 1925 the Institution for the Senile was
finally closed, and all patients were transferred to the State Hospital in Wichita
Falls. In anticipation of this move, the legislature in March 1925 had transferred
all the buildings to The University of Texas, where they became known as the
Little Campus. After some renovation, the Little Campus became a men’s dormitory. Occupancy of the buildings has changed several times since 1925, but
ownership has remained with the University.
Since restoration was completed, the Arno Nowotny Building (Building C)
(Figure 5) has housed the University Visitors’ Center, and Building H, the University admissions and employment offices. The exteriors of both buildings have
been restored as nearly as possible to their original (1888-1900) appearance
(Figure 6). The interiors have been modified to accommodate modern heating

8

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Plan of the main building at the Texas Asylum for the Blind with the
Arno Nowotny Building, which is all that remains today, superimposed.

and cooling equipment as well as safety and fire-protection features not required
when the buildings were erected. The interior of the Arno Nowotny Building has
been restored to conform to the historic period compatible with its exterior
design.

RESEARCH DESIGN
One of the conditions of the Antiquities Permit for restoration of the Nowotny Building virtually dictated the role of the archeologist in the project, requiring that "demolition should be monitored by the architect and a qualified
historic archeologist. If historic fabric is uncovered then appropriate steps should
be taken to investigate, incorporate, record, or protect as required."
Tillotson’s (1977) excellent history of the site, the architect’s plans, and the
files of the Texas Antiquities Committee were studied to identify problems and
areas of good archeological potential. Three questions were posed to be answered by excavation: (1) what was the size of the original east and west wings of
the Nowotny Building, (2) could intact nineteenth-century cisterns be found, and

Jackson--Little Campus

9

10

Texas Archeological Society

(3) what could be discovered about a basement kitchen that had been located
under the north side of the main block of the Nowotny Building (Figures 2, 3C).

PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS
Excavation began at the Nowotny Building during the University’s 1982
Christmas break, to avoid interference with the restoration work. The first project
was to uncover whatever remnants could be found of the foundations for the east
wing of the building, in order to determine its original (1859) size, for the original wings has been extensively expanded and remodeled in 1880 (Figure 5). The
renovation architect’s estimates of the size of the original wings were derived entirely from drawings and photographs.
East Wing
It took, almost a week to clear and map the foundations, which were fortunately found intact. First, we explored with a steel-rod probe to find the outline
of the foundation, in order to determine what areas should be cleared of soil and
building debris. Then we removed the hard-packed clay from the remains of the
walls with picks, shovels, and trowels. No power equipment was used. Once
cleared, the courses of masonry that were uncovered were swept clean to facilitate accurate mapping and photographing (Figure 7). Much to the relief of all
concerned, the foundations we uncovered proved the architect’s estimates to
be correct.

Cistern
Our second objective was to sample the contents of a large cistern that had
been fortuitously uncovered when its concrete cover was dislodged during the
clearing of demolition debris. The cistern was 17 feet deep and 10 feet in diameter, with a capacity of about 11])g cubic feet when filled to the 14-foot level.
Location of the cistern 20 feet north of the original west wing of the building
suggests that it was part of the original site rather than a later addition.
We sampled the contents of the cistern by quartering the deposit as if it were
a pie and excavating the southwest quadrant, waterscreening the soil through
quarter-inch mesh. Though we hoped for a significant artifact deposit, the result
was disappointing. The complete inventory of artifacts from the cistern follows:
1
1
1
23
1
1

iron sash pulley
two-piece sash pulley cover
fragment of ornamental iron
clear glass window sherds
brown/amber bottle sherd
1978-D U.S. copper penny

5
1
1
10
1

badly rusted nails
rodent skull
black-on-gray historic ceramic sherd
white ironstone ceramic sherds
fragment of white plastic

The plastic and the 1978 penny immediately destroyed our hope for an undisturbed nineteenth century deposit. After consultation with members of the

Jackson--Little Campus

11

~ FEET
Figure 7. Plan of the excavation of the foundations of the former east wing of what is now
the Nowotny Building, December 1982. Drawing by David G. Robinson.

Texas Antiquities Committee staff, further investigation of the cistern deposit
was abandoned. The cover was replaced, and the cistern is preserved intact beneath the landscaped grounds.

THE KITCHEN
Testing
When the kitchen wall at the west end of the central part of the Nowotny
Building was opened during demolition of the old added-on west wing (Figure
2), we gained access to the presumed basement kitchen and found the space partially filled with dirt and cultural debris.
A 1-by- 1-meter test pit was dug in the northwest corner of the area to determine the depth and nature of the cultural fill. That and other test pits showed that
the upper part of this fill contained caliche and ash, mixed throughout with mainly
post-1920 building debris: fi’agments of electrical wire, discarded plumbing
scraps and fixtures, nails, etc., but a sherd of a stoneware wine bottle led us to believe that at least the lower part of the fill had been in place since the late nineteenth century. At a depth of 7 feet 8 inches below the joists supporting the first
floor we encountered what appeared to be an intact flagstone floor.

12

Texas Archeological Society

Preparation for Digging
Several delays prevented an early start on excavating the kitchen: the forest
of piping and wiring had to be removed, but the structural engineer did not wish
the fill removed until certain deteriorated sections of the below-grade stone foundation wall had been repaired. It was also desirable that we wait until the building
contractor had excavated the areaway on the north side of the kitchen so we could
open the original windows into the kitchen to allow both daylight to work by and
access for our equipment.
The kitchen was 12 feet wide and slightly more than 44 feet long, and the fill
varied in depth from 2 to 3 feet. Therefore, since the upper part of the fill contained mainly post-1920 building debris, we chose, with the concurrence of the
Antiquities Committee staff, to remove the overburden with a small front-end
loader. Only the final 6 inches of the fill covering the flagstone floor would be
excavated by hand.
Surface Collecting
Some artifacts had been noted on the surface in a low crawl space that bordered the kitchen on the south. Two original access vents, each about 25 inches
square, led from the kitchen into this area. Because of plans for duct work and
other utilities, this space was to be excavated by the building contractor to a
depth of 4 feet below the supporting timbers.
Before the construction workers started excavating this area, we collected
all of the cultural material that lay on the surface. This crawl space evidently had
been a favored place for disposal of broken dishes, bottles, and glassware.
Sherds of white ironstone serving pieces had been thrown into the area from the
kitchen, and a quantity of bones suggested that pets had been fed kitchen scraps
and leftover meat here.
Excavation
Once the construction workers started to dig, they were asked to save all
artifacts for the archeologists. Daily monitoring visits were made, and an archeologist screened every tenth wheelbarrow load of soil removed from the space.
The fairly low rate of recovery from these sample loads suggested that the construction workers were indeed spotting most of the material and saving it for us.
We began the hand excavation of the final 6 inches of fill from the kitchen
area along the west wall and worked toward the east. We did not use grid units
because the artifacts could be plotted exactly from their locations relative to the
walls. After the floor was exposed, a grid system of 2-foot intervals was laid out
for use in photographic recording.
As we began uncovering the flagstone floor, the material turning up on our
screen suggested that the room had not been a kitchen when the first layer of fill
was deposited on the flagstones. Bits of anthracite coal, cinders, and badly rusted
pipes and fittings of the type once used in steam heating systems began to appear.
Most of these lay on or in a i-inch layer of white caliche that covered the flagstones;
the fill above the caliche was darker soil containing more debris and some ash.

Jackson--Little Campus

13

Figure 8. Photograph showing the east half of the kitchen during the final stages of excavation; a, upper limit of the overburden; b-b’, top of the standing balk of fill left at the east end
of Feature 1; c, the sealing layer of clean white caliche; d-d’, the brick and coal-slag debris
of the boilerhole fill.

Twelve feet from the west end of the kitchen we encountered a break in the
flagstone pavement and a distinct line of brick masonry, which we designated
Feature 1 (Figure 8). Investigation of his feature revealed the foundation of a
large, about 8-by-10-foot coal-fired boiler. Feature 1 was about 1 foot below the
level of the flagstone floor, and the sides had been lined with brick. A section of
the flagstone floor about 12 feet square had been removed to permit the installation of the boiler in this centrally located pit dug into the undisturbed caliche
beneath the site. The fill of Feature ! was rich in coal, slag, lumps of cinders, and
fire-blackened bricks. Here too we encountered many iron pipe fittings.
Oddly, the plaster on the walls below the fill line was quite well preserved,
but no plaster remained on the exposed walls; even the limestone blocks were
badly eroded by spalling above the upper surface of the fill.

Stratigraphy
The dark soil of the rather uniform overburden in the kitchen gave way to
the distinct layer of white caliche that lay on the flagstones (Figure 8). Below the
flagstone floor was the dark fill with burned brick of Feature 1, which was excavated into bedrock caliche.

14

Texas Archeological Socie&

Chronological Interpretation
We know from Mrs. Custer’s account (1971:230) that the kitchen was functioning as such in 1865 and that the building was still heated by wood-burning
fireplaces at that time (1971:238-239). We also know that after the centra!
boiler plant for the Asylum was completed in 1888, the separate furnace (Feature
1) would have been unnecessary. So the room ceased to be used as a kitchen at
some time during the 23 years between 1865 and 1888, when the separate furnace was installed.
Because we found anthracite coal in Feature 1, we can infer that the furnace
was designed to use this fuel and that it was installed after 1872 when the railroad
came to Austin. (Hauling hard coal by ox wagon would not have been economic.)
The records show that a planned expansion of the building was delayed for two
years in anticipation of a fal! in lumber prices expected when the railroad arrived
(Tillotson 1977:35). This expansion, which was the two-story stone wing built
in 1872 onto the north side of the central part of the building (Figure 2), blocked
the areaway that let light and air into the kitchen.
It seems apparent from these facts that the kitchen was not used as such after
the summer of 1872, and that the flagstone floor was pierced at about that time
for installation of the furnace. It should be noted that subsequent construction
projects further damaged the floor, but when it was fully exposed, more than 50
percent was intact.
A Preservation Problem
Although a substantial part of the original kitchen floor was intact, plans for
the restoration called for a concrete floor with drains and supports for heavy air
conditioning equipment at a level 6 inches below the flagstone floor. The cost and
delay of redesigning these installations would be prohibitive, but we were contractually obligated to preserve aJlJaistoric fabric.
In May 1983, University of Texas officials met with the staff of the Texas
Antiquities Committee to decide the disposition of the flagstone floor. They
decided:
I. That in-place preservation of the floor over concrete and under airconditioning equipment was not justified in a room to which the public
would not have access.
2. That the flagstones should be salvaged and reused, with appropriate
interpretive markers, in a patio outside the building.
3. That a systematic photographic record should be made of the floor
as it was found and before the flagstones were removed.

Photographic Techniques
Because the joists supporting the first floor were only 7 feet 8 inches from
the floor, that was our maximum camera distance. At this distance a 120-ramformat reflex camera framed an area about 36 by 40 inches in sharp focus. We
therefore set up a series of tracks at 2-foot intervals down the length of the room.

Jackson--Little Campus

15

Each track was simply two wires that were sufficiently far apart that they supported the body of the camera but allowed the lens to protrude down between
them. By exposing a frame every 3 feet along these tracks, we were able to construct a complete photomosaic of the floor surface.
We directed a hand-held floodlight at a low angle to create sharp shadows
between the individual stones and to augment the sometimes weak natural light
in the kitchen. A light-meter reading was taken before every fifth exposure, and
shutter speeds were adjusted accordingly. This photomapping operation consumed the efforts of three persons for most of a day, but was quite successful.
Although some of the film was not ideally exposed, the images obtained were of
sufficiently good quality that we were able to record the exact position of every
stone in the floor.
A string grid laid out at 2-foot intervals--each intersection was labeled with a
small tag--was the primary ground reference for the photomosaic. One of the
lessons we learned while cataloging the photographs was that larger tags with
numbers perhaps an inch high or larger would have been better than our discreet
little tags with numbers so small that on contact prints they could hardly be read
even with a microscope.

THE ARTIFACTS
The most interesting finds made by the construction workers were a reasonably well preserved fragment of a man’s pleated-front shirt that was completely
buried in the loose, dry soil, and an effigy tobacco pipe (Figure 17, a).
Since the provenience of some of the artifacts from the site is rather vague,
we will discuss in detail only the contents of the kitchen and the crawl space that
bordered it on the south, where the excavation was carefully controlled. This artifact assemblage does not so much lend further proof to the dates of the use
of the kitchen as it provides, from a limited context, a series of chronological
markers that can be used in dating other Reconstruction-era sites in Texas. The
true value of Custer’s kitchen lies in the fact that it was used so briefly; the space
served as a kitchen from 1859 to 1872, a total of only 13 years of the Civil War
and Reconstruction period. Some of the domestic artifacts from this kitchen that
are described here may become additions to the list of diagnostic artifacts for
this period.
Stoneware
Several sherds of a stoneware wine bottle (Figure 9) with part of the seal of
the Duchy of Nassau, which ceased to exist as a political entity in 1871, were
found in the lower part of the kitchen fill.
White lronside China
Several patterns and makers were represented in the assemblage of white
ironstone dinnerware fragments. A passage from Elizabeth Custer’s writing helps
to explain the surprising variety of patterns.

16

Texas Archeological Society

0

0
r

2 inches
i

1
m

b
I
,;
1

J
2

2
I
3

3 inches
,,I
CM

Figure 9. Photograph of sherds from stoneware wine bottle, a; drawing of impressed seal
from shoulder of bottle, b.

Occasionally we attempted a dinner, and, as we wanted to invite our own ladies
as well as some from the regular regiments, the table was a subject of study; for
when twenty came the dishes gave out. The staff dined early so we could have theirs,
and the southern woman who occupied two rooms in the building lent everything she
had [Custer 1971:230] .... and that on that table were the united contents of all our
mess chests, and there were not [more] saucers or dessert plates nearer than town.
We were aware that our stay in the south was limited, and made no effort to keep
enough crockery for dinners of twenty [Custer 1971 : 232].

A large baker or serving dish (Figure 10) was made by T&R Boote Co., of
Burslem, Staffordshire, England. The registry mark indicates that the pattern
(octagon shape) was registered for a three-year period beginning September 10,
1851 (Wetherbee 1980: 27, 49).
A 10-inch dinner plate (Figure 11) was made by Livesley and Powell & Co.,
of Hanley, Staffordshire, England. The shape was registered in 1855. The company was in business from 1851 to 1866 (Wetherbee 1980: 28).
Another 10-inch dinner plate (Figure 12) was made by T. J. and J. Mayer,
of Longport, Staffordshire, England. This firm operated from 1855 to 1858
(Wetherbee 1980: 29). The shape seems to be a variant of the Memnon pattern
registered by John Meir and Co. in 1857 (Wetherbee 1980:65).
A plain-bordered white ironstone 10-inch dinner plate (Figure 13) was made

Jackson--Little Campus

17

10 Cm

o
I
|

I

5 inches

)
C

0
I

i
I

I
t

2 inches

I

i

2 Cm

Figure 10. Large reconstructed baker or serving dish made by T&R Boote Co., of
Burslem, Staffordshire, England; a, photograph; b, enlargement of part of border design;
c, drawing of impressed registry mark.

by James Edwards, of Burslem, Staffordshire, England about 1850. The firm
went by this name from 1841 to 1851 and used a registry mark like the one on
this plate (Figure 13, c) on some later pieces (Wetherbee 1980:28, 40). The term
felspar opaque china, rather than ironstone, is used on this mark.

18

Texas Archeological Society

lO
_

5

inches 0

cm

0

c

0

|

!,

I
in

2

1

Figure I I. Ten-inch dinner plate made by Livesley and Powell & Co., of Hanley,
Staffordshire, England; a, photograph; b, enlargement of part of border design; c, drawing
of impressed registry mark.

Potter’s marks (Figure 14, a, b) show that a 10-inch dinner plate of unidentified pattern was made by John Maddock, of Burslem, Staffordshire, England,
who operated from 1842 to 1855 (Wetherbee 1980:28). The potter’s mark (Figure 14, c) from a nearly complete plain white ironstone 5.5-inch saucer shows
that it was made by James Edwards, the same potter who made the plainbordered dinner plate noted above (Figure !3). The marks differ, but the two
pieces appear to be from the same set, made between 1842 and 1851.
The printed maker’s mark (Figure 15) on a large sherd from a 10-inch dinner
plate has the same variant of the Memnon shape (as an edge design) as the plate

Jackson--Little Campus

0

I

19

2IN.
I

Figure 12. Fragment of a 10-inch dinner plate made by T. J. and J. Mayer, of Longport,
Staffordshire, England; a, photograph; b, drawing of part of the printed registry mark; c,
enlargement of part of the border design.

shown in Figure 12, but although this piece is apparently of U.S. origin, the other
is from Staffordshire. The style of the edge decoration is 1850s.
A heavy white ironstone dinner plate (Figure 16) bears the mark of the Prospect Hill Pottery Works, of Trenton, New Jersey, which, according to some au-

20

Texas Archeological Society

a

5CM

o
1,,
0

;IN.

C
0
I,

I
!

2IN
!

Figure 13. Part of a plain-bordered white ironstone 10-inch dinner plate made by James
Edwards, of Burslem, Staffordshire, England about 1850; a, photograph; b, enlargement
of border; c, drawing of registry mark, which is impressed under the glaze.

thorities, was founded in 1880 (Kovel and Kovel 1953:34, 154, 156,241; Barber
1976: 305). However, Lehner (1980: 1224) mentions that Dale and Davis, the
partnership that first operated the Prospect Hill Pottery, exhibited products in
Philadelphia in 1876. Because of the distinctly 1850-1860 style of the edge
decoration (Figure 16, c), itappears that they may have been in business earlier.
If that is not true, the piece is intrusive.

Jackson--Little Campus

21

b

Figure 14. Drawings of potters’ marks: a and b, from a 10-inch dinner plate of unidentified pattern; c, drawing of trademark from a nearly complete plain white ironstone 5.5inch saucer.

o
I

1
I
inch

Figure 15. Drawing of fragment of printed maker’s mark on a large sherd from a 10-inch
dinner plate. The mark probably read St. Louis, Missouri.

The variety of patterns and marks suggests that some of the assemblage
came from mess chests of the Custer party. The decorations typical of Britishmade white ironstone during the 1860s and 1870s were generally elaborate, with
ears of corn, sheaves of wheat, and vine leaves arranged in symmetrical decorative profusion. But the plainer, more formal designs were characteristic of the
white earthenware production of the Staffordshire potteries in the late 1840s and
the 1850s. The one piece of pottery that may have been made at the Prospect Hill
Pottery works (Figure 16) was perhaps intrusive in the fill, but its heavy symmetrical edge patterns were already 20 years out of fashion in 1880. It seems more
likely that the Prospect Hill Pottery was in operation as early as the mid-1860s
and that this particular item made its way south, possibly in a Union officer’s
mess chest.

22

Texas Archeologica! Society

u:

5

,mi

5-

E
U

G

I0

(
¢

|
I
Inches

2
,I

Figure !6. Part of a heavy white ironstone 10-inch dinner plate (three large sherds); a,
photograph; b, drawing of maker’s mark; c, enlargement of edge decoration.

Ceramic Tobacco Pipes
Three ceramic tobacco pipes were recovered. One is a slightly damaged
effigy (Figure 17, a) of President Franklin Pierce, who served from 1853 to 1857,
and because the title President appears on the molded label, the pipe probably
was made after 1853. This pipe, which was found in the crawl space adjacent to
the kitchen, was glazed with a glossy red-orange (terra cotta) slip that has been
noted on other effigy pipes (Pfeiffer 1981).
Another complete pipe (Figure !7, b) and a stem fragment (Figure 17, c) are
unglazed yellowish bisque-fired. Both were found in the caliche fill on the

Jackson--Little Campus

23

a

0
I

1
1

inches

C

2
]
I

I

3
I I
2

4
I

5
[,I Cm
3

Figure 17. Photographs of three clay tobacco pipes. Effigy pipe, a: complete pipe, b; stem
fragment, c.

kitchen floor, but the stem fragment was found during screening and came from
the far east end of the kitchen.
These pipes may be evidence of a problem that plagued the administration
of the Blind School. The trustees’ report for 1874 noted that "addiction to tobacco" was a problem among the boys and that "this habit, so injurious to all
who have not attained maturity, is especially pernicious, and unclean in the case
of the blind.., no evil habit is... more difficult to reform or eradicate .... "
(quoted by Tillotson 1977:36). We might speculate that the boiler room was a
favorite haunt of those who wished to practice the evil habit.
Glass Bottles
Certain diagnostic features of the glass bottles may be useful for dating
other Civil War and Reconstruction-era sites in Texas. A pontil scar is a circular
glass ring on the base of a hand-blown bottle. After a bottle is blown, it is
gripped with a pincers or pliers while being cut at the neck to separate it from the
blowpipe. The blowpipe, with the tubular remnant of neck glass still adhering to
its tip, then is stuck against the bottle’s base, and the blowpipe is held while the
neck is finished. Rather than using the blowpipe with the remnant tubular piece
of glass, a simple iron rod (pontil), with a glob of hot glass on its tip, can be
pushed against the bottle base until it adheres, and the pontil supports the bottle
while it is being finished. After the finish (i.e., the mouth) is applied, the bottle is
gripped with the pincers while the piece of glass between the blowpipe (or pontil)

24

Texas Archeological Society

0

5

CM

I,

3

IN

Figure 18. Photographs of bases of several bottles recovered from the crawl space, showing
rough pontil scars. All of these bottles have a faint aquamarine tint.

and the bottle base is severed (Blake and Colne 1880:358-359,384). The resultant scar, a raised circle of tubular glass (or a simple spot, from the glob on the
pontil’s tip) is the pontil scar characteristic of hand-made mouth-blown bottles
such as made in the United States before 1857.
An iron rod pontil can be pushed against the bottle base until it adheres temporarily. After the bottle finish is applied, the rod is detached by a sharp blow on
the pontil rod. The resultant circular indention, called a bare-iron pontil scar
(Baugher-Perlin 1982), is seen on some bottles found at Texas sites of the Civil
War era (see Figure 18).
The snap case was being used in the United States by about 1857 (Encyclopaedia Britannica 1959). By 1878 its use had nearly supplanted the method-described above--that produced pontil scars (Blake and Colne 1880: 358-359).
The snap-case is a pliers with curved jaws that grips the bottle when the blowpipe
is detached and then holds the bottle as its finish is applied.
The exteriors of bottles blown into iron molds that are too hot sometimes
appear as if they have been whittle marked or rough hammered. The use of whole

Jackson--Little Campus

25

(1

d

3
2

-3

1_-2 CM
!
0
Figure 19. Photographs of applied bottle necks from the crawl space behind the kitchen.
All but b have the rough-textured surface, and all but d have faint aquamarine tint. The
applied lip on specimen a was put on with a lipping tool and may be from a free-blown
bottle. Specimens c and d apparently have hand-finished lips.
iron molds was common in United States glass manufacturing by 1878; wooden
molds (water-soaked to prevent burning) were still preferred by many European
manufacturers because a smoother exterior finish could be obtained (Blake and
Colne 1880: 358-359, 366). The use of iron molds allows the imprinting of a
variety of symbols on the sides and bases of bottles.
Minerals or elements, including manganese, have been used since ancient
times to make new glass appear clear or to tint the glass certain colors (Brill
1963). By the 1870s it was common knowledge among glass manufacturers that
glass containing manganese turned purple with exposure to sunlight (Blake and
Colne 1880: 317), but the use of manganese to make clear glass persisted until
World War I, when German-controlled manganese supplies were not readily
available to United States manufacturers.
It can be assumed that bottles of standardized shapes and neck finishes and
with mold seams and/or symbols on the bases are post-Civil War and usually of
United States manufacture. Bottles with pontil scars, whittle marks, uneven side
seams, varying thickness, irregular (hand-finished) mouths, and without subtle
horizontal striations below the necks (often a sign that they were spun in the iron
molds in order to obliterate the side seams) may be of pre-Civil War manufac-

26

Texas Archeological Society

ture. Applied necks (Figure 19) made without benefit of lipping tools are seen on
most bottles made before about 1870.
Other Artifacts
The complete inventory of recovered artifacts is not given here because it
would not be of general interest. Most are in the permanent collection of the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin and are available for examination. Some specimens, such as plumbing fittings and pieces of pipe, have been
sketched, inventoried, and discarded. Badly rusted nails were counted and discarded, as were sherds of window glass, fragments of furnace slag, and lumps
of coal.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The investigations at the Arno Nowotny Building (41TV611) were of the
type that actively support and aid restoration projects. Our aims were not to illuminate the lifeways of nineteenth-century military men or blind children, but to
establish a few facts about a specific building. We were able to determine that the
architect’s estimates from photographs of the original sizes of the east and west
wings were accurate, we found the flagstone floor of the original kitchen and
recorded it before it was removed and before the flagstones began their new life
as a patio, and we evaluated the deposit at the bottom of the cistern.
The artifact assemblage was from the former cellar kitchen--which, according to documentary evidence, was used between 1859 and 1872--and from
the directly adjacent crawl spac~.~White ironstone sherds like the ones found here are common at many Texas
sites of the last half of the nineteenth century, but these specimens are especially
well dated archeologically because of the unusually discrete temporal context. In
addition, research into the makers’ marks and patterns of edge decoration has
shown them to be consistent with that context. So this artifact sample is presented not as support for dating the deposits excavated from the crawl space and
kitchen, but as a catalog of diagnostic types that may be useful for future reference. For this reason, several artifacts that are interesting, but of types not commonly encountered (such as the fragment of a man’s pleated-front shirt--noted
earlier--and a collection of pre-Braille raised letters), have not been discussed
or illustrated.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The restoration of the Little Campus was authorized under a permit issued by the
Texas Antiquities Committee to The University of Texas at Austin.
The writer thanks all the people who participated in the excavations at Little Campus. These include field workers Kevin Jolly, Don Lloyd, David Robinson, Leland
Bement, Bruce Nightengale, and Deborah Smith. I also extend my appreciation to Harry
S.’ Hansson, the University’s on-site construction inspector, for his cooperation throughout
the project.

Jackson--Little Campus

27

REFERENCES CITED
Barber, Edwin Atlee
1976 The pottery and porcelain of the United States and marks of American potters.
(Single-volume reprint of two-volume set published 1893 and 1904.) J. & J.
Publishing, New York.
Blake, William P., and Charles Coln6
1880
Glass and glass ware; classification and properties of glass. Reports to the
United States Commissioners to the Paris Universal Exposition, 1878. Government Printing Office, Washington.
Brill, Robert H.
1963

Ancient Glass. Scientific American 209(5): 120-130.

Custer, Elizabeth Bacon
1971
Tenting on the plains, or General Custer in Kansas and Texas. (Original edition
1877, C.L. Webster & Co., New York.) University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.
Encyclopaedia Britannica
1959
Glass. Volume 10. William Benton, Chicago.
Kovel, Ralph M., and Terry H. Kovel
1953
Dictionary of marks; pottery and porcelain. Crown, New York.
Lehner, Lois
Complete book of American kitchen and dinner wares. Wallace-Homestead
1980
Book Co., Des Moines.
Pfeiffer, Michael A.
Notes on unusual clay tobacco pipes found in Seattle. Historical Archaeology
1981
15(1) : 109-112.
Tillotson, Steven Land
Remnant of an era: the history of the Little Campus site (1859-1977). M.A.
1977
thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
Wetherbee, Jean
1980

A look at white ironstone. Wallace-Homestead Book Co., Des Moines.

Trustees’ Report
1872
Trustees’ Report. Texas State Asylum for the Blind, Austin.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Jack M. Jackson received his M.A. in anthropology from The University of Texas at
Austin in 1982. He is a historical archeologist, formerly on the staff of the Texas Archeological Survey, now on the staff of Prewitt and Associates in Austin.

A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas
Joe D. Hudgins

ABSTRACT
Late Prehistoric and Historic Indian cultural materials were found by
the writer in 1969 at the Shanklin site in Wharton County, Texas. This paper
describes the artifacts and faunal remains that were collected from the plowed
surface of the site.

INTRODUCTION
The Shanklin site (41WH8) is on the north bank of Peach Creek, a tributary
of the Colorado River, about 5 km (3 miles) west-southwest of Hungerford,
Wharton County, Texas (Figure 1). The creek divides the prairie region to the
north from the heavily timbered Colorado River valley to the south. Before it
was cleared and cultivated, the site area was lightly timbered with oak and
elm trees.
Cultivation--mainly corn and milo in the past 10 years--has disturbed the
surface, resulting in furrows 16 to 18 cm deep. All of the artifacts and faunal
material was collected from the surface of an area about 35 by 50 meters in the
cultivated field.

Indian History of Wharton County
The earliest recorded historic aborigines in Wharton County were the
Karankawa-affiliated Coco Indians (Campbell 1976: 181). They were first encountered by Cabeza de Vaca in the 1530s and later by Frenchmen of La Salle’s
expedition in the 1680s. The Coco Indians were most frequently associated with
the lower Colorado River in an area now covered by Colorado, Wharton, and
Matagorda Counties.
The most recent sighting of Indians in the site area was in the early 1870s,
according to J. D. Hudgins, of Hungerford (Hudgins 1969). He recalled a small
group of Indians who visited his ranch during the summer and stayed for a few
days begging food. This band of Indians was known by the local inhabitants as
fish-eaters, because they lived on the creeks and rivers, depending for food almost entirely on fish and shellfish.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986for 1984)

30

Texas Archeological Society

arford

N

bod ’85

i

Figure 1. Map showing the location of Wharton, Colorado, and Matagorda Counties.

LITHIC ARTIFACTS
Utilized Flakes
In all, 1,260 flint flakes were recovered. Most are 5 to 6 mm long; six are
very small flakes recovered by screening a random sample from the furrow
through eighth-inch hardware cloth.
Analysis of all of the flakes revealed that 70 percent are tertiary flakes
(flakes from within cores, with no remnants of cortex), 25 percent are secondary
flakes (flakes with some cortex), and 5 percent are primary flakes (flakes with
cortex covering one side or most of one side).
Cores
Ten flint cores (four are shown in Figure 2) were collected. Eight had been
worked bifacially, and one (Figure 2, a) is a chopperlike implement.
Bifaces
Other lithic artifacts from the site include 10 large bifaces (Figure 3). They
are 7 to 10 cm long and 4 to 5 cm wide and are either oval or leaf shaped. These
bifaces were found only in the southwestern and northeastern areas of the site.
End Scrapers
There are 150 unifacial end scrapers, varying from 3 to 7 cm in length and
2 to 3.5 cm in width (Figure 4). Only about 15 percent have remnant cortex.
Most of the scrapers have one end worked into a rounded or humped shape. All
were recovered from the southwestern and northeastern areas of the site.

Hudgins--Historic Indian Site

31

b

d

0
I

5 crn
!

I

I

I

I

Figure 2. Photograph, four flint cores from the Shanklin site.

Drills and Gravers
Twenty-three flint drills and four gravers were recovered (Figure 5). The
drills, 2.5 to 5 cm long, have unifacial base and biracial stems; the gravers, 2 to 4
cm long, are all unifacial.
Arrowpoints
The collection includes 110 arrowpoints and 7 larger projectile points. The
arrowpoints are Fresno, Guerrero, Cuney, and Bulbar Stemmed types (Hester
1980: 104).
Fresno Points (Figure 6)
Thirty Fresno points were found, 17 biracial and 13 unifacial. They are triangular with fiat bases and range in length between 2 and 4 cm.
Guerrero Points (Figure 7)
Thirty-five Guerrero points were recovered, 21 bifacial and 14 unifacial.
Guerrero points are sometimes triangular, but they have concave bases. Guerrero
points have been described as Historic; specimens have been found at Spanish
missions in Coahuila and Texas (Hester 1980: 106) and at Spanish Colonial missions in San Antonio (Fox 1979:25-26).

32

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Photograph, four flint bifaces from the Shanklin site.

I

I

I

I

I

I

Figure 4. Photograph, end scrapers from the Shanklin site.

Hudgins--Historic Indian Site

d
8

~ i !~ ~!ii;?¯

ii!
e

m
0

1,,!

5cm

I

I

I

I

Figure 5. Photograph, gravers (a-e) and drills (f-m) from the Shanklin site.

33

34

Texas Archeological Society

0

I

5cm

!

I

I

I

I

Figure 6. Photograph, 15 Fresno points from the Shanklin site.

Cuney Points (Figure 8)
Twenty-eight Cuney points were recovered, 12 bifacial and 16 unifacial.
They vary in length from 2.5 to 4 cm.
Bulbar Stemmed (Figure 9, a-e)
Nine bulbar-stemmed points were recovered, six bifacial and three unifacial. Two of these points (Figure 9, f, g) are generally triangular, each with a
small notch centered in the base. They are similar in length to Cuney points.

Hudghzs--Historic bldian Site

35

Other Point Types (Figure 10)
Four of the points recovered may fall into types other than those described
above. These points have small concave bases and pronouncedly convex sides. A
point of this type was found at Mission Conception in San Antonio (Cook
1980: 11, D).

Larger Projectile Points
Seven large biracial projectile points were recovered. Four (Figure 11, a-d)
are generally triangular and seem to be made from the same material as the arrowpoints. Two (Figure 11, e, f) have stemmed bases.
CERAMICS
Sherds
More than 8,000 ceramic sherds were collected from the surface of site
41WH8; they were about evenly distributed over the entire site. Most have hard,
smooth, thin walls and have fine, sandy, black paste. About 30 percent are bone
tempered. Colors of the exterior surfaces include buff (10 percent), light orange
(30 percent), and dark brown to black (60 percent). About 40 percent are decorated with straight or painted wavy black lines (Figure 12). The interior walls of
about 30 percent of the sherds are coated with asphaltum. Most of the sherds
from the Shanklin site appear to be of Rockport ware (Hester 1980: 128).
Two styles of rim sherds were found: smooth, slightly rounded rims (Figure
13) and notched rims (Figure 14). Two incised sherds (Figure 15) and a few fragments of clay handles (Figure 16) also were collected.
Figurines
A ceramic anthropomorphic figurine, 6.5 cm long and 2.5 cm in diameter
(Figure 17) is medium brown with a dark gray interior. On the back (Figure 17, a)
are three vertical rows of semicircular parallel indentations resembling fingernail
marks and one horizontal row of similar indentations that crosses the middle of
the vertical rows. Similar indentations are on the front of the figurine but do not
appear to follow a pattern. On the front the head has two eye holes and three
small incised marks above and beside the right eye (Figure 17, b). On the back
the head has no markings, but here a broken area exposes the dark gray interior
(Figure 17, a). From the side, the head is tapered toward the top. At the bottom
front of the figurine are two parallel vertical incised lines.
Smoking Pipe Fragments
A bowl fragment (Figure 18, a) and a stem fragment (Figure 18, b) from different smoking pipes indicate European influence. The bowl fragment is light
brown and has parallel lines extending from the seam. The stem fragment is gray
and has raised parallel lines extending from the seam.

36

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

i
0

I,

I

I

I

I

5cm

I

Figure 7. Photograph, 15 Guerrero points from Shanklin site.

HISTORIC EUROPEAN ARTIFACTS
Glass Artifacts
Seventeen fragments of heavily patinated glass were collected (Figure 19).
Most are dark green or blue green. One specimen (Figure 19, a) had been unifacially worked into an end scraper similar to the flint unifacial scrapers shown in
Figure 4. Three other fragments (Figure 19, b-d) had been bifacially worked into
round or oval shapes.
Coins

A single silver piece-of-eight was recovered (Figure 20) in excellent condition, showing little or no wear. The coin has a Mexican mint mark and the
date 1738.

Hudgins--Historic Indian Site

37

Iron Artifacts
An iron artifact resembling a projectile point was recovered from the site
(Figure 21). By microscopic examination, Harry Shafer, of Texas A&M University, found that the edges of the artifact had striations from filing and that its base
had been deliberately blunted (Shafer 1982). The artifact is apparently a keyhole
escutcheon that has been made into a projectile point.
Other iron artifacts include the midsection of a knife blade 8 cm long and
3 cm wide; a square iron spike 9 cm long, with the pointed end bent around to
form a hook; and a triangular piece of iron 2.5 cm long and 5 mm thick, with one
side heavily coated with an asphaltlike substance.

SHELLS AND SHELL ARTIFACTS
Freshwater Mussel Shell
About 30 percent of the freshwater mussel shell fragments on the site had
been notched (Figure 22). The reason for the notching is not known.

Marine Shells
Oliva sayana
Specimens of the letter olive (Oliva sayana) mollusc were recovered (Figure
23). Specimen a had not been worked, specimen b has its top missing (whether
purposely or naturally is unknown), and specimens c-f have V-shaped notches in
the bottom ends. Specimen d is an artifact known as a tinkler; it has an especially
interesting incised groove around the top, above which is a series of 10 notches.
An Oliva shell similar to specimen d was found at site 41VT34 near Victoria
(Janota 1980: 41).
Other Marine Shells
The following shells were also found on the site:
Giant Atlantic cockle: Laevicardium (Dinocardium) robustum
Transverse ark: Andara (Clarkiuna) transversa
Plicate horn: Cerithidea (Cerithideopsis) pliculosa
Rangia: Rangia cuneata
Lightning whelk: Busycon (Perversium) pulleyi
The giant Atlantic cockle, transverse ark, and the plicate horn were identified by D. Gentry Steele, of Texas A&M University (Steele 1982). There is no
evidence that these specimens were used as ornaments, but the site is 80 km (50
miles) from the Gulf of Mexico, so it is probable that they were ornaments or
trade items.

BONE ARTIFACTS
Projectile Points
Four bone projectile points were found at the site (Figure 24). They were
apparently shaped by using single slicing motions with sharp blades; there are no
indications of grinding or smoothing.

38

Texas Archeo!ogical Society

o
I

I

I

I

!

Figure 8. Photograph, 14 Cuney points from the Shanklin site.

Other Bone Artifacts
Other bone specimens found at the site had been drilled, smoothed, or
notched on one or both ends (Figure 25). Four of these specimens (b-e) had been
rounded and smoothed on both ends to make beads.
One bone fragment (Figure 25, f) has three painted black lines on the inner
side resembling the black lines on the potsherds in Figures 12 and 14.
Five bone fragments (Figure 25, g-k) had been purposely rounded or pointed
on one or both ends.
An alligator tooth (Figure 25, a) with a drilled hole through one end may
have been a bead.

Hudgins--Historic Indian Site

39

i>

d
0

5cm

I.

I

0
Ii

I

I

I

I

I

!

1

!

5cm
!

Figure 9. Photograph, 5 Bulbar stemmed points (a-e) and two basal notched triangular
points (f-g).

FAUNA
More than 300 bone fragments were collected, representing the following
animals: cow or bison, modern horse, whitetail deer, black bear, cougar, opossum,
eastern cottontail, red-eared turtle, box turtle, soft-shell turtle, alligator, and gar.
The specimens representing black bear, cougar, eastern cottontail, and
opossum were identified by William L. McClure, of Houston (McClure 1982).
The species found at the site, together with the skeletal elements from which the
bone fragments came, are listed in Table 1.
Because elements of bear, cougar, and horse were found, the faunal collection makes this site unique among the prehistoric sites in Wharton County. Remains of bear were found only in the north and northeastern parts of the site;
remains of cow or bison were found only in the south and southwestern parts. No
teeth from modern bison were available for comparison, but the cow or bison
teeth are unusually large in comparison to those of a 2,000-lb. Brahman bull.

40

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Species and Skeletal Elements
Opossum--Didelphis marsup&lis
Maxillary fragment with 3 molars
Mandible fragment with 2 premolars
Vertebra
Black Bear--Ursus americanus (at least 2 individuals)
Right mandible fragment with 3 molars
6 incisors
6 metatarsals, one each from digits 1, 2, 3, 4; two from 5
Cougar--Felis concolor (at least three individuals)
4 premolars
3 incisors
1 right mandible fragment with 2 premolars, 1 molar
Eastern Cottontail--Sylvilagus floridanus
Mandible fragment with 5 teeth
Cow or Bison--Bos or Bison
Maxillary with 3 premolars, 11 molars
Mandible with 1 incisor, 1 premolar, 2 molars
Radius, distal end
Tibia, 2 distal ends
10 Phalanges
Femur, proximal end
4 Tibial tarsal
Horse--Equus sp.
Maxillary with 1 premolar
Whitetail Deer--Odocoileus virginianus
Maxillary with 6 premolars, 9 molars
Mandible with 14 molars, 3 premolars
Humerus, distal end
2 Phalanges
3 Astragali
Metacarpal, proximal end
Alligator--Alligator mississippiensis
7 teeth
36 scutes
Red Eared Turtle--Pseudemys sp.
2 nuchals
35 shell fragments
Box Turtle--Terrepene sp.
2 nuchals
6 shell fragments
Gar--Lipisosteus sp.
3 scales

Hudgins--Historic Indian Site

41

0
I
Figure lO. Photograph, four points.

0

!

5cm

!

!

!

!

I

0

1,

5cm

I

I

I

!

1

Figure t 1. Photograph, four generally triangular large projectile points (a-d) and two
large projectile points (e, f) with stemmed bases.

42

Texas Archeological Society

0

!,l

5cm

I

I t,I

Figure 12. Photograph, sherds with asphaltum decoration from the Shanklin site.

Figure 13. Photograph showing smooth, slightly rounded rim sherds from the Shanklin site.

Hudgins--Historic Indian Site

0

I ..... 1

5cm

I

I

1

!

Figure 14. Photograph, notched rim sherds from the Shanklin site.

o
I
Figure 15. Photograph, incised sherds from the Shanklin site.

43

44

Texas Archeological Society

0
l,,

I

I

I

I

5cm
!

Figure 16. Photograph, fragments of clay handles from the Shanklin site.

a

b

Figure 17. Photograph, front (b) and back (a) views of anthropomorphic ceramic figurine
from the Shanklin site.

Hudgins--Historic Indian Site

45

~i~! ~i~¸ !~ !!ii!! ~!

8

b
0

I

I

I

I

5cm

I

I

Figure 18. Photograph, bowl (a) and stem (b) fragments of smoking pipes.

b

C

0

I

5cm

I

I

!

I

I

Figure 19. Photograph, glass fragment unifacially worked into an end scraper (a) and
three fragments bifacially worked into rounded shapes (b-d).

46

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 20. Photograph, Spanish silver piece-of-eight from the Shanklin site.

0

!

5cm

!

!

I

!

1

Figure 21. Photograph, iron keyhole escutcheon made into a projectile point.

Hudgins--Historic Indian Site

0

I

47

5cm

I

I

I

I

I

Figure 22. Photograph, notched freshwater mussel shells from the Shanklin site.

0

5cm

t

Figure 23. Photograph, specimens of the letter olive (Oliva sayana) mollusc from the
Shanklin site: a is unworked; b may be worked; c-f are worked.

48

Texas Archeological Society

0

I
Figure 24. Photograph, bone projectile points from the Shanklin site.

Hudgins--Historic Indian Site

49

f

h

k
0

I

5mm

I

!

I

!

!

Figure 25. Photograph, bone specimens from the Shanklin site: a, drilled alligator tooth
(possible bead); b-e, beads; f, painted specimen; g-k, rounded or pointed fragments.

50

Texas Archeological Society

Only a small percentage of the bone fragments had been burned, and no
evidence was found of hearths or burned areas at the site, in contrast to the prehistoric sites in Wharton County that yielded many fired clay balls and high percentages of burned bone fragments. This variation may result from different
cooking methods of the prehistoric and historic Indians in the area.

CONCLUSIONS
The artifacts recovered from the Shanklin site (41WH8) and described in
this paper indicate a historic Indian site, occupied possibly during the eighteenth
or early nineteenth century. Many of the recovered artifacts resemble those found
in archeological contexts at Spanish missions in Texas.
The artifacts and faunal material from this historic Indian site are assumed
to represent a single temporal component; they present a good opportunity for
noting the differences between historic and prehistoric Indian occupation sites in
the area.
REFERENCES CITED
Campbell, T.N.
1976
Coco Indians. In: The handbook of Texas 3: 181.
Cook, Paul J.
1980
A review of the history and archeology of Mission Concepcion. La Tierra
7(3) : 11.

Fox, Daniel E.
1979
The lithic artifacts of Indians at the Spanish Colonial Missions, San Antonio,
Texas. The University of Texas at San Antonio, Center for Archaeological Research, Special Report 8.
Hester, Thomas H.
1980

Digging into South Texas prehistory. Corona, San Antonio.

Hudgins, J. D.
1969

Personal communication.

Janota, Beverly
1980
A preliminary study of the shell ornaments of the Texas coast, between Galveston Bay and the Nueces River. In: Papers on the archeology of the Texas
coast, edited by Lynn Highley and Thomas R. Hester. The University of Texas
at San Antonio, Center for Archaeological Research, Special Report 11.
Shafer, Harry
1981
Personal communication.
McClure, William L.
1982

Personal communication.

Steele, D. Gentry
1982
Personal communication.

Hudgins--Historic Indian Site

51

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Joe D. Hudgins is a 1960 graduate of Texas A&M University in animal husbandry.
He is a lifelong resident of Hungerford, where he and his brothers operate their registered
Brahman cattle ranch. His interest in archeology dates back to his childhood. He is a
member of the Houston Archeological Society, the Texas Archeological Society, and the
Wharton County Historical Commission. He has recorded more than 85 sites in Wharton
County with the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.

A Newly Discovered East Texas Log Courthouse
David H. Jurney

ABSTRACT
Dendrochronology (tree-ring dating) was used to determine the initial
construction date for a post-oak log structure thought to be the original
Navarro County Courthouse. The cutting dates of five specimens of logs indicate that the structure was built in late fall 1848 or before the 1849 growing
season. The double-pen part of the structure probably is the original or part
of the original courthouse.

INTRODUCTION
The Reverend Hampton McKinney and his family left Macoupin County,
Illinois, in 1846 and established a temporary residence at Dresden in southwestern Navarro County, Texas (Figure 1). Later, while traveling along the Cow Head
Trail, McKinney selected a tract of high, rolling prairie with scattered timber
upon which to establish his land headright. (A headright is a grant of money or
land given in 1839 in Texas to those who fulfilled certain conditions relating especially to settling and developing land.) McKinney moved two empty log cabins
from what was known as Richardson’s settlement and put them together to form
his first residence.
According to Gammel’s Early Laws (Shafer 1948), the Texas Legislature appointed commissioners on February 12, 1848 to select land at Corsicana for the
county seat of Navarro County. The Reverend McKinney donated his residence
for a temporary courthouse and sold his headright to the city of Corsicana.
Later in 1848, the Corsicana courthouse was described by Judge John L.
Miller as having "cracks big enough to throw a wolf through . . . and was intended as a temporary structure," but we do not know whether this description
referred to McKinney’s former residence or to other court facilities in use at the
time. The courthouse subsequently vanished into legend, together with other log
buildings of the county.
All of the log buildings were thought to have been moved onto a local farm,
but in December 1980, two !og structures were discovered under the framing of
an old house at 209 West First Avenue (Figure 2), on the same lot that had held
the original Navarro County Courthouse. Older residents insisted that when they
were children they knew this house was built from the old courthouse logs.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986for 1984)

Texas Archeological Society

54

0

I0 KILOMETERS
I

I

0

’1

I0 MILES

N

BOD

1985

Figure 1. Map of Navarro County, Texas.

According to Jordan (1978:151), of the hundreds of early log courthouses
that once dotted the Texas landscape, the only one that was still standing in
1978 was in Comanche County. The Navarro County Historical Commission,
investigating the landmark status of the log structures in Corsicana, asked the
writer to analyze their architecture and determine, if possible, the dates of their
construction.
DESCRIPTION
The Corsicana structure is composed of what were originally two log buildings: a single-pen structure built primarily of red cedar and a double-pen structure built of post oak (Figure 3). Jordan (1978 : 107) describes a pen as a "unit of
four log walls fastened together with corner notching. All full-sized ground-floor
rooms subsequently added to the house, whether of log construction or not,
are also called pens." A pen can be "subdivided by light partitions into two or
more rooms."
The logs of the Corsicana structure had been coded with a numerical and
alphabetical system often used when log buildings are dismantled and moved.
The coding tabs have machine-cut "square" nails driven into them, indicating
that the structures were dismantled and reassembled sometime in the nineteenth
century. When the two log structures were subsequently reconstructed, they were

JurneyiLog Courthouse

55

Figure 2. Photograph showing front view of the structure built from two log buildings at
209 West First Avenue, Corsicana, Texas.

/
1,2,5,4,5,~ 22
-\ I

7,8,9,10,11,12
14--

PENI 2

--15--

I
--t5

t
I
I

PEN 5
/ ~.4,25,26,27,

2a--

\
PEN i

I

?,..~-TERs I
Figure 3. Plan of the building at 209 West First Avenue, Corsicana, showing the two original log structures (heavy lines) and subsequent additions (fine lines). Note the large doorway, later filled in by framing, that was originally between pens 1 and 2 of the double-pen
structure. Plain numbers indicate sample locations; bold-face numbers indicate dated
specimens (see Table 1).

56

Texas Archeological Society

joined together, forming a single T-shaped building that was covered with a
frame of sawn lumber. More windows and doors and two chimneys were added at
this time. Both parts of the building show evidence of rearrangement of wall logs
and remodeling. The logs originally were chinked with split logs and covered by
boards before they were whitewashed.
Dendrochronology (the tree-ring method of dating) was chosen as the method
to determine if the log structures could have been the first courthouse. Long-term
tree-ring chronologies have been clearly established in the eastern United States;
200-to-300-year chronologies are available for several hardwood and conifer species, and 39 modern chronologies have been established for pine, oak, cedar,
spruce, hemlock, beech, bald cypress, ash, and maple (Dewitt and Ames 1978).
David Stahle, research assistant in the Department of Geography at the University of Arkansas, has determined dates for the original construction and for isolated remodeling episodes of 24 historic log and frame buildings in Arkansas
(Stahle 1979). This method also is being used by archeologists at Southern
Methodist University to date buildings and reconstruct the settlement history of
the Richland-Chambers Reservoir near Corsicana.

METHODOLOGY
In order to select the most suitable timbers and framing elements for treering analysis, a detailed study was made of the entire structure. Since doorways
were the only areas where the ends of the wall logs could be examined, door
jambs were carefully removed from the two doors of the double pen that face the
interior hall between this oak structure and the red cedar single pen (Figure 4).
The exposed ends of the wall logs were then sampled by hand-cutting (with a crosscut saw) thin transverse slices (Figure 3), and the door jambs were reattached.
In the laboratory the cross sections were sanded with progressively finer
textured sandpaper, producing highly polished surfaces that allowed examination
in minute detail of the cellular structure of each growth ring. Five red-cedar and
five post-oak specimens were selected from the thirty samples because they had
suitable numbers of rings for tree-ring analysis (Table 1).
The Douglass method of tree-ring dating (wherein the patterns of wide and
narrow rings are recorded and correlated with cycles of wet and dry years) was
employed to date the specimens (Douglass 1941; Stokes and Smiley 1968). The
red-cedar specimens provide a 70-year floating chronology. (The writer is currently collaborating in an effort to construct a modern red-cedar chronology that
will make it possible to date buildings in the area.)
The five post-oak specimens, all from the double-pen structure, span 114
years, the period from A.D. 1735 to 1848. All five dates are dates of cutting. The
trees were cut in the late fall or winter of 1848, before the growing season of
1849. Since the builders of the structures used green wood--because green
wood, especially oak, is much easier to work than seasoned wood--the cutting
dates of these trees should closely reflect the construction date of the double-pen
structure.

Jurney--Log Courthouse

57

Figure 4. Photograph showing interior view of the post-oak double-pen structure. The
red-cedar single-pen structure can be seen through the doorway. Tree-ring samples were
taken from the logs at the right of the photograph.

Four master chronologies were used to date the Corsicana specimens, derived from living post-oak stands in Texas at Oak Park in Navarro County; the
Fort Worth Nature Center in Tarrant County; and the Dwight Nichols Ranch in
Throckmorton County; and in Oklahoma at Mud Creek in Jefferson County (Figure 5). No living chronologies have been established for red cedar in Texas.
Samples for the Navarro County chronologies were collected by Cook and Harlan
in 1974 (DeWitt and Ames 1978). The Throckmorton and Tarrant Counties,
Texas and the Jefferson County, Oklahoma chronologies were collected by David
Stahle under the auspices of the Climatological Divison of the National Science
Foundation.

Texas Archeological Society

58

Table 1. List of Dated Specimens from the Post-Oak Double-Pen Part
of the Log Structure at Corsicana (os, outside surface;
b, bark; p, pith; comp, complete terminal ring)
Specimen
Number
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC

9
11
12
24
27

Design
Element

Inner

Wall
Wall
Wall
Wall
Wall

1735p
1745p
1745p
1749p
1750p

log
log
log
log
log

Dating
Outer
1848
1848
1848
1848
1848

comp
comp
comp
comp
comp

Remarks
os
os
os
os-b
os

In composite, good x-dating

In composite, good x-dating
Suppression, sapwood wormy
In composite, good x-dating

NOTE: All dates have been confirmed by David W. Stahle.

OKLAHOM A

Cross TimbE

TEXAS
0
I

100
I

200 KILOMETERS
I

Figure 5. Map of East Texas and part of Oklahoma, showing locations of modern post-oak
chronologies: (north to south) Jefferson County, Oklahoma; Throckmorton County, Fort
Worth Nature Center, and Oak Park, Texas.

Jurney--Log Courthouse

59

The post-oak tree-ring dates from the Corsicana double-pen samples compare very well with all of these master chronologies, reflecting 19 dry years and
two wet years in common for all of the specimens. The Corsicana samples match
most closely the Oak park chronology and somewhat less well the Throckmorton, Fort Worth, and Mud Creek chronologies. The dating area for post-oak
covers at least 400 km’- (200 square miles).
CONCLUSIONS
Tree-ring dating establishes that the post-oak wall logs in the double-pen
part of the Corsicana structure were cut in 1848 and 1849, the time of construction of the courthouse. The large doorway in the partition between pens 1 and 2
has a parallel in many clerical offices where there are large doorways between
public areas in one room and official files in another; the whitewashed outside
walls would have made the building stand out against the surroundings as a public
building should.
The Navarro County Historical Commission has proposed landmark status
for these early log buildings, and the owner, Dennis Cooper, of Corsicana, has
dismantled the structures in preparation for on-site renovation. Fragments of
Texas history such as these are often swept away in the march of progress, but
these buildings will soon grace the East Texas landscape again.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The writer thanks the Navarro County Historical Commission and members of the
Navarro County Historical Society for their aid and support in this project. Particular
thanks are due Verna Ann Bonner and Wyvonne Putnam for their archival research and
encouragement. Randall Moir and James Bruseth, of Southern Methodist University, provided support in production of the report. David Stahle corroborated the tree-ring dating
and criticized the report. Special thanks are due Sheila M. Jones for her aid in production
of the final report.

REFERENCES CITED
DeWitt, E. and M. Ames (editors)
1978

Tree-ring chronologies of eastern North America. Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research Chronology Series 4, vol. 1. University of Arizona, Tucson.

Douglass, A. E.
1941

Crossdating in dendrochronology. Journal of Forestry 39(10):825-831.

Jordan, T. G.
1978

Texas log buildings: a folk architecture. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Shafer, M. E.
Gammel’s annotated rules of civil procedure in Texas. Gammel’s Bookstore,
1948
Austin.

60

Texas Archeological Society

Stahle, D. W.
1979
Tree-ring dating of historic buildings in Arkansas. Tree-Ring Bulletin 39: 1-28.
Stokes, M. A. and T. L. Smiley
1968
Introduction to tree-ring dating. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
David Jurney received his B.A. in anthropology from Appalachian State University
in 1973 and his M.A. from the University of Arkansas in 1978. He is employed by the
Archaeology Research Program of Southern Methodist University as a Project Archaeologist, supervising historic archeological investigations. He is enrolled in the S.M.U. doctoral program and is planning doctoral research on the use of dendrochronology in East
Texas architectural studies.

La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas
Kathleen Gibnore

ABSTRACT
The location of La Salle’s colony in Texas, established in 1685, has
been in doubt. Comparisons with a model of topographic, physiographic,
and geographic data, and physical cultural remains make it evident that the
Keeran site on Garcitas Creek in Victoria County (41VT4) is the site of the
colony. Part of the proof lies in the presence there of a ceramic ware made in
Saintonge, France in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

INTRODUCTION

The location of La Salle’s colony in Texas, Fort St. Louis, long has been the
subject of discussion. To commemorate the three hundredth anniversary (1985)
of the establishment of the colony, this report seeks to resolve doubts about its
location. Since the finding by the historian H. E. Bolton of a 1691 survey map
that compared favorably with modern maps of the Matagorda Bay area, the location has been generally accepted to be somewhere in that area (Figure 1).
Bolton (1924), on July 3, 1914, boarded a train in Austin, Texas, traveled to
Placedo, Texas, contacted the local people, and found a site that had on the
surface "small fragments of antique blue and white porcelain." A wall 21/2 feet
thick enclosing an area 90 feet square was traced and, although Bolton knew and
admitted that these remains probably belonged to the Spanish presidio established at La Salle’s colony, he was convinced that this was the site of La Salle’s
colony too. This site, now known as the Keeran site, is in Victoria County on
Garcitas Creek, a stream flowing into Lavaca Bay, which in turn flows into the
larger Matagorda Bay (Figure 1).
Because Bolton could not prove that this was the site of La Salle’s colony,
other historians were not convinced of the validity of his claim. Some thought the
colony probably was on Galveston Bay; some, on the Lavaca River about 8 km
(5 miles) east of Garcitas Creek. Finally in 1950 excavations were carried out by
the Texas Memorial Museum at the site on Garcitas Creek (Figure 2) and nonIndian artifacts were found. It is the analysis (Gilmore 1973) of the material from
these excavations plus recent additional information from France, Canada, and
elsewhere (Gusset 1984; Barton 1981) that makes it possible to put to rest doubts
about the location of La Salle’s Fort St. Louis.
In the study of the data two objectives were kept in mind: to accept or reject the hypothesis that this was the site of La Salle’s Fort St. Louis, and to deter-

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986for 1984)

62

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Map of the Matagorda Bay area of Texas showing location of the Keeran site
(41VT4). Base map from AMS 1:250,000: Beevilte, Bay City.

mine through study of the artifacts what materials were at the site and why they
were there.
For the first and primary objective, the same method was used as had been
employed in looking for the precise locations of other historical sites: the use of a
conceptual model of what the site should look like in the field. To do this, four
kinds of information (geographic, physiographic, topographic, and data about
physical cultural remains) were gathered. For example, if La Salle’s colony had
indeed been on this site, what would be expected both in physical surroundings
and in the ground. This information would come from research in historical
documents and archeological material from sites of the same time period and
cultural tradition; from a systematic analysis of each kind of information the
conceptual model would be formed. Following is a historical sketch from which
the conceptual model for this site was constructed.

HISTORY OF LA SALLE’S EXPEDITION
La Salle sailed from La Rochelle, France on July 24, 1684, with four ships
and about two hundred people: soldiers, tradesmen, derelicts, and women, all

Gilmore--La Salle’s Fort

63

Garc/’tas Creek

IS

0

N

\

(
’,,

,..~7
~ 89V <~II

~
5

.’

4

\
\

\

27

\
%

%

I

"-,.015
EXPLANAq’ION

I

~
\

Margin of cleared area ~

[’--7 Excavation unit

!
!

16

!

?

¯ _., Earth mound

17

Contour interval 2 feet
0
I

50
I

I00 FEET
I

/

~pl8
¯

,,

~30~

-J

~.19

-*

bod 1985

Figure 2. Topographic map showing the 1950 excavations by the Texas Memorial Museum at the Keeran site. Contour interval 2 ft. Map by Texas Memorial Museum.
sparked with enthusiasm by the romance and wealth of the exotic New World.
This colony was to be established at the mouth of the Mississippi River, which,
together with all the land drained by the river, had been claimed by La Salle for
France when he explored the river down to its mouth in 1682. One of his supply
ships, the St. Francis, was captured by privateers in the West Indies. After a stay
in Hispaniola, the expedition, now three ships (a supply ship, a small frigate, and

;

64

Texas Archeological Society

an escort man-of-war), finally landed on February 20, 1685 at the mouth of a
river that La Salle hoped was the Mississippi.
Upon entering the channel the supply ship ran aground and was wrecked.
Some cannon had been removed to lighten the load and other material was salvaged, but this ship had contained most of the supplies for the colony: the forge,
mill, colonists’ possessions, cannon balls, and most of the medicines. The
people, all of whom were saved, gathered with the salvaged material on the shore
not far from the entrance to the bay (Joutel 1962:49). With both supply ships
lost, a large supply of goods would not be expected at the settlement.
La Salle then set out to explore the area to find the mouth of the Mississippi
River and a place for a settlement. He found a spot on a small hill, 2 leagues
(about 8 km, or 5 miles, using 2.6 miles as equivalent to 1 league) up the smalleSt
river that flowed into the bay from the northwest. La Salle’s personal ship, the
small frigate Belle, because of a sand bar, could not anchor near the settlement.
A depot was set up opposite the bar so material could be carried in the Belle from
the original camp to the depot camp, from which it was then transported to the
settlement in canoes. (A memorial statue of La Salle now stands at Indian Point
near the site of the depot camp at the entrance to Lavaca Bay.) Canoes were
scarce; some were appropriated from the Indians to their great displeasure.
It has been confirmed that the settlement was on a rise, 2 leagues (ca. 8 km,
or 5 miles) up the smallest river draining into the bay from the northwest.
One house at the settlement was built of timbers obtained--at great sacririce--about a league (about 4 km, or 2.6 miles) upcountry. A house next to the
first was built of salvaged ship timbers.
While La Salle was exploring the region in search of the Mississippi, the
Belle, which was at anchor awaiting his return, was blown across the bay and
grounded. According to La Salle’s brother Jean Cavelier (Delanglez 1938), "all
boxes, clothing, papers, utensils, linen, plates, and dishes" belonging to La Salle
and the people of his company were on board. Most of La Salle’s belongings were
salvaged, together with some swivel guns and rigging.
Two more buildings were built: a chapel made of stakes driven into the
ground and "a sort of separate building" of logs plastered with clay mixed with
earth and thatched with reeds. A palisade around the settlement was started. Gardens were planted with chicory, melons, pumpkins, cotto.n, celery, and asparagus, but rabbits and rats ate the tender shoots, and an alligator devoured
what remained (Joutel 1962: 70).
Near the settlement was a marsh where fish and birds were found, among
them turkeys, partridges, a bird they called the great gullet (pelican), and one
with pale red feathers they called spatula because of the shape of its beak (undoubtedly a roseate spoonbill). Rattlesnakes were common, and there were large
alligators in the rivers. Both live oak and deciduous trees grew there and also a
plant whose leaves they described as like rackets andfull ofprickles (prickly pear
cactus). Other plants, harsh and sharp pointed, with leaves like gutters, were
probably Spanish daggers.

Gilmore--La Salle’s Fort

65

So it is clear that the site of La Salle’s settlement should be found in an area
where pelicans, roseate spoonbills, turkeys, partridges, rattlesnakes, and large
alligators existed, and there were growing in the vicinity live oak trees, prickly
pear cactus, and a plant similar to if not the Spanish dagger.
La Salle became convinced at last that he was not at the mouth of the Mississippi and, since the wreck of the Belle made communicating by sea impossible, the only alternative he had was to return to France for help, overland
by way of the Illinois country and Canada. On January 12, 1687, almost two
years after landing, only 37 of the 200 or more people who had landed were left;
17 people set out on the journey, leaving in the settlement 20 people, 70 or 75
swine, 18 or 20 hens, some casks of meal, powder, ball, and eight pieces of cannon without any bullets (Joutel 1962:84).
On March 20, 1687 La Salle and others were killed by members of their
own party, leaving 15 survivors from the 17 who set out on January 12. Six of
the 17 eventually returned to France and 9 were captured by the Spaniards
(Wedel 1973).
From the time of the capture of the supply ship St. Francis in the West Indies, the Spaniards had known of plans for the French colony, and many expeditions had been sent by land and by sea to search for it. A land expedition headed
by Alonso de Le6n came upon the French settlement on April 22, 1689 (Le6n
1909) and found it sacked. It was littered with broken chests, bottle cases, and
furniture, about 200 torn and scattered books (in French), and gun stocks without locks or barrels. They found and buried three bodies; no living creatures were
found. They counted six houses (Figure 3): nearest the arroyo (Garcitas Creek) at
the north edge of the settlement was a house of four rooms built of ship’s timbers;
near this, a one-room house; toward the south, two more houses; and toward the
west, two more. A small hut faced the arroyo. Eight iron cannon and three old
swivel guns were there. They buried the cannon and one swivel gun and carried
off two swivels, together with the other iron they found (Bolton 1959 : 398-399).
They drew a plan of the site (Figure 3), and one of the soldiers composed a poem
of lament (Le6n 1909: 336).
When de Le6n learned that there were two Frenchmen living with the Indians some distance away, he sent for them, and they told about the destruction of
Fort St. Louis. The two surviving Frenchmen had stayed with the Indians in East
Texas after La Salle’s murder and immediately after they heard that the Indians
had raided the Garcita’s Creek fort about three months previously, they had gone
there and found it devastated. They buried 14 bodies and exploded about 100
barrels of powder.
De Le6n himself was sent back the next year (1690) to burn the fort. While
he and his men were exploring the area looking for further French activity, in the
bay at the mouth of the river they saw two objects they suspected were buoys.
This discovery caused consternation in Spanish colonial government circles, and
a sea expedition with engineer C~irdenas aboard was sent to find and destroy the
buoys, map the bay, and search for evidence of the French in the area (see

66

Texas Archeological Society

E257

Figure 3. Sketch plan of the French settlement in 1689 (Le6n 1909:330).

Gilmore 1973, Appendix III). The buoys proved to be logs grounded by high
water, and no evidence of French activity was found.
The map made by this expedition (Figure 4) compares favorably with modern maps of the Matagorda Bay area; the route the expedition took around the
bay can be traced with ease. According to the map, the river on which the Pueblo
de los Franceses was located has an island at its mouth, and it enters the bay
(Lavaca Bay) from slightly west of north. Another small river enters the bay to
the south, and another larger river enters southeast of the Rio de los Franceses.
The next spurt of Spanish activity was in response to French activity on the
Red River, when the Aguayo Expedition was sent by Spanish authorities in 1722
to establish missions and presidios throughout the area. One presidio, Nuestra
Sefiora de Loreto La Bahfa, was built on the site of the French settlement. While
ditches were being dug for these fortifications, "pieces of gun locks and fragments of other things used by the French were found," according to the diarist for
the expedition. Lines for four bulwarks were drawn, each curtain to be 45 varas
(38 meters, or 125 ft.) long. The place where the powder had been exploded in
1689 was enclosed within the lines of the fort (Pefia 1935:63-64). A mission,
Espfritu Santo, was established across the same river, three-quarters of a league
(3 km, or 2 miles) distant. But Presidio Loreto did not prosper as expected, and
four years later, in 1726, both the presidio and the mission were moved farther
inland.

Gilmore--La Salle’s Fort

67

!

/

/

Figure 4. Map showing the route of the C~irdenas-Llanos Expedition of 1691. From the
J. P. Bryan Collection (24a, 1691), The University of Texas at Austin.

68

Texas Archeological Society

The similarity of the C~irdenas map to modern maps of Matagorda Bay, and
the fact that the route of this expedition can be traced accurately on a modern
map, demonstrate that the French colony of St. Louis was located in the Matagorda Bay area. Therefore, the model to be considered for the location of La
Salle’s settlement will be in the Matagorda Bay area.
THE MODEL

Fort St. Louis was described as on a small hill 2 leagues (8 km, or 5 miles)
up the smallest stream emptying into the bay that stretches northwestward. At the
mouth of this river was said to be a small island. From the modern map (Figure 1) we can see that Agula Creek on the south may be smaller than Garcitas
Creek but it has no island at its mouth, and the Lavaca River on the southeast has
islands at its mouth, but it is the largest river flowing into this bay, and the C~irdenas map shows the French settlement on a river that comes into the bay at a
more northerly point. Birds of many kinds, including pelicans and roseate spoonbills, inhabit the area; rattlesnakes abound and are held in great respect. The
writer has seen no alligators there, but there are marshes southwest and northeast
of the Keeran site. Live oaks, yucca, and prickly pears grow in the area. Therefore the topographic, geographic, and physiographic parts of the model coincide
clearly with field data from the Keeran site.
Physical cultural remains, the fourth part of the model to be reconciled with
the field data, are known not only from historical documents, but also from archeological information from sites of the same time period and same cultural
traditions.
In this part of the model, structural remains and ceramic artifacts have been
emphasized. Stylistically and technologically, ceramics are sensitive indicators
of cultural traditions, and it seemed a good probability that French ceramics of
the period could be isolated from those of the Spanish more effectively than
could other artifacts. For the Spanish settlement there should be indications of
the four bulwarks outlined by Aguayo, in addition to certain artifacts left by the
Spaniards.
Majolica ware is Spanish-Mexican tin-enameled earthenware. Tin-enameled
earthenware has a soft, absorbent, white to light red or buff paste, and is coated
with a vitreous tin-bearing opaque glaze. The technique of manufacture was
brought from Spain to Mexico soon after the conquest in the middle of the sixteenth century. Tin-enameled earthenware made in France is usually referred to
as faience, and that made in Holland and England as delft. Majolica and faience
can be differentiated usually by design style and technique of glaze application.
Majolica potsherds serve as "index fossils" for Spanish Colonial sites, and a
chronological sequence of design styles has been devised.
Majolica types for the occupation at the Keeran site should include some of
those found at Spanish Colonial sites of the same period (e.g., the second location of Presidio Loreto, the Alamo, and certain sites in Florida), and among these

Gilmore--La Salle’s Fort

69

types would be Puebla Polychrome, San Agustin Polychrome, Puebla blue on
white, and possibly Abo Polychromes. Sherds of San Luis Polychrome were
found at the second location of this presidio (Loreto) and might be found here
as well.
Of the 10,200 tin-enameled sherds examined, only 20 were polychrome.
Some are Puebla Polychrome, and most of the blue on white majolica seem to be
San Agustin plates, cups, and bowls. Although the type variety expected was not
found, the types that were found do coincide with the model, confirming the
Spanish occupation of this site during the first half of the eighteenth century.
For the French settlement we should find the outlines of six burned houses,
five of which should contain fragments of burned daub or clay and possibly
burned timbers or charcoal. These house outlines should fit the pattern on de
Le6n’s map and his description, and associated artifacts should be of French origin, provided the construction and occupation of the Spanish presidio did not
destroy them.
The fortress of Louisbourg in Nova Scotia was started about 1715 (Lunn
1973), Fort Michilimackinac in Michigan was occupied by the French at about
the same time, and the French occupation at Santa Rosa Pensacola in Florida was
in 1719 (Smith 1965). Since faience from France was found at these three sites, it
would be expected at Fort St. Louis. At Louisbourg (Marwitt 1966; Barton 1981)
and Michilimackinac (Miller and Stone 1970), many coarsewares or kitchenwares were found, and considering the nature of the pioneer settlement, more
coarsewares than finewares probably would be found at Fort St. Louis.
As expected, in the Keeran site collection was one group of French sherds
(Figure 5) of a type that, to the best of the writer’s knowledge, does not occur at
any other site in Texas. The interiors are covered with a white slip over which a
green glaze was applied; this glaze varies from dull greenish yellow to deep grass
green. The lips on these sherds have been rolled onto the exterior, making them
much thicker than the bodies of the sherds. The paste is buff to pink, with
red specks. At the time of the original analysis (Gilmore 1973), this ware was
thought probably to have been made in France. Research carried out in both
Canada and France since that time has shown definitely that the ware originated
in Saintonge, France (Gusset 1984), not far from La Rochelle, which was the
center of colonial trade and the port where La Salle embarked on his last adventure. Unmistakable clues to this origin are the paste, the glaze technique, and the
rim treatment. A shallow bowl found at Louisbourg of similar ware, but decorated with brown dots and lines, has been dated from the late seventeenth century
(Webster 1969:Figure 1), and a shallow undecorated bowl of this type is in the
Tunica collection from Louisiana (Brain 1979:59). The Tunica Indians were
early and long-time trading friends of the French. Examples have also been reported from Port Dauphin, Dauphin Island, Mobile Bay--primarily occupied
from 1702 to 1717 (Brain 1979:59)--and Fort Michilimackinac (Miller and
Stone 1970).
Great quantities of this inexpensive utility ware were exported to the New
World in the seventeenth century and most of the eighteenth. Intense rivalry be-

70

Texas Archeological Society

/

/ /
/
!
/ J

0
I

I
I

2
1

3
!

4
I

5 cm
I

C

Figure 5. Photographs of green glaze ware from Fort St. Louis.

Gilmore--La Salle’s Fort

71

tween Spain and France would have precluded the bringing of this French ware to
the site by the Spaniards. Furthermore, by 1722, when the Spanish presidio was
established on this spot, both tin-enameled ware and utility wares were being
produced in quantity in Mexico.
Other utility wares abound in the collection. Some undoubtedly are French,
and some may have been made at the site. A scaffito sherd depicts an animal with
an arrow sticking in or out (as the viewer prefers to see it), done in a technique
similar to that of Louisbourg coarseware from the early eighteenth century
(Webster 1969:Figure 5). A few tin-enameled sherds in the Keeran site collection may be French.
Further application of the model to the field data reveals that the 86 sherds
of the green glaze ware were recovered only in excavation units 1, 5, 7, 12, 13,
and 14 (Figure 2). Possible faience occurred only in units 4, 7, 12, and 13. Clay
daubing in the collection in the greatest numbers came from units 1,5, 7, and 19,
and was also found at units 3, 4, 6, 12, and 26. The percentages are biased by
what the excavator decided to bring in.
This clustering indicates that the French houses depicted by de Le6n (Figure 3) were in these areas; the four-room house nearest the arroyo was in unit 14;
the two houses toward the south were in units 5 and 7; the two houses toward the
west, in units 13 and 12; and a small hut facing the arroyo was in unit 1.
All parts of the model are in agreement with the field data, and there are
artifacts of French origin and of the time of La Salle’s colony at the Keeran site
on Garcitas Creek. These facts make it certain that the Keeran site was the scene
of the tragic events that started 300 years ago on February 20, 1685, at the settlement at Fort St. Louis.
REFERENCES CITED
Barton, Kenneth James
1981

Coarse earthenwares from the fortress of Louisbourg. History and Archaeology
55, Parks Canada.

Bolton, Herbert E.
1924
The location of La Salle’s colony on the Gulf of Mexico. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 27(3) : 171-189. Reprinted from The Mississippi Valley Historical
Review, Vol. 2, No. 2, 1915.
1959

Spanish exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. 1916. Reprint. Barnes and
Noble, New York.

Brain, Jeffrey
1979

Tunica treasure. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology
Harvard University. Vol. 71.

Delangtez, Jean (Translator)
1938

The journal of Jean Cavelier: the account of a survivor of La Salle’s Texas expedition, 1684-1688. Institute of Jesuit History, Chicago.

Texas Archeological Society

72

Gilmore, Kathleen
1973

The Keeran site: The probable site of La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas. Texas
Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist Reports, Number 24.

Gusset, Gerard
1984

Personal communication.

Joutel, Henri
1962

A journal of La Salle’s last voyage. 1714. Reprint. Corinth Books, New York.

Le6n, Alonso de
1909

Historia de Nuevo Le6n, edited by Genaro Garcfa. Documentos In~ditos o Muy
Raros, Vol. 25. Librerfa de la Vda. de Ch. Bouret, Mexico [City].

Lunn, John
1973

Colonial Louisbourg and its developing ceramics collection. In Ceramics in America edited by Ian M. G. Quimby. University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville.

Marwitt, Renee H.
1966

A preliminary survey of seven coarse earthenwares from the fortress of Louisbourg. The Conference on Historic Site Archeology Papers, 1965-1966, Vol. 1.

Miller, J. Jefferson II and Lyle M. Stone
1970

Eighteenth-century ceramics from Fort Michilimackinac: a study in historical
archaeology. Smithsonian Studies in History and Technology, No. 4. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington.

Smith, Hale G.
1965

Archeological excavations at Santa Rose Pensacola. Notes in Anthropology,
Vol. 10. Florida State University.

Pefia, Juan Antonio de la
1935

Pefia’s diary of the Aguayo expedition, translated by Peter P. Forrestal. Preliminary Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical Society, Vol. 2, No. 7. Reprinted from Records and Studies of the United States Catholic Historical
Society, Vol. 24, 1935.

Webster, D. B.
1969

Early slip-decorated pottery in Canada. Charles J. Musson, Toronto.

Weddle, Robert S.
1973

Wilderness manhunt. University of Texas Press, Austin.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
A past president of the Texas Archeological Society, Kathleen Gilmore graduated
from the University of Oklahoma in geology and earned her Ph.D. in anthropology from
Southern Methodist University in 1973. She is also a member of the Dallas Archeological
Society. Her interests are Caddo archeology and historical archeology. Since 1975 she has
been with the Institute of Applied Sciences at North Texas State University in Denton.

The Gregg Ranch Site (41HY131), Hays County, Texas
Howard D. Land

ABSTRACT
Excavations at the Gregg Ranch site (41HY131) revealed the presence
of man on the’Blanco River in Hays County,’Texas, for a period that spans
10,000 years, from mid-Paleo-Indian to Late Prehistoric periods of the Central Texas Archaic. In addition to providing supplemental information on
previously defined Archaic traditions, archeological data from site 41HY 131
shows that relations existed between late Paleo-Indian and very early Archaic traditions long suspected of overlapping in both time and space. The
site also yielded new variants of Early Archaic projectile points as well as
evidence suggesting the existence of an early occupation shelter.

INTRODUCTION
The primary objective of this report is to supplement previous studies of
early man in Texas and to corroborate certain ideas that recently have become
evident in Texas archeology. This includes support of previously defined chronological sequences for Central Texas, with the addition of new information, the
identification of specialized tools, and the formulation of a hypothesis for the
settlement patterns at the Gregg Ranch site. Special emphasis has been placed on
Late Paleo-Indian through Early Archaic data called San Geronimo (Weir 1976a).
The Gregg Ranch site (41HY131) is a multicomponent occupation site on a
low terrace of the Blanco River, a tributary of the Guadalupe River in Hays
County, Texas. The site is about 6.4 km (4 miles) west of Kyle on the land of
A. W. Gregg (Figure 1). Limited excavations were carried out by the writer and
Paul Duke, of Austin, on weekends and holidays from August 1976 through May
1977.
Description of the Site
The Gregg Ranch site is a single burned rock midden situated on a low alluvial terrace on the north side of the Blanco River (Figures 2, 3). The terrace is
about 20 meters wide; it is bounded by a limestone bluff about 3 meters high
(Figure 3, b) on the north and by the river’s flood plain on the south (Figure 4).
The river channel is about 60 meters south of the terrace, and about 60 meters
east of the site is an intermittent creek. The midden is in front of the bluff (Figure 3, b) where limestone is readily available for cultural needs. The midden was

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986for 1984)

74

Texas Archeological Society

TEXAS
~alcones
Escarpment
AUSTIN

HAYS CO.
41HYI31A

HDL/BOD
Figure 1. Map of Texas showing location of Hays County and the Gregg Ranch site.

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

75

"o
0
o

e~

©

@

@

76

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Photographs: a, northwest view of Blanco River near site;
b, Area A, looking north, showing exposed limestone bluff.

easily identifiable by surface concentrations of burned rock, hearths, snail
shells, lithic debris, and dark soil. Artifacts and surface lithic scatters are sparsely
distributed in the vicinity of the site, particularly on the higher terrace that over!ooks the site. From surface indications, the midden was judged to be about 20
meters wide and 50 meters long (Figure 5).
Previous Investigations
Limited excavations have been carried out in the area by several universities
in conjunction with surveys in the San Marcos and Blanco drainages. Excava-

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

77

Figure 4. Photograph: view of Area A looking south
across flood plain and Blanco River.
tions were carried out at the Greenhaw site (41HY29) by Frank Weir from 1974
to 1976 (Weir 1979), but no previous excavations or surveys are known to have
been made in the Gregg Ranch area.

Environment
The character and location of the Gregg Ranch site, situated directly on the
Balcones escarpment at the eastern rim of the Edwards Plateau offered many advantages to aboriginal peoples. From it the faunal and floral resources of both the
Edwards Plateau and the Blackland Prairies, directly to the east, were easily accessible. A sheltered southern exposure provided more protection and warmer
average temperatures than are found on adjacent uplands. The large limestone
outcrop (Figures 5 and 3, b) also provided a readily available source of raw materials for hearths, ovens, shelter hold-down, and other uses. The presence nearby
of permanent water and a source of stone for making tools (Figures 2 and 3, a)
were especially favorable to settlement. Possibly in former times there was an
abundance of plants and both large and small game. By following the drainages
of nearby major streams, the inhabitants could traverse several biotic zones, a
situation that offered significant advantages for food procurement. The avail-

78

Texas Archeological Society

@

/

Land~Gregg Ranch Site

79

ability of vegetable foods was probably optimal and very suitable to the early
hunter-gatherer populations (Butzer 1971:151). Exploitation of molluscs and
fish is evidenced archeologically in late Paleo-Indian times as well as during the
Early and Middle Archaic. As the result of Pleistocene alluviation, it is apparent
that an old flood plain was stranded on the north bank of the Blanco River due to
down-cutting during drier periods. On the bench formed by the stranded flood
plain is the Gregg Ranch site, where the early inhabitants made their temporary
camps, starting about 10,000 years ago and lasting to Historic times. As time
passed and groups continued to use this favorable location, midden material and
occasional flood deposits accumulated until the site grew to a thickness of more
than 2 meters in some places. Climate undoubtedly played a major role in occupation and deposition at the site, affecting interrelations of soils, plants, animals, and man (cf. Butzer 1971:49-78). If the scenery and climate of the past
were similar to those of the present, the site area must have been a beautiful place
to live. The existence of a site at the Gregg Ranch was predictable because there
are so many favorable indicators in the vicinity today.

Excavation
To begin excavations at the Gregg Ranch site, a 20-meter north-south baseline was established between two datum reference points, bisecting the site. Excavations along this baseline were designated Area A, and an area 18 meters east
of the south datum point was designated Area B (Figures 5, 6). The writer was
responsible for Area A, and Paul Duke for Area B. We set an arbitrary elevation
of 210 meters (690 feet) for the north datum stake (the top of the stake was level
with the midden surface). Using reference data from U.S.G.S. 7.5 minute quadrangle San Marcos North, we constructed a grid system along the north datum
line and established the horizontal control point at the south datum stake, which
was designated N00-E00. All points on the site were measured from this datum.
Within squares, measurements were taken in centimeters starting at the southwest stake, moving to the east, then to the north. Vertical measurements were
taken from an established plane that was maintained throughout the excavation.
Measurements were recorded in field notes, and artifacts were recorded by provenience. These records made it possible to reconstruct excavated profiles and features (Figures 7, 8). Excavation was by arbitrary 10-centimeter levels, and material was screened through quarter-inch hardware cloth. All cultural material was
saved, except for burned rock and snail shells. All materials were separately
bagged, recorded, washed, and analyzed. More than 500 man-hours were spent
on 18 squares that ranged in depth between 90 and 200 cm.

AREA A
Internal Structure
Excavation revealed live primary strata (Figures 7, 8).

Texas Archeological Society

80

a

I:
Figure 6. Photographs: a, Area A excavation; b, north view of Area A
¯ showing it excavated to the Paleo-Indian level.

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

o
0

,.

0
Z

V-

w~

1
I

0

I
i

oJ

<

6

Ld

Z
0

z

81

82

Texas Archeological Society

hi
Z
0
N

-A
-0
11)

.J
txl
>
ILl
-J

SMALL HAMMERSTONE

Late
Prehistoric
700 BP

Tw in
Sisters

--2~O00BP--

San
Mercos
~2,600 BP--

BI BLACK

Round
Rock
--4,000 BP-

Clear
Fork
--5,000 BP~

C

TAN
San

Geronimo
EARLY BARBED
BIFACE
GOWER
PLAINVIEW PREFORM
BARBER
EXPANDING BASE(~ GOUGE BIT

7

8,000 BP-BONE AWL

D YELLOW
PREFORM
CORE/CHOPPER
.FLAKES
9

E

HARDPAN
YELLOW

IO

MUSSEL SHELL
PRISMATIC BLADES

° ° %o-o" -- ~’--o-..o-oO
°o°-0.,
oSNAIL’ o°o°"o~,, .o , o o

PaleDIndian

--lO,O00 BP--

?

9hIleM,
Figure 8. Idealized profile in Area A, Gregg Ranch site.

HDL/BOD

I

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

83

Zone A (Surface Zone)
Consists, in the northern half of the site, of a dark brown compact midden
soil and, in the southern half of the site, a compact tan alluvial clay, probably
deposited by heavy flooding. This zone contains much burned rock (including
hearths), snail shells, bone, artifacts, and lithic debris. The tan soil is generally
sterile. The average thickness of Zone A is 10 cm.
Zone B (Main Occupation Zone)
Contains an abundance of dark gray to black midden soil, burned limestone
fragments, hearth stones, bone, snail shells, lithic debris, and artifacts. The
average thickness of Zone B is 80 cm (thinning out toward the edges~; and the
zone is at an average depth of 10 cm below the surface, extending over about half
of the site.
Zone C
A zone of loose, tan, sandy soil that contains much cultural debris, including diagnostic tools, mussel shell, snail shells, bone, and burned rock fragments.
The average thickness is 30 cm; the top of Zone C averages 90 cm below the
surface.
Zone D
Composed of loose, yellow, claylike soil that contains a small amount of
burned rock, snail shells, and cultural material. The average thickness of this
zone, encountered at an average depth of 110 cm below the surface, is 50 cm.
Zone E

A soil of light yellow compact clay that contains very little cultural material. This soil was encountered at an average depth of 160 cm below the surface
and extends to an undetermined depth.
Dating
No radiocarbon dates have been established for the Gregg Ranch site, so the
archeological sequence is in temporal limbo. Using previously established sequences from other sites in Central Texas, and closely adhering to the detailed
chronological framework established by Weir (1976a), the site can be dated with
the help of new data with a fair degree of confidence. The new data from the
Gregg Ranch site have not radically altered the picture of the cultural history of
Central Texas presented by Weir (1976a), but have corroborated his phases, especially the San Geronimo phase. The finding of Plainview, Barber, Scottsbluff(?), Angostura, Early Triangular, Gower, Hell Gap(?), and early barbed
projectile points and the remains of a possible shelter--all stratigraphically below Early Archaic materials--was fortuitous, and can be exploited scientifically.
Using approximations of Weir’s phase sequence for Central Texas, as well as
Paleo-Indian sequence data from the Devils Mouth site (Sorrow 1968:45-50)
and Baker Cave (Word 1970:98-105), the following time periods can be estimated for the Gregg Ranch site (Figure 8).

84

Texas Archeological Society

Period 1--Paleo-Indian
Levels: 7, 8, and 9
Soil Zone: D
Time Period: 10,000-8,500 years BP
Diagnostic Artifacts: Plainview preform, Barber, expanding-base dart point
(posible Scottsbluff), choppers, utilized flakes, prismatic blades, gouge,
and other preforms and bifaces
Bone Artifacts: Awl
Shell: Mussel and snail
Burned Rock: Minimal amount

Period 2mSan Geronimo Phase
Levels: 5, 6, and 7
Soil Zones: C and D
Time Period: 9,000-5,000 BP
Diagnostic Artifacts: Early barbed, Lerma, Gower, ovate scrapers, drills, utilized flakes, flake knives, side scrapers, choppers, and other bifaces
Bone: Small animals, including deer, and bison
Shell: Mussel and snail
Burned Rock: Minimal amount

Period 3--Clear Fork Phase
Levels: 4 and 5
Soil Zone: B
Time Period: 5,000-4,000 years BP
Diagnostic Artifacts: Travis, Nolan, Panda!e, Bulverde, Pedernales, Uvalde,
Wells, other bifaces, and utilized flakes
Bone: Small animals, including deer
Shell: Snail
Burned Rock: Much accumulated and compacted rock with dark soi!

Period 4--Round Rock Phase
Levels: 3 and 4
Soil Zone: B
Time Period: 4,000-3,000 years BP
Diagnostic Artifacts: Bulverde, Nolan, Castroville, Pedernales, and other bifaces
Bone: Bison and deer
Shell: Snail
Burned Rock: Much compacted rock

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

85

Period 5--San Marcos Phase
Levels: 2 and 3
Soil Zone: B
Time Period: 2,800-1,900 years BP
Diagnostic Artifacts: Marcos, Pedernales
Bones: Bison
Shell: Snail
Burned Rock: Much compacted rock

Period 6mTwin Sisters Phase
Levels: 1 and 2
Soil Zone: B
Time Period: 1,700-700 years BP
Diagnostic Artifact: Marshall
Bone: None
Shell: Snail
Burned Rock: Much compacted rock

Period 7--Late Prehistoric
Level: 1
Soil Zones: A and B
Time Period: 700 years BP or more recent
Diagnostic Artifacts: Perdiz, small hammer stone
Bone: None
Shell: Minimal snail
Burned Rock: Surface hearths

Provenience of the Artifacts
If each excavation unit at the Gregg Ranch site had been stratigraphica!ly
level and uniform in thickness, it would have been ideal to list individual 10-cm
levels chronologically for each of the eight squares, but the site had about a 15percent slope, and the thickness of the stratigraphic units varied.
During excavation, all vertical measurements were plotted on a profile chart
showing the east profile of all eight squares (Figure 7). Stratigraphic changes and
major features (burned rock, tan soil, yellow soil) were plotted from the field
measurements. Multiple occurrences of special cultural material (mainly the recognized projectile point types) were used to make inferences about time spans of
specific levels. Cultural phases proposed by Weir were the basis for establishing
time markers for Gregg Ranch site (Weir 1976a), as follows: Late Prehistoric
(400-1,500 BP); Twin Sisters (700-2,000 BP); San Marcos (1,800-2,800 BP);

86

Texas Archeological Society

Round Rock (2,600-4,200 BP); Clear Fork (4,000-5,000 BP); San Geronimo
(4,500-8,000 BP); and Paleo-Indian (7,000-12,000 BP). For postulating
chronological relations among artifacts, the Area A profile was divided arbitrarily into ten 20-cm levels (Table 1). These 10 levels are correlated with temporal phases (Weir 1976a) postulated from artifact types by various researchers
(Johnson 1964, 1967; Sorrow et al. 1967; Word and Douglas 1970; Hester 1971)
(Figure 8).
The occurrence of Nolan points (Clear Fork phase) consistently at the very
bottom of the primary burned rock midden suggests the start of a new life-style
about 5,000 years ago. Below this depth a different group of people (San Geronimo phase) is indicated, represented by early corner-notched points, early
barbed, and Uvalde-like points as described by Hester (1971:71) and others
(Johnson 1964, 1967; Sorrow et al. 1967; Word and Douglas 1970). Below the
San Geronimo phase (cf. Weir 1976a: 121-124) Paleo-Indian points are found
together with other material thought to represent a life-style slightly different
from that of the later, Archaic hunter-gatherers. Probably there was an overlap of
the late Paleo-Indian with the Early Archaic in Central Texas (Prewitt n.d.).
There are instances of Gower and Early Triangular points occurring stratigraphically with or below Plainview and Barber at the Gregg Ranch site (Table 1;
Figure 8).

Artifacts of the Clear Fork Phase and Earlier
In the descriptions below, emphasis is placed on artifacts found in the Clear
Fork, San Geronimo, and Paleo-Indian levels. Additional data and field notes are
on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.
Projectile Points
Early Barbed Points
10 Specimens (Figure 9)
Description: Triangular with deeply cut corner notches and expanded stems;
base is usually inverted V-shaped with straight lines as opposed to the slightly
curved lines of the Martindale point, but sometimes rounded instead of V-shaped.
Workmanship good. Stone is usually a variety of homogeneous, dark Edwards
Plateau flint. Figure 9, i, often called Bandy, is typical of these points.
Dimensions: Length 32-57 mm; width across shoulders 30-40 mm; length
of stem 7-17 mm; depth of notches 6-10 mm; width of base 19-26 ram; thickness 4-7 mm.
Provenience: Area A, squares N08, N09, N11, N12, N14-E01, levels 5, 6,
and 7; most specimens came from level 6.
Remarks: These projectile points are of an unnamed type, similar in most
respects to Martindale (Suhm and Jelks 1962:213). However, barbed specimens are found consistently well below Early Archaic projectile points (Nolan,
Bulverde, and Travis) and just above types of the Paleo-Indian tradition (Angostura, Barber, Plainview). Similar types have been found in like context at La

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

87

Jita (Hester 1971 : 71-73), Baker Cave (Word and Douglas 1970: 21 - 25), Devils
Mouth (Johnson 1964: 2, 3), Stillhouse Hollow (Sorrow et al. 1967: 16- 24), Jetta
Court (Wesolowsky et al. 1976:46), San Geronimo, and Wilson-Leonard (Weir,
personal communication). Weir includes this type in the San Geronimo phase of
the Central Texas Archaic (Weir 1976a: 52, Figure 9, F and G). Several varieties
may become evident after additional work at Gregg Ranch or other early occupation sites in the region. There also appears to be some connection with the
Uvalde type, and a lanceolate variety (Figure 12, b).

Plainview Preform
1 Specimen (Figure 10, a)
Description: Percussion-flaked, parallel-sided, lanceolate biface with slightly
indented base and broken end; base is beveled as if preparation was being made
for final basal thinning. Flake scars create slighly irregular edges along both margins; has minimal retouch and no evidence of grinding on the lowest edge or
base. Stone is opaque tan flint. Specimen probably was discarded after breakage
occurred at the distal end.
Dimensions: Extrapolated length 80 mm; width across shoulders 20 mm;
thickness 7 mm.
Provenience: Square N10-E01, 149 cm below datum; assigned to level 7.
Remarks: Unlike most Archaic artifacts at the Gregg Ranch site, which
often have crusts, this specimen has a slight patina on one side; classed as a
Plainview preform because of its stratigraphic position in the site, workmanship,
shape, and probable stage in production.
Possible Lange
1 Specimen (Figure 10, b)
Description: Triangular with prominent shoulders resulting from deep corner notches and an expanding stem; base is straight and shows no evidence of
grinding; basal thinning by removal of short flakes. Stone is light tan flint. Good
workmanship; mainly percussion flaking with minor pressure retouch. Apparently an unfinished point that was broken during manufacture.
Dimensions: Extrapolated length 63 mm; extrapolated width across shoulders 35 mm; length of stem 10 mm; basal width 22 mm; thickness 6 mm.
Provenience: Square N12-E01, Area A, 147 cm below level 7 datum.
Remarks: In general this specimen fits within the range defined by Suhm
and Jelks (1962:203). The point was lying on edge below the Golondrina point
(level 7). If it is a Lange, it is considerably out of context. When found it was
believed to be in good context due to the compact soil that surrounded it and
because it had the encrustation that is typical on lithic debitage at this depth. But
there could have been some mixing resulting from soil cracking during dry periods or burrowing by rodents, although no evidence of burrows was noted. Assuming good context (10 cm below and near the Barber point), one can speculate
on its morphological relation to Paleo-Indian projectile points.

Texas Archeological Society

88

o

0

,.d

t~

o")

~

t--I

,-.i

.<

_

~~ !

~

-~

~

o .~. o

?.,.~

mm~

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

89

÷

G’,

+

,o

~g

©
¢.)

°~
~D

Z
~

ww~
r~

90

Texas Archeological Society

a

d

e

g
0
!

h

I

I

I

I

5 CM
I

0
[

~

!

3CM
I

Figure 9. Early barbed projectile points from Area A, Gregg Ranch site; a, b, c, and i are
Bandy points.

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

91

Figure 10. Plainview preform, a, from Area A; possible
Lange point, b, from Area A.

Barber
1 Specimen (Figure 11)
Description: Biface lanceolate point with deep concave base, smoothed (by
grinding) lateral edges, and slightly flared basal corner with recurved edge.
Flake removal was by either heavy pressure or a technique of closely controlled
percussion, resulting in oblique-parallel flaking. Good workmanship; minimal
amount of marginal retouch is probably the result of edge straightening; basal
thinning is of the crescent variety. Stone is opaque, gray flint. Cross section is
piano-convex, suggesting that a prismatic blade was the initial stage in the manufacturing process. Distal end, one edge, and one basal ear have been damaged; it
appears that an attempt was made to remove a flake at the distal end with a burin
stroke after breakage during manufacture. The resulting fractured tip may have
been used for cutting.
Dimensions: Extrapolated length 95 mm; maximum width 23 mm; basal
depth 7 ram; thickness 7 mm.
Provenience: Square N15-E01, Area A, 134 cm below level 7 datum.
Remarks: Except for the well-executed oblique-parallel flaking and the
piano-convex cross section, this point is similar to the Golondrina type from the

92

Texas Archeological Society

Devils Mouth site (Johnson 1964:46-52), but its oblique flaking and deep basal
concavity identify it as a Barber point (Kelly 1983; Turner and Hester 1985 : 70).
The occurrence of these well-made points in Central Texas suggests an affiliation with Paleo-Indian cultures of the High Plains; the Jimmy Allen site readily
comes to mind (Wormington 1957 : 145). Additional work done at Hell Gap places
the Gregg Ranch specimen potentially within the Frederick or Lusk complexes
as defined by Irwin-Williams et al. (1973:50-52). Note also that Irwin’s spatial
representation for the Frederick complex, although not totally defined because of
lack of evidence, extends from southern Montana through the Great Plains and
into Central Texas (Irwin 1971 : Figure 6). The writer also agrees with Irwin’s reservations about assigning a site to a complex on the basis of morphology of specific artifacts rather than considering the entire tool assemblage (Irwin 1971:54).
In the case of the Gregg Ranch site (Area A), an additional item that favors the
Frederick complex is a bone awl at the same stratigraphic level as the Barber
point. An oval of large rocks--possibly the remains of a temporary light-weight
shelter--in the Plainview level in Area B, comparable to a feature found at Hell
Gap (Irwin-Williams et al. 1973:45), also indicates temporal affiliation with the
Frederick complex. Much comparative analysis between Central Texas assemblages is needed before we can establish relations among Paleo-Indian occupations. A possible Hell Gap point was also found in Area B at the Gregg Ranch
site (see below). Because the Gregg Ranch Barber specimen was stratigraphically below early barbed points, but contemporaneous with Gower points (San
Geronimo), possibly there is an overlap of Archaic and Paleo-Indian traditions in
Central Texas. This has long been suspected by Prewitt (n.d.), Weir (1976a),
Agogino (n. d.), Johnson ( 1964: 92), and Sorrow (1968 : 48). Willey (1966: 62 64) cites several instances of mixed contexts found in eastern North America,
the Great Plains, and Texas, including the Jake Martin site (Davis and Davis
1960: 22).
Additional evidence for this hypothesis was found at Gregg Ranch, Areas B
and C, where Early Triangular, Plainview, and (possible) Hell Gap points were
found in the same levels and where Gower and early barbed points have been
reported by relic hunters below Plainview and Angostura in Area C. There is, of
course, the possibility of mixing between the late Paleo-Indian occupation and
the succeeding San Geronimo phase (Archaic) during the Altithermal climatic
period (7,000 years BP approximate starting date). Mixing might be the result of
very little deposition during a dry period or of heavy erosion during wet periods
(Hester 1982).
Tree-root growth, animal burrowing, soil cracking, and the treading of men
and animals also may account for the mixing of artifacts. Special attention was
given to this problem during the excavation at the Gregg Ranch site, where animal burrowing was noted; some specimens obviously were out of place. Also
found in the same level as the Barber specimen were several large prismatic
blades and many thinning flakes that were very similar in color, texture, and
composition, implying a good context. Fortunately, artifacts assigned to the San

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

93

//\.~

/

\
\

t

\
\

\

~! i~¸~
L~

0
1

I

!

I

!

5CM
I

Figure 1 !. Barber point from Area A.

Geronimo phase were plentiful, particularly in levels 6 and 7 (Figure 8). In addition to the Plainview preform and the Barber specimen, the San Geronimo materials aided in determining the Paleo-Indian level, which is thought to lie on a hard
terrace surface (Figures 7, 8). An additional argument for the contemporaneity
of Paleo-Indian and Archaic traditions is the occurrence of Archaic cornernotched points in eastern North America 8,000 to 11,000 years ago (Coe 1964 :
12; Broyles 1971:49; Peck and Painter 1984:23); similar Archaic points could
have been in Central Texas at the same time. The relations between climate,
flora, fauna, and man suggest that even the Paleo-Indian peoples as big game
hunters occasionally may have exp!oited geographical areas other than the High
Plains and eventually may have been drawn to a different way of life--the Archaic. The flaking pattern on this specimen differs from most Paleo-Indian points
of this type, suggesting that it may have been manufactured by a left-handed individual, judging from the writer’s experiments with preform holding and flake
removal.

94

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

Unclassified
5 Specimens (Figure 12, a-e)
Description: Triangular to leaf shaped with straight or convex edges; prominent shoulders with rounded or barbed corners; strongly expanding stems; base
has slight concavity and is sometimes similar to Martindale. Some specimens
have stem and basal smoothing.
Provenience: Squares N08-E01, N1 l-E01, N12-E01, and N15-E01, Area
A, level 5.
Remarks: Except for 9, a, these specimens apparently are variants of Travis
or Nolan types. Specimen 12, c is well made, has serrated edges, and may be a
Travis point. Specimens 12, a and b have slight to moderate smoothing along the
base and stem edges. Figure 12, b has a base similar to those of the early barbed
points shown in Figure 9 or to the Martindales. These specimens compare favorably with ones assigned to the San Geronimo phase of the Central Archaic as
defined by Weir (1976a: 52, Figure 9, D and E).
Nolan
10 Specimens (Figure 12, f-k)
Description: Triangular to leaf shaped; stems (except for Figure 12,g) alternately beveled and rectangular to slightly expanding in cross section; stem edges
on most specimens lightly smoothed. Workmanship varies from fair to good; percussion is the predominant flaking technique. Preferred material is an opaque
flint. Some specimens show evidence of heat treatment.
Dimensions: Length 50-9~=mm; width across shoulders 20-32 mm; length
of stem 12-27 mm; width of base 12-20 mm; thickness 5-9 mm.
Provenience: Squares N09, N09, Nll, N13, N14, and N15, levels 3, 4, and
5; most specimens were near the bottom of the primary burned rock midden, on
level 5.
Remarks: Both edges of the stem of one specimen (Figure 12, g) were beveled on the same face. Called Zorra by some, the writer believes this to be only a
variant of Nolan. Two Pandale points were recovered very near several Nolan
points in Square N15-E01 (Figure 7). These are thought to be Nolan, although
they have expanding bases and well-pronounced bevels on the stems. Some
Nolan points also closely resemble Travis. These similarities suggest cultural affiliations among the three types.
At Gregg Ranch there was evidence that the people who produced the Nolan
type specimens (Clear Fork phase), though not the earliest, were the first to use
burned rock middens intensively. Whether the vast accumulations of burned rock
at this site represent many hearths, a system of ovens, or some other cultural
feature is not known. Nolan specimens from Gregg Ranch conform to the type
described by Suhm and Jelks (1962:225). Weir considers Nolan diagnostic of the
Clear Fork phase of the Texas Archaic (1976a: 29, Table 1).

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

f

c

b

a

i

0

I

e

d

h

g

95

j

k

5CM

I

I

I

.I

i

Figure 12. Unclassified points from Area A, a-e (b-e may be variants of Travis or Nolan);
Nolan points from Area A, f-k.
Pandale
2 Specimens (Figure 13, a, b)
Description: Leaf shaped; convex edges beveled to such an extent that the
specimens are slighly twisted; slightly beveled shoulders narrow into recurved
base. Stone is opaque tan flint and chocolate-brown chert. Workmanship good;
percussion used for finishing.
Dimensions: Length 65-70 mm; width across shoulders 24-26 mm; maximum width of base 17-19 mm; thickness 8 mm.
Provenience: Square N14-E01, level 4, Area A.
Remarks: These specimens resemble Nolan closely and are affiliated with
Nolan materials near the lower part of the primary burned rock midden. They
conform to the type described by Suhm and Jelks (1962:231). Weir considers
this type diagnostic of the Clear Fork phase of the Texas Archaic (1976a: 29,
Table 1).

Texas Archeological Society

96

a

b

c

d

i

h

9
0
I

e

I

I

I

I

5CM
I

Figure 13. Projectile points from Areas A and C: a, b, Pandale; c-h, Bulverde; i, Castroville; j, Lerma.

Bulverde
6 Specimens (Figure 13, c-h)
Description: Large and small triangular specimens; characteristic rectangular or slightly contracting stems and straight to slightly concave bases thinned to
wedge shape (Suhm and Jelks 1962: 169). Specimens e, g and h appear to have
been reworked.
Dimensions: Length 35-90 mm; width across shoulders 20-40 mm; length
of stem 8-20 mm; basal width 15-22 mm; thickness 7-11 mm.
Provenience: Squares N10, ! 1, 12, 13, and 15-E01, Area A; three specimens assigned to level 4 and one each to levels 2, 3, and 5.
Remarks: The specimens were found in the lower levels of the primary
burned rock midden and probably represent stages of the Round Rock and Clear
Fork phases of the Texas Archaic. Weir considers the Bulyerde type diagnostic of
the Clear Fork phase (1976a: 53, Figure 10A, B).

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

97

Castroville
1 Specimen (Figure 13, i)
Description: Triangular with slightly convex edges; corner notched with
straight base and wide stem. Specimen apparently was unfinished due to a hinge
fracture that terminated at the completed corner notch and created a thicker cross
section near one corner. Stone is a light tan, opaque flint. Workmanship very
good; percussion flaking primary means of final thinning.
Dimensions: Length 78 ram; width across shoulders 31 ram; length of stem
9 mm; extrapolated basal width 18 ram; thickness 8 mm.
Provenience: Square N13-E01, level 3, Area A.
Remarks: Similar to Lange; conforms to the type described by Suhm and
Jelks (1962:173). Weir considers this type diagnostic of the San Marcos phase of
the Texas Archaic (1976a:29, Table 1).

Lerma
1 Specimen (Figure 13, j)
Description: Leaf-shaped biface with impaot fracture on distal end. Stone is
brown flint. Workmanship good; both percussion and pressure employed for final
thinning and shaping; no basa! or edge smoothing evident.
Dimensions: Extrapolated length 70 mm; width 22 ram; thickness 7 ram.
Remarks: Conforms to the type described by Suhm and Jelks (1962: 207). It
came from the level just above Nolan and Bulverde (Figure 8). Lerma points
are thought to occur early in the Archaic and may be associated with the San
Geronimo phase.

Wells
1 Specimen (Figure 14, a)
Description: Triangular blade with convex edges, narrow shoulders, and
long, rectangular stem that terminates in straight base that has cortex from the
original core nodule; stem is slightly ground along one edge. Stone is opaque,
mottled brown flint. Workmanship good; edge retouch by both percussion and
pressure.
Dimensions: Length 51 mm; width across shoulders 23 ram; length of stem
21 mm; basal width 16 ram; thickness 7 mm.
Provenience: Square N13-E0I, level 4, Area A.
Remarks: Except for the flat cortex base with remnant cortex, this specimen
conforms to the type description by Suhm and Jelks (1962:257). Weir considers
this type diagnostic of the Clear Fork phase of the Texas Archaic (1976a: 53,
Figure 10, G).

98

Texas Archeological Society

b

d

c

h

g

k

I
0
I

e

I

I

rn

!

~

n

5CM
I

Figure 14. Projectile points from Area A: a, Wells; b-k, Pedernales; 1, Marcos; m,
Marshall; n, Gower.

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

99

Pedernales
11 Specimens (Figure 14, b-k)
Description: Generally triangular with straight sides; shoulders prominent
and stems generally rectangular with the typical indented base. Stone ranges
from translucent tan chert to opaque, brown flint. One specimen has evidence of
heat treating (Figure 14, g). Percussion was primary means of flake detachment,
with pressure flaking for final shaping, edge straightening, and retouch. Resharpening also evident on some specimens. (Fine pressure flaking produced a
sharp serrated edge on a single point found by a relic hunter in Area C.) Specimens found at the Gregg Ranch site conform closely to those described by Suhm
and Jelks (1962 : 235- 238). Workmanship generally good.
Dimensions: Length 50-95 mm; width across shoulders 23-38 mm; length
of stem 17-24 mm; basal width 17-22 mm; thickness 5-9 mm.
Provenience: Squares N09-E01, N10-E01, Nll-E01, N12-E01, N13-E01,
and N14-E01; levels 2, 3, 4, and 5; most specimens recovered from levels 3
and 4.
Remarks: Several of the Pedernales specimens found at the Gregg Ranch
site represent different phases of the manufacturing process. Figure 14, f is a
biface (preform) that has only the base finished, obviously the first step in shaping this particular specimen. Figure 14, g represents the next stage of manufacture: final shaping, done by pressure flaking along the edges. The specimen illustrated in Figure 14, j, first thought to be a Gower point, is probably a Pedernales
preform, primarily because of its provenience within the primary burned rock
midden. Figure 14, c, j, and k may be reworked points. Figure 14, h was found
out of context in a rodent burrow. Figure 14, b has an impact fracture on the
distal end. Weir (1976a: 29, Table 1) considers the Pedernales type diagnostic of
the Round Rock phase of the Texas Archaic.

Marcos
1 Specimen (Figure 14, 1)
Description: Long and triangular, slightly convex edges; deeply barbed
on corners, with convex base, resulting in a strongly expanding stem. Stone is
opaque tan flint. Workmanship good; percussion was the primary means of thinning; minor pressure retouch was employed along the edges, resulting in some
serration. Has a broken distal end.
Dimensions: Extrapolated length 55 mm; width across shoulders 24 mm;
length of stem 10 mm; basal width 20 mm; thickness 5 mm.
Provenience: Square N14-E01; level 3, Area A.
Remarks: Conforms to the type described by Suhm and Jelks (1962: 209).
Weir includes Marcos in the San Marcos phase of the Texas Archaic (1976a: 29,
Table 1).

100

Texas Archeological Society

Marshall
1 Specimen (Figure 14, m)
Description: Triangular with straight edges; shoulders strongly barbed,
stem rectangular, base straight. Stone is translucent brown chert. Workmanship
good, with percussion the primary means of final thinning. Has an impact fracture on one side at the distal end; one ear and one edge broken.
Dimensions: Extrapolated length 66 mm; extrapolated width across shoulders 35 mm; length of stem 10 mm; basal width 19 mm; thickness 4 mm.
Provenience: Square N10-E01, level 2, Area A.
Remarks: Conforms to type described by Suhm and Jelks (1962:211). Weir
considers this type diagnostic of the San Marcos phase of the Texas Archaic
(1976a:55, Figure 12).

Gower
1 Specimen (Figure 14, n)
Description: Triangular with straight edges and thick body; stem straight
and deeply notched; lateral edges lightly smoothed; basal thinning by removal of
crescent-shaped flakes. Stone is tan flint. Workmanship fair; primary manufacturing technique is percussion. One ear of stem is missing.
Dimensions: Length 60 mm; width across shoulders 37 mm; length of stem
17 mm; width of stem 22 mm; thickness 8 mm.
Provenience: Square N15-E01, Area A; 147 cm below level 7 datum.
Remarks: Specimen was slightly deeper than the Plainview-Golondrina
specimens and may be out of context due to rodent activity in the midden. It is
similar in outline to a Pedernales type found much higher in Area A at 47 cm
(Figure 14, k) and to a Gower found at Youngsport (Shafer 1963: Figure 7-B) as
well as several of those found at Granite Beach (Crawford 1965: Figure 3). Its
context in the Gregg Ranch site, however, falls within or near the San Geronimo
phase of the Archaic as defined by Weir (1976a: 52, Figure 9, H, I).

Other Lithic Artifacts
Corner Tanged Knife
1 Specimen (Figure 15, a)
Description: Triangular biface with tang on one corner for hafting. Stone is
light tan chert. Workmanship very good; primary means of final thinning was
percussion; sharpened by pressure retouch.
Dimensions: Length 90 mm; width 38 mm; width of tang 20 mm; depth of
notches 10 mm; thickness 7 mm.
Provenience: Level 4, Area C (Figure 5), 1 meter east of N12-E01 and 70
cm below the surface.
Remarks: Specimen was slightly deeper than the Plainview-Barber speci-

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

b

101

d
C

g

h
0
I I

I

I

1

5CM
I

Figure 15. Corner-tanged knife, a, from Gregg Ranch site, Area C; ovate specimens, b-e,
and side scrapers, f-i, from Area A.

mens and may be out of context due to rodent activity in the midden. It is similar
in outline to a Pedernales type found much higher in Area A at 47 cm (Figure 14,
k) and to a Gower found at Youngsport (Shafer 1963: Figure 7-B) as well as several of those found at Granite Beach (Crawford 1965: Figure 3). Its context in the
Gregg Ranch site, however, falls within or near the San Geronimo phase of the
Archaic as defined by Weir (1976a:52, Figure 9, H, I).

102

Texas Archeological Society

Miscellaneous Artifacts

Several ovate specimens and side scrapers were found in the San Geronimo
occupation level of the Gregg Ranch site (Figure 15, b-e, i). Some appear to have
been heat treated; some appear to have sustained use breakage. A possible preform (Figure 15, e) from the San Geronimo level was heat treated; it is a glossy
pink. A probable ovate scraper (Figure 15, f), also was heat treated. A probable
side scraper (Figure 15, b) came from N08-E01, level 6. Figure 15, d appears
to be a uniface scraper, and Figure 15, b and c appear to be side scrapers. Figure 15, g and h appear to be broken scrapers that were heat treated.
Other lithic tools from the Gregg Ranch site include a probable Perdiz arrowpoint (Figure 16, b) and a preform (Figure 16, c) found in the upper 10 cm (level
1) of Square N13-E01). Although it was found just above a heavy layer of snail
shells and hardpan soil (Figures 7, 8) deep in Square N15-E01, 147 cm below
level 7 datum, Figure 14, f appears to be a Pedernales point, but based on its
archeological context it is probably a Gower. A possible Pedernales point (Figure 16, a), broken, was found in Square Nll-E01, and the broken and burned
base of a Nolan point (Figure 16, d) came from Square N08-E01, level 5. An
artifact from N09-E01, level 7, probably the bit end of a Guadalupe Gouge (Figure 17, h), appears to have been in context with Paleo-Indian materials. A preform (Figure 17, i) came from Square N08-E01, level 4, and a broken hammerstone (Figure 17, e) from Square N09-E01, level a. The hammerstone is of red
quartzite and has use-wear along the edge. Utilized flakes (Figure 17, a-g) were
recovered from various levels. One (Figure 17, e) has fine retouch on all edges in
addition to use-wear. The blade is straight and has a strong lip at the platform,
indicating soft-hammer removal while on an anvil. A possible scraper (Figure
17, f) also has fine retouch flaking along all edges. Two of the utilized flakes
(Figure 17, a and b) were found near the Barber point (Figure 11). A possible
gouge (Figure 17, a) may have come from the same flint nodule as the Barber
point. Another flake (Figure 17, b) may have served as a graver. Several prismatic blades (Figure 18) were recovered from probable Paleo-Indian levels. Two
prismatic blades (Figures 15, h and 17, a), one (Figure 15, h) apparently a preform that has had some flakes removed at the start of the thinning process, were
also very close to the Barber point (Figure 11), and they to appear to have come
from the same flint nodule.
Among the representative bifaces from the Gregg Ranch site (Figure 19) is
one (Figure 19, e) from the San Geronimo level that appears from its pink color
and glassy sheen to have been heat treated; and has an oblique transverse parallel
flake-scar pattern that may be Paleo-Indian workmanship. Of particular interest
too are pink bifaces with glassy sheen (Figure 15, b-h) from the San Geronimo
level that apparently were heat treated. Figure 15, d is a prismatic blade from the
San Geronimo level.
Several drills (Figure 20, a-d) came from the middle Archaic, a bone awl
(Figure 20, e) came from the Clear Fork phase of the Central Texas Archaic, and
a probable bone awl (Figure 20, f) came from the Paleo-Indian level. Three ap-

Land---Gregg Ranch Site

103

b

a

0
I I

I

I

e

5CM
I

I

d

Figure !6. Lithic tools from the Gregg Ranch site, Area A: a, possible Pedernales point
from N1 l-E01, level 2; b, probable Perdiz point from N13-E01, level 1; c, preform from
N13-E01, level 1; d, broken burned base of Nolan point from N08-E01, level 5.

b
a

d

h
i

0
I

!

I

1

I

5CM
I

Figure 17. Utilized blades and other tools from the Gregg Ranch site, Area A: a-g, utilized flakes from various levels; h, probable bit end of a Guadalupe Gouge from San
Geronimo level; i, preform from N08-E01, level 4; j, broken hammerstone from N09E01, level 1.

Texas Archeological Society

104

a

C

5CM

d
Figure 18. Prismatic blades from probable Paleo-Indian levels.

d

b

o
I t

I

I

1

5CM
I

g
Figure 19. Representative bifaces from the Gregg Ranch site.

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

105

parent uniface knives (Figure 20, g-i) came from the San Geronimo level, all
with secondary retouch flaking along the cutting edges on one face only and each
with a wide safety ridge along the top side. All three have apparent use-wear.
Four choppers or cores (Figure 21) were recovered, one (21, a) from well below
the Barber point, which was just above the Paleo-Indian level (N1 l-E01, level 8).

AREA B

Description
Area B (Figures 5, 22) was excavated by Paul Duke, of Austin, at the same
time that Area A was being excavated. Metric measurements originated from the
site datum (N01-E01). Area B excavations commenced 17 meters east of the site
datum and were within a 12-square-meter grid. Squares were excavated individually by 10 cm levels and screened through half-inch hardware cloth.
Surface
On the surface of Area B were two hearths (Figure 23).
Occupation zones began on the surface and continued to a depth of 130 cm.
A possible shelter feature, a classic Plainview point, and an Early Triangular
point--all in close proximity--and a possible Hell Gap point and a Clear Fork
gouge were recovered. Except for these, the artifacts, soil color, bone, shell, and
burned rock midden features in Area B were typical of those found in most
burned rock middens of Central Texas and are not discussed here.
Excavation
While excavating squares N01-E19, N02-E19, N03-E19, N02-E20, and
N03-E20 Duke encountered seven large fragmented limestone rocks arranged in
a circle 2 meters in diameter (Figure 22). These rocks lay on soil that was relatively free of other rock and sloped slightly to the south toward the flood plain.
Due south of and near this feature were the remains of a stone-lined hearth. The
arrangement of the large rocks in the 2-meter circle suggests that they were
the remains of a simple windbreak or shelter. A similar feature was noted in the
lower levels of locality 1 at the Hell Gap site in Wyoming (Irwin-Williams et al.
1973:45). However, significant artifacts are two projectile points that may have
been directly associated with the rock feature. A classic Plainview point (Figure
24, a) was found next to one of the large rocks in Square N03-E20 and an Early
Triangular point (Figure 24, h) was found on the opposite side of the same rock
(Figure 22, a). All three items appeared to be at the same level and in good context. The Plainview point, of excellent workmanship, is made from a light tan
Central Texas chert. It has an indented base, basal thinning, and has been ground
on the base and lower edges. The distal end has been damaged. The Early Triangular point is similar to other triangular points found at comparable levels in
Area B. Hester considers the Early Triangular point to be pre-Early Archaic in
age at the La Jita site (Hester 1971 : 119). Evidence from Gregg Ranch may push

Texas Archeological Society

106

b

a

e

g

d

c

0
! I,

I

I

I

5CM
!

h

Figure 20. Middle and Early Archaic artifacts from the Gregg Ranch site: b, d, San
Geronimo level; e, bone awl from Clear Fork phase of Central Texas Archaic; f, probable
bone awl from the Paleo-Indian level; g-i, uniface knives from the San Geronimo level.

the chronological position of the Early Triangular point further back in time,
possibly to 10,000 years BE The point (Figure 24, h) is made from a local blue
gray chert, of excellent workmanship, with basal thinning and some grinding
along the base, but not on the edges.
Among the other artifacts found in Area B is a possible resharpened Hell
Gap point (Figure 24, e). It is similar to points found at several Hell Gap sites in
Wyoming (Frison 1974:71-90, 1978:168-177) and was made from a light tan
Central Texas chert. It has moderate grinding along the base and lower lateral

Land--Gregg Ranch Site

107

Figure 21. Choppers or cores.

edges. This point was found in the lower levels of Area B. Several Clear Fork
gouges (not illustrated) were also found in the lower levels of Area B, but although they are believed to be as old as Plainview, their exact age has not been
determined. Several early corner notched points (Figure 24, b, f) of the San
Geronimo period were also recovered together with a Travis (Figure 24, d) and a
possible Meserve point (Figure 24, c).

108

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

Figure 24. Artifacts from Area B: a, classic Plainview point from N03-E20; b, early
corner-notched point; c, possible Meserve point; d, Travis point; e, possible Hell Gap
point, resharpened; f, early corner-notched point; g-j, Early Triangular points; h is from
N03-E20, made of local blue gray chert.

Land---Gregg Ranch Site

109

a

b
Figure 22. Photographs of Area B: a, east view of possible Paleo-Indian shelter showing
location of Plainview point (A) and Early Triangular point (B); b, north view of shelter.

CONCLUSIONS
The prevalence of hunting and hide-working tools (dart points, knives,
scrapers, and awls) over grinding tools suggests that hunting was the primary
means of subsistence, with a secondary reliance on gathering. Lithic artifacts
and debitage are the most abundant materials found at the Gregg Ranch site; they
are the basic sources available for the analysis of stone-working techniques.

110

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 23. Photograph showing typical hearth in Area B.

The close association of a Plainview point with an Early Triangular point
and a primitive-style, stone-lined, windbreak type of shelter suggests an overlap
in time of two different cultures: the highly mobile Great Plains big-game hunting tradition of the Paleo-Indians and the riverine hunter-gatherer tradition of the
Archaic. These early peoples most likely exploited the environment using all
manner of hunting and gathering techniques, available resources, and ideas
gained from contact with other groups--groups both nomadic and fairly stable in
their settlement patterns. At the Gregg Ranch site the variety of game and lithic
resources, varied topography, good weather, good water, and easy access must
have come together as it does today to make an ideal place for man to live.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The writer thanks several individuals who graciously provided assistance and suggestions in behalf of this project. Sincere thanks are extended to Frank A. Weir, Thomas R.
Hester, Harry J. Shafer, Elton R. Prewitt, Robert J. Mallouf, and Ralph Robinson for their
encouragement and support. Special thanks are also given to our wives Billie Land and
Nina Duke, who provided us with help and understanding.

Land~Gregg Ranch Site

111

REFERENCES CITED
Agogino, George
n.d.
Personal communication.
Butzer, Karl W.
1971

Environment and archeology: an ecological approach to prehistory (Second ed.).
University of Chicago.

Broyles, Bettye J.
1971

Second preliminary report: the St. Albans site, Kanawha County, West Virginia.
Report of Archeological Investigation 3. West Virginia Geological and Economic Survey, Morgantown.

Coe, Joffre L.
1964

The formative cultures of the Carolina Piedmont. Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society, n.s. 54(5).

Davis, William A. and E. Mott Davis
1960

The Jake Martin site: an Archaic site in the Ferrell’s Bridge Reservoir area,
northeastern Texas. Archeology Series, .N~3, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Frison, George C.
1974

The Casper site: A Hell Gap bison kill on the High Plains. Academic, New York.

1978

Prehistoric hunters of the High Plains. Academic, New York.

Hester, Thomas R.
1971
Archeological investigations at the La Jita site, Uvalde County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 42:51-148.
1976

Papers on Paleo-Indian archeology in Texas. Center for Archaeological Research Special Report 3, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Irwin, Henry T.
1971

Developments in early man studies in western North America, 1960-70. Arctic
Anthropology 8(2) :42-67.

Irwin-Williams, Cynthia, Henry Irwin, George Agogino, and C. Vance Haynes
1973

Hell Gap: Paleo-Indian occupation on the High Plains. Plains Anthropologist
18(59)40-53.

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1964
The Devils Mouth site: A stratified campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. Archeology Series, 6, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
1967

Toward a statistical overview of the Archaic cultures of Central and Southwest
Texas. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 12.

112

Texas Archeological Society

Kelly, Thomas C.
1983

The Barber Paleo-Indian point. La Tierra 10(4): 10-25.

Patterson, J. T.
1936

The corner-tang flint artifacts of Texas. The University of Texas Bulletin 3618:
Anthropological Papers 1(4). Austin.

Peck, Rodney M. and Floyd Painter
1984

The Baucom Hardaway site: a stratified deposit in Union County, North Carolina. The Chesopiean 22(2), Spring. Norfolk.

Prewitt, Elton R.
n.d.
Pesonal communication.
Shafer, Harry J.
Test excavations at the Youngsport site: a stratified terrace site in Bell County,
1963
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34:57-81.
Sorrow, William M.
The Devils Mouth site: the third season--1967. Papers of the Texas Archeologi1968
cal Salvage Project, 14, Austin.
Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
1967

Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, 11.

Sulm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962

Handbook of Texas archaeology: type descriptions. Texas Memorial Museum
Bulletin 4, Austin.

Turner, Ellen S., and Thomas R. Hester
!985

A field guide to stone artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Field Guide
Series. Texas Monthly, Austin.

Weir, Frank A.
1976a The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Anthropology,
Washington State University, Pullman.
1976b

The Central Texas Archaic reconsidered. In: The Texas Archaic: A symposium.
Edited by Thomas R. Hester, pp 60-66. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 2.

1979

Greenhaw: an Archaic site in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 50: 5-67.

Wesolowsky, A1 B., Thomas R. Hester, and Douglas R. Brown
1976

Archeological investigations at the Jetta Court site (41TV 151), Travis County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47 : 25-88.

Land

Gregg Ranch Site

113

Willey, Gordon R.
1966

An introduction to American archaeology: North and Middle America. PrenticeHall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.

Word, James H. and Charles L. Douglas
1970

Excavations at Baker’s Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Memorial Museum, 16.

Wormington, H. M.
1957

Ancient man in North America. (Fourth ed.) Denver Museum of Natural History (popular series) 4.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Howard D. (Doug) Land received his M.B.A. from Eastern New Mexico University
and is currently a Lieutenant Colonel on active duty in the United States Air Force. Over
the past several years he has been an active avocational archeologist, with membership in
many national and state archeological societies, publishing several articles in newsletters
and journals. An accomplished flint knapper, he enjoys working in experimental archeology and lithic technology, specializing in Paleo-Indian studies. Address: 3904 Santee Way,
Valrico, FL 33594.

Analysis of Ceramic Function:
a Late Caddoan Example
Anna J. Taylor

ABSTRACT
Using as a model Shafer’s ceramic-distribution study of the Late Caddoan Attaway site in Henderson County, Texas, it is shown that ceramic usewear studies can be used effectively to provide data about site activities and
functions. Ceramic use-wear studies should be planned before collecting ceramics in the field to avoid destroying evidence of use-wear during recovery
and processing. (A revision of a paper presented at the 1982 Caddo Conference in Fayetteville, Arkansas)

INTRODUCTION
Recent archeological and ethnographic studies of the uses and disposal of
ceramics have indicated that there is a strong potential in ceramic studies for
yielding information about the activities and organization of past cultures. Ceramic function analysis includes all stages of a vessel’s existence, from its manufacture through its use and eventual disposal, and deals with interrelations between vessel form and design, with utilitarian uses such as storage, cooking, or
serving; and ceremonial activities.
Several aspects of ceramic function analysis will be explored, using information from Shafer’s (1981) analysis of the Late Caddoan Attaway site. These are
the potential of ceramic function analysis for detecting patterned human behavior by focusing upon vessel forms found in different discard contexts, the techniques that can be used for ceramic function analysis, problems connected with
recovery of data, and problems connected with preservation of data in the field
and laboratory.

THE ATTAWAY SITE (41HEll4)
The Attaway site was a badly disturbed Late Caddoan (Frankston focus)
settlement that was eroding into Lake Palestine in Henderson County, Texas. The
site was investigated in 1975 by anthropology students from Texas A&M University (Shafer 1981), who found that two distinct contemporaneous activity
areas--a midden and a cemetery--had been exposed by wave action. Test excavations in the cemetery area revealed about seven burial pits. No undisturbed

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986for 1984)

116

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

midden deposits were found, but ceramics from the eroded midden area were
collected and used in the analysis (Shafer 1981 : 147-152; 157, 158; 166, 167).
Ceramic analysis of the Attaway site was directed toward determining if
functionally separate areas such as the midden and the cemetery could be distinguished solely by their associated ceramics. It was hypothesized that ceramics
from the midden area would come from vessels used and discarded during domestic activities, and ceramics from the cemetery area--mortuary ceramics-would come from vessels used and discarded during ceremonial activities. The
midden ceramics, most of which were small, eroded sherds, were sorted into formal types and vessel forms on the basis of rim form and mode of decoration. The
mortuary ceramics, most of which were whole or partial vessels, were also
sorted into formal types and forms (Shafer 1981:166-168).
From the midden area 2,452 sherds were collected, and after the badly
eroded sherds were excluded, 2,215 midden sherds remained in the sample.
About 60 percent of the midden sherds were jar sherds, characterized by wet
paste decorations. Only about 5 percent of the midden sherds were from bowls or
bottles, characterized by engraved designs. Vessel forms of the remaining midden sherds could not be identified with confidence (Shafer 1981:168-170).
The mortuary ceramic sample consisted of sherds representing 21 vessels
and one smoking pipe; 71.4 percent (N= 15) of the vessels were bowls; 14.3 percent (N=3) were jars; and 14.3 percent (N=3) were bottles (Shafer 1981 : 170,
173, Table 3).
This analysis indicates that there are qualitative differences between the ceramic assemblages from the midden and the cemetery. Predominant forms in the
midden sample were jars; the predominant forms among the mortuary vessels
were bowls (Shafer 1981 : 168-175). But, as Shafer notes, the differences in frequencies of jars, bottles, and bowls in the midden and mortuary samples cannot
be interpreted as meaning that the ceramic assemblage in particular households
consisted mostly of jars and a few bowls and bottles, or that bowls were made
mainly to serve as grave goods. Different frequencies among ceramic forms and
decorative techniques in the midden sample can be attributed to the use of particular kinds of vessels for specific domestic purposes and, in the mortuary
sample, to the selection of specific mortuary items by the villagers (Shafer
1981 : 175; cf. Braun 1980, 1982; David 1972; DeBoer 1974; Foster 1960).
The high frequency of jar sherds and the low frequency of bowl and bottle
sherds in the midden sample is mainly a result of (1) differing frequencies of
different kinds of vessels, i.e., jars, bowls, and bottles, in the original domestic
assemblage; (2) differing life spans (or breakage rates) of the vessels, i.e., jars,
bowls, and bottles, (3) the different methods of disposal used for different kinds
of broken vessels, i.e., some kinds of broken vessels may have been discarded
where they broke, other kinds may have been carried to the midden, or perhaps
all broken pottery was taken to the midden for disposal (David 1972; Foster
1960). If all broken ceramics were indeed taken to the midden for disposal, the
proportion of jars, sherds of bowls, and bottles recovered from the midden at the
Attaway site would indicate that jars were broken more frequently than were
bowls and bottles. But comparison of frequencies of sherds from different vessel

Taylor--Ceramic Function

117

forms (or from different sized vessels) do not take into account the fact that
breakage of large vessels can result in more sherds than breakage of small vessels. More accurate counts of vessels of different forms and sizes can be obtained
by recording and comparing the percentages of total vessel orifices represented
by individual rim sherds; these data can provide the approximate numbers of vessels of different forms and sizes in a sherd assemblage (Braun 1980: 176-177;
Egloff 1973). The mortuary vessel sample from the Attaway site is considered a
valid representation of a Late Caddoan mortuary assemblage, since every vessel
in the sample was deliberately selected to be placed with a burial.
Ethnographic studies of the manufacture and use of ceramics have demonstrated that certain vessel forms are used consistently for certain tasks; jars are
generally used for food storage and cooking, and bowls for food preparation and
serving (Braun 1980, 1982; Ericson, Read, and Burke 1971; Fontana et al. 1962;
Stanislawski 1978). Ethnographic accounts of the Caddo support these findings.
One account reported that "the Indians fashioned large vessels for the storage of
water and for cooking and serving" (Griffith 1954: 104; cf. Swanton 1942).
Although ethnographic descriptions of vessel use are helpful to archeologists, there are other ways to determine how vessels were used, for example investigation of sooting, of organic or mineral residue or stains, of pollen from
domestic and wild plants on the surfaces of vessels, of abrasions or cuts on surfaces, of differences in the paste, temper, surface treatment, and of other technological features (Braun 1980, 1982; Ericson, Read, and Burke 1971; Griffiths
1978; Lischka 1978; Shafer and Taylor 1980; Smith 1982; Steponaitis 1980;
Usrey 1982). Vessel size, as determined from curvatures of rim sherds or by
measurement of whole and incomplete vessels, also can be an indicator not only
of vessel function, but also of distance of sites from water sources and of size of
household groups (Linton 1944; Nelson 1980, 1981; Turner and Lofgren 1966).
Preservation of organic materials in the moist environment of East Texas is
generally poor, but the extent to which organic residues are preserved on ceramic
surfaces has yet to be investigated. Sooty deposits on the exteriors of cooking
vessels that were used extensively for liquids are preserved in most regions, but
often are scrubbed off in the laboratory and usually are not considered in archeological analyses. These layers of soot are indicators of vessel function. At least
one vessel, a mortuary jar recovered from the Attaway site, has some sooty residue (Shafer 1981 : 163, Figure 9, D) that may indicate either that the vessel, selected from the household vessels, had already been used for cooking, or that
food was ceremonially cooked in it before it was placed in the grave. Detailed
study of sooty mortuary vessels might yield more information about their functions and about the ceremonial activities of the Late Caddo.

RECOVERY OF CERAMIC FUNCTION DATA
It is important that field recovery methods and laboratory processing be
planned so as to preserve information needed for ceramic function analysis. Although ceramic types, ceramic technology, and vessel form can be determined

Texas Archeological Society

118

from scrubbed and acid-treated ceramics, data that could provide information
about vessel function--impossible to recognize during excavation--can be literally washed away during processing in the laboratory (Charnela 1969). Excavators should avoid scraping or scratching soft surfaces of vessels during excavation, and they should preserve residues, use-marks, and signs of wear on
vessels and sherds. Tools of bamboo, plastic, or wood are recommended; metal
excavating tools should not be used. Ceramics to be examined for staining, sooting, abrasion, and other signs of wear should undergo minimal handling in the
field and should be bagged separately from other ceramics specimens.
Traces of slip and paint, abrasions, and other use-marks, residues, and pollen can be easily lost during laboratory processing. Caddo ceramics, for example, are often quite fragile due to low-temperature firing and subsequent inundation by ground water, which causes deterioration of bone and shell temper. It
is especially difficult to process such pottery without destroying data that pertain
to vessel function. In such situations, washing and permanent labeling of the
pottery to be examined for function data should be postponed until analysis is
completed.
In the field care should be taken to record the contexts of whole vessels,
partial vessels, and sherds. Pottery from different contexts can be compared only
if contexts are carefully and consistently recorded (Lischka 1978).
SUMMARY
Ceramic-function analysis has great promise for yielding information about
cultural activities in which ceramics have been used, and factors such as context,
differential breakage, and conditions of deposition are important in such analysis. Other evidences of vessel function such as residue and wear are easily lost
during recovery and processing, so field and laboratory methods should be designed to prevent accidental destruction of these kinds of perishable evidence.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Special thanks are given to Harry J. Shafer, of Texas A&M University, who encouraged this study and allowed the writer free access to his data on the Attaway site and to his
knowledge of Texas ceramics. Jean M. Christiansen also helped by providing information
and direction concerning field and laboratory techniques.

REFERENCES CITED
Braun, David P.
1980

Experimental interpretation of ceramic vessel use on the basis of rim and neck
formal attributes. In The Navajo Project: Archaeological investigations, Page to
Phoenix 500 KV southern transmission line, by Donald C. Fiero, R. W. Munson, M. T. McClach, S. M. Wilson, and Anne H. Zier, pp. 170-231. Museum
of Northern Arizona Research Paper, (11).

Taylor--Ceramic Function

1983

119

Pots as tools. In Archaeological hammers and theories, edited by James A.
Moore and Arthur S. Keene, pp. 107-134. Academic Press, New York.

Chernela, Janel
1969

In praise of the scratch: The importance of aboriginal abrasion on museum ceramic ware. Curator 12(3): 174-179.

David, Nicolas
1972

Comment: On the life span of pottery, type frequencies, and archaeological inference. American Antiquity 37: 141-142.

DeBoer, Warren R.
1974

Ceramic longevity and archaeological interpretation: An example from the
upper Ucayali, Peru. American Antiquity 39: 335-343.

Egloff, B. J.
1973

Comment: A method for counting ceramic rim sherds. American Antiquity
38 : 351-353.

Ericson, Jonathan E., D. W. Read, and C. Burke
1971

The relationships between the primary functions and the physical properties of
ceramic vessels and their implications for distributions on an archaeological
site. Anthropology UCLA 3 : 84-95.

Fontana, Bernard L., William Robison, Charles Cormack, and Ernest Leavitt, Jr.
1962
Papago Indian pottery. University of Washington Press, Seattle.
Foster, George M.
1960
Life expectancy of utilitarian pottery in Tzintzuntzan, Michoacan, Mexico.
American Antiquity 25:606-609.
Griffith, William J.
1954

The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as seen by Europeans, 1687-1772. Middle
American Research Institute, Publication 12(41-168): 1 - 165.

Griffiths, Dorothy M.
1978

Use-marks on Historic ceramics: A preliminary study. Historical Archaeology
12:68-81.

Linton, Ralph
1944

North American cooking pots. American Antiquity 9:369-380.

Lischka, Joseph J.
1978

A functional analysis of Middle Classic ceramics at Kaminaljuyu, Guatemala.
In The ceramics of Kaminaljuyu, edited by Ronald W. Wetherington, pp. 223278. Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park.

120

Texas Archeological Society

Nelson, Ben A.
1980

Cultural responses to population change: A comparison of two prehistoric occupations of the Mimbres Valley, New Mexico. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Anthropology, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale.

1981

Ethnoarchaeotogy and paleodemography: A test of Turner and Lofgren’s hypothesis. Journal of Anthropological Research 37(2): 107-129.

Shafer, Harry J.
1981

Archeo!ogical investigations at the Attaway site, Henderson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52: 147-178.

Shafer, Harry J. and Anna J. Taylor
1980

Form and uses of Mimbres Classic Black-on-White ceramics from the NAN
Ranch ruin, Grant County, New Mexico. Paper presented at the 45th Meeting of
the Society for American Archaeology, Philadelphia.

Smith, Marion F., Jr.
Economic interpretation of the size and shape of archaeological ceramics. Grant
1982
proposal submitted to the National Science Foundation.

Stanislawski, Michael B.
1978

If pots were mortal. In Explorations in ethnoarchaeology, edited by Richard A.
Gould, pp. 201-228. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Steponaitis, Vincas E
1980

Ceramics, chronology, and community patterns at Moundville, a Late Prehistoric site in Alabama. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Swanton, John R.
Source material on the history and ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Smith1942
sonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 132: 1-332.

Turner, Christy G., II, and L. Lofgren
1966

Household size of prehistoric western pueblo Indians. Southwestern Journal of
Anthropology 22(1): 117-132.

Usrey, Steven J.
1982

A preliminary pollen analysis of the NAN Ranch ruin. In NAN Ranch ruin: A
collection of papers on the archaeology of the NAN Ranch ruin, Mimbres Valley, Grant County, New Mexico, edited by Harry J. Shafer, pp. VI: 1 - 11. Texas
A&M University Anthropology Laboratory, Special Series. College Station.

Taylor--Ceramic Function

121

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Anna J. Taylor obtained her M.A. from the Department of Anthropology at Texas
A&M University. She did her undergraduate work at Wayland Baptist College, Plainview,
Texas. She has worked in Texas, New Mexico, and Belize. Her research interests include
ceramic function analysis, spatial distribution of metal arrowpoints, New Mexican comanchero and pastore involvement in the Texas Panhandle-Plains, and the Mimbres
Mogollon culture of New Mexico. She is a Research Associate at the Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78285.

Pictographs of the Red Monochrome Style
in the Lower Pecos River Region, Texas
Solveig A. Turpin

ABSTRACT
The Red Monochrome pictographs are the latest of three prehistoric
rock-art styles defined in the Lower Pecos River region of Southwest Texas.
Twenty-three possible examples of this style are described and compared
with pictographs at similar sites in the Big Bend region to the west. Long
acknowledged as intrusive into the region after A.D. 600, this pictograph
style is only one trait in a complex that defines the Late Prehistoric period in
the Lower Pecos region. The adoption of the bow and arrow and the appearance of feature types such as crescent-shaped burned rock middens, cairns,
and circular stone structure outlines suggest the infusion of a fully formed
culture system. Parallels with both the material culture of the Southern
Plains and the pictographs of the Big Bend point to an origin with nomadic
hunters and gatherers analogous to the documented movements of the inhabitants of the Southern Plains during protohistoric and historic times.

INTRODUCTION

The Red Monochrome pictogaphs are the latest of three major prehistoric
rock-art styles defined in the Lower Pecos region of Southwest Texas (Figure 1).
This area, which encompasses the lower reaches of both the Pecos and Devils
rivers and their confluences with the Rio Grande, holds one of the largest and
most diverse bodies of Native American rock art. The dominant regional form is
the Archaic-age polychrome Pecos River style wall art (Kirkland 1937, 1938,
1939; Jackson 1938; Graham and Davis 1958; Gebhard 1960, 1965; Grieder
1965, 1966a, b; Kirkland and Newcomb 1967; Turpin 1982). Although often
overshadowed by the more elaborate polychrome Pecos River style panels, pictographs of the Red Monochrome style, when placed in their cultural context, are
one of a complex of traits that defines the Late Prehistoric period in the Lower
Pecos region. The Red Linear style is the third of the regions’s prehistoric rockart styles (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967; Gebhard 1960, 1965; Parsons n.d.;
Grieder 1966a; Turpin 1984).
The Red Monochrome panels are composed of frontally posed, crude, but
realistic life-sized human figures, arranged in horizontal bands, armed with bows
and arrows, and accompanied by naturalistic animals of many species (Figure 2).

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986for 1984)

124

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Map showing distribution of Red Monochrome sites in the Lower Pecos region,
Val Verde County, Texas. Small circles show approximate locations of sites; large circle
encloses three sites.

The humans stand with legs spread, arms raised, and fingers clearly detailed, like
victims of a modern-day holdup (Kirkland and Newcomb t967:81). Occasionally, the fingers and toes are so exaggerated and the bodies so flexed that the
images are lizardlike in appearance (Gebhard 1965:36) (Figure 3). Handprints,
both negative and positive, are a frequently occurring motif. Large, enigmatic,
geometric forms often are found in panels otherwise composed of humans and
beasts. Terrestrial animals and birds are shown in profile; aquatic animals such as
catfish and turtles are in plan view as they are normally seen in nature. The presence of the bow and arrow (Figure 2, b) dates this style to the Late Prehistoric
period, after A.D. 600.

Turpin--Red Monochrome Pictographs

O

O

Z

125

126

Texas Archeological Society

Turpin--Red Monochrome Pictographs

127

Although monochrome human figures abound in the aboriginal rock art of
North America, a few traits distinguish the Red Monochrome style from the
many miscellaneous pictographs. A single line perpendicular to the crown of the
head is presumed to be a feather ornament (Figure 3), although to modern viewers it more closely resembles a lightning rod (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:81).
Rounded protruberances on the sides of the heads have been variously called ears
(Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:81), caps or curled hair (Lowrance 1982a: 65),
and buns. Since the heads are usually solid circles of color with no other features
delineated, these distinctive protrusions must mirror real characteristics. Male
nudity is apparent in the display of male genitals, but no female genitalia are
detectable. Clothed figures appear to be wearing long skirts or tunics. An apparent preoccupation with hands and feet results in disproportionately large fingers
and toes, with each digit clearly drawn. Handprints are common signatures of
preliterate art, but the emphasis on prints in the Red Monochrome style is carried
to the extreme in one case (site 41VV327) where turkey tracks are shown following behind the bird.

THE SITES
Twenty-three sites with possible Red Monochrome affiliation are known; 21
of these have been formally recorded. Many of these sites consist primarily
of panels in other art styles with only minor Red Monochrome components.
Omitted from this count are sites with figures that may belong in the Late Prehistoric period but are either too badly deteriorated or too aberrant to be classifed
as Red Monochrome. For example, one site described by House and Hester
(1971) has elements of both Red Monochrome and Pecos River styles, but the
figures conform to neither of these styles.
Of seven sites located by Graham and Davis (1958) during their survey that
preceded the construction of the Amistad Dam, six had been copied or photographed by Kirkland or Jackson in the 1930s. Parsons’s (n.d.) rock-art survey for
the Texas Memorial Museum and Texas Historical Commission found seven sites
with Red Monochrome figures previously documented to some degree by one or
the other of these pioneers in Texas rock-art studies (Table 1). Four new sites on
the Devils River were recorded during Parsons’s and later surveys (Parsons n.d.;
Dibble and Prewitt 1967). Three sites were added to the sample in 1984 and 1985
during an intensive survey by the University of Texas under a grant from the Kelberg Foundation. One of these sites, 41VV699, the Turkey Bluff site, was mentioned but not visited by Jackson (1938:Site 94). Another site on the Devils
River, reported to Jackson (1938:Site 97) by local informants, has been located
but remains unrecorded. It too has as a central figure a turkey, a common motif in
Red Monochrome art. One site, INAH 203, is on the Mexican side of the Rio
Grande, and only a few photographs are available for study.
Site 41VV52
Site 41VV52, at the upper end of the Devils River arm of Lake Amistad
(Figure 1), was recorded by Graham and Davis (n.d.; 1958). These surveyors

128

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Correlation of Designations for Red Monochrome Sites,
Val Verde County, Texas

TARL"

Kirkland b

Jackson c
Site 101 (?)

41VV52
41VV72

Seminole Canyon Shelter 1
Plates 43-46

Site 85, Plates
CLXV-CLXVII

41VV77

Pressa Canyon
Plate 64

Site 89, Plates
CLXXIII, CLXXIV

41VV78

Painted Rock Shelter
Plates 47-49

Site 90, Plates
CLXXVI, CLXXVII

41VV89

Pecos River Site 1
Plate 4(1)

Site 70
Plate CXXVI

41VV97

Pecos River Site 8
Plate 31(1)

41VV201

Pressa Canyon, Site 3
Plate 53

41VV226

Seminole Canyon Shelter 2
Plate 46

41VV236

Lewis Canyon
Plate 29(4)

Site 81
Plate CLI

41VV238

Pecos River Site 6
Plate 51

Site 67
Plate CXVIII

41VV239

Pecos River Site 11
Plate 34(3)

41VV241

Pandale Crossing
Plate 54

41VV243

Ingram Ranch
Plate 36

Site 65, Plates
CXVI, CXVII
Site 94

41VV699

Tardy Draw
Plate 50
° Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
bKirkland and Newcomb 1967.
c Jackson 1938.

Turpin--Red Monochrome Pictographs

129

suggested that 41VV52 might be Jackson’s site 101 (1938 : 239), a pictograph site
plotted on his Map V, but not further documented or described. One human figure with straight arms, bent legs, fingers and toes detailed, a single-feather headdress, and buns around the ears (Figure 4, a) is flanked by two large teardropshaped animals, probably bison. Their darker color suggests that they may not be
contemporary with the human. Other bison pictographs along this stretch of the
Devils River, such as those at 41VV343 and 41VV400, are demonstrably historic (slides on file at the Texas Memorial Museum). Faded red and yellow discs
of various sizes and a red conical geometric form appear to be older than the
human and animal figures.
Site 41VV72, Seminole Watering Hole
Site 41VV72, Seminole Watering Hole, is above a permanent spring-fed
pool just south of US 90, in Seminole Canyon. The location of this site and
41VV78 prompted Kirkland (1938 : 20) to name the Red Monochrome pictographs
the Val Verde Flooded Shelter style. In addition to being damaged by floodscouring because of its position low in the canyon, the site has been profoundly
vandalized due to its proximity to the now-abandoned Southern Pacific Railroad
right-of-way. Lichen growing down from the roof of the shelter also has obliterated many of the figures, so Kirkland’s copies of this site are virtually all that
remain of one of the largest Red Monochrome panels (Figure 2, a). In his water
color copies are more than 60 human figures, large and small, that once decorated these walls. Deer, rabbits, dogs, and a panther are discernible among the
many animals. The bow and arrow, long garments, male genitals, the singlefeather headdress, geometric forms, and innumerable handprints--all traits of
the Red Monochrome style--are illustrated. Using Kirkland’s reproductions as a
guide, one can still detect a very few complete figures, most notably the prone
figure riddled with projectiles. Three of the discernible figures have faded to a
yellow that Kirkland thought was stain from an oily binder (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967 : 83).
Site 4/VV78
Site 41VV78, the largest and best-preserved Red Monochrome panel, is
above a spring-fed pool low in the wall of a tributary of the Rio Grande, a situation similar to that of 41VV72. This site was also copied by Kirkland (Kirkland
and Newcomb 1967:Plates 47-49), probably with more accuracy than he was
able to attain at 41VV72. A turkey, rabbit, catfish, deer, turtle, and dog are
clearly drawn (Figure 2, b). The human figures, in their characteristic frontal
posture, are either armed with bows and arrows or riddled with projectiles, implying considerable hostility. Negative handprints, outspread fingers, elbow ornaments, single feathers, and buns on the sides of the heads are easily discerned.
One large deer is shown in X-ray style, the only example of this technique as yet
found in the Lower Pecos region. (The X-ray style is known at many European
Paleolithic rock-art sites.) Newcomb (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:84) interprets the outstretched tongue as a heart line, a common motif in North American

130

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

d

c

h

k
Figure 4. Red Monochrome figures with protruberances around the ears, from: a, 41VV52; b
and c, 41VV78; d, 41VV239; e, 41VV243; f, 41VV317; g, h, 41VV327; i, INAH203; j,
Agua Fria; k, Bear Creek; 1, Payne Canyon. (a, d, g, h from slides at Texas Memorial
Museum; b, c, e from Kirkland and Newcomb 1967; e, g, h, j, k, 1 from Jackson 1938; f
from Grieder 1965; i from photograph by David S. Dibble; j, k, 1 from Lowrance 1982a,
1982b.) These figures differ widely in size, but are reproduced at the same size to facilitate comparison.

art, citing Schaafsma’s suggestion that this trait is an Athapaskan import, either
developed or adopted from Plains groups. Remnants of Pecos River and Red Linear art are still visible at the upstream end of the shelter, but the superimposed
Red Monochrome clearly is later than the Pecos River style.

Turpin--Red Monochrome Pictographs

131

Site 41VV77, Vaquero Shelter
Site 41VV77, Vaquero shelter, has an outstanding example of historic Native American art: a panel complete with a mission building, horsemen, longhorn cattle, and costumed Spaniard (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:Plate 64).
Shadowy remnants of both Pecos River and Red Monochrome figures are now
extremely difficult to decipher (Gebhard 1965:36).
Site 41VV89
Site 41VV89, just above the mouth of the Pecos, was investigated by Jackson (1938:Site 70) and Woolsey (1936), so a photographic record is preserved
in the files of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. Kirkland’s copies
(Kirkland and Newcomb 1967 : Plate 4-1) are listed as Pecos River site 1. Called
Wolf or Coyote Cave for its dominant pictograph--a pair of canines with bristling tails--this site also has minor motifs: a human figure, a round geometric
design, and stenciled negative handprints.

Site 41VV97
Site 41VV97 consists primarily of Pecos River style pictographs (Kirkland
and Newcomb 1967:Plate 31), but at its base is one possible Red Monochrome
human figure. This figure is a standing torso with upraised arms, outspread fingers, and a single-feather headdress.
Site 41VV123
Site 41VV 123, above the mouth of the Pecos River, was recorded by Graham
and Davis (1958) and was summarily described by them as a few human figures,
badly deteriorated and intentionally defaced. Of five Red Monochrome humans
there, only three are still clearly discernable. One figure lacks hands and feet but
has remnants of the characteristic protrusions about the ears. Another elongated
human resembles the pictographs at 41VV327 on the Devils River more than it
does its companions at this site. A fourth figure, completely eradicated, has been
scratched from the wall.

Site 41VV201, Red Linear Site
Site 41VV201, the Red Linear site, is the type site for the Red Linear style,
a miniature monochrome art form tentatively dated to the Late Archaic period
(Turpin 1984). The larger, paler figures and a series of tally marks at this site
were considered by Gebhard (1965:36) to be superimposed Red Monochromes.
Site 41VV226, Kirkland Camp
Site 41VV226, Kirkland Camp, has a few pale red handprints at the base of
a Pecos River style panel. Newcomb included this site in his discussion of the
Red Monochrome style (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967 : 89, Plate 46-2), but only
these handprints conform to the characteristics of this later style.

132

Texas Archeological Society

Site 41VV233, Lewis Canyon
Lewis Canyon, is most noted for its intricate petroglyphs. Adjacent pictographs, site 41VV233 include a human male with upstretched arms and bent
legs, his body impaled by projectiles. His headdress, as copied by Kirkland
(Kirkland and Newcomb 1967 :Plate 29-4), is unusual; it has two prongs that are
more like horns than feathers.
Site 41VV238
Site 41VV238, adjacent to 41VV89, was copied by Kirkland (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967:Plate 51), described by Jackson (1938:Site 67), and photographed by Woolsey (1936). Eleven prints of right hands and l0 prints of left
hands surround a small dog (Figure 5, b). All of the handprints are small, evidently of children (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:91). Two human figures, another dog, and two geometric designs complete this panel.
Site 41VV239
Site 41VV239, on the lower Pecos River, depicts a phallic, feather-headdressed human pierced by projectiles (Figures 3 and 4, d). The emphasis on fingers and feet characteristic of Red Monochrome art is expressed in both this and
the adjacent figure (Figure 3). The larger figure (Figure 4, d) has only four toes
on one foot, but whether this was intended to depict a real characteristic is not
known. Kirkland copied this panel with the aid of binoculars (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967 : Plate 34) from the opposite rim of the canyon, which accounts for
inaccuracies in his reproduction (Figures 3 and 4, d).

Site 41VV241, Pandale Crossing
Site 41VV241, Pandale Crossing can be considered Red Monochrome only
on the basis of a few red handprints (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967 : 95). Most of
the pictographs are geometric, painted over the older handprints. Of some interest to the discussion that follows on the cultural implications of the Red Monochrome style is a large segment of a ceramic vessel recovered from the midden
fill at this site, one of the few instances where pottery has been found in a Lower
Pecos rock-shelter (Stewart 1965).
Site 41VV243
Site 41VV243, photographed by Jackson (1938:Site 65) and copied by
Kirkland (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967 :Plate 36), has Red Monochrome figures
superimposed on a larger Pecos River style panel. Among these small human
figures is one with a single-feather headdress (Figure 4, f) and another with genitals and the buns or protruberances around the ears (Figure 4, e). A solid handprint completes the traits typical of Red Monochrome art at this site. Jackson
(1938: 170) likened these Red Monochrome additions to Mescalero or other
Apache art.

Turpin--Red Monochrome Pictographs

133

b

C

Figure 5. Dogs that are characteristic of Red Monochrome iconography: a, 41VV78;
b, 41VV238; c, Agua Fria; d, 41VV317; e, INAH203. These figures differ slightly in
size, but are reproduced here at the same size to facilitate comparison. (a, b from Kirkland
and Newcomb 1967; c from Jackson 1938; d from Grieder 1965 and photographs at Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory; e from photographs by David S. Dibble.)

Site 41VV317
Site 41VV317, on the Devils River, was recorded during a survey of the
river prior to impoundment of Amistad Reservoir (Dibble and Prewitt 1967 :Figure 9) and was further documented by Grieder (1966a). The site is now inundated and undoubtedly dissolved away. Among the crude anthropomorphic, zoomorphic, and geometric figures was one doglike animal (Figure 5, d) with mouth
and ears similar to those of 41VV238. Beneath this red dog was another quadruped, apparently a bear, painted in black. This animal and a turkey, also found
at a site on the Devils River, corroborate Graham and Davis’s (1958:80) and
Gebhard’s (1965:48) statements that both black and red figures are found in this

134

Texas Archeological Society

style. Two of the three human figures at this site wore single feathers and had
rounded protrusions of the head (Figure 4, f).
Site 41VV320
Site 41VV320, on the Devils River, is included as a Red Monochrome site
purely on the basis of about 30 positive right and left handprints impressed on an
overhang above a long red streamer. Some of the handprints are child sized.
Site 41VV327
Site 41VV327 is a large Red Monochrome panel overlain by historic pictographs. This site is east of the Devils River and adjacent to other historic rockart sites. All of the pictographs are red, but the earlier Red Monochromes are
paler and have deteriorated more than have the obviously historic figures. The
extremely elongated bodies of the older humans are unusual (Figure 6) and are
seen in only one other recorded site (41VV123) on the Pecos River. The characteristic method of depicting the human beings with fingers, toes, single-feather
headdress, and buns about the ears (figure 4, g, h); a naturalistic turkey complete
with three-toed tracks, a dog, turtles, and a geometric star with a blank circle at
its center clearly belongs to the Red Monochrome style. The later artists took
advantage of the stick-em-up posture of one figure and added a man with rifle
leveled at this target (Figure 6). Two other men with firearms take aim at the
adjacent Red Monochrome dog.
41VV699, Turkey Bluff Site
Site 41VV699, the Turkey Bluff site, is under a shallow overhang high
above the Devils River. A large but typical Red Monochrome dog appears to
be chasing a solid black turkey. Both are bullet pocked, obviously targets for
riflemen shooting from the river. Jackson (1938:Site 94) had been told that a
shelter in this location had pictographs, but the site was not formally recorded
until 1985.

41VV700
Site 41VV700 is a complex of five overhangs near 41VV699. All three
Lower Pecos prehistoric styles are represented, each in a separate alcove. The
Red Monochrome panel consists of 11 yellow right handprints outlining a natural
seep fault line near the base of the cliff face. One yellow and two red crosses are
at the side of the seep.
41VV701
Site 41VV701, also recorded in 1985, depicts a line of six small red animals. At least five of them are classic Red Monochrome dogs, apparently chasing
a deer whose tracks trail behind its rear hooves. One of the three blocky red
shapes is the remnant of a Red Monochrome human much like the central charac-

Turpin--Red Monochrome Pictographs

135

~z
©

136

Texas Archeological Society

ter at 41VV52 (Figure 4, a). This male figure now lacks a head; the appendages
are short and stubby, but the fingers and toes are clearly detailed.
INAH203
Site INAH203, a large panel, lies up a tributary on the Mexican side of the
Rio Grande (Dibble n.d.). This site bears the Instituto Nacional de Antropologfa
e Historia (INAH) number 203. The photographs available for study show one
human figure armed with a bow and arrow, the arrow pointing at a naturalistic
rabbit. The man’s posture is more fluid than is normal for Red Monochrome figures, but his characteristic buns about the ears (Figure 4, i) and his companion
animals clearly belong to this style. The site is said to include at least four or five
such humans in addition to the realistic rabbit, a dog (Figure 5, d), and a turkey.
Tardy Draw
Tardy Draw, an unnumbered site, is stylistically aligned with the Red Monochrome panels at 41VV72 and 41VV78 by Newcomb (Kirldand and Newcomb
1967: 89). This site consists largely of geometric engravings and painted handprints. According to Newcomb, the engraved arrowpoint forms--probably Perdiz points of Late Prehistoric age, postdating A.D.900--are related to those seen
in Red Monochrome panels. A second petroglyph site with similar geometric
designs, Kirkland’s Pecos River site 7 (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967: Plate 51-2),
is probably site 41VV321, now inundated by Amistad Reservoir.
Unrecorded Site
Jackson (1938:Site 97) mentioris a site high on the Devils River that he
did not visit, describing the most outstanding pictograph as a turkey, a common
animal in Red Monochrome art. This site has been located but has not been
recorded.
INTERPRETATION OF THE RED MONOCHROME STYLE
Interpretations of the meaning of Red Monochrome art have been as straightforward as the pictographs themselves. Newcomb (Kirkland and Newcomb
1967:88) considers the style representational--an attempt to portray humans
and animals as they were. And, since his premise is apparently justified, the
characteristics that distinguish this style from miscellaneous red figures at other
sites can be confidently considered to mirror real attributes. The larger Red
Monochrome panels seem much like group portraits that show idiosyncratic
qualities of the individuals (Figure 2, b).
The animals that can be identified are deer, turkey, turtle, catfish, rabbit,
canine, and feline, all known archeologically throughout the Lower Pecos Archaic and seen in the region today. The rarity of vegetation in the panels and the
realism with which the menagerie is depicted suggest that a special relationship
between man and animal transcended simple dietary needs. Two of the most
common central figures are dogs, the earliest domesticated animal, and turkeys,

Turpin--Red Monochrome Pictographs

137

birds of some ceremonial importance in the prehistoric greater Southwest. This
identification between man and beast implies a set of social values, but the specific connotations are not apparent in the pictographs. Never in the available
sample is a large or ferocious animal hunted or slain. In the two pictographs
where a hunter aims his arrow at an animal, the target is a rabbit, indicating that
hunting magic is not an overt function of Red Monochrome art. The notable absence of the economically important horse and bison suggests that neither was of
central concern to the artists at the time the panels were painted. This fact, together with the absence of any other European influence and the incorporation of
Red Monochrome figures into apparent later historic compositions, clearly indicates a prehistoric age.
Hostility is depicted in several upright and prone human figures that are
riddled with projectiles. The penetrating lances are generally longer than the arrows, perhaps an artistic convention to emphasize their power or perhaps an illustration of the type of weapon that preceded the bow. Although this trait could
reflect warfare attendant upon the intrusion of foreigners into the region, the injured figures bear many of the characteristics of the group as a whole. One has a
single-feather headdress, two have buns about the ears, two have long garments,
and two are unadorned. Two wounded figures carry simple bows, but none carry
recurved bows. It may be that the Red Monochrome artists were commemorating
internal animosities or losses at the hands of their enemies, rather than a successful battle.

CULTURAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE RED MONOCHROME STYLE
Strong parallels among the sites in methods of depicting human figures and
animals, together with the many handprints, indicate an internal cohesion interpreted as reflecting a brief time span for the Red Monochrome style (Kirkland
and Newcomb 1967:89). Compared to the Pecos River style pictographs, the
Red Monochrome figures are rare. However, the far-ranging distribution of the
sites (Figure 1) suggests that the groups who painted the Red Monochrome pictographs traversed the entire length and breadth of the region.
The Red Monochrome style has long been considered intrusive into the
Lower Pecos region (Kirkland 1937: 113). Its divergence from classic Pecos
River form and content (Jackson 1938:226) and the lack of an internal evolution
of style suggest that it was introduced in fully developed form (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967 : 89). Gebhard (1965 : 36) saw a similarity to more western modes
of depicting human figures in protohistoric and historic times. Outside of the
Lower Pecos region, the Red Monochrome style most closely resembles some
monochrome figures in the Big Bend region to the west (Jackson 1938: 167;
Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:Plate 82; Lowrance 1982a:66, 117). As long ago
as 1938, Jackson (1938: 170) noted a resemblance between the more recent
pictographs at 41VV243 and the picture-writing of Mescalero or other Apache
groups.

138

Texas Archeological Society

Lowrance (1982a:66) presents a case for Jumanos as painters of the Big
Bend figures. She points out that the hair styles of the Jumanos (Newcomb
1969:237; Hammond and Rey 1966: 160, 161), would be shown correctly in
two-dimensional representation by the rounded protrusions of the Red Monochrome figures. In addition, she notes that the nude males, feather headdresses,
men with hair cut short and curled to resemble caps, and women attired in skirts,
bodices, and cloaks described for the Jumano are apparent among the Red Monochrome figures of the Lower Pecos region.
The comparisons drawn by Lowrance (1982b: Plate CCLXXXX) are based
on the small sample of Red Monochrome sites described by Jackson (1938) and
Kirkland and Newcomb (1967). The less publicized sites documented in the files
of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory of The University of Texas at
Austin and the Texas Memorial Museum provide more examples of the shared
motifs. The unusual buns, or protruberances, around the ears are found at 41VV52
(Figure 4, a), 41VV78 (Figure 4, b, c), 41VV123, 41VV239 (Figure 4, d),
41VV317 (Figure 4, f), and 41VV327 (Figure 4, g, h) in Val Verde County,
INAH203 (Figure 4, i) in Mexico, and Payne Canyon (Figure 4, 1), Agua Fria
(Figure 4, j), and Bear Creek shelter (Figure 4, k) in Brewster County (Lowrance
1982a:66, 117). A fourth site in Brewster County with black monochrome humans has been reported to the writer by John Green of E1 Paso. The differences in
style found in all attributes except these protrusions reinforces their importance
and suggests that the protrusions constitute a defining characteristic of the people.
Parallel modes of illustrating the mouth and ears of a small doglike animal are
found at 41VV78 (Figure 5, a) near the Rio Grande, 41 VV238 (Figure 5, b) on the
Pecos River, 41VV317 (Figure 5, d), 41 VV699, and 41VV701, high on the Devils
River, INAH203 (Figure 5, e) in Mexico, and Agua Fria shelter (Figure 5, c) in
Brewster County (Jackson 1938:Figure 112). This commonality in motifs and
attributes suggests a sharing of iconographic tradition between the Big Bend and
Lower Pecos regions during the Late Prehistoric period. In addition, Kirkland
(1937) saw similarities between the Lower Pecos pictographs and the pictographs
he copied at Paint Rock in Concho County, Texas, and Meyers Springs in Terrell
County, Texas, similarities also evidenced by Jackson’s grouping of attributes
from these sites (1932: 146-157, 269, Plates CCLXIX, CCLXX). Newcomb
(Kirkland and Newcomb 1967: 122) considered the Indian Water Hole, near
Meyers Springs in Terrell County, chronologically equivalent to the Lower Pecos
Monochrome style.
So little is known of the Jumano (Newcomb 1969 : 225-245) that attributing
the Red Monochrome style to them does little to increase knowledge of the cultural context of the pictographs. We know that some members of the Jumano led
a far-ranging Plains existence at the time of contact, traveling between their
settlements on the upper Rio Grande and the Caddo region to the east (Newcomb
1969: 239, John 1975). The first Spaniards to cross the lower Pecos--Gaspar
Castafio de Sosa’s expedition from Monclova, Mexico to the Pecos pueblos-encountered a group of bison hunters near present-day Sheffield, on the Pecos
River in Crockett County (Schroeder and Matson 1965:51; Hammond and Rey

Turpin--Red Monochrome Pictographs

139

1966:256); both sets of translators identify these people as Jumanos. The next
group encountered by the Spaniards may have been Apaches (Schroeder and
Matson 1965:50-56).
Additional evidence for mobility during the protohistoric period is found in
historic documentation of travels by allied Indian bands from along the Rio
Grande below La Junta, together with groups from northern Mexico, to the
mouth of the Pecos River for communal winter bison hunts (Griffen 1969, John
1975). The tribal identity of these people is beyond our grasp today, but from
these accounts it is apparent that nomadic hunting groups ranged into the Lower
Pecos region in protohistoric times. The lack of knowledge of archeological sites
south of the Rio Grande precludes any present attempt to trace the hunters into
northern Mexico. It seems unlikely, however, that groups accustomed to winter
bison hunts would omit such an important animal from their iconographic repertoire. So the Red Monochrome panels probably were painted before the appearance of bison on the margins of the Southern Plains in protohistoric and historic
times (Griffen 1969).
The relative frequency of recorded Red Monochrome sites, which seems to
favor a Lower Pecos heartland, is probably a function of past interpretive work.
The Amistad Reservoir District has been surveyed for pictographs and studied far
more intensely than have any adjacent areas. Virtually nothing is known of the
extent of Lower Pecos rock art in the region south of the Rio Grande, and there
are fewer surface exposures suitable for painting to the north, east, and west. The
long tradition of wall painting in the Lower Pecos region seems to have prompted
imitation; every known intrusive group, including the European settlers, has
added to the rock art, often in the same locations as their predecessors. For this
reason, no continuous or widespread distribution of any of these art styles should
be expected. Whether for lack of study or for scarcity of paintable surfaces, the
sample from which the regional distribution of pictograph styles has been determined is not sufficiently large to be used for density or frequency projections for
Red Monochrome art.
Within the Lower Pecos sample, the choice of locations for Red Monochrome panels clearly favors exposed overhangs rather than the deep, longinhabited shelters preferred by artists of the Pecos River style. Although Red
Monochrome figures are occasionally superimposed on earlier, deteriorated,
Pecos River style panels, one has yet to be found in a true sheltered environment.
Of the sites for which information is available, only 4tVV72, 41VV78, and
41VV320 include concentrated cultural deposits, and in all three cases these are
not typical rock-shelter deposits, but are burned-rock and chert accumulations
adjacent to permanent water sources. At least 13 of the sites are under shallow
overhangs with barren or sloping floors, high on cliff faces overlooking major
rivers or tributaries. This notable tendency to select open, barren, rock surfaces
may reflect a trend away from sheltered habitation toward open camps. On the
other hand, the Red Monochrome panels may have been painted by members of
intrusive groups who avoided the confinement of sheltered sites or sites recently
or currently occupied by established residents of the region.

140

Texas Archeological Society

Other evidence suggests that the Red Monochrome style was only one of a
complex of cultural traits introduced into the Lower Pecos region during the Late
Prehistoric period. The traditional time marker of this period, the adoption of the
bow and arrow, is signaled by the advent of arrowpoints in shelter deposits dated
to A.D. 600 (Dibble 1974). Here they are comingled with dart points characteristic of the later phases of the Late Archaic period. These same dart points are the
most common types found in ring- or crescent-shaped burned rock middens, giving rise to the assumption that these features are Late Archaic phenomena. However, radiocarbon dates obtained from charcoal found in these middens are later
than A.D. 700 (Luke 1983), and within the Late Prehistoric period as defined
here. The morphology of crescent middens is most often explained by comparing
them with ethnohistoric descriptions of Apache baking ovens.
Adjacent to some burned rock middens are circles of paired stones thought
to be remnants of supports for vegetation- or hide-covered huts. These remnants,
the first evidence for this type of open upland camp, may signal a different settlement preference and may account in part for the sparseness of Late Prehistoric
cultural deposits in many shelters. A second feature type--piled rocks that
probably functioned as burial cairns--has been assigned to the Late Prehistoric
period on the basis of only one excavation (Turpin 1982). However, the occurrence of both rings and cairns at several sites suggests a common cultural
affiliation.
Finally, a distinctive artifact assemblage that includes small stemmed and
triangular arrowpoints, steeply beveled end scrapers, and plain brown ceramics
found on the later, larger, stone-circle sites has strong parallels with sites on the
margins of the Southern Plains. The pottery has been informally named Abilene
Brown (Word n.d.), an indication of its concentration in that area. A few sherds
of this same type, found at the Lipan Apache mission of San Lorenzo de la Cruz
(Tunnell and Newcomb 1969), are evidence for the late date of this ceramic type.
When the Red Monochrome art is viewed in this framework of late prehistoric culture change, its introduction into the Lower Pecos region by nomads
who traveled the margins of the Southern Plains becomes more plausible. The
upland types of features--cairns and rings--are more common to the north and
west. The late artifact types have broad affinities with the tool kit of the Southern
Plains, and the morphology of crescent middens is explained by recorded Apache
practices. Although the Red Monochrome style probably predates the historically documented advent of the Apaches in the Lower Pecos region, the archeological remains strongly suggest earlier analogous intrusions, sometime after
A.D. 600.
It is difficult to coordinate the dates of emergence of the various cultural
traits in the Lower Pecos region. The sites are all surface sites, datable only by
their characteristic artifacts. Until the culture history of the Late Prehistoric period is refined, the cultural processes that effected these changes will remain elusive. It may be reasonable to assume that changes such as the adoption of new
weaponry (e.g., the bow and arrow) or a variation on an established method of
food processing that resulted in the formation of crescent middens took place by

Turpin--Red Monochrome Pictographs

141

the slow process of diffusion. However, when these traits can be seen in conjunction with changes in mortuary practices, settlement preference, structures, and
art styles, it becomes plausible to consider an infusion of a cultural system carried by an intrusive group. Whether those incursions were sporadic or regular,
their effect on the resident population, their origins, and precisely when they occurred are research problems for the future.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This summary of the Red Monochrome style owes its very being to the work of several pioneers in Texas rock-art studies, most notably A.T. Jackson, Forrest Kirkland,
W. W. Newcomb, Jr., Terence Grieder, and Miriam A. Lowrance. Mrs. Lowrance’s presentation of the evidence for contact between the Lower Pecos and Big Bend regions is the
basis for this further corroboration of that possibility. David S. Dibble kindly loaned his
photographs of INAH203. Terence Grieder, of the Department of Art, The University of
Texas at Austin, provided copies of his original documentation of 4tVV317. The Texas
Memorial Museum granted permission to examine, copy, and reproduce past documentation of Red Monochrome sites. Herbert H. Eling, Jr., prepared the photographs, and Carol
R. Fabac drafted the map. I owe special thanks to David G. Robinson, who produced the
line drawings from often obscure past documentation. Draft versions of the manuscript
have been revised after many happy hours of debate with David Robinson and Lee Bement, my coworkers in the field. Ronald W. Ralph prompted me to expand the discussion
of the distribution of sites in the Lower Pecos region. W. W. Newcomb and Miriam A.
Lowrance were kind enough to read an early draft.

REFERENCES CITED
Dibble, David S.
n.d.
Personal communication and photographs of INAH203.
1974

A report on additional archeological investigations in the Amistad International
Reservoir area, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 4, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Dibble, David S. and Elton R. Prewitt
1967

Survey and test excavations at Amistad Reservoir, 1965-65. Texas Archaeological Salvage Project Survey Reports 3, The University of Texas at Austin.

Gebhard, David
1960
Prehistoric paintings of the Diablo region of western Texas. Roswell Museum
and Art Center Publications in Art and Science 3, Roswell, New Mexico.

1965

Prehistoric rock paintings of the Seminole Canyon area, Val Verde County,
Texas. Report to the National Park Service.

142

Texas Archeological Society

Graham, John A. and William B. Davis
n.d.
Site files, Amistad Reservoir, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1958

Appraisal of the archeological resources of Diablo Reservoir, Val Verde County,
Texas. A project of the Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program, Archeological Salvage Program Field Office, Austin. National Park Service. U.S. Department of the Interior.

Grieder, Terence
n.d.
Personal collection of photographs and line drawings, 41VV317.
1965

Report on a study of pictographs in Satan Canyon, Val Verde County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Miscellaneous Papers 2, The University of
Texas at Austin.

1966a

Speculation on some pictograph sites in the region of Amistad Reservoir. Report to National Park Service.

1966b Periods in Pecos style pictographs. American Antiquity 31(5):710-720.
Griffen, William B.
Culture change and shifting populations in central northern Mexico. Anthropo1969
logical Papers of the University of Arizona 13. University of Arizona Press.
Hammond, George P. and Agapito Rey
The rediscovery of New Mexico !580-1594. The University of New Mexico
1966
Press, Albuquerque.
House, J. W. and T. R. Hester
Notes on a pictograph site in Val Verde County, western Texas. The Record
1971
27(4): 1, 2, Dallas County Archeological Society Newsletter, June 1971.
Jackson, A. T.
Picture writing of Texas Indians. Anthropological Papers Vol. II, The University
1938
of Texas at Austin.
John, Elizabeth A. H.
1975
Storms brewed in other men’s worlds. Texas A&M Press, College Station, Texas.
Kirkland, Forrest W.
1937

A study of Indian pictures in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society 9 : 89-119.

1938

A description of Texas pictographs. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society 10: 11-39.

1939

Indian pictures in the dry rock shelters of Val Verde County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society 11:47-76.

Turpin--Red Monochrome Pictographs

143

Kirkland, Forrest W. and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967

The rock art of Texas Indians. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Lowrance, Miriam A.
1982a Rock art of Brewster County, Texas. The Artifact 20(1-2). E1 Paso Archaeological Society.
1982b

Rock art of Brewster County, Texas. The Artifact 20(3-4). El Paso Archaeological Society.

Luke, Clive J.
1983
Continuing archaeology on Interstate Highway 10: the Musk Hog Canyon project, Crockett County, Texas. Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Highway Design Division Publications in Archaeology 24,
Austin.
Newcomb, W. W. Jr.
1969
The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Parsons, Mark L.
n.d.
Notes and site forms on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Schroeder, Albert and D. S. Matson
1965

A colony on the move: Gaspar Castafio de Sosa’s journal 1590-1591. School of
American Research, Alphabet Printing Co., Salt Lake City.

Stewart, Bill (editor)
1965
Pefia Pow-wow, newsletter of the Carrizo Springs High School Archeological
Society IV(I), October 8, Carrizo Springs, Texas.
Tunnell, Curtis D. and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1969
A Lipan Apache mission, San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz 1762-1771. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 14, The University of Texas at Austin.
Turpin, Solveig A.
1982
Seminole Canyon: the art and the archeology. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 83, The University of Texas at Austin.
1984

The Red Linear style pictographs of the Lower Pecos River region, Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 29(105): 181 - 198.

Woolsey, A. M.
1936
Notes and photographs on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Word, J. H.
n.d.

Written communication.

144

Texas Archeological Society

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Solveig A. Turpin received her Ph.D. from The University of Texas at Austin, where
she is Director of the Texas Archeological Survey. Mail address: Texas Archeological Survey, Balcones Research Center, 10100 Burnet Rd., Austin, TX 78758.

A Petroglyph (41TG54) from Tom Green County
West-Central Texas
J. A. Jaquier

ABSTRACT
This paper describes a previously unpublished aboriginal petroglyph
found in Tom Green County. The specimen has been excavated and placed on
public display in San Angelo, Texas by the U.S. Corps of Engineers. The
petroglyph is described, and its composition and probable temporal placement are discussed.

INTRODUCTION
The Concho Valley of west-central Texas has long been noted as the location
of Paint Rock (41CC1), the major pictograph site on the Concho River, about
48 km (30 miles) east of San Angelo. The discovery of this isolated petroglyph
(41TG54) along the southwestern margin of the O. C. Fisher Reservoir (north of
San Angelo in Tom Green County) represents, to the best of the writer’s knowledge, the only documented example of rock carving (as opposed to rock painting) along the Concho River.
The petroglyph (Figure 1), herein called the Red Arroyo hunting scene, was
discovered in August 1974 on U.S. Corps of Engineers land by two motorcyclists
who subsequently reported the find (Thomas 1979). The small sandstone boulder
on which the petroglyph is carved was at the side of a draw below a sandstone
bluff. The reservoir manager, D. A. Caffey, immediately expressed concern over
protection of the petroglyph to the Fort Worth District of the Corps and constructed a small wooden shelter to cover the boulder. By the time the site was
recorded by Darrell Creel in December 1975, the shelter had been torn down by
vandals, and weathering of the petroglyph was occurring at a rapid rate. In November 1977, under a contract between the Corps of Engineers and the Cultural
Resources Institute of Texas Tech University, William J. Mayer-Oakes conducted
an archeological survey of the site area. Based on his recommendations (MayerOakes 1977), Corps personnel prepared a statement of work and awarded a contract in May 1979 to Benham-Blair and Affiliates, Inc. of Oklahoma City to excavate and, if possible, remove the sandstone boulder. In June 1979, the work
was completed and the Red Arroyo hunting scene petroglyph was placed in a
naturalistic setting in a display case in the project office of the O. C. Fisher Reservoir, where it can be viewed today.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986 for 1984)

146

Texas Archeological Society

I0 CENTIMETERS
I

Figure 1. Tracing of the Red Arroyo hunting scene petroglyph, Tom Green County, Texas.
From a 1974 U.S. Corps of Engineers photograph.

DESCRIPTION
The Red Arroyo hunting scene is composed of three distinct stylistic representations: a human stick figure equipped with bow and arrow, a discoidal depression probably representing the sun, and a depression in the form of a large
quadruped (the target of the hunter). Each of these depictions was carved into the
surface of a small (75 by 50 by 40 cm) sandstone boulder that has a gray cortex
and tan interior.
The following description of the petroglyph is from direct observation of
the rock art, extrapolation of measurements from a 1974 Corps of Engineers
color photograph, and discussions with D. A. Caffey, who observed the petroglyph when it was first discovered. Detailed measurements to the nearest millimeter or degree were made of the petroglyph itself with stainless steel calipers
and goniometer.

Jaquier--Aboriginal Petroglyph

147

The human stick figure is at the left of the grouping, with the hunter facing
and aiming his weapon to the right (as viewed). The hunter has a short protrusion, which probably represents a feather, extending upward at a slight backward
angle from the back of his head. The bow, undrawn, is held vertically, and the
arrow angles slightly upward at a less-than-optimum shooting angle toward the
quadruped. The grooves (lines) of the stick figure are still quite deep (as much as
8 mm) and have near-vertical sides, despite obvious deterioration.
The quadruped, at the right of the grouping and facing to the right away
from the hunter, appears to have a tail, a dorsal hump, and horns. Its legs are
much thicker than would be expected, even allowing for weathering, and the
forelegs thicken considerably toward the hooves.
The circle representing the sun is centered above the two lower figures; the
composition of the three elements suggests that the sun was placed in this position intentionally to be the apex of a triangle. The depressions forming both the
sun and the quadruped figure are relatively deep, with gradually sloping edges.
There are no traces of pigment in or around any of the figures. Gray cortex is
visible in the grooves as well as on the lower parts of the rock surface, but on
many high spots the cortex has been abraded naturally, so the tan color of the
rock’s interior shows through. Chips of cortex are still flaking off from the surface of the rock, threatening further damage to the figures. Texture of the rock in
and around the grooves is rough and pitted. From the early photographs it was in
that condition at the time of discovery.
Basic macromorphological dimensions are:
Human Stick Figure
Height: 272 mm
Line width: 6 mm (average)
Line depth: 8 mm (maximum)
Quadruped
Height: 105 mm
Length: 240 mm
Depth: 20 mm (maximum)
Sun

Diameter: 65 mm (average)
Depth: 18 mm (maximum)

DISCUSSION
The two basic methods of creating petroglyphs are grinding and incising. In
ground petroglyphs the rock is abraded with another, usually harder, rock. Grinding, whether linear or areal, creates smooth-surfaced depressions with gradually
sloping sides and is usually performed on sandstone or other soft stone (unless
tools, rather than designs, are the desired end products). Incising, on the other
hand, is accomplished by hammering or pecking at the rock on which the design
is being carved. Pecking is done either directly (by a hand-held hammerstone

148

Texas Archeological Society

beaten directly against the rock) or indirectly (by a hand-held hammerstone hit
against a second stone that does the actual chipping of the rock, similar to the
action of a hammer and chisel). Incising virtually dictates a more linear or outline style (Schaafsma 1980 : 31) with rougher and near-vertical sides of the resulting grooves or depressions, particularly when the indirect technique is used. The
Red Arroyo hunting scene’s human stick figure has narrow (6 mm), deep (8 mm)
grooves with near-vertical sides, so indirect incising is the technique that probably was used by the aboriginal artist. Although the areal depressions forming
the sun and quadruped have sloping sides, they are rough surfaced, and the tail,
horns, and legs of the animal are more linear than areal, so indirect incising
probably was used in the creation of these figures too.
The age of the oldest rock drawing in the Southwest is still undetermined,
although Schaafsma (1980:3) states that some are at least 2,000 years old and
believes another thousand years should be added for preceramic hunting and
gathering cultures. In west-central Texas, the hunting and gathering lifeway persisted much later (Prewitt 1981:84), perhaps as late at A.D. 1750. Schaafsma
(1980:3) finds no correlation between the degree of artistic sophistication of
groups and their levels of cultural development.
Techniques such as patination, superimposition, and vertical placement
cannot be used for dating this petroglyph, but content and comparison are dating
techniques that merit discussion. The human stick figure is obviously using a
bow and arrow. Hester (1980: 86) believes common use of the bow and arrow
occurred around A.D. 1000 or shortly after in South Texas, but Prewitt (1981 : 83)
suggests about A.D. 700 as the time when the bow and arrow replaced the atlatl
and became prevalent in Central Texas. Although eventually it was replaced by
the gun, the bow and arrow continued in use among Indians in the Concho Valley
into the late nineteenth century (Clemens 1980:64). Realistically, then, the depiction of the bow and arrow restricts the petroglyph to the period from about
A.D. 700 to 1870.
The rock paintings on the bluffs at Paint Rock (41CC1) are believed to be
primarily of Lipan Apache origin (Clemens 1980: 28, 34), with many scenes obviously depicting historical events. Many of these drawings show wasp-waisted
human outline figures--some on horseback--and this style is attributed to historical aborigines (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967). Equestrian Indians, primarily
Apaches and Comanches, arrived in the Concho Valley in the seventeenth century (Clemens 1980:28). Since the human stick figure in the Red Arroyo hunting scene is hunting on foot and not on horseback, the date for the petroglyph’s
creation might be further restricted to the 900-year period between A.D. 700
and 1600.
Considering the depiction of the large quadruped, we must ask what species
it was intended to represent. Caffey (n.d.) is convinced that when he first viewed
the petroglyph, the animal was clearly a buffalo. Deer, antelope, and bison were
present in west-central Texas during historic times and have been documented
archeologically as part of the Indian subsistence pattern for thousands of years.
The relatively short horns of the animal in this petroglyph appear to be extremely

Jaquier--Aboriginal Petroglyph

149

low on its head; the dorsal hump and massive forequarters argue against deer and
antelope and in favor of bison. Too, bison are common themes in at least six
petroglyph panels at Paint Rock (41CC1), clearly recognizable from their horns,
dorsal humps, and large forequarters (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967). If the
quadruped is accepted as a bison (and that certainly appears, also considering
faunal evidence from archeological sites, to be the most reasonable conclusion),
a brief examination of bison density in the region is warranted.
Dillehay (1974) proposed a period from about A.D. 500 to 1300 when bison
were almost absent on the southern plains of New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas,
and in Louisiana. Lynott (1979: 98), discussing north-central Texas, postulated a
high-density bison population during the period from about A.D. 1200 to 1600,
and an even greater density in bison population on the High Plains to the west.
Using these two hypotheses as models for the exploitive strategy of the Concho
Valley, bison herds were abundant and became a dominant part of the hunting
economy in the area during that period. Although it remains to be proven archeologically, should the period from A.D. 1200 to 1600 be found to be a reliable
high-density period for bison in the Concho Valley, such a conclusion could further narrow the most likely time span for creation of the Red Arroyo hunting
scene to that 400-year period.
Hurt (1977) finds no stylistic parallel between the Red Arroyo petroglyph
and the pictographs at the Paint Rock site, but it must be pointed out that the
Paint Rock pictographs are an admixture of styles and cultures (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967)covering perhaps 1,000 years (Clemens 1980:34), therefore
consideration of the rock art at Paint Rock as a single entity for comparative purposes is invalid. Newcomb (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:143) sets the Paint
Rock pictographs apart as a rock-art form because of their geographic isolation
and because the artwork, albeit crude in many respects, does not seem related to
that at any other site or to any defined regional style. Human stick figures,
as opposed to outline forms, occur clearly at least 16 times in the Paint Rock
panels. Kirkland and Newcomb (1967) have illustrated similar human figures
equipped with bows and arrows (page 147, plate 98, panel 1), bison (page 147,
plate 98, panel 2), and even a human stick figure with feather using a bow and
arrow to shoot a bison (page 153, plate 105, panel 5). So, motifs similar to those
in the Red Arroyo hunting scene are found at Paint Rock, but at Paint Rock the
motifs are in the artwork of a culture earlier than that of the historic equestrian
Indians whose work is characterized by wasp-waisted figures, outline forms, and
depictions of horses, guns, and Spanish missions.
In sum, the Red Arroyo hunting scene is a valid example of prehistoric Indian rock art. Analysis of the content--particularly the bow and arrow and
bison--and a comparison with the mixed artistic styles of the Paint Rock pictographs further confirms the prehistoric nature of this petroglyph. A more finite
span of A.D. 1200 to 1600, which fits within Prewitt’s (1981:75) Neo-Archaic
stage or Hester’s (1980: 156) Late Prehistoric stage, is tentatively proposed.
Unfortunately, five years of exposure to the elements (from time of recording to removal to the display) after runoff cleaned the surface of the rock of its

150

Texas Archeological Society

protective cover of soil, and were responsible for serious deterioration of the Red
Arroyo hunting scene petroglyph. Today, despite being indoors in a display, the
petroglyph’s human stick figure is barely recognizable, and the animal figure on
its right cannot be clearly discerned at all. Flaking and chipping of the sandstone
cortex continue. Caffey (n.d.) advises that Thorn’s (1979:6) recommendation for
a protective coating to retard further deterioration has not been followed. A coating of simple polyvinyl acetate or other protectant is urgently needed to preserve
what is left of the only known example of prehistoric petroglyph art from Tom
Green County.

REFERENCES CITED
Caffey, D. A.
n.d.
Personal communication.
Clemens, Gus
1980

The Comanche country. Mulberry Avenue Books, San Antonio.

Dillehay, Tom D.
1974
Late Quaternary bison population changes on the southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19(65): 180-196.
Hester, Thomas R.
1980
Digging into South Texas prehistory. Corona, San Antonio.
Hurt, Richard
1977
An unusual petroglyph in Tom Green County, Texas. Appendix A in Preliminary archeological reconnaissance of two sites at O. C. Fisher Lake, Texas, by
W. J. Mayer-Oakes, Cultural Resources Institute, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, pp. 1-18.
Kirkland, Forrest, and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967

The rock art of Texas Indians. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Lynott, Mark J.
1979

Prehistoric bison populations of northcentral Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 50: 89-101.

Mayer-Oakes, William J.
1977

Preliminary archeological reconnaissance of two sites at O. C. Fisher Lake,
Texas. Cultural Resources Institute, Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock, Texas: l - 18.

Schaafsma, Polly
1980
Indian rock art of the Southwest. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Thoms, Alston
1979

Archeological Excavation of a petroglyphic boulder at O. C. Fisher Lake, Tom
Green County, Texas. Benham-Blair & Affiliates, Inc., Oklahoma City.

Jaquier--Aboriginal Petroglyph

151

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
J. A. (Jaq) Jaquier has participated in many archeological surveys and excavations
from Abilene to the Gulf Coast, including the Alamo, Timmeron Rock-shelter, and
St. Mary’s Hall. He has been a volunteer professional archeologist for the Fort Concho
"Digging History" program, which has trained more than 240 gifted and talented sixthgrade students in archeological excavation techniques and cultural resource conservation.
He directed the 1976 summer field school (excavations at Walker Ranch, 41BX228) Of
The University of Texas at San Antonio and is backup archeologist on permit for the Fort
Concho National Historic Landmark and Museum in San Angelo. He is a charter member
of the Regional Archeological Stewardship Network, a member of the Board of Directors
of the Barrow Museum in Eola, and since 1974 has been a research associate with the
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Rock Art at Monk’s Cave (41RK84)
Rusk County, Texas
Henry F. Ball

ABSTRACT
Until Monk’s Cave was reported in 1980, there had been only one Texas
rock-art site reported east of the Brazos River--that one in Henderson
County--and no rock-art sites had been reported in deep East Texas, Louisiana, or Mississippi. A small rock-shelter in Rusk County, Texas, near the
Louisiana border, has on one wall incised figures that are of unknown origin
and age. They include elements similar to ones found elsewhere in rock art
of Indian origin. There is evidence of use of the shelter by Caddos for temporary or permanent habitation, and its orientation suggests that it may have
served a ceremonial function as well.

INTRODUCTION
Monk’s Cave, or Indian Cave, as the rock-shelter is called by many of the
local inhabitants, came to the writer’s attention in the spring of 1980, when W. E.
Langford, an architect living in Henderson, Texas, described it to him. Langford
believed the little cave was of some archeological significance; the only previously reported site in Texas east of the Brazos River is in Henderson County
(Jackson 1938:460), and to the writer’s knowledge none have been reported in
deep East Texas, Louisiana, or Mississippi (Grant 1967: 17).
Langford had been shown the shelter first when he was a boy, in about 1935,
after a friend had failed to locate a larger cave reported to have two rooms, with
lots of Indian artifacts in the back room. Langford was taken to the small cave so
he wouldn’t be disappointed, and thereafter, he and a friend visited it often when
hunting in the area. The shelter is in a rather remote location and remains essentially as it was remembered, by an acquaintance of Langford’s, from his youth in
the 1890s. A large beech tree on which were carved Civil War period dates grew
on top of the shelter, but it is gone.
Upon our arrival at the site, we found that the shelter had been visited
shortly before by pothunters. A hole had been dug on the south side of the entry,
the incised figures had been traced with aluminum paint (with some embellishment), and efforts had been made, with some success, to pry off sections of the
sandstone slab on which the figures were incised (Figure 1). A small pocketscreen and a trenching tool had been left behind.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986 for 1984)

154

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Photograph of Monk’s Cave showing petroglyphs on the north wall.

The site, which is beside an old logging road, was thought to be on the prop-.
erty of the Southern Pine Lumber Co., but was found to be owned by Morgan
Strong, of Tyler, Texas. Strong had plans to clear the property for a tree farm,
but kindly agreed to permit investigation of the shelter pending that work. He
also agreed to preserve the site if it was archeologically important, and we assured him that it was.
INVESTIGATION

Monk’s Cave is located southwest of Mount Enterprise, in Rusk County,
Texas, on a fast-flowing branch in an area of heavily wooded, rolling terrain with
deep, sandy topsoil. Drainage is generally westward to the Angelina River,
thence via the Neches River to the Gulf of Mexico. Where it has not been logged
or farmed, the land is timbered with pine, beech, water oak, post oak, and sweet
gum trees. Chinkapin, hickory, pecan, and black walnut trees can also be found,
together with wild plum, muscadine, persimmon, and mayhaw.
The principle determination to be made about the shelter was, of course, the
authenticity of the inscriptions. All of the local inhabitants with whom the cave
was discussed simply took it for granted that the petroglyphs were of Indian origin. Artifacts were found near the surface at the entrance to the cave, and we
were shown a celt and half a celt, apparently of quartzite, and a cast-iron Confederate grave-marker that were found near the site.

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

155

Figure 2. Topographic map and cross section of Monk’s Cave.

The site has apparently aggraded over the years; local inhabitants who can
remember standing erect in the shelter can no longer do so. Since the water in the
branch is gritty, and the shelter is at a point where steep confining creek banks
give way to a relatively wide flood plain with a meandering channel, accretion of
soil could have occurred at Monk’s Cave as the products of cycles of erosion and
flooding accumulated.
The site was mapped (Figure 2), and photographs were taken of the petroglyphs, the shelter, and its environs. In the hope of demonstrating that the site

156

Texas Archeological Society

had indeed been used by Indians, a 1 x 2-meter test pit was put down just outside
the entrance. This location was chosen on the premise that hearths might be located there, since the shelter is too small to be comfortable with a fire inside.
The premise appeared to be confirmed when artifacts were uncovered at
quite shallow depths; one of the first was a Perdiz point. All excavation was by
trowel. Time limitations permitted excavation of only two levels of 10 cm each.
Primary screening was through quarter-inch hardware cloth, and about six random samples were fine-screened through window screening for trade beads, but
none were found.
Historic and prehistoric artifacts were intermingled to a depth of 15 cm, but
little was recovered in the last 5 cm. The intermingling and perhaps the shallow
depth of artifacts can be explained by the churning that is commonly found in
flood plains. (The light soils frequently found in such places become unstable
when the stream rises in flood stage, moving and shifting artifacts that are
in them.) There was nothing to map in the walls of the test pit except for some
charcoal--probably displacediand little to gain from flotation analysis of the
churned matrix.
Excavation records were kept, and progress photographs were taken. These
records, together with the artifacts and uncontaminated charcoal samples, were
kept for possible future detailed study and analysis that time and resources of this
investigation did not permit. Positive association of the occupants of the shelter
with the petroglyphs on the wall could not be established. The rock art could be
much older than the artifacts, and comprehensive investigation of the site would
be justified, since this is apparently a very old occupation site.
The objective of this investigation was attained with the evidence of Indian
occupation. The artifacts discovered in the test pit are evidence that the rock
art is of Indian origin. A list with brief descriptions of the artifacts documents
this claim.

ARTIFACTS
Lithic
Points
A Perdiz point (A.D. 1000-1500), made from petrified wood, was recovered from Level 1, and a Yarbrough point, apparently reworked (500 B.C.A.D. 1000), made from jasper, was found in Level 2 (Figure 3, C, D) (Bell
1960:78, 98).
Tools
A quartzite knife was recovered from level 1 and a petrified wood scraper
from Level 2 (Figure 3, A, B).

Stones
Rather large stones, apparently quartzite, were found in Level 2 at 10 to
15 cm, as much as 10 to 15 cm in major dimension, and associated with some of
the larger potsherds. The stones were not fire stained.

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

157

ARTI FACTS

0y
C

13

D

LITHICS

G

H

M

L

POTTERY
0

5cm

Figure 3. Drawings of diagnostic artifacts from Monk’s Cave.

158

Texas Archeological Society

o
0

d

~

o

=

o

0o
0

0

0

tth

0

eo
o~
~

t-q

o

0

.0
0
0

©

o
~0

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

~=~o
:::3

0D

<

o

159

160

Texas Archeological Society

Debitage
Two interior flint flakes, one gray and one buff, were found in Level 1, and
three pieces of petrified wood about 2 x 4 cm. Many small pieces of quartzite,
possibly country rock, were found in Level 2.

Pottery
Bullard Brushed (A.D. 1200--1500)
About i5 sherds were found in each level that were diagnostic bone and
sand tempered ware typical of Caddo utility ware (Figure 3, E, F, G, H, J)
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954: 252).

Polished Ware
Pieces of finer, polished ware were also found at both levels (Figure 3, L). A
rim sherd from Level 1 was engraved with a V pattern (Figure 3, K) and one from
Level 2 was incised (and brushed ?) diagonally (Figure 3, M). All appear to be
typical of Caddo eating or storage ware (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954:252).

Bone
Level I
Deer. One vertebra, two knuckle bones, 11 leg bone fragments.
Bird. One wing bone and one talon.
Unknown. Twelve pieces less than 1 cm long.

Level 2
Deer. One vertebra, 13 pieces leg bone, larger than in Level 1, as long as 4 cm.
Turtle. Carapace 1.5 x 3 cm.
Unknown. Eleven pieces
Historic
Nails
Two rusted, wire nails, one 6d and one 12d, were found in Level 1.

Glass
Level 1. Two pieces of milk glass, nine of bottle glass (one brown), seven of
window glass, one of crockery, and a piece of an ornamental ceramic base.
Level 2. Two pieces of milk glass, nine of bottle glass (two brown), one window
glass, and one piece of crockery.

Ammunition Cases
Five .22 caliber shell cases marked U on the bases came from both levels.

Projectiles
Two flattened lead balls, apparently .30 caliber ball-and-cap ammunition,
were found, one in each level.

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

161

Other
Charcoal
Both levels contained several concentrations of charcoal, indicating hearth
areas. However, as noted above, cobbles found were not fire stained or associated
with the charcoal.

Red Ocher
Several pieces of red ocherous sandstone, soft and readily abraded, were
found in both levels.
PETROGLYPH ANALYSIS
The pertroglyphs are on the north wall of the rock-shelter, and there appear
to be some 34 figures remaining (Figure 4). A slab of sandstone on which, according to a local resident, was "the best picture of a deer" has been pried off at
the upper left corner (facing the wall), and another smaller slab (Figure 5) apparently has sloughed off. The petroglyphs consist of primitive stick figures and
other shapes, with little obvious meaning in most cases. A few do appear to be
representational.
Indian rock art in the form of petroglypl-rs"and pictographs has been viewed
by different observers as having served various purposes for its creators. Some
consider it to be a primitive form of writing (Gelb 1963 : 24). Others consider it
to consist of doodles, fetishes, or personal signatures (Colton 1946: 1-18). It
probably serves all of these purposes and more, considering the diversity and
wide distribution of the figures found. There does appear to be general agreement also that although similar figures occur in the thousands of sites in this
country and around the world, common meanings cannot be assigned to them.
Any universality that exists must be attributed to the limited possibilities available to their creators for figure formation (Renaud 1935:5-8).
This limited commonality of meaning makes classification, identification,
and interpretation of rock art difficult. Jackson made a survey of Texas rock art
and established two major classifications: (1) realistic figures and (2) conventional figures. The word conventional was used to identify primitive or stylized
figures. These major classifications were subdivided into many more categories,
grouped under common headings (i.e. weapons, ladders, rakes, Spanish mission
and other European influences, animals, and others). Identification of the individual elements was based on resemblance to known objects, geometric shape,
and ethnic identification (i.e. tepees, zigzags, headdresses).
Jackson identified two sources of information available to aid in interpreting
the elements: (1) ethinic sources and (2) the accumulated knowledge of primitive
psychology and the early ways of man in general (Jackson 1938:357). However,
he provides few insights into the meanings of the figures, concentrating instead
on their identification and distribution.
Jackson also proposed a broad chronology to be applied to rock art in Texas.
It consists of three categories: (1) entirely prehistoric, (2) prehistoric and his-

162

Texas Archeological Society

t

I

1

~5"i

’’-’~

¯

I

1..~’~.\\ 1

#

o

~

"-I ~

I

"

1
/! \-\t

rm

,-.M
©

t~

/

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

163

Figure 5. Photograph of Monk’s Cave showing illumination by the sun at 5:00 p.m. The
apparently scaled-off central part of the back wall can be seen.

toric, and (3) historic (Jackson 1938 : 5). He found 70 percent of the work to be
prehistoric; 20 percent prehistoric and historic; and 10 percent entirely historic.
His chronology is based on the presence or absence of historic elements (i.e. men
on horseback and depictions of mission buildings) among the figures. This procedure has obvious limitations: it does not account for subsequent additions to earlier figures or the creation of purely magic or hunting fetishes in historic time.
Examination of the elements in Monk’s Cave in accordance with Jackson’s
findings yields the fol!owing information:
1. The elements are conventional, identified as
a. Deer (Figure 6, nos. 4, 16, 27, 31 32)
b. Wind (Figure 6, no. 17)
c. Bird (Figure 6, no. 7), possibly realistic
d. Rain (Figure 6, no. 19)
e. Y-shape (Figure 6, no. 26)
2. The elements are entirely prehistoric.
More success has been achieved by others in establishing a rational classification system derived from analysis of Great Basin style petroglyphs. They have
been divided into four categories: 1) naturalistic, 2) stylized, 3) abstract curvilinear, and 4) abstract rectilinear (Grant 1967 : 25-27). In California the elements

Texas Archeological Society

164

have been further separated into five styles, according to location: 1) human,
2) animal, 3) circle and dot, 4) angular, 5) curvilinear (Clewlow 1978:619).
These rationalizations are the result of the study of thousands of elements that
apparently were formed primarily by pecking (Great Basin style). The further
stylistic subdivisions appear to be valid only for the sites from which they were
derived in California.
A chronology has also been devised for the California pecked figures, spanning the period between 1000 B.C. and A.D. 1500, with some subdivisions for
the various styles (Heizer and Baumhoff 1962: 226-233). The elements analyzed to establish the time frame were: 1) lichen growth, 2) associated cultural
phenomena such as the change from the atlatl to the bow and arrow, 3) patination, 4) erosion, 5) stylistic and technological analysis, 6) superposition, 7) archeological correlation, and 8) ethnographic identification (Heizer and Baumhoff 1962:226-233). The pecked elements lend themselves to the use of such
techniques more readily than do incised or gouged elements. It is not clear
whether chronology developed from the analysis of pecked petroglyphs can be
applied to gouged or incised petroglyphs without substantiating evidence.
Many sites have various combinations of the elements of classification, and
this is the basis on which the California sites are futher subdivided (Clewlow
1978:619). Others include all of the elements; Monk’s Cave appears to fall into
this category.
Heizer and Clewlow (1973) identify five sources of information for use in
identification and interpretation of rock art. They are
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Statistical analysis (Von Werlhof)
Ecological analysis (Heizer and Baumhoff)
Ethnological analysis
Direct observation
Eclectic analysis (all or part of above)

All of the various methods have been used at different times and places with
varying degrees of success. Interpretations have been established for the following commonly used symbols:
1. Clan symbols, marking boundaries (Grant 1967:28ff.)
2. Ceremonial symbols: weather modification, fertility, puberty (Clewlow
1978; Sutherland 1976: 97 ft.; Williamson 1984: 77 ft.)
3. Mnemomic memory aids (Grant 1967:28 ft.)
4. Records of important events (Miller 1955:6 ft.)
5. Doodling, copying ancient designs (Grant 1967 : 28 ft.)
6. Hunting magic (Clewlow 1978:621)
The symbols for weather modification and prayers for assistance in hunting
are especially widespread (Ctewlow 1978). In California the Great Basin style
petroglyphs are almost always associated with game trails, winter grazing areas,

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

165

and favored hunting and ambush areas; they are clearly linked with hunting and
hunting magic (Clewlow 1978:621). Ceremonial symbols have been identified in
Texas (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967 : 218; Grieder 1982: 22 ft.), as have records
of important events (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967: 328; Jackson 1938 : 349).
The petroglyphs in Monk’s Cave can be examined against this background.
A classification system that groups the petroglyphs into five categories will be
used in an attempt to be more definitive.
The elements in Monk’s Cave (Figure 6) are classified and interpreted as follows. Numbers refer to those in the sketch of the petroglyphs (Figure 6):
A. Naturalistic
1. Bird (priesthood symbol): 7
2. Setting sun (religious fetish): 18
3. Star (religious fetish): 19
4. Female genitalia (fertility symbol): 28
B. Stylized
1. Deer (hunting fetish): 4, 16
2. Unfinished deer (hunting fetish): 27, 31, 32
C. Symbolic
1. Clan, boundary markers: 1, 22
2. Wind, rain (weather fetish): 17, 19, 24
3. Fertility symbols: 5, 9, 13, 20, 28
D. Abstract
1. Curvilinear: 12, 15, 26, 30, 33
2. Rectilinear: 6, 25, 27
E. Tool sharpening and unknown: 2, 3, 8, 10, 11, 14 21, 23, 29, 33, 34
These classifications and interpretations are necessarily largely subjective,
but the interpretations are believed to be consistent with those made by other investigators cited herein. Perhaps the ultimate test of an interpretation is whether
it makes sense, provides information, or tells a story. Applying this test to the
petroglyphs at hand, we find that the elements, as classified and interpreted, do
appear to make sense and tell stories. We find that the figures to which meaning
has been ascribed can be grouped as follows. Numbers refer to those in the
sketch of the petroglyphs (Figure 6).
A. Prayers for good hunting: 4, 16, 27, 31-32
B. Prayers for good weather: 17, 19, 24
C. Prayers for fertility, good harvests: 5, 9, 13, 20, 28
D. Religious symbols: 7, 18, 19
These interpretations strongly imply a religious usage for the shelter. Since
religion appears to have been a common inspiration for rock art, this is not surprising. For example, rock art is rare in areas of Caddo occupation, so what does
exist is likely to have special, possibly religious, significance; and we are told

166

Texas Archeological Society

that the lives of the Caddo were ruled by their priests (DuPratz 1758). We find too
that the father (sun) and the child (evening star) are strong religious symbols of
the western Indians (Williamson 1984), who appear to have based their calendar
on the sun. Their priests established sun-watching stations marked with rock art
(Williamson 1984) which permitted them to identify the solstices, the equinoxes, and other important celestial occurrences.
There is also some basis for establishing a more definite time frame than
Jackson’s inclusive prehistoric dating. Only one of the elements suggested by
Heizer and Baumhoff (1962) as useful for establishing time frames--archeological correlation--is present in Monk’s Cave. The test excavation uncovered
artifacts identified with the Caddo Indians, most recently probably of the Frankston or Allen focus, who once occupied that area, as well as a possible Archaic
dart point. Potsherds from the area have been dated between A.D. 1200 and
1700, dates that correspond well with the time span (A.D. 1000-1500 estimated
for the California petroglyphs. This comparison is significant primarily because
the elements identified by Heizer and Baumhoff were present in California, permitting a more accurate estimate of time than is commonly possible elsewhere.
Obviously, the link between artifacts and cave art is tenuous at best, and any
link between Texas rock art and that of California is even more so. Although rock
art was being created as early as 1500 B.C. by the Olmecs in Mexico (Smith
1968:37) and by the Indians in Texas well into historic time (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967:207), it is believed that the correlation between the Texas and
California dates lends some credence to the archeological linkage.
One final item of interest was the orientation and configuration of the shelter. The discovery of the sun dagger at Chaco Canyon (Williamson 1984:103)
spawned a spate of activity in archeoastronomy. One result is the documentation
that attests to the knowledge and use of celestial bodies and their cycles by the
Indians. Spiral elements appear to have been widely used as calendrical devices
(Williamson 1984:103; Sherrod 1984:119), and although there is no spiral element in Monk’s Cave, the major axis of the cave is oriented N60°E, magnetic
(Figure 2). The magnetic declination is now 8°E of N, making the true azimuth
of the major axis of the cave 248°. The shelter is at 31°52’N, and the azimuth of
the sunset on the horizon at the winter solstice is 242° at this latitude, a difference of 6°. However, the sun’s rays do not penetrate the trees across the branch
when it is on the horizon; the last uninterrupted rays of the sun come from above
the trees at about the same azimuth as that of the major axis of the rock-shelter.
Monk’s Cave has a somewhat peculiar configuration (Figure 2), for it comes
to a point at the back wall. This means that the only time that that point will be
illuminated by sunlight may be at sunset during the winter solstice period. So the
configuration of the shelter might have permitted it to serve the same purpose for
its users that the spiral elements served for the desert tribes of New Mexico and
Arizona and the tribes along the Arkansas River (Sherrod 1984:119).
The agricultural economy of the Caddos required that they have some
means of marking seasonal changes so they could know the proper time for planting their crops. Among ancient peoples the world over this time has been marked
from the summer and winter solstices, the equinoxes, and the positions of the

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

167

planets. From these observations they could measure the passage of time (perhaps in moons--lunar months) required until the best planting time for their
crops came around. Further investigation appeared to be called for in order to see
if Monk’s Cave could have been used in such observations.
On January 4, 1983 a visit was made to the shelter to see if it was in fact
oriented with relation to the solstices. At the previous visit the shelter had not
been visible from the approach route because of its orientation and the dense
vegetation in the creek bottom, but now winter had stripped the leaves, and from
across the creek the first view of the shelter was startling: a bright shaft of sunlight illuminated the petroglyphs on the north wall, while the south wall and rear
of the shelter were in shadow. As the sun continued to sink in the west, the illumination crept to the back of the shelter, and, as the sun disappeared at 5:30 p.m.,
the south wall remained in shadow while the north wall and the narrow back of
the shelter were fully illuminated (Figure 5).
The shelter was inspected closely for evidence that it might have been made
by man, but although the texture, grain, and composition of the rock and bedding
of the rock differ from one part of the shelter to the other, no evidence was found
to indicate that Monk’s Cave was not a natural shelter.
But it is possible that man may have improved on a natural rock formation.
The roof has horizontal fissures that provide purchase for prying loose slabs of
rock. Vertical fissures made it possible for vandals to pry off a section of the
petroglyphs and for other larger spalls to fall or be pried off the north wall, and a
flat shelf had been formed on the south wall by removing some of the overlying
rock. Finally, the rock that forms the shelter is unique in its composition and
fractured state. The other rock in the area is a uniform, very dense, ferruginous
sandstone approaching quartzite in hardness.

CONCLUSIONS
Monk’s Cave could have been used to determine the occurrence of the winter
solstice. It would have required only a mark on the back wall to indicate the
northernmost point reached by the shadow. Whether it was so used is, of course,
a matter of conjecture, for no signs of such markings have been found.
A survey of mound-builder sites (Rolingson and Sherrod 1984) it has been
found that such orientations existed at most of the sites. Notable exceptions are
the George C. Davis site (Caddo Mounds State Historic Site) near Alto, Texas,
and apparently the Washington Square prehistoric site in Nacogdoches. It may be
significant that Monk’s Cave, which does have celestial orientation, is only about
32 km (20 miles) from either of these two sites.

REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert E.
1960
Guide to the identification of certain American Indian projectile points. Special
Bulletin 2, Oklahoma Anthropological Society.

168

Texas Archeological Society

Clewlow, C. W., Jr.
1978
Prehistoric rock art. Ballena, Ramona, California.
Colton, H. S.
1946
Fools names like fools faces. Plateau, 19. Museum of Northern Arizona,
Flagstaff.
Du Pratz, Le Page
1758

L’histoire Louisianne. Paris.

Gelb, J. J.
1963
A study of writing. University of Chicago Press.
Grant, Campbell
1967

Rock art of the American Indians. Promontory, New York.

Grieder, Terence
1982
Origins of Pre-Columbian art. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Heizer, R. F., and Robert F. Baumhoff
1962

Prehistoric rock art of Nevada and eastern California. University of California
Press, Berkeley.

Heizer, R. F., and C. W. Clewlow, Jr.
1973
Prehistoric art in California, vols. 1, 2. Ballena, Ramona, California.
Jackson, A. T.
1938

Picture writing of Texas Indians. Anthropological Papers 2, The University of
Texas, Austin.

Kirkland, Forrest, and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
The rock art of Texas Indians. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Miller, W. C.
1955

Two pictographs from northern Arizona, super nova, July 4, 1054 A.D., birth
of the Crab Nebula.

Renaud, E. B.
Petroglyphs of north central New Mexico. University of Denver Archeological
t938
Survey, 1 l~h Report. Denver.
Rolingson, Martha A., and R Clay Sherrod
Celestial alignments of mounds at Caddoan and Lower Mississippi Valley sites.
1984
Paper presented at the 26’h Annual Caddo Conference, Nacogdoches, Texas.
Sherrod, R Clay
1984
Motifs of ancient man. University of Arkansas Press, Little Rock.

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

169

Smith, Bradley
1968
A history in art. Editoria Cultural Y Educativa, S.A. de C. V., M~xico, D.F.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954

An introductory handbook of Texas archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society vol. 25.

Sutherland, Kay (editor)
1976
American Indian rock art. El Paso Archaeological Society.
Williamson, Ray
1984
Living the sky. Houghton-Mifflin, Boston.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Henry F. Ball was born in Yoakum, Texas, and grew up in Victoria. In World War II
he saw active duty in the Army Field Artillery, with combat in the Pacific Theater and
occupation duty in Japan.
Upon his return from service, he took his degree in Civil Engineering at Texas A&M
University. A registered civil engineer, his professional life has encompassed most phases
of the profession in local, state, and federal governments, and he has authored several
technical articles. Since he retired from the federal service in 1979 he has operated a consulting business in Euless, Texas.
Ball’s active participation in archeology began with his retirement. He is a member of
the Texas Archeological Society and has attended several field schools. He is also a member, and has served twice as president, of the Tarrant County Archeological Society.

Big R k: a Woodland and Caddoan Rock-Shelter
hi East Texas
Thomas H. Gudeijan

ABSTRACT
Big Rock is one of only a few rock-shelters known in East Texas. Test
excavations at the site in 1980 indicated the existence of distinct Woodland
and Caddoan components, each with a high degree of preservation of biological materials. During excavation, fragments of geometric and abstract
pictographs were found between the two components, indicating that at least
some of them date from the Woodland period.

INTRODUCTION
This article is a revision, with new material, of "Big Rock Shelter," chapter
11 in Archaeological Investigations in the Forest Grove/Big Rock Areas, NorthCentral Texas (Guderjan et al. 1981).
Big Rock Shelter (41HE1) is a stratified Woodland and Caddoaa site located
on the western periphery of the Caddo area in northern Henderson County. The
importance of the site lies in two unique aspects: its high degree of preservation
and its petroglyphs, which derive at least in part from the Woodland occupation.
Surprisingly, Big Rock Shelter has been known since at least 1926. J. J.
Faulk, in his history of Henderson County, mentioned the "ancient and peculiar
heiroglyphics and etching on the rock" (1926:33). Somewhat later, A. T. Jackson reported the site in Picture-Writing of Texas Indians (1938). Nevertheless,
until the shelter was rediscovered in 1980, its location had been lost (Carolyn
Spock n.d.), and whether the descriptions of Faulk and Jackson were of the same
site was not even certain (Bagot and Skinner 1974).
Setting
Big Rock Shelter is near the divide of the Trinity, upper Sabine, and Neches
River basins, a ridge of ferruginous sandstone of the Carrizo Formation (Claiborne Group, Eocene), with a north-south trend through Henderson and Van Zandt
counties. The ridge is capped with deep deposits of Pickton sands (Hatherly and
Mays 1979) that are exposed only intermittently. The Pickton is exposed for
2 km in the area of the rock-shelter and has several outliers, most of which are
about 10 meters square, but some of which are much larger. Big Rock Shelter
was formed in one of these outliers at a disconformity in the sandstone in a time

Bulletin of the Texas A rcheo!ogical Society 55 (1986 for 1984)

172

Texas Archeological Society

W

5
2
I
0

DRIP lINE

1

I
2

" Figure 1. West-east cross section A-A’ through Big Rock Shelter, Henderson County,
Texas. See Figure 2 for location of cross section.

when the water table was much higher. The rock-shelter, which faces north and
west, is on the northwest slope of a sand hill about 100 meters from the ridge
exposure.
The deep sands of the upland ridge and associated hills probably have supported an oak-hickory-pine forest since Pleistocene time. These upland sand hills
make the western limit of the present pine forest; the deep sand no doubt allowed
the pines to persist. The topography and soils also contribute to the presence of
many permanent springs around the ridge. As the topography slopes off to the
Trinity River to the west, the more common savannah soils and environments
dominate. The far western Pickton sands probably supported some isolated pine
stands of a few square kilometers, but mixed hardwoods dominated the Eastern
Cross Timbers of Texas.
The sandstone outlier in which Big Rock Shelter has been formed is about
10 meters square and 7 meters high. The rock-shelter itself is 2.5 meters high,
5 meters deep, and 8 meters long (Figure 1); the overhang is literally covered
with petroglyphs. In the shelter the ground surface is depressed about 50 cm, but
is raised at the drip line due to rock fall; from there it slopes downward to the
north. The fill is composed of sands that have washed in from the sides, small
boulders that have oxidized and degraded, and, on and near the drip line, large
rocks that have fallen from the top of the outcrop. Preservation in the shelter is
very good; charcoal, faunal, and maerobotanical remains were recovered in excellent condition.

Guderjan--Big Rock Rockshelter

173

Prehistory
An initial inspection in June 1980 indicated that some of the site assemblage
was Caddoan; arrowpoint fragments and a single potsherd were recovered from
the surface. The site had been disturbed; during the excavations the vertical, but
not the horizontal, extent of the disturbance was determined.
Our knowledge of the prehistory of the region begins with the Woodland
and Caddoan occupations. The Woodland period (A.D. 400-800) has been only
recently identified as an independent entity. Johnson (1962), in his pioneering study of the East Texas Archaic, considered the introduction of plainware ceramics an insignificant addition to an essentially Late Archaic tool repertoire.
However, Studies in the upper Sabine River basin, northeast of the site, indicate
that during the Woodland period small sites were occupied by sedentary groups
who practised horticulture and imported lithic raw materials (Bruseth and Perttula 1981). Findings such as these justify the separation of the Woodland from
the Archaic, Just as in the rest of East Texas, little is known of upland Woodland
behavior in this area, principally because of poor preservation of artifacts in
open and upland sites and modern destruction of the soils.
The Early Caddoan period, represented here by the Sanders focus (A.D.
800-1300), is marked by larger groups and more intensive cultivation of maize
(Bruseth and Perttula i981). Much larger sites, such as the George C. Davis site,
came into being and probably were centers of regional control. The Caddo were
well adapted to the lowland environments, where they developed a system of intensive agriculture. The Early Caddoan settlement system consisted primarily of
dispersed small hamlets such as the Hanna site in Louisiana (Thomas et al.
1980), which were linked to one another politically through larger moundcomplex sites (Gregory 1980). In the Neches River valley, east of Big Rock Shelter, many such hamlets have been found (Anderson 1972).
A similar situation, coupled with increasing importance of maize agriculture along the upper Sabine (Bruseth and Perttula 1981), was found in the upper
Sabine River drainage northeast of Big Rock Shelter. The few Caddoan settlements that existed to the west in the nearby Trinity River basin appear to be outlying hamlets.
THE EXCAVATIONS
Six 1-meter squares were excavated at the site (Figure 2), three in the shelter, two on the drip line, and one about 10 meters from the front of the shelter. In
addition, many shovel test pits, 50 cm square, were dug near the shelter to determine the extent of the deposit.
One unit was excavated outside the shelter in the hope that early materials
would be found there. An artifact concentration was found in a matrix of heavily
leached sand at a depth of 30 cm, but it could not be linked stratigraphically to
the interior of the shelter.
Perishable remains were best preserved in the two units excavated on the
drip line. The matrices of the drip-line units consisted of dark gray sand, par-

174

Texas Archeological Society

N

Figure 2. Plan of Big Rock Shelter. Henderson County, Texas.

ticles fallen from the roof and top of the rock, and large flat rocks, which caused
the abandonment of both units at a depth of 60 cm.
The three units that yielded the most information formed a trench in the
center of the shelter. They were excavated to depths from 1 to 1.5 meters. These
units consisted of layers of large oxidized fallen rocks separating strata of particulate fall. One of these, N2E2, consisted almost entirely of oxidized rock and
will not be considered further.
The profiles of the west and east sides of the two units of the central trench
(Figures 3 and 4) show that the upper parts of the units apparently had been disturbed by looting; the triangular feature in the upper right in the east profile is a
remnant of such activity. The looting clearly did not progress below the large
boulders and rocks, so the lower two-thirds of the gray-brown sands and all of the
orange and white sands and organic deposits are intact.
The disturbed upper part of the gray-brown sands yielded prehistoric Caddoan materials quite like those of the lower part. Although microstratigraphic
work may reveal lenses of artifacts in these sandy deposits, the entire upper part
of the excavation is probably Caddoan (Sanders focus).
Below this are the orange and white sands, which constitute a single depositional unit. The orange sands are fallen particles that, like the large rocks above

Guderjan--Big Rock Rockshelter

175

Z

o

o
r-

d
e¢3

Z

bD

~0
¢.)k,

I

I

I

o
LO
1

176

Texas Archeological Society

oi
o
(.~I

I

J

I

I

,~

Guderjan--Big Rock Rockshelter

177

and below them, have become oxidized; the white sands are simply leached
orange sands. Water running from the drip line between rocks in the west profile
has repeatedly saturated the white sands. The edge of the drip line is seen in the
upper right corner of the west profile (Figure 4). Except for a few pockets of
black organic sand in the east profile (Figure 3), little artifact deposition was
found in these sands.
The deposits below about 95 cm are quite different from those above. Below
95 cm the profiles, especially the east profile, become very complex. Shown in
the east profile (Figure 4) are discontinuous lenses of black organic sands--the
only artifact-bearing strata below 95 cm. Only unit N3E2 was excavated deep
enough to encounter the black organic sands. The assemblage includes an undecorated sherd and pre-Caddoan projectile points. A radiocarbon date of 1587
+ 133 years B.P.A.D. :363 (SMU-964) was obtained on charcoal recovered
from this level and reveals a lower component that is clearly of Woodland period age.
At least some of the petroglyphs date from the Woodland occupation of Big
Rock. A large area of glyphs, once on the central part of the roof of the shelter,
had spalled off before Jackson’s first visit and our investigation. A glyph fragment
was recovered below the Caddoan materials, resting directly on, but not in, the
dark organic sands that contain the Woodland materials.
Although the central units were excavated in 25-cm levels, the information
presented here is simply separated into Caddoan and Woodland. The homogeneity of the artifacts in the upper levels does not justify further division, and the
limited horizontal extent of the excavation precludes examination of intrasite
variations.

CERAMICS
In all, 38 sherds were recovered. Nineteen were undecorated, and the decorated sherds were either incised, brushed, or punctate. Due to the small size of
the sherds, none of the decorative modes could be identified as representing a
specific ceramic type (Irvine 1981).
All of the sherds except for a single plainware sherd were grit-and-grog tempered (Newell and Krieger 1949). The decorative techniques displayed on the
pottery also are common to Caddoan ceramic assemblages from northeastern
Texas (Brown 1971). A single shell-tempered sherd, which also appears to have
Caddoan origins, was recovered from the site. It is likely that the Big Rock Shelter ceramics have affiliations with the Sanders focus, which dates from A.D. 800
to 1200. A single plain sherd, probably of Woodland period affiliation, was recovered from the lovcest level excavated at the site.

LITHICS
Lithic artifacts totalling 2,715 were recovered from Big Rock Shelter. The
central trench yielded 1,213 specimens, and 1,502 specimens originated mostly
in the upper few centimeters of the interior of the shelter, which was removed and

178

Texas Archeological Society

O)

~

~

.-- 03
4--+.0 C
O) .-"7 0

o

’~t

t’N

e4

~

~

O~

0

cO

’~

0

0

--

[3._

.-eq

o

tt~

U--

tN

’+-

0
0

0

r~

~- 0
"--t--

>.
t~
0

0

~

0

O

O

¯-- ~ (I)
O]O,-L-I-O_
~Err

-cg~

13}
0--- COl
~

~C,

I]0 J~z LL
I--

C40

~-

0.-- ~I
L--I

>.
l_ tn
I~

co
0
z
w

L-rill_

(D-

o

’,0

~o

i,

--

~J

t.L/

kl_

[..-

<,
~u

0~

LI.I
0""
14b’)

§

40

Guderjan--Big Rock Rockshelter

O4

O4

.--

o

qt_

+_
a3
(D

~

oF

~-

0
O3

1.
Lt.

4O"
F-

-~

l,w

o~

¢.

>-

~,

--

--

kO

tn

--4--

--0

fO

4fO

~9_

179

180

Texas Archeological Society

screened in order to obtain an estimate of the amount of modern disturbance.
Also included among the 1,502 artifacts are spot finds from tests outside the shelter where artifact density was quite low. Since controlled excavations were limited to the central trench, the discussion that follows focuses on units N3E2 and
N4E2 (Figure 2).
Most (75.1 percent) of the artifacts from the central trench assemblage were
chips (pieces of debris less than 15 mm long) of various sorts (Table 1). In this
report artifacts are divided into debitage: flakes that have potential for further
modification into tools, and debris: chips that have no potential for modification
into tools. The principle distinguishing factor is length. Because the smallest tool
found at the shelter was approximately 15 mm long, all specimens less than 15
mm long are considered debris.
Flakes with less than 50 percent cortex comprise 14.5 percent of the assemblage, and primary flakes--with more than 50 percent cortex on the dorsal
side--comprise 5.4 percent (Table 1). Projectile points account for 2.5 percent
of the assemblage.
The other analytical categories are core-trimming elements, biface-thinning
flakes, marginally retouched pieces, unifacial tools, and bifacial tools. Coretrimming elements are flakes resulting from the rejuvenation of platforms on
cores. They are characteristic of Caddoan lithic technology, but not of the earlier
Archaic technology. Conversely, biface-thinning flakes, although found in later
assemblages, are much more common in Archaic assemblages. The technological similarity between Woodland and Archaic assemblages has been noted by
Johnson (1962).
Marginally retouched pieces are tools with edge blunting or edge retouch
caused either by intentional modification or by use. Unifacial tools are distinct
from marginally retouched pieces in that retouch extends along a face of the
piece, away from the retouched edge. Bifacial tools require no explanation as a
class. It is notable that only one core was recovered from the site.
The Caddoan and Woodland assemblages differed radically (with a chisquare value of 404 and 8 degrees of freedom, p < .005). The very high frequency of chips and dearth of cores indicates a scarcity of lithic resources. Apparently the raw material was brought to the shelter in pebble form from gravel
beds in both the Sabine and Trinity bottomlands, and the tools were manufactured on the site. The tool assemblage is characterized by small projectile points,
unifacial pieces, and marginally retouched flakes. The average size of the nonutilized flakes and primary flakes is notably small, indicating a high degree of
conservation of lithic resources.
Seventy-seven projectile points were recovered from the shelter, thirty of
which were identifiable as to type (Table 2). The most common point types at Big
Rock Shelter are Scallorn (12) and Alba (6). Many of the broken points also may
be of these types. Other point types recovered include Bonham, Cliffton, Cuney,
and Perdiz (Table 2). Most of the points from the uppermost Caddoan deposits
are very small (less than 20 mm long). The manufacturing techniques, however,
are similar to those of the larger and more common Scallorn and Alba types. One
unique projectile point was recovered: a unifacially flaked point made from a

Guderjan--Big Rock Rockshelter

181

Figure 5. Photograph showing representational petroglyphs (chalked
for visibility) of animal footprints at Big Rock Shelter, Henderson
County, Texas.

small flake, with a remnant of the bulb of precussion on the lateral edge of the
point rather than on the proximal end. This is an example of the occasional modification of techniques of tool production imposed by limitations on quantity and
size of raw material. All of these point types were found in the upper strata, and
all are consistent with Caddoan occupation.

THEROCK ART
Both the ceiling and back wall of the rock-shelter, as well as part of the rock
face east of the shelter’s drip line, had petroglyphs. Jackson (1938) recognized
several conventional human and animal figures, but in the summer of 1980 they
were not in evidence. These figures could have eroded beyond recognition in the
last 42 years, or it is possible that Jackson saw figures where the writer saw only
abstract design motifs.

182

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Photograph showing cluster of rectilinear motifs (chalked for visibility) at Big
Rock Shelter, Henderson County, Texas. Motifs measure about 1 meter across.

The petroglyphs fall into two general categories: representational carvings
of animal footprints (Figure 5) and clusters of abstract geometrical design elements consisting of both rectilinear and curvilinear motifs (Figures 6 and 7). The
recognizable animal prints, all outside the entrance to the shelter, are deer, turkey, and raccoon. It is possible that the human hand reported by Jackson (1938)
may be the one identified here as a raccoon print. Although it is quite small-about life size for a mature animal--the claws are visible. The abstract designs
consist of irregular curvilinear patterns often connected with or superimposed on
rectilinear designs made up of crosshatching or lines arranged conically: the
"teepees" of Jackson’s report.
Most of the grooves were made with a pointed instrument and are V shaped
in cross section, but several were carved with round-tipped tools that produced
quite deep, U-shaped grooves.
Some of the petroglyphs apparently were produced by the sharpening of
bone or wooden tools rather than as artwork (Figures 6 and 7). Other carvings are
quite elaborate and no doubt had some meaning--lost to us--for the individuals
who put them there (Figure 8). The animal prints may be connected with hunting
magic, since bones of both raccoon and deer in the shelter’s midden confirm that
these animals were targets of the aboriginal hunters. In eastern California and
Nevada, Heizer (1962) reports representational rock art where both hunted animals and their footprints were carved by Archaic hunters at ambush sites.

Gudetjan--Big Rock Rockshelter

183

Figure 7. Photograph showing cluster of rectilinear motifs (chalked for visibility) at Big
Rock Shelter, Henderson County, Texas. Motifs measure about 1 meter across.

FAUNAL AND FLORAL REMAINS
Large amounts of faunal remains, recovered from all strata, were concentrated principally in the gray-brown and dark organic sands. Due to the small
scale of the excavation and the exploratory nature of the research, as well as the
fragmentary condition of the material, no attempt was made to count the bones.
The following listing of the species recovered focuses principally on materials
recovered from the Caddoan deposits.
The dominant component of the faunal remains was deer (Odocoileus virginianus) bones, most of which were in fragmentary condition. The largest
single bone was a complete mandible recovered from one of the drip-line units.
Most of the other materials were burned and broken long bones. Deer are a
woodland species, adapted to the hardwood forests because of food resources
such as acorns, persimmons, red cedar, and mistletoe (Murray 1981).
An atlas vertebra from a fox squirrel (Sciurus niger) was found in Unit
N2E2. Fox squirrels prefer open hardwood forests or woodlands and pines (Lowery 1974). Remains of cottontail rabbit (sylvilagusfloridanus) also were found,
but they appear to represent only a single individual. Crushed mollusc shells
were found throughout the strata. No identification of species was possible, but
the molluscs probably were gathered from nearby stable springs. A few turtle

184

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Photograph showing petroglyph measuring about 25 cm across (chalked for visibility) at Big Rock Shelter, Henderson County, Texas.

scutes (Pseudemys sp.) were recovered with the Caddo materials. These too
may have been caught in nearby springs. Skeletal elements of a gopher snake
(Pituophis melanoleucas) also were recovered, but may have come into the deposit naturally.
Among the Woodland material were a deer astragalus, part of a deer molar,
and a few crushed long bones, probably from deer. Crushed shell was the only
other faunal material associated with the Woodland deposit.
No attempt was made to extract pollen from the sands of the shelter, but
material from a Caddo period level was recovered by flotation and examined for
macrobotanical remains. From a single small sample, 9 g of hickory nutshell and
0.8 g of wood charcoal were recovered (Crane n.d.). Oak and hickory trees now
grow next to the shelter and probably did in prehistoric times as well.

SEASONALITY
The location and orientation of the shelter are such that seasonality is easily
determined. Since it is open to the north and completely exposed to north winds,
the shelter is not an attractive place in winter, but in summer it is the coolest spot
for many miles around, and nearby permanent springs are accessible from it. The
hickory nutshells in the flotation sample expand the seasonal range to include the
fall, but there is no evidence to indicate springtime use of the shelter.

Guderjan--Big Rock Rockshelter

185

SUMMARY
Big Rock Shelter is a stratified Woodland and Caddoan site. Although the
petroglyphs, which date at least in part to the Woodland occupation of the site,
include both representational depictions of animals and complex motifs, they are
generally uninterpretable.
The site apparently was occupied seasonally, probably for brief periods-certainly in the fall, and probably in the summer too, but never in winter--by
sedentary people. In the Caddoan period, these occupants most likely made their
homes in the lowlands of the nearby Neches or Sabine rivers.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Several people assisted with the work at Big Rock Shelter, including Max Baldia, Jim
Bruseth, Sue Guderjan, Dan McGregor, Allan McIntyre, Phil Murry, Chris Nunley, Mark
Raab, Gary Rutenberg, and Herman Smith. Marilee Irvine and Phil Murry analyzed the
ceramics and bone, respectively. Herman Smith’s assistance with the rock art also is appreciated. Joel Gunn visited the site and made useful comments. Special thanks are due to
W. W. Bradshaw, manager of Big Rock Ranch, for his invaluable assistance. The work at
Big Rock Shelter was financed by Texas Utilities-Services, Inc.

REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, Keith M.
Prehistoric settlement of the upper Neches River. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo1972
logical Society 43:121-197.
Bagot, Joe T., and S. Alan Skinner
1974

An evaluation of the historical and archaeological resources in parts of Henderson and Van Zandt counties, Texas. Report submitted to the Southwest Research Institute, San Antonio, by the Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.

Brown, James A.
Pottery vessel. In Spiro Studies, Vo;. 3. University of Oklahoma Research Insti1971
tute, Norman.
Bruseth, James E., and Timothy K. Perttula
1981

Prehistoric settlement patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Crane, Cathy J.
n.d.

Personal communication.

Faulk, J. J.
1926

History of Henderson County. Athens Review Printing Co., Athens, Texas.

186

Texas Archeological Society

Gregory, Hiram F.
1980

A continuity model for Caddoan adaptation on the Red River in Louisiana. Louisiana Archaeology 5: 347-360.

Guderjan, Thomas H., Gary W. Rutenberg, Maximillian O. Baldia, Herman A. Smith,
and L. Mark Rabb
1981

Archaeological investigations in the Forest Grove/Big Rock areas, north-central
Texas. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Hatherly, Don T., and Major T. Mays
1979

Soil Survey of Henderson County, Texas. U.S. Department of the Interior,
Washington.

Heizer, Robert F.
1962

Prehistoric rock art of Nevada and eastern California. University of California
Press, Berkeley.

Irvine, Marilee
1981

Analysis of ceramics from three tested sites, 41HE1, 41HE110, and 41HE85.
Appendix 4 in Archaeological investigations in the Forest Grove/Big Rock
areas, north-central Texas, by T. H. Guderjan et al., pp. 99-103. Archaeology
Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Jackson, A. T.
1938
Picture-writing of Texas Indians. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Johnson, LeRoy Jr.
1962

The Yarbrough and Miller sites of northeastern Texas, with a preliminary definition of the LaHarpe aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
32: 141-162.

Lowery, G. H.
1974 The mammals of Louisiana and its adjacent waters. Louisiana State University
Press, Baton Rouge
Murry, Phillip A.
1981

Faunal analysis of material from 41HE1, 41HEt 10, and 41HE85 and prehistoric ecology of the Forest Grove/Big Rock area. Appendix 5 in Archaeological investigations in the Forest Grove/Big Rock areas, north-central Texas,
by T. H. Guderjan et al., pp. 105-106. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Newell, H. E, and A. D. Krieger
1949

The George C. Davis site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoir of the Society tor
American Archaeology 14.

Richner, Jeffery J., and Joe T. Bagot
1978
A reconnaissance survey of the Trinity River basin. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Research Report 112. Dallas.

Guderjan--Big Rock Rockshelter

187

Spock, Carolyn
n.d.
Personal communication.
Thomas, Prentice M. Jr., L. Janice Campbell, and Steven R. Ahler
1980

The Hanna site in Alto Village in Red River Parish. Louisiana Archaeology,
Vol. 5.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Thomas H. Guderjan is the Director of Exhibits at The University of Texas Institute
of Texan Cultures in San Antonio. He is completing work for the Ph.D. degree at Southern Methodist University. His research has focused on the southern United States; his
fieldwork has been both there and in Central America. Address: The Institute of Texan
Cultures, 801 S. Bowie St., San Antonio.

An Annotated Index to the Fh’st Ten Volumes
of the Bulletin of the
Central Texas Archeological Society
WilKam E. Moore and Michael R. Bradle

ABSTRACT
The Central Texas Archeological Society was organized in 1934 and is
the second oldest archeological society in Texas. The Society has made
notable contributions to Texas archeology and has published 10 volumes of
Central Texas Archeologist: Bulletin of the Central Texas Archeological Society. This index provides researchers with annotations for all entries in the
10 volumes, listed under several headings.

INTRODUCTION
The Central Texas Archeological Society was organized on February 17,
1934 in Waco, Texas, with W. R Meroney as president. The first Bulletin, edited
by Frank Watt, was published in January 1935. The Society consisted of avocational archeologists who were determined in their desire to learn about Texas archeology. At that time very little was known about the prehistory of the State.
The Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society (later renamed Texas Archeological Society) had been in existence only six years. There were very few
professional archeo!ogists in Texas at that time, and most of their work was conducted in the 1930s under auspices of WPA (the work program of the Roosevelt
administration) and in the 1940s as part of the River Basin Surveys of the
Smithsonian Institution.
Over the years, several members of the Central Texas Archeological Society
have achieved recognition in the archeological community. Frank Watt, who
served as editor and president during many of his years with the Society, received
the George McJunkin Award of Honor from the Instituto Interamericano and was
awarded the title Master Archeologist by the Guild of American Prehistorians.
Contributors to the Society’s journal, the Bulletin of the Central Texas Archeological Society (BCTAS), include A. T. Jackson, Forrest Kirkland, J. E. Pearce,
Harry J. Shafer, Dee Ann Story, and Frank H. Watt.
The focus of the Society has been primarily on McClennan and surrounding
counties, although articles concerning other states and other countries have ap-

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986for 1984)

190

Texas Archeological Society

peared in the BCTAS. Information disseminated through the BCTAS has provided important insights into such archeological problems as the distribution and
function of Waco Sinkers and the use of rock-shelters as mortuary sites in Central Texas.
The year 1986 marks 50 years since the first BCTAS was published by the
Central Texas Archeological Society, which is still active and has members
throughout Texas. We hope this index will be a useful reference for researchers
interested in the archeology of Central Texas and an introduction to the Central
Texas Archeological Society. Complete sets of the BCTAS are on file in the Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University and in the private collection of Albert J. Redder, of Waco, Texas.
The main part of the index is the "Authors" section, which is arranged alphabetically and carries the complete citations, followed by the counties, states,
and countries the article concerns. Where counties are not mentioned in the text,
they are named in cases where they could be ascertained from the locations of
sites mentioned or where they were supplied by Albert Redder or others familiar
with the area. In order to provide references to as many counties as possible, all
counties mentioned in the articles are named.
The articles in the 10 volumes are also listed by areas and by subjects. A key
to these listings follows.

Key to the Index
Listing
Authors
Areas
Counties
Other states
Other countries
Drainages
Subjects
Artifacts
Site types
Site names
Early explorers

Page
4
19
27
29
30
41
47
51
56

Moore and Bradle--CTAS Index

191

AUTHORS
Acres, Fred
Burial mound on Leon. 1 : 24 Coryell
1935
Site on the Leon River, excavated by A. T. Jackson, of the University of Texas; produced 16 burials, including one cremation.
Agogino, George A.
The Hell Gap point: a twenty-year evaluation. 10:110-116 Colorado,
1985
Iowa, Ohio, Texas, Wyoming
Reevaluation of evidence on this point type suggests to the writer
that it is a valid type representing an outgrowth from an Agate Basin
component; Hell Gap point type, its distribution, typically associated
artifacts, and other projectile point types of the period are described.

Andretta, A,A.
1956
Central Texas cultural affiliation below the Llano Estacado. 7 : 33-40
Fisher, Kent, Scurry
Archeological overview of the part of West Texas just below the
Caprock; site types, mortuary practices, and specific sites. Artifacts
and types of burials found in the area are illustrated.
Anonymous
1935a Illustrating types, showing relative sizes and giving comparative data
on sinkers. 1 : 30
Table comparing sinkers from Central Texas to those found in the
Mississippi Valley and the Columbia River area.

1935b

Geographical sketch of area. 1 : 10 Bell, Bosque, Comanche, Coryell,
Falls, Hamilton, Hill, Lampasas, Limestone, McLennan, Navarro
Central Texas defined; brief overview of area geology. According
to BTAS, vol. 10, this article was ghost written by Frank Watt, probably from notes furnished by Frank Bryan.

Atlee, William A.
1953
Caddo burial in northeastern Texas. 6:38-39 Upshur
A burial site on Little Cypress Creek; associated with burials
were a jar described as Ripley engraved and a large cooking jar with
applique decoration; Atlee puts site in Titus focus.

1956

Petroglyphs on Tonk Creek. 7:52-55 McLennan, Milam, Stephens
Group of petroglyphs on Tonk Creek described and illustrated;
hypothesized that they were carved in the eighteenth century during
the period of Spanish missionary activity in Central Texas.

192

Texas Archeological Society

Aynesworth, K. H.
1936a Biographic studies of twenty-one skulls of Central Texas Indians.
2: 30-34 Bell
Results of examination of skulls from Kell Branch Shelter No. 1;
first systematic study of a skeletal population in Central Texas; skulls
are dolichocephalic; average cephalic index of group is below 75.
Aynesworth, K. H.
1936b Flint arrowhead wounds of bones as shown in skeletons in Central
Texas. 2:74-79 Bell, Comanche, McLennon
Discussion of the scarcity of arrow wounds in Central Texas;
characteristics of the wounds and examples are discussed, described,
and illustrated; one example is buffalo bone with embedded stone point.

1938

Stone artifacts peculiar to the highest Brazos River terrace. 4:98-99
Crude quartzite implements typically found on highest terraces of
Brazos River; author says no other types of implements--such as
arrowpoints, knives, or scrapers--of this material have been found.

Bryan, Frank
1935
A resum6 of the prehistoric human cultural remains so far discovered
in Central Texas. 1:5-9 Coryell, Falls, Limestone, McLennan,
Williamson
Leadoff article for the first issue of the BCTAS; types of sites
in Central Texas, typical artifacts, and presumed dates from prehistoric populations of the area; geological explanations for deeply
buried middens.
1936a

Geological sketch of Moffat-Whitehall-Pendelton area. 2:28-29 Bell
Moffat-Whitehall-Pendleton area discussed in terms of geology
to help explain age of rock-shelter burial on the Leon River in Bell
County.

1936b

Indian remains of Central Texas buried by earthquakes. 2:55-58
Falls, McLennan, Travis, Williamson
Letter from Frank Bryan to J. K. Mason discussed deeply buried
sites similar to those found by Mason (1936a) on Brazos River; Bryan
attempts to explain sites by geological phenomena such as earthquakes and shifting faults. Letter is listed in table of contents, but no
title is given in the text.

1936c

Preliminary report on the archeology of western Limestone County.
2:810-95 Hill, Limestone, McLennan, Navarro
General statements concerning kinds of sites and artifacts in
western Limestone County; general locations of such sites shown
on maps.

Moore and Bradle--CTAS Index

193

1937

A preliminary report on the archeology of western Navarro County
and some camp sites in Hill and McLennan Counties. 3:70-79 Hill,
McLennan, Navarro
General statements about kinds of sites and artifacts in these
counties; sites mentioned are shown on map.

1953

The Coyote Lake midden. 6:9-26 Bailey
Site on the Llano Estacado in Bailey County, on the ridge of a
crater basin; relationship of site to others in vicinity and geology and
early history of the area.

1956

Early Texas travelers. 7 : 57-108 All counties
Probable routes of early explorers who passed through Texas;
separate chapters on expeditions of Cabeza de Vaca, Coronado, De
Soto, and La Salle.

Conger, Roger H.
1953a Iron trade hatchets in Central Texas. 6:86-87 Stephens
Iron hatchets associated with a rock-shelter burial in Stephens
County; other historic finds.
1953b

Central Texas Archeological Society, secretary’s report. 6: 102-104
Society had been inactive for almost 10 years; report lists new
officers, past field work, and future goals.

de Graffenreid, Gaines
1937
Notes on some prehistoric ruins in New Mexico. In "Society Notes."
3 : 85-86 New Mexico
Excavation by de Graffenreids of a ruin on the San Francisco
River about 120 km (75 miles) north of Silver City, New Mexico; surface collections from other ruins on both sides of the river.

Dietz, W. H.
1935
Shelter burial on Bluff Creek near Crawford. 1 : 26 McLennan
Two shelters on McLennan County excavated in 1934 yielded at
least five burials, four of adults, one of a child; each burial was under
a pyramid of three stones, one of which was usually a metate.
1936

A few Mimbres bowls. 2:61-63 New Mexico
Mimbres pottery and associated artifacts excavated in 1935 by
Dietz and his wife; site is about 6.4 km (4 miles) south of Mattocks
ruin, north of Silver City, New Mexico.

1938

Notes on some Mimbres excavations. In Society notes. 4:102-103
New Mexico
Ruins excavated in southwestern New Mexico near San Juan; fve
rooms yielded burials, pottery, shell bracelets, beads, manos, and
metates.

194

Texas Archeological Society

Forrester, R. E.
Horn Shelter number 2: the north end. 10:21-35 Bosque
1985
Stratified deposits from this shelter on the Brazos River have
yielded artifacts believed to be linked with Toyah and Austin foci of
Central Texas aspect, Round Rock focus of Edwards Plateau aspect,
and La Harpe aspect of East Texas; Folsom, Scottsbluff, and other
Paleo-Indian point forms are reported.
Graffenreid see de Graffenreid

Hampton, Howard and Grady Moore
1936
A burial site in northeastern Red River County. 2 : 65-69 Red River
Excavation revealed nine burials and associated grave goods:
bowls, pots, and a frog effigy vessel.
Hawkins, J. E.
1938
Society notes. 4:100-102
Business of the Society, activities of some of its members; speakers and topics presented at the annual meeting.
Horne, Sam
Petroglyphs. 1:30-31 McLennan
1935
Group of petroglyphs on Tonk Creek; referred to as the only petroglyphs known in north-central Texas. (Discussed in more detail by
Atlee, 1956.)
1936

A Hamilton County cache. 2:43 Hamilton
Prehistoric cache of 93 stone tools found by E. F. Hill in 1923 on
Pecan Creek; most specimens are triangular or oval.

1937

A Mimbres cremation burial and an effigy pot. 3:49-51 New Mexico
Brief discussion of burial from Mimbres River valley, New Mexico; pottery and effigy pot described and illustrated.

1938

Dating Cave Creek Shelter occupancy. 4: 96, 97 Coryell
Shelter excavated in 1933 by members of the Society and A. M.
Wilson, of The University of Texas; artifacts found are described as
flints similar to those from middle levels of burned rock middens in
south-central Texas.

Jackson, A. T.
1935
Technique of archeological field work. 1 : 20-23
Basic techniques of excavation, survey, and documentation of
archeological sites.
Kirkland, Forest
A comparison of Texas Indian pictographs with Paleolithic paintings
1937
in Europe. 3:9-26 Concho, Jeff Davis, Reeves, Terrell, Val Verde;
France, Spain.
Rock-art styles and methods for examining sites in Texas and Europe; major examples from various sites illustrated.

Moore and Bradle--CTAS Index

1938

195

An archeological survey of the Cranfills Gap area. 4:71-84 Bosque,
Hamilton
Results of survey in Cranfills Gap area: flint workshops, middens, hearths, shelters, and graves.

Lawrence, T. G., Jr., and Albert J. Redder
Frank H. Watt, the Central Texas Archeologist. 10:7-11.
1985
Biographical sketch of Frank Watt by two of his friends.

Lux, Konrad
Dental pathology from crania in Central Texas. 1:13-15 Central
1935
Texas, California
General review of dental pathologies found in Central Texas
sites, compared with specimens from other parts of the country.

1936

A detailed report of the teeth and supporting structures as found in
crania of Aycock shelter. 2: 39-42 Bell
Pathologies in teeth and supporting structures from skeletal population at Aycock shelter. In addition to normal problems common to
people today, Lux discovered unusual conditions: congenitally missing third molars, peg-shaped lateral incisors, abnormal frenum; retained deciduous teeth with a displaced permanent tooth, and several
forms of malocclusion.

1937

A detailed report of the teeth and supporting structures as found in
crania of mass burial near Waco. 3 : 34-40 McLennan
Detailed descriptions offindings in 12 sets of teeth, together with
illustrations of the skulls.

Marrs, Otis
Some Mimbres pottery finds. 6:88-101 New Mexico
1953
Burials, decorated geometric and realistic bowls, and other artifacts from several expeditions to ruins in Mimbres Valley of New
Mexico.
Mason, J. K.
1936a Buried midden on the Brazos. 2:52-58 McLennan
Artifacts and hearths found 20--25 ft. below surface at site on
Brazos River near Waco; letter from Frank Bryan (1936b) discusses
similar sites in other areas.
1936b

A Central Texas multiple metate. 2: 80 McLennan
Large rock weighing 43 kg (950 lbs. ) from a rock-shelter on Tonk
Creek believed to be a multiple metate; 86 rounded basins from 2.5-20 cm (1 to 8 in.) in diameter apparently were produced by grinding;
also straight, narrow grooves that may have been for shaping bone
needles.

196

Texas Archeological Society

1937

Supplementary notes on buried midden on the Brazos. 3:68, 69
McLennan
Additional ilformation from site reported by Mason (1936a) in
previous issue of Bulletin; includes a letter from the Smithsonian Institution identifying shells sent them by Mason.

Meroney, W. R
1935
Corner notched tomahawk. 1:30, 31 Colorado
Tomahawk collected in Colorado in 1850following Indian attack
on wagon train, described and illustrated.
1936

A mass burial near Waco. 2 : 59 McLennan
Discusses 23 skeletons found on Brazos River; associated ear
spool--believed to be Caddoan--and three projectile points; one
point had penetrated intervertebral cartiledge between ninth and tenth
vertebrae.

Moore, H. G.
A sinker factory site. 1 : 11 McLennan
1935
Discussion of Lattimore Hill on Brazos River, where in 1935
more Waco Sinkers had been found than at any other site in Texas;
author proposes that Waco Sinkers were mass produced at this site.

Pearce, J. E.
Destructive activities of unscientific explorers in archeological sites.
1936
2:44-47 Bosque, Coryell, McLennan
Problems of vandalism as they existed in 1936 and some ideas for
halting this practice.

Perkins, John L.
Tonk Creek shelter. 7:41-47 McLennan
1956
Shelter on Tonk Creek excavated by Perkins; artifacts (some illustrated) include dart points, arrowpoints, worked bone, and a metate;
four burials were uncovered.
Redder, Albert J.
1967
Possum Branch, a forest-buried type midden. 8:21-26 McLennan
Artifacts found during excavation described and illustrated.
1985a

Bibliography of Frank H. Watt. 10:12-20
Frank Watt was a prolific writer, often in disciplines other than
archeology.

1985b

Horn Shelter number 2: the south end. 10:37-65 Bosque
Excavation revealed burials, Paleo-lndian points, bone fishhooks, shell beads, bone tools, and a tooth pendant; Paleo-lndian, Archaic, and Neo-American deposits identified.

Moore and Bradle--CTAS Index

197

Reed, Erik K.
1938a Archeology of the Mimbres Valley, New Mexico. 4: 9-20 New Mexico
Overview of archeology of Mimbres Valley; previous investigations, kinds of sites and artifacts, and cultural phases described.

1938b

Burials at Mission Espiritu Santo. 4: 85-95 Goliad
Skeletal material excavated in 1935 by Civilian Conservation
Corps (CCC) workers; writer believes skeletons may represent Aranama Indians, known to have lived at this mission; grave goods include glass beads, rosary, cross, copper pendants, copper armband,
and iron arrowpoint.

Runkles, Frank A.
1936
Indian artifacts of Comanche County, Texas. 2 : 70-73 Comanche
General statements about kinds of sites and artifacts in Comanche County.
Russell, F. B.
1936
Archeology in Bell County. 2:48-58 Bell
General statements about sites in Bell County; emphasis on rockshelters with large numbers of burials.

Shafer, Harry J.
1985
Prehistory of the Rio Grande Delta, Texas. 10:97-109 Cameron,
Hidalgo, Willacy
Detailed overview of area; kinds of cultural resources; typical
artifacts; major archeological concepts relating to the area, and a
model of prehistoric lifeways.
Simmons, Frank
1953
Archeology in Coryell County. 6:26-38 Coryell
Overview of Coryell County prehistory; kinds of sites and typical
artifacts.
1956

Snails of the burnt rock middens. 7:48-51 Coryell, Val Verde
Indigenous snails exploited in prehistoric times; writer says
Bulimulus scheideanus pecosensis and Bulimulusu dealbatus mooreanus are most common snails in burned rock mounds and middens of
Central Texas.

Smith, G. Hubert
1953
Indian trade beads from Fort Berthold, N.D. 6:41-56 North Dakota
Several kinds of trade beads unearthed in 1952 during excavation
of a mid-nineteenth-century trading post in the Garrison Reservoir by
Smithsonian Institution River Basin Surveys.
Smith, J. D.
Report on teeth and supporting structures, Asa Warners burials. 8:
1967
18-20 McLennan
Teeth from three individuals from Asa Warner site burials.

198

Texas Archeological Society

Sneed, Gilbert
1956
Ute Fire Dance. 7 : 30, 31 Utah
Eye-witness account of 1949 Ute Indian fire dance.

Stephenson, Robert L.
Frank H. Watt: a tribute. 10:1-6
1985
More than 30 years of memories of working and corresponding
with Frank Watt.
Story, Dee Ann
1985
The Walton site: an historic burial in McLennan County, Texas. 10:
66-96 Hill, Lamar, Limestone, McLennan, Milam, Mitchell, Montague, Palo Pinto, Rains; Kansas, Oklahoma
One of the few historic Indian burials in the Waco area; believed
to be Wichita Indian buried between 1760 and 1820; associated artifacts include sword blade, glass beads, ceramic pipe, and metal
fragments; includes an overview of historic Indian groups of the area.

Turner, Fred A.
1936
Chronic arthritis in the early American Indian in Central Texas. 2:
35-38 Bell
Examination of skeletal remains from Aycock shelter revealed hypertrophic arthritis as a common malady among the prehistoric populations of Central Texas.
1937

Review of skeletons from a mass burial near Waco. 3 : 29-33 McLennan
Study of skeletal material from mass burial site revealed 22 individuals in an area 12 by 14 ft. and 48 to 60 in. deep. Each of the 10
skeletons that could be isolated and studied showed some pathology;
hypertrophic arthritis was common. Turner’s composition of the burial
population does not agree with figures of Watt and Meroney (1937b).

Watt, Frank H.
1925
Stone implements of Central Texas area. 1 : 16-19 Comanche, Coryell, Falls, Limestone, McLennan
Major kinds of stone tools known in Central Texas; certain specimens are illustrated; classification chart of projectile points.

1936

A prehistoric rock-shelter burial in Bell County, Texas. 2:5-27 Bell,
Val Verde
Excavations at Kell Branch Shelter No. 1 by Central Texas Archeological Society; 32 burials; one with an arrowpoint embedded in
a rib; from the dearth of stone tools and other artifacts it was concluded that primary function of shelter was for burial rather than
habitation; letter from Walter J. Williams to Frank Watt identifying
species of river mussel from Kell Branch Shelter No. 1.

Moore and Bradle--CTAS Index

199

1937a

Central Texas Archeological Society notes. 3:83-87
List of activities of Society members and programs presented at
the regular meetings.

1937b

Descriptive analysis of glass Indian trade beads found in Central
Texas. 3 : 59-67 Hill
Glass beads from Central Texas; some specimens ordered by
color with measurements; no sites mentioned.

1937c

A gravel pit burial near Little River. 3 : 80-82 Bell
Two burials from a site about 275 meters (300 yds.)from a surface site; single associated artifact was flint point directly over arm
bones of one burial.

1937d

The importance of an archeological survey. In "Editorial Comment."
3:6-8
Necessity for keeping accurate records and following accepted
surveying procedures is stressed.

1938a

The Waco Sinker. 4: 21 -70 Falls, Hill, Limestone, McLennan, Milam,
Navarro, Williamson
The Waco Sinker, an artifact described as unique to this part of
Central Texas, described; emphasis on distribution and description of
different forms.

1938b

Report on a small rock shelter in Coryell County. In "Society Notes."
4: 103-104 Coryell
Small rock-shelter on small spring-fed branch of Leon River was
looted by vandals; at least six burials, together with accompanying
flint projectile points, were removed.

1944a

Abrading implements, cultural indices in the central Brazos Valley
area. 5 : 2-16 McLennan
Article claims that abrading implements occur sufficiently often
in archeological sites in Central Texas that they ean serve as temporal
markers; kinds of abraders found in Central Texas and their primary
locations are described.

1944b

The Wacoe’s teepee pole grove. 5 : 18, 19 McLennan
Discusses and supports with documentary evidence the location
where, in historic times, the Waco Indians collected poles from a
grove in what is now Waco.

1953a

Ash pit in buried midden on Brazos River. 6:40 McLennan
Buried ash pit near a shallow, rock-linedfire pit; washed away by
flood waters shortly after its discovery.

200

Texas Archeological Society

1953b

Pottery diffusions of the central Brazos Valley. 6:57-85 Bell, Bosque,
Coryell, Falls, Hamilton, Hill, Limestone, McLennan, Milam,
Robertson
Detailed study of the several types of pottery found in the central
Brazos Valley; emphasis on relations of this region to other pottery
regions in Texas; comments on possible trade between regions; discussion of sites that have yielded specific types.

1956a

Archeological materials from the Asa Warner sites. 7 : 7-19 McLennan
Results of extensive excavations at four sites on tributary of Brazos River; burials accompanied by flint tools, shell pendants, a possible deer-antler tool, and pottery.

1956b

Two Coryell County burials. In "Society Notes." 7 : 111 Coryell
Burials in southeastern Coryell County excavated by Harry
Shafer and Wilber Carbin; one burial was a child of seven or eight;
associated were a gar scale (under right scapula), a hammerstone,
and two projectile points.

1967a

A detachable type of atlatl hook. 8 : 8-17 Bell, Bosque, Brewster, Val
Verde; Alabama, Alaska, Georgia, Kentucky, Nevada, Ohio, Oklahoma; Central America, Mexico, Peru
Atlatl hook found by collector in rock-shelter in Lake Whitney
Reservoir area described together with specimens from Texas and
other states; burial with Perdiz arrowpoint in chest cavity also found
at the site.

1967b

Lookout Point, Lake Waco. 8:24-39 McLennan
Excavations at site 41ML33 by Frank Watt; artifact illustrations
and site-location map.

1967c

Society notes. 8:5-7
Officers of the Society named, objectives presented, and programs for the year described.

1969

The Waco Indian village and its peoples. 9: 1-244 McLennan
Indians and their village thought to have been located on the Brazos River within the city limits of Waco.

Watt, Frank H. and W. R Meroney
1937a Glass Indian trade beads in Central Texas. 3:52-58 Falls, Hamilton,
Hill, McLennan
The kinds of glass beads found in Central Texas; discussion of
specific sites; descriptions (detailed) and illustrations of bead types;
virtually all of the 30,000 beads discussed are from Stansbury site now
inundated by Lake Whitney.

Moore and Bradle--CTAS Index

1937b

201

Supplementary report on mass burial near Waco. 3:27-29 McLennan
Examination of skeletal material from mass burial on Brazos
River near Waco (Meroney 1936); 10 of the 12 skeletons studied were
adults; 2 were children; ages range from 4 to 65.

White, J. B.
1937
Milam County, the future field for archeologists. 3:41-48 Brazos,
Burleson, Falls, Gaines, McLennan, Milam, Robertson, Walker
Discussion of areas and kinds of sites in Milam County and vicinity from which White amassed a large collection of artifacts; other
collectors in the area are identified.

Williams, Walter J.
1935
Museum and field sketches: collection of artifacts of the American Indian in the Baylor University Museum. 1:27-36 Bailey, Bosque,
Brewster, Burnet, ComanChe, Coyrell, E1 P~iso, Falls, Hamilton, Hill,
Lampasas, Lee, Limestone, McLennan, Robertson, San Saba, Tom
Green; Alaska, Costa Rica; England, Mexico
Brief inventory of Indian artifacts housed in Baylor University
Museum; specimens from other parts of the worm are included.
Wilson, Loyall
1956
Case report on burials, Warner’s no. 2.7 : 56 McLennan
Examination offive skeletons and a group of miscellaneous bones
from the Asa Warner site shows that most of the skeletons were of
young adult males.

202

Texas Archeological Society

AREAS

Counties
Bailey
Bryan 1953
Williams 1935
Bell
Anonymous 1935b
Aynesworth 1936a, 1936b
Bryan 1936a
Lux 1936
Russell 1936
Turner 1936
Watt 1936, 1937c, 1953b, 1967a
Williams 1935
Bosque
Anonymous 1935b
Forrester 1985
Kirkland 1938
Pearce 1936
Redder 1985b
Stephenson 1985
Watt 1953b, 1967a
Williams 1935
Brazos
White 1937
Brewster
Watt 1967a
Williams 1935
Burleson
White 1937
Burnet
Williams 1935
Cameron
Shafer 1985
Comanche
Anonymous 1935b
Aynesworth 1936b
Runkles 1936
Watt 1935
Williams 1935
Concho
Kirkland 1937
Coyrell
Acree 1935
Anonymous 1935b
Bryan 1935
Horne 1938

Pearce 1936
Simmons 1953, 1956
Watt 1935, 1938b, 1953b, 1956b
Williams 1935
Culberson
Williams 1935
E1 Paso
Williams 1935
Falls
Anonymous 1935b
Bryan 1935, 1936b
Watt 1935, 1938a, 1953b
Watt and Meroney 1937a
White 1937
Williams 1935
Fisher
Andretta 1956
Gaines
White 1937
Goliad
Reed 1938b
Hamilton
Anonymous 1935b
Home 1936
Kirkland 1938
Watt 1953b
Watt and Meroney 1937a
Williams 1935
Hidalgo
Shafer 1985
Hill
Anonymous 1935b
Bryan 1936c, 1937
Stephenson 1985
Story 1985
Watt 1937b, 1938a, 1953b
Watt and Meroney 1937a
Williams 1935
Houston
Story 1985
Jeff Davis
Kirkland 1937
Kent
Andretta 1956

Moore and Bradle--CTAS Index

Lamar
Story 1985
Lampasas
Anonymous 1935b
Williams 1935
Lee
Williams 1935
Limestone
Anonymous 1935b
Bryan 1935, 1936c
Story 1985
Watt 1935, 1938a, 1953b
Williams 1935
McLennan
Anonymous 1935b
Atlee 1956
Aynesworth 1936b
Bryan 1935, 1936b, 1936c, 1937
Dietz 1935
Home 1935
Lux 1937
Mason 1936a, 1936b, 1937
Meroney 1936
Moore 1935
Pearce 1936
Perkins 1956
Redder 1967
Smith 1967
Story 1985
Turner 1937
Watt 1935, 1938a, 1944a, 1944b,
1953a, 1953b, 1956a, 1967b, 1969
Watt and Meroney 1937a, 1937b
White 1937
Williams 1935
Wilson 1956
Milam
Atlee 1956
Story 1985
Watt 1938a, 1953b
White 1937
Mitchell
Story 1985

Montague
Story 1985
Navarro
Anonymous 1935b
Bryan 1936c, 1937
Watt 1938a
Palo Pinto
Story 1985
Rains
Story 1985
Red River
Hampton and Moore 1936
Reeves
Kirkland 1937
Robertson
Watt 1953b
White 1937
Williams 1935
San Saba
Williams 1935
Scurry
Andretta I956
Stephens
Atlee 1956
Conger 1953a
Terrell
Kirkland 1937
Tom Green
Williams 1935
Travis
Bryan 1936b
Upshur
Atlee 1953
ValVerde
Kirkland 1937
Simmons 1956
Watt 1936, I967a
Walker
White 1937
Williamson
Bryan 1935, 1936b
Watt 1938a
Willacy
Shafer 1985

203

204

Texas Archeological Society

Other States
Alabama
Watt 1967a
Alaska
Watt 1967a
Williams 1935
California
Lux 1935
Colorado
Agogino 1985
Meroney 1935
Florida
Story 1985
Georgia
Watt 1967a
Iowa
Agogino 1985
Kansas
Story 1985
Kentucky
Watt 1967a

Nevada
Watt 1967a
New Mexico
de Graffenreid 1937
Dietz 1936, 1938
Home 1937
Marrs 1953
Reed 1938a
North Dakota
Smith 1953
Ohio
Agogino 1985
Watt 1967a
Oklahoma
Story 1985
Watt 1967a
Utah
Sneed 1956
Wyoming
Agogino 1985

Other Countries

Central America
Watt 1967a
Costa Rica
Williams 1935
England
Williams 1935
France
Kirkland 1937

Mexico
Watt 1967a,
Williams 1935
Peru
Watt 1967a
Spain
Kirkland 1937

Drainages

Aquilla Creek
Bryan 1935b, 1937, 1938a
Moore 1935
Story 1985
Watt 1935, 1938a, 1944a, 1953b
Barron Branch
Story 1985
Watt 1969
Battle Creek
Bryan 1937
Beehouse Creek
Watt 1935

Big Creek
Bryan 1935b
Blackwater Draw
Bryan 1953
Bluff Creek
Dietz 1935
Watt 1944a
Bosque River
Bryan 1935b
Watt 1953b, 1967b
Brazos River
Agogino 1985

Moore and Bradle--CTAS Index

Aynesworth 1936b, 1938
Bryan 1935a, 1935b, 1937
Forrester 1985
Lux 1937
Mason 1936a, 1937
Meroney 1936
Moore 1935
Redder 1967, 1985b
Smith 1967
Stephenson 1985
Story 1985
Turner 1937
Watt 1935, 1938a, 1944a, 1944b,
1953a, 1953b, 1956a, 1967a, 1969
Watt and Meroney 1937a, 1973b
White 1937
Williams 1935
Wilson 1956
Brushy Creek
Bryan 1935a
White 1937
Cameron Creek
Home 1937
Cave Creek
Horne 1938
Chambers Creek
Watt 1938a
Christmas Creek
Bryan 1935a, 1936b, 1936c
Colorado River
Bryan 1953
Shafer 1985
Story 1985
Cook’s Creek
Andretta 1956
Coyrell Creek
Bryan 1935b
Cow Bayou
Bryan 1935a, 1936c
Cowhouse Creek
Bryan 1935b
Russell 1936
Simmons 1953
Watt 1944a, 1953b
Coyote Lake
Bryan 1953
Double Mountain Fork
of the Brazos River

205

Andretta 1956
Bryan 1953
Elm Creek
White 1937
Garrison Reservoir
Smith 1953
Hacking River
Watt 1967a
Harl Creek
White 1937
Hog Creek
Bryan 1935b
Horse Creek
Simmons 1956
Watt 1956b
Kell Branch of Stampede Creek
Aynesworth 1936a
Lux 1936
Turner 1936
Watt 1936
Lake Shafter
Andretta 1956
Lake Waco
Watt 1967b
Lake Whitney
Watt and Meroney 1937a
Lampasas River
Bryan 1935b
Russell 1936
Watt 1953b
Leon River
Acree 1935
Aynesworth 1936a, 1936b
Bryan 1935a, 1935b, 1936a
Russell 1936
Runkles 1936
Simmons 1953, 1956
Watt 1935, 1936, 1938b, 1953b
Watt and Meroney 1937b
Little Brazos Creek
Bryan 1935b
Little Brazos River
Bryan 1935b
Watt 1944a
Little Cypress Creek
Atlee 1953
Little River
Bryan 1935b

206

Texas Archeological Society

Watt 1937c
White 1937
Medridian Creek
Kirkland 1938
Middle Bosque Creek (River)
Bryan 1935b
Perkins 1956
Mimbres River, New Mexico
Dietz 1936, 1938
Horne 1937
Marrs 1953
Reed 1938a
Watt 1937c
Mississippi River Valley
Story 1985
Watt 1967a
Missouri River
Smith 1953
Navasota River
Bryan 1935a, 1935b, 1936c, 19,
1938b
Watt 1935, 1953b
Neches River
Story 1985
Watt 1953b
Neils Creek
Kirkland 1938
Nolan Creek
Russell 1936
North Bosque River
Watt 1967b
Ohio River, Ohio/Kentucky
Watt 1967a
Oso Creek
Shafer 1985
Owl Creek
Watt 1944a
Partridge Creek
Watt and Meroney 1937b
Patrick Creek
Bryan 1937
Pecan Creek
Home 1936
Pecos River
Bryan 1953
Kirkland 1937
Simmons 1956
Peugh Branch
Simmons 1953

Pin Oak Creek
Bryan 1936c, 1937, 1938d
Pine Creek
Hampton and Moore 1936
Pond Creek
White 1937
Possum Creek
Redder 1967
Prairie Creek
White 1937
Ranch Creek
Watt 1935
Red Aleck Creek
Andretta 1956
Red River, Texas
Story 1985
Richland Creek
Bryan 1935a, 1936c, 1937
Watt 1938a
Rio Grande
Shafer 1985
Story 1985
Rock Creek
Bryan 1937
Rocky Creek
Watt 1967a
Rough Creek
Andretta 1956
Sabine River
Story 1985
Watt 1953b
San Francisco River, New Mexico
de Graffenreid 1937
San Gabriel River
Atlee 1956
White 1937
Salado Creek
Russell 1936
Sandy Creek
White 1937
Sass Box Branch
Simmons 1953
South Bosque Creek (River)
Bryan 1935b
Stampede Creek (Kell Branch)
Watt 1936
Tehuacana Creek
Bryan 1935, 1936b, 1936c, 1937
Moore 1935

Moore and Bradle--CTAS Index

Story 1985
Watt 1953b
Tonk Creek
Atlee 1956
Horne 1935
Mason 1936b
Perkins 1956
Watt 1935, 1944a
Tradinghouse Creek
Bryan 1935b, 1937
Watt 1935
Trinity River
Bryan 1935b, 1937

Shafer 1985
Story 1985
Watt 1938a, 1953b
Walker’s Creek
White 1937
White Rock Creek
Bryan 1937
Watt 1944a
Williams Creek
Bryan 1935b, 1937
Watt 1935, 1944a
Withlacoochee River, Florida
Story 1985

207

208

Texas Archeological Society

SUBJECTS
Artifacts
Abrading Implements
Watt 1944a
Atlatl Hooks
Watt 1967a
Beads
Acree 1935
Andretta 1956
de Graffenreid 1937
Dietz 1936, 1938
Forrester 1985
MalTs 1953
Redder 1985b
Reed 1938b
Smith 1953
Story 1985
Watt 1937b
Watt and Meroney 1937a
White 1937
Bone
Acree 1935
Andretta 1956
Aynesworth 1936b
de Graffenreid 1937
Dietz 1936
Forrester 1985
Marrs 1953
Mason 1936b
Perkins 1956
Redder 1985b
Reed 1938a
Runkles 1936
Story 1985
Turner 1936
Watt 1936, 1938b, 1956a, 1967c
Watt and Meroney 1937a
Celts
Bryan 1936c
Runkles 1936
Clay Pipes
Story 1985
Watt and Meroney 1937a
Corner-tang Implements
Bryan 1936c
Forrester 1985

Meroney 1935
Runkles 1936
Watt 1935
Williams 1935
Ear Spools
Meroney 1936
Manos
Bryan 1937
de Graffenreid 1937
Dietz 1938
Forrester 1985
Kirkland 1938
Marrs 1953
Reed 1938a
Simmons 1953
Watt 1935, 1936, 1944a, 1967b
Metal Artifacts
Conger 1953a
Reed 1938a, 1938b
Story 1985
Watt and Meroney 1937a
Metal Arrowpoints
Runkles 1936
Reed 1938b
Watt and Meroney 1937a
Story 1985
Metates
Acree 1935
Bryan 1936c, 1937
Dietz 1935, 1938
Forrester 1985
Kirkland 1938
Marrs 1953
Mason 1936b
Perkins 1956
Watt 1935, 1944a
Williams 1935
Mortars
Marrs 1953
Reed 1938a
Runkles 1936
Simmons 1953
Williams 1935
Watt 1944a

Moore and Bradle--CTAS Index

Obsidian
de Graffenreid 1937
Forrester 1985
Runkles 1936
Simmons 1953
Pestles
de Graffenreid 1937
Marrs 1953
Reed 1938a
Runkles 1936
Williams 1935
Pottery
Atlee 1953
Bryan 1935, 1936c, 1937, 1953
de Graffenreid 1937
Dietz 1936, 1938
Forrester, 1985
Hampton and Moore 1936
Home 1937
Marrs 1953
Reed 1938a
Runkles 1936
Russell 1936
Story 1985
Watt 1953b, 1956a
Watt and Meroney 1937a
Williams 1935

209

Red Ochre
Forrester 1985
Redder 1985b
Shell
Acree 1935
de Graffenreid 1937
Dietz 1935, 1936, 1938
Forrester 1985
Redder 1967, 1985b
Reed 1938a
Story 1985
Watt 1936, 1956a, 1967b
Watt and Meroney 1937a
Sinkers
Andretta 1956
Anonymous 1935a
Bryan 1936c, 1937
Moore 1935
Runkles 1936
Watt 1935, 1938a, 1944a
Williams 1935
Tomahawks
Meroney 1935
Turquoise
de Graffenreid 1937
Reed 1938a

Site Types
Burials
Acree 1935
Andretta 1956
Atlee 1953
Aynesworth 1936a, 1936b
Bryan 1935
Conger 1953a
de Graffenreid 1937
Dietz 1935, 1936, 1938
Forrester 1985
Hampton and Moore 1936
Horne 1937
Kirkland 1938
Lux 1935, 1936, 1937
Marrs 1953
Mason 1937
Meroney 1936
Perkins 1956

Redder 1985b
Reed 1938b
Russell 1936
Smith 1967
Story 1985
Turner 1936, 1937
Watt 1936, 1938b, 1944a, 1953b,
1956a, 1956b, 1967a
Watt and Meroney 1937a, 1937b
Williams 1935
Wilson 1956
Burned Rock Mounds and Middens
Acree 1935
Andretta 1956
Bryan 1935, 1953
Kirkland 1938
Mason 1936a, 1937
Redder 1967

210

Texas Archeological Society

Simmons 1953
Watt 1936, 1953a, 1956a, 1967b
Historic Indian
Acree 1935
Andretta 1956
Bryan 1936c, 1956
Meroney 1935
Reed 1938b
Smith 1953
Sneed 1956
Story 1985
Watt 1944b, 1953b, 1969
Watt and Meroney 1937a
Lithic Caches
White 1937
Horne 1936
Williams 1935
Lithic Workshops
Kirkland 1938
Mimbres
Dietz 1938
Home 1937
Marrs 1953
Reed 1938a
Missions
Reed 1938b
Paleo-Indian
Agogino 1985
Andretta 1956
Bryan 1953

Forrester 1985
Redder 1985b
Runkles 1936
Rock Art
Atlee 1956
Bryan 1953
Horne 1935
Kirkland 1937
Mason 1936b
Watt 1936, 1944a
Rock-shelters
Aynesworth 1936a
Conger 1953a
Dietz 1935
Forrester 1985
Horne 1938
Kirkland 1937, 1938
Lux 1936
Mason 1936b
Pearce 1936
Perkins 1956
Redder 1985b
Russell 1936
Simmons 1956
Smith 1967
Turner 1937
Watt 1936, 1938b, 1944a, 1956a,
1967a
Watt and Meroney 1937a

Site Names
Asa Warner (41ML46)
Watt 1956
Ayala
Shafer 1985
Ayres Farm
Story 1985
Big Hill
Andretta 1956
Cement Hill, 39D2-2
Watt 1953b
Cement Plant
Bryan 1937
Chupek, 39B5-16
Watt 1953b

Clovis
Bryan 1953
Colonel Cooper
Story 1985
Colorado City
Story 1985
Coyote Lake Midden
Bryan 1953
Delia, 40A5-11
Watt 1953b
Flag Lake, 40C8-5
Watt 1953b
Floyd Morris
Shafer 1985

Moore and Bradle--CTAS Index

Fort Berthold
Smith 1953
Gas Plant
Story 1985
Gilbert
Story 1985
Hog Island Camp
White 1937
Horn Shelter Number 2
Forrester 1985
Redder 1985
Keeran Ranch
Story 1985
Kell Branch
Watt 1946
Kirchmire
Shafer 1985
La Bahia del Epiritu Santo
Reed 1938b
Latham
Andretta 1956
Lattimare Hill (41ML52)
Moore 1935
Longest
Story 1985
Lookout Point
Watt 1967
Lower Tucker
Story 1985
Lubbock
Bryan 1953
McLaren Camp
White 1937
Nuestra Sefiora de Loreto
Story 1985
Pearson
Story 1985

Possum Branch
Redder 1967
Quintana Anglo Component
Story 1985
Ratliff Mound
Andretta 1956
San Juan Capistrano
Story 1985
San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz
Story 1985
Sanders
Story 1985
Stansbury
Story 1985
Stone
Story 1985
Vinson
Story 1985
Upper Tucker
Story 1985
Walton
Story 1985
Warner No. 2, 39D3-2
Watt 1953b
Washington-on-the-Brazos
Story 1985
Watson
Story 1985
White
Story 1985
Womack
Story 1985
39 BI-20 (41-39BI-20)
Watt 1967
41ML68
Story 1985

Early Explorers
Cabeza de Vaca
Bryan 1956
Coronado
Bryan 1956

De Soto
Bryan 1956
La Salle
Bryan 1956

211

212

Texas Archeological Society

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We express our appreciation to those who helped make this project possible. Albert J.
Redder and D. Gentry Steele read the manuscript and made corrections. David Carlson
reviewed the manuscript and allowed us to use his word processor to type it. We also acknowledge the members of the Central Texas Archeological Society who have contributed
not only to the articles included in this index but also to the knowledge of Central Texas
archeology.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
William E. Moore received his M.A. in anthropology from Texas A&M University in
1980. Since that time he has worked for Heartfield, Price, and Greene, Inc., in Monroe
Louisiana; Intermountain Research in Silver City, Nevada; and the Nevada State Museum
in Carson City, Nevada. Moore is now employed with the Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University. His major interests are archival research, editing, and report
preparation and his areas of specialization are Southeast Texas and Central Texas. Recent
publications include a report of the 1976 Texas Archeological Society Field School (Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Volume 53) and a bibliography of historical archeology in Texas (with Roger Moore) to be published by the Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Michael R. Bradle is an undergraduate student in anthropology at Texas A&M University. He recently participated in a survey of Fort Hood, Texas conducted by the Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University and has worked with Frederick
Briuer and George Thomas, Fort Hood archeologists, in a monitoring project for Fort
Hood sites. His major areas of interest are documentation of vandalism of archeological
sites and relations between the archeological community and the public. Bradle is president of the Pecan Valley Archaeological Society in Lampasas, Texas.

Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains from the Palm
Harbor site (41AS80), a Mortuary Site on the Central
Gulf Coast of Texas

A. G. Comuz~e, Marianne Marek, and D. Gentry Steele

ABSTRACT
In October 1980, during a construction project, human remains were
recovered near Rockport, Texas, from what has been determined to be a prehistoric mortuary site. Because the remains were comingled during the uncontrolled removal, they were treated like ossuary samples. There were at
least seven individuals (four males, two females, and a single juvenile of indeterminate sex), ranging in age from about five to over 40. The pathologies
in the sample are few and are mainly associated with age-related degenerative conditions. The three cases of traumatic injury show evidence of antemortem recovery. These individuals came from a relatively tall, markedly
robust population that had a large degree of sexual dimorphism.

INTRODUCTION
In October 1980 the remains of 12 humans were recovered from a site in the
central part of the Gulf Coast of Texas, at N27°58’25", W97°05’45", just south of
Rockport. The site, now known as the Palm Harbor site (41AS80), had been inadvertently exposed during construction of a building on private property.
When the human skeletal material was exposed, the construction crew notified the Aransas County sheriff’s office. Believing the remains might be those of
recently deceased individuals, the sheriff’s staff undertook noncontrolled excavations in an effort to determine their origin and extent. After concluding that the
remains were prehistoric, the State Archeologist’s staff asked Ed Mokry, of Corpus Christi, to inspect the site and file a report. Mokry in turn requested that the
skeletal remains be analyzed by the writers at the Physical Anthropology Laboratories at Texas A&M University.
As a result of the uncontrolled excavation of the site, much of the site was
disturbed, and much of the skeletal material recovered had been scattered and
severely damaged. To complicate the matter, the remains that were removed for
analysis were inadvertently mixed at the site (E. Mokry, n.d.). Because of the

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986for 1984)

214

Texas Archeological Society

extremely fragmented and comingled condition of the material, it was impossible to reconstruct any of the skeletons. Therefore, the bones were analyzed by
skeletal elements. This paper reports on the anatomy of the skeletal material, the
pathologies suffered by the individuals, and attempts to reconstruct the basic
demographic features of the sample.

ANATOMICAL DESCRIPTIONS

Because the remains were comingled, they were separated into skeletal elements and analyzed as if they were an ossuary sample: they were separated into
skeletal elements and analyzed as subsamples. The demographic and pathological data for each subsample are presented separately.
Crania
At least seven individuals are represented by crania: three males (one partial
cranium may represent a fourth male), two females, and one juvenile of undetermined sex. The ages, based on eruption of teeth, extent of dental attrition, and
the state of suture fusion, range from about five to over forty years. The only
evidences of pathology in the cranial remains point to periosteal infections
of possibly treponemal origin in two individuals; there is no evidence of traumatic injury.
During the analysis of these cranial remains, basic measurements were recorded (Table l). These measurements give good indications of both the overal!
robusticity and the extent of sexual dimorphism of the sample. Comparison of
crania B and G provides the strongest indication of the sexual dimorphism in the
population, since they appear to be of the same age. This robusticity and sexual
dimorphism is most readily apparent in the measurements of the palate and mandible. The mandibles of the males B and E have significantly larger bigonial and
bicondylar widths, together with longer ascending ramus heights than do the females C and G. Finally, the males A and B have significantly greater cranial circumference than does the female G.
Although individual C was designated a female on the basis of visual analysis, in some cases its measurements overlap those of the males. This may indicate
either that the individual was a male or that the individual was simply a larger
than average female. Although the measurements of C are large, the writers believe that C is most likely a female, since there is an apparent absence of welldefined sites of muscle attachment.
Cranium A
The first individual examined is represented by a nearly complete and articulated braincase, missing only the squamous part of the left temporal. Except for
the nasals, the face is completely missing. Since the breaks in the bone appear to
be fresh, both the loss of the squamous and a fracture of the right parietal are
believed to have occurred during removal.

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

215

Table 1. Cranial Measurements (mm)
Specimen
A
Sex
Glabello-occipital length
Maximum breadth
Cranial index
Basion-bregma height
Minimum frontal breadth
Bizygomatic breadth
Nasion-prosthion
Nasal height
Nasal breadth
Interorbital breadth
Basion-prosthion
Basion-subnasal
Basion-nasion
Orbital height: Left
Right
Orbital breadth: Left
Right
Palate breadth
Palate length
Symphysis height
Bigonial width
Bicondylar width
Gonial angle
Ascending ramus height
Minimum breadth
ascending ramus
Mandible length
Skull circumference
Mastoid length

B

C

D

E

G

Adult
Mean

M
F
M
M
M
F
194
178
185
191
--187
136
141
131
141
--137
70
79
71
74
--73
137
.....
-102
t00
-84
--95
142
......
57
.....
__
.......
25
-24
-24
-24
25
28
33
---27
......
-.......
110
.....
-34
.....
__
-34
38
---36
......
--41
.....
36
-65
-63
-55
50
....
---32
35
36
--34
89
121
-99
--103
118
135
----127
104°
105°
109°
130°
--112°
73
72
66
-57
-67
--520
33

42
91
512
30

-103
---

__
__
__
__

38
82
---

31
82
495
28

37
90
509
30

This specimen has been identified as male because of the noticeably heavy
browridges and a well-developed occipital protuberance accompanied by a welldefined crest running perpendicular to the nuchal lines of the occipital. In addition, the bone is relatively thick.
Since there are no teeth associated with this cranium, dental attrition cannot
be used as an indicator of age, but the specimen does have areas of suture fusion
and obliteration along the coronal and sagittal sutures, tentatively identifying the
individual as an older adult (Bass 1971).

216

Texas Archeological Society

Cranium B
This specimen consists of three-fourths of a reconstructed braincase (Figures 19, 21), together with face (Figure 1) and mandible (Figure 23); the basal
part of the braincase is totally absent. These remains are extremely fragmentary,
and the freshness of the breaks indicates that they were broken during excavation. The facial remains consist of both maxillae, the right malar, and the right
lacrimal (Figure 1). The maxillary dentition is complete except for the first and
second right molars. The mandible is complete except for the medial part of both
right and left condyles and the left lateral incisor and canine.
These are apparently the remains of an extremely large, robust male. In addition to a well-defined browridge and what is best described as an occipital protuberance, there is a well-developed crest that runs transverse to the nuchal lines
of the occipital, indicating an area of large muscle attachment. The mastoid processes are large, a trait generally found in males, and the mental spine of the
mandible also has indications of a strong muscle attachment. The mental eminence of the mandible is extremely square and the teeth are relatively large.
The third molars are erupted and show signs of light wear, basically a polishing of the occlusal surfaces. There is no apparent fusion of the cranial sutures.
In combination, these characteristics point to a young adult, possibly in the late
teens or early twenties.
The cranium shows no signs of pathology or trauma, but it does have an
extremely large Inca bone in the lambdoidal suture. This supernumerary b~ne is
bounded by the temporal mastoids, the lambdoidal suture, and a supernumerary
suture bisecting the squamous part of the occipital. It has a maximum height of
53 mm and a maximum breadth of 93 ram. It is interesting to note that in a much
earlier study, Woodbury and Woodbury (1935) reported that this condition was
totally absent in all of the coastal Indian samples they observed.
The dentition of Cranium B shows no evidence of caries or other dental pathology. All of the missing teeth--the right mandibular lateral incisor and canine
and the left maxillary first and second molars--appear to be postmortem losses.
The maxillary left lateral incisor is morphologically atypical with respect to the
other upper incisors. The other incisors have the shovel shape characteristic of
Amerindian populations, but this one has a rounded form that is intermediate
between the shovel shape and the atypical peg shape commonly seen in most
supernumerary incisors. The upper central incisors evidence what Dahlberg
(1963) described as lateral winging (Figure 2).
The wear patterns on these teeth can be characterized as light on the second
and third molars and heavy on the incisors (Figure 2), a pattern that has been
reported for Texas coastal Indian populations (Maples 1962). This individual has
a very marked edge-to-edge bite (Figure 1).

Cranium C
This specimen consists of a nearly complete braincase, a left malar, the
petrosal and mastoid processes of the left temporal, and a partial mandible (Figure 3), including a right ascending ramus.

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

217

Figure 1. Attrition of maxillary and mandibular dentition of cranium B resulting in an
edge to edge bite.

Figure 2. Maxillary dentition of cranium B showing an atypical left lateral incisor and
lateral winging of the central incisors.

218

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Mandible of cranium C showing severe evidence of periodontal infection together with antemortem loss of teeth accompanied by resorption of the bone.

These remains are much more gracile than those of the males A and B, and
are therefore considered female. The browridges are not as well developed, and
the occipital region shows no sign of enlargement or marked muscle attachment.
The mandible is more rounded, and the teeth that are present are generally
smaller than those of the males.
The lower left third molar is present and shows signs of extreme wear, as do
most of the other teeth, but the cranial sutures show no signs of fusion or obliteration. Based on these findings, in the context of this population, cranium C is
considered an adult of middle to old age.
The braincase and facial bones show no evidence of pathology or trauma,
but both the mandible and dentition show signs of a rather severe periodontal
infection (Ortner and Putschar 1981) (Figure 3). The body of the mandible shows
evidence of an alveolar infection with subsequent loss of the teeth and resorption
of the sockets. This individual appears to have lost the right mandibular second
premolar, the right first and second molar, the left first and second molar, and
possibly the left third molar (the loss of the left third molar cannot be positively
documented due to the absence of this part of the mandible). The part of the
mahdible where these teeth were lost shows evidence of both alveolar resorption
and remodeling. This degree of tooth loss and mandibular resorption has been
repOrted in great numbers of individuals from Texas Indian populations (Maples
1962). In addition to the teeth already noted, both of the left mandibular incisors
are missing, probably a postmortem loss. The remaining teeth in this specimen
have the same marked wear pattern as has been noted in other coastal aboriginal

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

4

219

5

Figure 4. Distal view of the right mandibular second premolar of cranium C showing evidence of culturally induced interproximal grooving.
Figure 5. Labial view of the right mandibular second premolar of cranium C showing
evidence of culturally induced interproximal grooving.

populations: a complete loss of enamel on the occlusal surface, exposing the dentine. Wear has completely removed the enamel fi’om the left mandibular third
molar, producing extreme saddling of the occlusal surface. This could be the result of a malocclusion caused by the remodeling of the mandible. It should be
noted, however, that even with the evidence of the severe abscessing of the mandible, which either contributed to or resulted from the loss of the teeth, the remaining teeth show no evidence of dental caries.
The dentition of cranium C is also marked by culturally induced dental mutilation. The type seen here is known as interproximal grooving and is found on
the mesial face of the right mandibular second premolar (Figure 4, 5). This was
accomplished by rubbing a small stick in the interstitial gap between the teeth
and has been seen most commonly between the second premolar and first molar,
the first and second molars, and second and third molars (Ubelaker et al. 1969).
The practice may have occurred in order to counteract dental discomfort by producing a counter pain, thereby inadvertently producing the dental mutilation.
Cranium D
The fourth cranium is represented by a face alone and consists of both right
and left maxillae and malars. Except for the right posterior part of the hard
palate, the bones are relatively complete, but the specimen has suffered postmortem loss of all the maxillary incisors and the right and left maxillary second
and third molars.

220

Texas Archeological Society

Considering the size of the teeth and the width of the face, these remains are
probably those of a male. The severe dental attrition indicates that, relative to the
rest of the sample, the individual was in late middle or old age.
This specimen shows signs of what could be treponemal scarring, manifested
by subperiosteal bone deposition surrounding the anterior nasal spine (Figure 6),
an area commonly affected by treponemal infections (Steinbock 1976).
The dentition also has some interesting wear patterns and indications of disease. The anterior alveolar margin above the left and right first premolars shows
signs of what appears to be deposition of new bone of a type indicative of periodontal infections (Ortner and Putschar 1981). The wear on these teeth can be best
described as extreme (Figure 7). The enamel has been totally removed from all of
the teeth; not only from the occlusa! surfaces, but down to the cervical margins
as well.
The left maxillary first molar has an unusual mol~hological structure in
which the buccal roots extend out beyond the alveolar border, and the occlusal
surface is horseshoe shaped (Figure 7). This same form has been noted in molars
of several specimens from the Callo del Oso site, which is geographically and
perhaps temporally close to the Palm Harbor site.

Cranium E
The fifth cranium is represented by only a few calvarial fragments and a
mandible, all of which are considered to be from the same individual, since they
share the same extent of discoloration and do not articulate with any of the
others. The calvarial fragments consist of a medial part of the frontal, a major
part of the squamous of the left temporal, fragments of the left parietal, two fragments of the right parietal, and one fragment that may be from either the frontal
or a parietal. Missing from the mandible are the right ascending ramus, all of the
incisors, the two canines, and the first right premolar, all of which appear to be
postmortem !osses.
Cranium E is considered that of a male on the basis of the robusticity of the
cranial fragments and mandible and the particularly marked male features, including the heavy browridges on the frontal fragment and the square mandible
with its large, well-defined mental eminence.
The high level of wear on the dentition of these remains indicates that in
relation to the remainder of this population, the individual is an old adult.
The cranial fragments show no evidence of pathology or trauma; all of the
breakage is believed to have occurred during recovery.
Cranium F

The sixth cranium is believed to represent the youngest individual in the
sample; it also has the fewest remains. Only four extremely thin fragments of the
parietal were recovered. The thinness of this tabular bone suggests that these remains are of a juvenile, but because the remains are so few, no assumptions concerning sex, pathologies, or traumas can be made.

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

221

Figure 6. Frontal view of maxilla of cranium D, showing periosteal infection around the
anterior inferior margin of the nasal spine.

Figure 7. Maxillary dentition of cranium D showing extreme dental attrition and an unusual wear pattern on the left maxillary first molar.

222

Texas Archeological Society

Cranium G
This cranium is in relatively complete condition. The bones of the braincase
are virtually intact (Figures 20, 22), with only the left temporal and the basal part
of the skull missing. The face consists of both maxillae, the left lacrimal, and the
right malar. The maxillary dentition is complete except for the postmortem loss
of both medial incisors. The mandible is nearly complete, missing only the right
coronoid process.
These remains are much more gracile than those of the males so far described, so cranium G is believed to represent a female. It has neither a prominent browridge nor extreme development of the occipital protuberance and nuchal.
crest. The teeth are generally smaller than those of the males, and the mandible is
markedly rounded; the mandibles of what are considered males in the sample are
more square.
The third molars show only light wear, suggesting that in this population
this individual was a young adult.
Although there is no evidence of traumatic injury or infectious disease, this
individual does have some interesting dental anomalies and pathologies. The
most unusual feature is a fossa associated with each of the right and left first
upper premolars on the buccal surface of the maxilla. These fossae, in which the
roots of both upper first premolars are exposed, appear to be the result of incomplete formation of the bone during development and not the result of traumatic or
pathological activity. The best evidence to support this argument is the symmetrical nature of the fossae and the fact that the bone inside of them does not differ
from the rest of the cortical bone. However, there is evidence of a carious lesion
with associated abscessing of the upper left canine. This cavity on the occlusa!
surface of the tooth apparently penetrated the pulp cavity and continued into the
root, producing an apical abscess. This could have led to the accumulation of pus
in the gingival sulcus, which would have sought the path of least resistance for
drainage (Gorlin and Goldman 1970). There is an opening, with some associated
bone destruction (Figure 8), from the sulcus of the canine into the fossa of the
first upper premolar. This suggests that the infection had utilized the fossa as part
of its passageway for drainage. The specimen also displays asymmetrical wear of
the occlusal surface of the teeth; the left half of the dentition is much more worn
than the right (Figure 9).

Vertebral Column
The vertebral sample from the Palm Harbor site is fragmentary and poorly
preserved. No juvenile vertebrae were recovered; most elements could be classified only as cervical, thoracic, or lumbar.
Virtually every vertebra in the sample shows some type of pathology, with
arthritic lipping and fusion of elements the most common. Only those with the
most severe pathological conditions are discussed here.

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

223

Figure 8. Left maxilla of cranium G showing abscessing and drainage of the anterior premolar alveolus.

Figure 9. Maxillary dentition of cranium G showing asymmetrical wear of the dental arcade.

224

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 10. Second and third cervical vertebrae showing evidence of arthritic fusion.

Cervical Vertebrae
The sample of cervical vertebrae, all classified as adult, is relatively well
preserved and consists of four atlas, three axis, one third cervical, eight cervicals
numbers 3-6, and one seventh cervical vertebra.
The most severe pathology of the cervical vertebrae is fusion of an axis to a
third cervical (Figure 10). The fusion occurs predominantly in the region of the
neural arches. The articular processes are completely fused, and the beginnings
of fusion are apparent in the posterior region of the centrum. The inferior aspect
of the anterior part of the centrum of the third cervical also shows some evidence
of fusion to a fourth cervical, but this fourth cervical was not recovered.
All of the remaining nine cervicals show some degree of arthritic lipping,
characterized by the buildup of bone on the inferior and superior margins of the
centrum (Steinbock 1976). Of these nine elements, two have flaring of the anterior inferior edge of the centrum; two other specimens exhibit evidence of fusion
to their articulating partners, and two have deposition of numerous bony spicules
on the central surface of the centrum.
Thoracic Vertebrae
The 29 thoracic vertebrae were separated into upper, middle, and lower
thoracics, based on the relative size of the centrum in combination with the angle
of the spinous process. The five uppermost thoracics had the smallest centra and
more horizontally extended spinous processes; the six lowest thoracics generally
had larger centra and horizontally extending, slightly squarish spinous processes

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

225

(Steele and Bramblett n.d.). The middle thoracics have medium-sized centra
in combination with sharper, more downward angles of the spinous processes
(Steele and Bramblett n.d.).
All of the thoracic vertebrae in the sample have some degree of osteoarthritic lipping similar to that found in the cervicals and characterized by recognizable rings of bone deposition along the superior and inferior edges of the centra. Bony spicules similar to those described on the cervicals occur on only one
of the thoracic vertebrae.
Lumbar Vertebrae
The fragmentary condition of the lumbar vertebrae has allowed the identification of only five isolated elements. All are classified as adult and show some
degree of arthritic lipping.
The most severe case of vertebral osteoarthritis is displayed on a fifth lumbar; the lipping is most visible on the anterior inferior border of the centrum (Figure 11). The other lumbar vertebrae also display some degree of lipping on the
superior and inferior margins of the centra, as noted in the other vertebrae in the
sample.
Clavicles

The Palm Harbor clavicle sample consists of seven isolated specimens, six
of which are classified as adult and one as juvenile (Table 2). The age determinations of the adult specimens were based on their relatively large size in combination with their degrees of epiphyseal fusion. The age of the juvenile specimen
was determined to be under 18, due to absence of the medial epiphysis (Bass
1971). Its size suggests the individual was between five and 10 years old.
Virtually every clavicle in the sample has some form of pathology and/or
anomalous sternal facet. The sternal end of one clavicle (A) is extremely flat and
worn, with a pitted surface indicative of osteoarthritis (Steinbock 1976). A second
(E) has an abnormally deep, sharply depressed area on the surface of the sternal
facet, with visible wear on the margins and possible deformation of the epiphysis. Evidence of periosteal infection is seen on the inferior aspect of the distal
end near the conoid tubercle of a third clavicle (B). The sternal facets on three
other adult clavicles (B, C, and D) differ markedly in shape, a difference noted
by others in this facet of the clavicle (McKern and Stewart 1957) (Figure 12).
Scapulae
The sample of scapulae from Palm Harbor is composed of seven isolated
specimens that consist mainly of the heavier bone of the spine, glenoid cavity,
axillary border, and the acromion and coracoid processes. The thinner bone of
the scapula bodies is consistently absent.
On the basis of size, six of these specimens are classified as adult; four of
the six have lipping of the glenoid cavity that is considered common after the age
of 30 to 35 (Steele and Bramblett n.d.). The remaining scapula has been classified as juvenile due to the billowing of the epiphyseal surfaces of the coracoid

226

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 11. Lumbar vertebra (II) showing evidence of severe arthritic lipping on the anterior inferior margin.

Figure 12. Sternal ends of (left to right) clavicles B, D, and C, showing atypical development.

and glenoid cavity, which indicates that the individual was under 15 (Bass 1971);
the size of the bone indicates that the individual was over five.
Only one adult specimen in this sample shows evidence of a pathological
condition: a small amount of bone deposition on the surface of the glenoid cavity,
which may be the result of the early stages of osteoarthritis.

Sterna
The sternum sample consists of two manubria and one sternal body. Both
manubria show evidence of the beginning of fusion, but neither can be articulated with the sternal body. The body consists of three segments, and the inferior
surface of the third segment is billowed. All of the sternal remains are classified
as adult, and no pathological conditions are evident.

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

227

table 2. Clavical Measurements (mm)
Specimen
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

Side

Right

Right

Left

Right

Left

Left

Left

Age

Adult Adult Adult Adult Adult Adult Juvenile

Maximum
length
Middle
circumference

148

43

......

42

32

--

36

--

26

Adult
Mean

t48

38.25

Ribs
The fragmentary condition of the ribs has made it difficult to determine the
number in the sample; only two could be reconstructed completely. Two rib fragments appear to be juvenile; the remainder appear to be adult. There is no evidence of pathology on any of the ribs.

Humeri
The Palm Harbor humerus sample (Table 3) consists of nine isolated specimens. On the basis of epiphyseal fusion, seven of these specimens, three right
and four left, are classified as adults more than 20 years old (Bass 1971; Steele
and Bramblett n.d.). The two remaining humeri belong possibly to one juvenile
between five and 12 years old (Table 11).
Abnormal bone development that may be osteoarthritis occurs in four of the
adult specimens at the junction between the capitulum and trochlea, and may
correspond to a similar bone formation found in the trochlear notches of several
specimens of the ulna sample (Figure 13). Further evidence of osteoarthritis is
seen in the prominent lipping of the distal edge of the olecranon fossa.
The most severe abnormality of the humeri occurs in an adult specimen
where a possible dislocation of the ulna is indicated by a relatively large wear
facet on the lateral wall of the olecranon fossa (Figure 14). This fossa is very
deep, and there is also a small area of bone formation on the medial wall. No
corresponding wear pattern can be found on any of the ulnae in the sample. It
should also be noted that this bone has the greatest bicondylar width of the
humerus sample (Humerus F, Table 3)(Figure 13).
The only other abnormality of the humerus sample is the extreme gracility
of one adult specimen (Humerus C, Table 3). Even without the distal end and
olecranon fossa, it is one of the longest bones in the sample and has the largest
head of all the humeri. Yet the deltoid tuberosity is almost absent, and the proximal end is unusually smooth, to the extent that the division between the greater
tuberosity and the head is barely visible.

228

Texas Archeological Society

©
°~

=
+1
t"q

~

,,6

O

O

©

+1
~

C’q

~.D

I

tt’3

t"q ¢’q

+1
t-...-

,,6~.

©

tr3

+1
c,.)

,-z

<

o
t, -)

°
cq

<

~

.~~

~

~

~D

’~

e~

~

tt’3

t"q

"~

.~

~ < ~

~~ ~

~

~ ~ ~ ~

~.~

~o°

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

229

Figure 13. Humerus F, showing the formation of a bony ridge on the ventral surface of the
capitulum, with a corresponding development of a bony ridge on the ventral surface of the
trochlear notch of ulna C.

Figure 14. Olecranon fossa of humerus F showing a large wear facet on the lateral surface.

230

Texas Archeological Society

Table 4. Radius Measurements (mm)
Specimen
A
Side
Age
Maximum
length

Left

B

C

D

Right Right Right

E

F

G

H

Left

Left

Right

Right

Adult
Mean

Adult Adult Adult Adult Adult Adult Adult Juvenile

235

236

247"

263 .....

245.25

Approximate length.

Radii
On the basis of the amount of epiphyseal fusion, seven of the eight radii in
the Palm Harbor sample (four right and three left) are classified as adults more
than 20 years old (Table 4). The remaining radius is classified as a juvenile between five and 18 years old (Bass 1971; Steele and Bramblett n.d.).
Periosteal infection is evident on the distal ends of two of the adult specimens; osteoarthritis is evident on two others. In one, osteoarthritis is manifested
by lipping along the edges of the lunate surface, and there is a small area of bone
deposition along the anteriomedial aspect of the border between the lunate and
scaphoid surfaces. In the other, the medial side of the head has an overhanging lip
(Ortner and Putschar 1981).
An important abnormality of the radius sample is seen in four of the adults
as a deep depressed area located laterally on the midshaft in the area of insertion
of the Pronator teres muscle (Gray 1936)(Figure 15).
Ulnae
On the basis of epiphyseal fusion six (three right and three left) of the eight
Palm Harbor ulnae are classified as adults more than 20 years old (Bass 1971,
Steele and Bramblett n.d.) (Table 5). The two remaining ulnae are from a young
adult about 17 to 20 years old (Ulna A) and a juvenile between five and 16 years
old (Bass 1971; Steele and Bramblett n.d.).
Robusticity is reflected in four of the adult ulnae by the prominent depression under the coronoid process of the trochlear notch, in the area of insertion for
the thick tendon of the Brachialis anticus muscle (Gray 1936).
In two adult specimens, a pathological condition is suggested by a sharp,
medial-lateral ridge of developed bone on the nonarticular strip of the trochlear
notch (Figure 13). As mentioned above, this bony ridge may correspond to a
similar development of bone on the distal articular surfaces of several specimens
of humeri. Together, these bone formations appear to indicate degenerative arthritis. Another abnormal ulna (Ulna D), which has an unusually straight, smooth
shaft, is from an adult.

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

231

Table 5. Ulna Measurements (mm)
Specimen
Adult
Mean

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

Side

Right

Right

Right

Right

Left

Left

Left

Right

Age

Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult

Juvenile

Maximum
length

266

Physiological
length

224

Least
circumference
of shaft

31

....

36

40

34

37

236

35

--

--

266

--

230

--

35.5

Evidence of a traumatic injury, in the form of a midshaft fracture, is shown
on one adult specimen, Ulna E (Figure 16). The injury is manifested by a large
callus whose surface appears to be composed of relatively smooth laminar bone,
indicating complete mending of the break before death (Steinbock 1976).

Pelves
The shattered and warped condition of the pelvic remains permitted only
limited reconstruction. Seven ilia fragments (four right and three left) with identifiable sciatic notches were recovered. Determinations of sex were based on the
angles of these notches together with the presence or absence of preauricular
sulci. Specimens with sciatic notches of less than 50 degrees and lacking preauricular sulci were considered male. Specimens with angles greater than 50 degrees or with preauricular sulci were considered female (Table 6). As with the
rest of the skeletal remains, there is marked sexual dimorphism in the pelvic
sample. The bones of the males appear to be heavy and generally robust; those of
the females are much more gracile and usually thinner.
Six of the seven ilia in this sample are identified as adult. The remaining
one, based on the absence of fusion of the ischium with the pubis, is considered a
juvenile between five and 12 years old (Bass 1971; Steele and Bramblett n.d.).
No traumatic or pathological evidence is associated with any of the specimens in the pelvic sample.
Femora
Ten adult femora (five right and five left) from this population were recovered from this sample (Table 7).
Periosteal infection is evident in the slight scarring of the anterior part of the
lower shaft of only one specimen. Another (Femur G) has extreme anteriorposterior flattening that is often associated with healed fractures, but since the

232

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 15. Depressions on the lateral surfaces of radius C (left) and radius F (right) near
the site of insertion for the Pronator teres.

Figure 16. Ulna E, showing a large callus near the midshaft marking the site of a healed
fracture.

surface of the bone does not show any evidence of bone deposition that normally
would be associated with a healed fracture, this flattening is thought to be not
from a traumatic injury, but a structural variation.
Tibiae
All of the nine tibia specimens (five right and four left) represent adult individuals (Table 8).
The only abnormality in the tibia sample occurs in periosteal infections of
five specimens. In the two most advanced cases (Tibiae A and B) severe periosteal

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

233

Table 6. Innominates
Specimen

Angle of sciatic notch
Pre-auricular sulcus

A

B

C

D

E

F"

44

80

97

66

48

62

Absent Present Absent Present Absent Absent

Sexu

Male

Female Female Female

Male

Female

Age c

Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult

a Specimen F is considered a female because of the gracile nature of the sacralilliac joint.
bThere is also a marked sexual dimorphism in this sample, the males being more
robust than the females.
cAge for these specimens is based on the state of fusion of the epiphysis and
overall size.

infection and deformation in the form of large areas of rough, subperiosteal bone
cover the entire bone surfaces (Steinbock 1976)(Figures 17, 18). Surface pitting
and several prominent transverse lines, all probably attributable to the infection,
are visible on the shafts. This pathological condition, commonly seen in tibiae,
may be associated with treponemal infections (Steinbock 1976; Ortner and
Putschar 1981).
Fibulae
The fibula sample consists of only the shafts (two right and three left) of five
adult specimens. No measurements were taken.
The entire surface of the shaft of one fibula is covered with a slight periosteal infection. Another has sustained a longitudinal fracture of the distal shaft.

Carpals and Tarsals
In all, 18 carpals and 10 tarsals (Table 11) were recovered from the Palm
Harbor site; only two are classified as juvenile. One of the juvenile bones, a right
calcaneus (D) with evidence of possible periosteal infection, has been identified
as an individual less than 14 years old (Krogman 1962).
It was possible to estimate the sex of the adult tarsals by utilizing the formula developed by Steele (1976). Based on calculations from measurements of
the calcanea (Table 9), at least one male and one female are represented in the
sample. The one complete talus recovered is apparently from an adult male
(Table 10).

234

Texas Archeological Society

+[
r¢3
e.l

e~l ,,D

~5

,d

e¢3
e¢3

t",l

e¢3

e.l

e,l
t’-.I

p..
t".l

t"-I

.<
+l

-<
+[

.~

t’-.I

<
+1

r’,l
t~ e¢3

+~
e~

t".l

e-I
r¢3 ,,..,.t

+l
t".l

e-I

t¢3 t"-I
r~

+1
t¢’3

e.I

t<
t- 3
e.l

e’l

+[

.<

e-i

t’-.I

O
t",l

eD

~ ~,~

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

~

t’q

e¢3

~’~

~-

t"~

~6

It3

o

1.,..

I
t_

1

t

1

r13

~5

¢0

E

¢q

,i
1

.

~°°

~ ~~ ~
~~
~.~

t"-I

e¢~

235

236

Texas Archeological Society

~D

+1

t"q
OO
t"q

¢’~

.<

I"-

I
+1

.-,

t"q

o")

+1

O

t-’q

+1

I
0’3
t""¢o
I,d
t~

¯

tt3

tr’)

t....... ’,,D

¢o

0

.~

I

1

I

I

0
o
o
0

+1

,

t’~ t"q

+l

o

o
o

<
<

~

o

xz

~

~

E

.0",

o ~

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

17

237

18

Figure 17. Tibia B, showing pitting of the shaft resulting from a severe periosteal
infection.
Figure 18. Tibia A, showing pitting of the shaft resulting from a severe periosteal
infection.

238

Texas Archeological Society

Table 9. Caleaneus Measurements (mm)
Specimen

Side
Age
Maximum length
Minimum width
Body height
Load arm length
Load arm width

A

B

C

D

Adult
Mean

Right
Adult
76
29
48
51
42

Left
Adult
73
28
46
50
42

Left
Adult
81
26
44
49
38

Left
Juvenile
---41
32

76.7
27.7
46.0
50.0
40.7

Table 10. Talus Measurements (mm)
Specimen A "

Side
Age
Maximum length
Maximum width
Body height
Trochlear length
Trochlear width

Right
Adult
56
44
32
31
29

Source: Steele 1976.

DISCUSSION
At least seven individuals are represented in the Palm Harbor sample (Table
11): four probable males, two females, and one juvenile of indeterminable sex.
The individuals ranged in age from a juvenile between five and 10 years old to
relatively old adults over 40. It is impossible to determine if the sex ratio and age
distribution found in this sample are results of its limited size or of population
structure or burial practices.
Estimates of stature for the Palm Harbor sample are based on the femora,
tibiae, humeri, radii, and ulnae (Table 12). The fragmented condition of the remains made it necessary in most cases to calculate the length of each long bone
from its fragments (Steele 1970) and then to estimate stature, following both
Trotter and Gleser (1952) and Genoves (1967).

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

239

Table 11. Minimum Number of Individuals--Palm Harbor Site (41AS80)

Element

Adults

Right
Juvenile

Left
Adults

Juvenile

Cranium"
Humerus
Radius
Ulna
Femur
Tibia
Fibula
Clavicle
Scapula
Innominate

6
3
4
3
5
5
2
3
3
4

1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

-4
4
3
5
4
3
3
4
3

-1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1

Carpal
Pisiform
Capitate
Lunate

0
0
0

0
0
0

1
1
1

0
0
0

Metacarpal
First
Second
Third
Fourth
Fifth

2
1
1
1
2

0
0
0
o
0

1
3
!
1
2

0
0
0
0
0

Tarsal
Calcaneus
Talus
Cuboid
Navicular
Cuneiform

1
1
1
1
1

1
0
0
0
0

2
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

Metatarsal
Third
Fifth

1
0

0
1

0
0

0
0

Sacrum"
Manubrium~’
Sternal body~’

1
2
1

0
0
0

----

----

NOTE: Due to identification difficulties caused by their fragmentary condition,
vertebrae and ribs are not included in this table.

"For convenience, cranium, sacrum, manubrium, and sternal body counts are
listed under the right column only.

240

Texas Archeological Society

oD

¢D
~

+1 +1

+l

+1

¢)

¢)

+1

+1

,4
+1
o,1

06

(.,,)

~

tt’~

¢)

¢9,

’,.0,--,

¢)

"-I.

,4,4

o4~

"fi

+l +l

+1 +l

+1

+1

*"

"~i" 0

~C,

~

oo

",d’- v’~

’,0 ’,.D

’,.D

oo

["’--

12-.-

°

,<-

,ff

~

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

241

Estimates of stature range between 189.1 cm (6 ft. 2.5 in.) and 144.9 cm (4
ft. 9 in.). The mean for all stature estimates is 168 cm. These estimates compare
favorably with those from the Shellpoint sample (Wilkinson 1973), the Oso series (Woodbury and Woodbury 1935), the Doering and Kob sites (Neuman
1952), and the sample from the Harris County Boys School (Wilkinson 1977).
The inhabitants of these sites (Wilkinson !977) and the Palm Harbor site are estimated to have been taller than other Amerindian populations (Wilkinson 1977).
This population is also characterized by its high degree of robusticity, especially noticeable in comparisons with Indians of the Southwest. This robusticity,
also noted in other Indian samples from the Gulf Coast of Texas (Wilkinson
1977), is best expressed in the marked development of the sites for muscle attachment, the marked development of nuchal cresting, the well-defined cranial
and facial features such as browridges and occipital protuberances (Figures 19,
20), and also in the massiveness of the postcranial remains.
In conjunction with well-defined robusticity, this sample is also characterized by marked sexual dimorphism, most apparent at the sites of muscle attachment and particularly noticeable on the crania. There is also marked dimorphism
in the shapes of the male and female crania: those of the males are relatively
oblong in superior view, whereas those of the females are much more rounded
(Figures 21, 22). Wilkinson (1977) has also pointed out what appears to be dimorphism in the shape of the mandibles in remains from the Shellpoint and other
coastal Indian sites in Texas: the male mandibles are markedly square along the
mental eminence, and the females are more rounded (Figures, 23, 24).
In the postcranial remains this sexual dimorphism is expressed in both the
marked rugosity of the sites of muscle attachment and the diameters of the shafts
of the long bones. However, since their condition precluded accurate sexing, a
coefficient of sexual dimorphism cannot be calculated for the long bones. The
shaft lengths and diameters of the long bones do vary widely, and this variation is
thought to be a result of sexual dimorphism. The degree of sexual dimorphism in
this sample is generally greater than is found in other coastal Indian populations.
According to Wilkinson (1977), the unusual robusticity and sexual dimorphism among certain prehistoric mortuary samples from the central coast of
Texas are indications of a common cultural affinity, and represent populations of
precontact or early postcontact Karankawan culture. All of these populations
share not only morphological similarities, but also to some extent common mortuary practices (E. Mokry n.d.). It is interesting to note that both the Palm Harbor and Shellpoint samples match the Otamid skull type of Neuman (1952),
which is based on remains from the Callo del Oso site (Jackson 1933). This is
significant, since the Callo del Oso site has been considered a type locality for
Karankawan material culture. But whatever their cultural affinities may be, the
Palm Harbor, Shellpoint, and Callo del Oso remains share a common morphology that distinguishes them from other Texas Indian populations.
Important to understanding the environment and life-style of this population
are the identification and interpretation of their pathological conditions.

242

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 19. Lateral view of male cranium B showing pronounced browridges, large mastoid process, and prominent site of muscle attachments.

Figure 20. Lateral view of female cranium G showing slightly more gracile browridges,
mastoids, and muscle attachments than does cranium B, Figure 19.

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

243

Figure 21. Superior view of cranium B showing the elongated skull characteristic of the
males in the sample.

Figure 22. Superior view of cranium G showing the rounded skull characteristic of the
females in the sample.

244

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 23. Inferior view of the mandible of cranium B showing the bilobed chin and thick
body of the males.

Figure 24. Inferior view of the mandible of cranium G showing the single lobed chin and
gracile body of the females.

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

245

The most severe pathological condition in the sample is periosteal infection,
which is manifested by surface pitting and scarring of the affected cranial and
postcranial elements. These conditions are typically associated with treponemal
infections and can result from any of three diseases--syphilis, endemic syphilis,
and yaws. The cause of this periostitis in prehistoric populations is not well
understood (Hackett 1976).
Another frequently encountered pathological condition is arthritic lipping
on the vertebrae and the articular surfaces of the arm and leg joints. The vertebrae are the most severely affected; nearly every vertebra in the sample has some
degree of arthritic damage. There is also evidence of fusion of several vertebrae,
particularly of the atlas-axis complex and other cervical elements. All of the arthritic damage in this sample has been identified as resulting from degenerative
arthritis, which is caused by both age and wear on the articular surfaces. This is
the most common disease of the bony parts of the joints, and it has been suggested that its effects do not often appear until about the fourth decade of life
(Heine 1926). The first evidence of this disorder usually occurs as marginal lipping at the edges of the articular cartilage, apparently caused primarily by stress
on the joints over time. Studies have indicated that the rates of degenerative arthritis are highest among populations with vigorous life-styles and that males are
more often affected than females (Ortner and Putschar 1981).
Although all the dental material from this sample is characterized by heavy
attrition, there is only one case each of dental caries and periodontal disease.
Absence of dental caries is to be expected in populations with high grit content
in their diets, for grit is a natural cleaning agent, and its attrition obliterates
the natura! crevices on the teeth where decay usually begins (St. Hoyme and
Koritzer 1976).
The only severe case of periodontal infection is in Cranium C (Figure 3).
This disease is usually caused by a buildup of plaque and calculus, which produces mechanical irritation of the gums that leads to infection. Although there
are several causes for the evulsion of teeth, tooth loss resulting from decay or
trauma can be distinguished from loss resulting from periodontal infection. Infection is indicated in this specimen by calculus deposits on many of the remaining teeth, exposed root surfaces, and the presence of reactive alveolar bone.
Only three bones in the Palm Harbor sample show evidence of traumatic
injury. These injuries are a longitudinal fracture on the distal part of a fibula, a
possible dislocation of the ulna indicated by a large wear facet in the olecranon
fossa of a humerus, and a fracture of another ulna indicated by a large, prominent, midshaft callus.
The ability of a coastal environment to provide a healthy and nutritious diet
has been questioned. Rathbun, Sexton, and Michie (1980), in a study of a coastal
population of South Carolina, found that the people had suffered from sufficient
severe seasonal malnutrition and parasitic infections to cause arrest of growth
and development. In addition they found high rates of traumatic injury and degenerative bone disease (degenerative arthritis), both of which they believe were

246

Texas Archeological Society

due to the severe demands placed by the environmental surroundings on the lifestyles of the population.
The pathological evidence from the Palm Harbor site, however, contradicts
the conclusions of Rathbun, Sexton, and Michie (1980). Considering their stature and robusticity, there is no indication that the Palm Harbor population suffered nutritional deficiencies or related disorders, and the low rate of traumatic
injury and cortical thickness of the long bones indicate healthy, strong bones and
absence of extreme physical stress. The apparent lack of physical stress also suggests that the degenerative arthritis in some of the joints is predominantly a result
of old age. Since degenerative arthritis usually does not appear until the fourth
decade of life, the degree of lipping seen in some of the vertebrae indicate that
life expectancy in this group was substantial.
It is therefore our belief that the pathological conditions associated with this
sample are the result of normal aging and typical of climatic stress, and are not
the result of living in an area of marginal nutritional resources.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Ed Mokry for his contribution of time and effort, and the Department of
Anthropology at Texas A&M University for assistance with laboratory facilities and wordprocessing equipment. Most importantly we thank Mrs. Grace Stanick, of Rockport,
Texas for allowing access to her property and to the skeletal material; without her permission and interest, this project would not have been possible.

REFERENCES CITED
Bass, William M.
1971

Human osteology: a laboratory and field manual of the human skeleton. Edited
by David R. Evans. A special publication of the Missouri Archaeological Society. University of Missouri, Columbia.

Brothwell, D. R.
1981

Digging up bones (third ed.). Cornell University Press, Ithaca.

Dahlberg, A. A.
1963

Analysis of the American Indian dentition. In Dental Anthropology, edited by
D. R. Brothwell. Pergamon, New York.

Genoves, Santiago C.
1967

Proportionality of long bones and their relationship to stature among Mesoamericans, American Journal of Physical Anthropology 26(!): 67- 78.

Gorlin, Robert J., and Henery M. Goldman
1970

Thoma’s oral pathology (sixth ed.), vol. 1. C. V. Mosby, St. Louis.

Gray, Henery FRS
1936
Gray’s anatomy, edited by Warren H. Lewis, B.S., M.D. Lea and Febiger,
Philadelphia.
Hackett, C. J.
1976
Diagnostic criteria of syphilis, yaws, and treponemarid (treponaematoses) and
of some other diseases in dry bones. Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften Mathematisch-naturwissen-schaftliche Klasse, Abhandlung 4. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Heine, J.
1926
Uber die Arthritis deformans. Virchow’s Archiv fur pathologische Anatomie
und Physiologie und fur linische Medizin, 260:521-663.
Jackson, A. T.
1933
Excavation of the Callo Del Oso burial site at the mouth of the false Oso Creek.
Unpublished manuscript, on file at the University of Texas at Austin, Department of Anthropology.
Krogman, W. M.
The human skeleton in forensic medicine. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield,
1962
Illinois.
Maples, William Ross
1962
A morphological comparison of skeletal material from the Sanders focus and
from Fulton aspect. Unpublished M.A. thesis, The University of Texas at
Austin.
McKern, Thomas W., and T. Dale Stewart
1957
Skeletal age changes in young American males, analyzed from the standpoint
of age identification. Technical Report EP-45. Environmental Protection Research Division, Quartermaster Research and Development Center, U.S. Army,
Natick, Massachusetts.
Mokry, E. R., Jr.
n.d.
Written communication to D. Gentry Steele.
n.d.

The Palm Harbor Site (41AS80), A prehistoric mortuary site from the central
Texas coast. Manuscript in preparation.

Neuman, G. K.
1952
Archeology and race in the American Indian. In Archeology of the Eastern
United States, edited by J. B. Griffin. University of Chicago Press.

Ortner, Donald J., and Walter J. Putschar
1981
Identification of pathological conditions in human skeletal remains. Smithsonian
Contributions to Anthropology 28. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington.

Texas Archeological Society

248

Rathbun, Ted A., Jim Sexton, and James Michie
1980

Disease patterns in a formative period South Carolina coastal population. Tennessee Anthropological Association Miscellaneous Papers 5:52-74.

St. Hoyme, L. E., and R. T. Koritzer
1976

Ecology of dental disease. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 45(3)
Pt. II: 673-685.

Steele, D. Gentry
1970

Estimation of stature from fragments of long limb bones. In Personal identification in mass disasters, edited by T. D. Stewart. Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C.

1976

The estimation of sex on the basis of the talus and calcaneus. American Journal
of Physical Anthropology 45(3) : 581-588.

Steele, D. Gentry, and Claud Bramblett
n.d.

Anatomy and biology of the human skeleton. Texas A&M University Press. In
press.

Steinbok, R. Ted
1976

Paleopathological diagnosis and interpretation: bone diseases in ancient human
populations. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinois.

Trotter, Mildred, and Goldine C. Gleser
Estimation of stature from long bones of American Whites and Negroes. Ameri1952
can Journal of Physical Anthropology t0: 463-514.
Ubelaker, D. H., T. W. Phenice, and W. M. Bass
Artificial interproximal grooving of the teeth in American Indians. American
1969
Journal of Physical Anthropology 30(1) : 145-150.
Wilkinson, Richard G.
1973

The physical anthropology of Shell Point. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 44: 31-50.

1977

Osteological evidence for the identification of pre-contact Karankawa. In Anthropological Papers; Research Essays in Honor of James B. Griffin, edited by
C. E. Cleland. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan.

Woodbury, George, and Edna Woodbury
1935
Prehistoric skeletal remains from the Texas coast. Lancaster, Pennsylvania.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES
A. G. Comuzzie is a graduate student and instructor in the Department of Anthropology at Texas A & M University, where he is completing his MA thesis on the skeletal
biology and population structure of the prehistoric Blue Bayou Cemetery site (41VT94) in

Comuzzie, Marek, and Steele--Skeletal Remains

249

south Texas. His fieldwork has included both historic and prehistoric sites in Jamaica and
Texas. His research interest and specializations are human osteology, human variation and
adaptability, and zooarcheology. Address: Department of Anthropology, Texas A & M
University, College Station, Texas 77843.
Marianne Marek is a graduate student in the Department of Anthropology at Texas A
& M University, where she is working on her MA thesis on the osteology of the Mimbres
Indian children from the NAN Ranch in southwestern New Mexico. She has done fieldwork and served as a field and laboratory director on projects for Texas A & M University
in both nautical and terrestrial archeology. Her specializations are cartography, conservation, and human osteology. Address: Department of Anthropology, Texas A & M University, College Station, Texas 77843.
D. Gentry Steele is a professor of anthropology at Texas A & M University. His research interests are human skeletal biology, primate biology, and zooarcheology. He has
conducted fieldwork in both North America and Europe. With Claud A. Bramblett, of the
University of Texas at Austin, he is co-authoring a book on the anatomy and biology of the
human skeleton. Address: Department of Anthropology, Texas A & M University, College
Station, Texas 77843.

Book Reviews
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. By Lawrence E. Aten. Academic
Press, New York. 1983. 392 pp. $39.50
Most of the research on the Indians of the upper Texas coast has been done
in the last twenty years, and a significant amount of literature on this subject is
now available (Patterson 1982). Until now, however, no book has been published
that was devoted completely to the Indians of this region. A book on this subject
has now been published by Lawrence Aten, which concentrates mainly on postceramic prehistoric Indians and historic Indians of the upper Texas coastal margin. This specific emphasis by Aten constitutes both the strength and weakness of
this book. The strength of this book lies in Aten’s detailed presentation of the
archeology and ethnohistory of the late prehistoric and historic periods of the
upper Texas coastal margin. Aten has been a major contributor to research in
these subject areas, and is well qualified to present syntheses on various topics
within these subject areas. Newcomb (1984) noted in a separate review, that in
this book Aten developed a surprisingly detailed synthesis from a limited amount
of data.
The weakness of this book is centered in the representation made that this is
a synthesis of works about the entire upper Texas coastal region. Not all time
periods, geographic areas, and various material cultural remains of this overall
region are covered in a uniform manner, even for topics where significant published data are now available.
One of the most important subject areas covered by this book is the ethnohistoric period, with five chapters devoted to various details of this subject. Discussion of research objectives and ethnic groups are followed by more detailed
discussions of specialized subjects, including population reconstruction, social
organization, and ritual and cognition. A detailed bibliography for this time period is included, which was previously available only in Aten’s (1979) doctoral
dissertation. Although reliable estimates of Indian population have been difficult
to make, Aten has attempted estimates of populations of several ethnic groups
from approximately AD 1750 to 1900, including considerations of historic population declines. Discussions on social organization include sections on status,
level of social integration, and reciprocity and trade. These discussions are fairly
well connected to ethnohistoric references.
Aten presents a tabular summary of ethnohistoric references of native ritual
and cognition on the upper Texas coast. He also presents a preliminary model of
cognitive structures for late Indians of this region. This is a controversial subject
because of the level of abstraction required, compared to the available data, but
this model still represents a good start on the subject in regard to religious and
other ritual activities. Future research will determine how far this model can
be tested.
Bulletin of the Texas A rcheological Society 55 (1986 for 1984)

252

Texas Archeological Society

A considerable part of this book is devoted to the late prehistoric situation,
mainly of coastal-margin shell middens. There are chapters on site descriptions,
ceramic artifacts, nonceramic artifacts, local chronologies, technological history, and archeological evidence for group territories. Aten’s considerable body of
work on coastal-margin ceramic typologies and chronologies is summarized in
this book, including the Galveston Bay area, the Brazos River delta, and the
Sabine Lake area. Some attention is also given to the inland Conroe-Livingston
area. This is one of the best parts of the book. Aten has developed an especially
detailed ceramic chronology for the Galveston Bay area, and notes the variations
in ceramic typologies for other local areas. Since many of the reports referenced
are now out of print, it would have been desirable for Aten to have included more
details on at least some of the major sites discussed.
In some case, Aten has attempted interpretation of available data on rather
high levels of abstraction. While he is to be admired for attempting to gain so
much from a small data base, testing of some of his models would be very difficult. For example, in Chapter 16, archeological evidence for group territories has
been discussed, based on a few technological traits. The concept of relating the
geographical distribution of isolated technological traits to the indentities of specific social groups is extremely nebulous. In the case of shell tools, geographic
distribution may be simply a matter of raw material availability.
The various models of cultural patterns presented in this book are useful
because they are explicit. Whether or not these models are ultimately proven to
be correct is probably not the major consideration. The main value of these explicit models is to serve as a definite point of departure for further research and
discussion. In this, Aten has been successful.
In the development of chronologies for the upper Texas coastal margin, an
appendix has been included that gives details on carbon-14 dating of Rangia
cuneata shellfish remains. Since many investigators do not regard dating of shellfish remains as a very reliable technique, Aten’s discussion provides a rationale for
his extensive use of this dating method.
Throughout his book, Aten insists on stating that there have been no sites
discovered for the Paleoindian, Early Archaic, and Middle Archaic time periods
in this region. This is not correct. A number of sites with components from these
time periods have been published. It is true that many of these sites are deflated,
but this does not negate their existence. One of the major points established
through archeological investigations in the last 10 years is that there are very
long occupation sequences on many sites in the inland part of the upper Texas
coast, with many of these occupation sequences starting in the Late Paleoindian
period. The population dip that Aten postulates for the Altithermal period of
roughly 8,000 to 5,000 BC is not well supported in the available archeological
record. Butzer (1982:301) and Madsen and O’Connell (1982:3) both warn
against the pitfalls of relating generalized climatic data to cultural events.
A chapter of this book is devoted to details of terrace geology of the lower
Trinity and Brazos rivers. This information should be useful to future investigators in these geographic areas. It should be noted, however, that most sites

Reviews

253

having early preceramic components have been found inland on the banks of
smaller streams that have less complicated sequences of alluvial geology than
these major rivers.
Aten has chosen not to cover some basic subjects, such as settlement and
subsistence patterns, but plans a future volume covering additional subjects. This
is an unfortunate circumstance, considering the high cost of this book, as some
persons may not wish to purchase a series of volumes on this subject.
In summary, Aten’s book is a major contribution to the late prehistory and
ethnohistory of the upper Texas coastal margin, and it should remain a major
reference for some time. A detailed synthesis of the prehistory of the upper Texas
coast that gives uniform coverage to all time periods and geographic areas of this
region remains to be published.
L. W. Patterson
Houston, Texas

REFERENCES
Aten, Lawrence E.
1979
Indians of the upper Texas coast: Ethnohistoric and Archeological Frameworks.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of
Texas at Austin.
Butzer, K. W.
1982
Archaeology as human ecology. Cambridge University Press.
Madsen, D. B. and J. F. O’Connell (eds.)
Man and environment in the Great Basin. Society for American Archaeology,
1982
SAA Papers No. 2.

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1984
Book review: Indians of the upper Texas coast by Lawrence E. Aten. Science,
Vol. 224, p. 485.
Patterson, L. W.
Bibliography of the prehistory of the upper Texas coast, No. 5. Houston Ar1982
cheological Society, Special Publication.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Leland W. Patterson is an avocational archeologist with major interests and field experience in the upper coast and south-central regions of Texas. Besides archeological
analysis, his research interests include cultural resource management. He is a longstanding member of the Texas Archeological Society and the Houston Archeological society.
Address: 418 Wycliff, Houston, TX 77079.

254

Texas Archeological Society

Living Archaeology. By Richard A. Gould. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge. 1980. xv + 270 pp.
Ethnoarcheology is more than just another noisesome neologism. This term
usefully identifies a fertile discipline that has done much in its one-score years to
enliven the study of the past and allow actual behaviors to be reconstructed. The
African studies by John Yellen and Henry Harpending (Yellen 1977) are among
the very best. And Richard Gould, the writer whose book is being reviewed,
should be put at the top of this list of dedicated and specialized ethnographers-yes, the work these people do is truly ethnographic, in spite of ultimate archeological concerns.
Gould’s book offers the reader two things: a partly new methodology and
terminology for doing "living archeology," and a wealth of interestingly described information from Australia as examples for his ideas. Of course he
makes a few mistakes; he sometimes gives new labels to old notions and does
things for which he criticizes other archeologists. But these errors and lapses are
trivial when compared to the importance of the main argument.
Let me discuss, first, Gould’s position in respect to methods and concepts.
He cleanly breaks with 1960s archeologists of the avant-garde school who treated
their profession as one more science dedicated to establishing lawlike explanations or nomothetic regularities. His disaffection with that school is explained by
his belief that lusting after laws leads to the use of uniformitarian ideas. In
human studies, uniformitarianism supposes that historic behaviors are also
prehistoric behaviors; its use, according to Gould, causes archeologists to sin
through explaining archeology by analogy with the behaviors of historic and living peoples. His suggested alternative is to search for anomalies--irregularities
or unusual occurrences--in archeological data, especially those that appear
poorly adaptive to nature or bespeak behavioral detours from established regularities. General principles or propositions of behavior can be found by studying
these anomalies and accounting for them. This idea is so strongly advertized
throughout the book that I might suggest a new title, perhaps Living Anomalies?
At any rate, several principles or trends in behavior are suggested that are most
interesting, and no claim is made for their finality.
My discussion above is so abstract and conceptual that we must quickly turn
to Gould’s human subjects or else lose the tenor of the book. The reader will be
comforted to hear that Living Archaeology includes wonderful stories about real
people and their activities, and is not just another boring treatise on what passes
for philosophy in the field of archeology. For one thing, the reader is ahnost literally taken by the hand and introduced to various members of a group of Western
Desert Aborigines and is given episodes of behavior throughout Australia. To
whoever anticipates a dry presentation I recommend a quick inspection of the
story (p. 245) about the Ngatatjara woman usually given to petting and nuzzling
her dogs. After much pestering and thieving by these animals, one day she
picked up a metal digging rod, uttered a piercing cry, and began to flail every dog

Reviews

255

she could reach, arousing the whole camp with the terrific bedlam of her screams
mingled with the howls of dying canines. So much for dry scholasticism.
Gould describes several sets of ethnographic and archeologic data to illustrate his new approach, only one of which will be reviewed here. To conform to
the tone of the Bulletin, I have chosen an archeological example rather than an
ethnographic one--a comparison of human residue (artifacts, bones, and "appliances") from Puntutjarpa Rockshelter, in the Western Australian Desert, with
similar residue from a shelter of the Central Desert called James Range East.
Puntutjarpa is used as a base for deciding what a typical and uniform sequence of
archeological residue is like, though James Range East also has similar items.
But the latter site additionally yielded a greater number and range of flaked and
seed-grinding stone tools than did the former. Also, more of the stone raw material at James Ridge East was exotic than at Puntutjarpa, and local rock art was
more widely distributed near the former site. In addition, the fragments of
broken kangaroo bones at James Ridge East were much larger than those found at
Puntutjarpa.
Gould sees the "additives" of the Central Desert site as anomalies that are
more important than the things that make the two sites similar. This sort of hankering after unusual finds and happenings is the very core of Gould’s approach to
studying archeological residues and living societies. In the present example he
concluded that (my wording):
1) A greater variety of finished tools was present in the Central Desert than in the
Western because of the availability of water near quarries in the first area (p. 20t).
The reasoning is that people could stay at Central Desert quarry sites near water long
enough to produce many finished tools in a wide variety of forms, and reduce the
loads of raw stone that would be transported to the living stations; scarcer water in
the west limits the time people can stay at such quarries.
2) The size of the pieces of butchered bone mirrors differences in the amount of
stress caused by dissimilar distributional patterns of available water in the two site
areas (p. 194). In the drier west it is more important to secure all available liquids
from cooked kangaroos, since water is more precious there; hence bones are broken
into tiny pieces for maximum extraction of liquids.
3) The greater abundance of rock art in the Central Desert may be due to the wider
distribution of the water resources there, which allows more artists to work in more
places throughout the region, although ideational variables may also come into play
(p. 203).
There is no room here to repeat Gould’s abundant evidence for the three conclusions I have outlined, and I can only say that some of the proof leaves me doubting. Generally, he maintains that the two studied sites show different adaptations
to nature. In the Western Desert, behaviors are seen in the archeological residue
that minimize the greater risks to human life there.

256

Texas Archeological Society

Gould’s employment of the concept of adaptation is extremely sophisticated-much more astute than others that appear in the literature. Although
archeologists have generally fallen into the enticing embrace of adaptationism,
Gould has not: "... living archaeology needs to examine relationships within
the society being studied for possible adaptive and materialist explanations to the
utmost on one hand while, on the other hand, accepting the possibility that some
kinds of behavior may in fact prove to be maladaptive" [p. 237]. His allowance
for the interference of ideas and beliefs in a society’s adaptation to the environment, and the recognition that fairly inefficient modes of adaptation can be
gotten away with in some surroundings, raise Living Archaeology from the mire
of adaptationism in which many archeologists seem to have become entrapped.
It is encouraging that biological evolutionists such as Stephen Jay Gould
(e.g., 1982) are fighting against adaptationism in evolutionary biology--adaptation being "the idea that organisms respond to changing environments by evolving a form, function, or behavior better suited to these new cricumstances"
(Gould 1982: 78). It is the word better that causes the problems, for it implies
that the fit between organism and nature is excellent. Tosh! Both in the case of
pandas’ thumbs and the economic systems of humans, the adaptation achieved
can be awkward and inefficient when compared to other possibilities. Human behavior can be very inflexible, even downright maladaptive.
I hope Texas archeologists will take the lead given by Stephen Gould and
that they will even abandon the extension of adaptationism which asserts that
changing environments necessarily produce very different, efficient adaptations.
The view is rampant in archeology that societies adapted, or changed, in kneejerk ways to altering climates and that the resulting adaptations were something
highly efficient and marvelous. It is instructive to recall that human hunting activities at the French site of L’Hortus changed very little during a span of 20,000
years, and that designs of the site’s flint Mousterian tools stayed almost unaltered
through that long period--this in spite of major changes in climate and life forms
(Lumley 1972).
A few deficiencies of Living Archaeology need to be aired. It is pleasing
that Richard Gould is unhappy with the deductive method and the goal of finding
nomothetic regularities, but the major criticism of that school of thought was not
addressed. I mean the argument made within the field of philosophy by Michael
Scriven (e.g., 1956, 1963) and others, and applied only once to archeology
(Johnson 1972), that deductivism is inappropriate in studies of human behavior. I
firmly recommend Scriven’s writings to the reader, since a definition of good conceptual tools in archeology is of more than passing interest.
Richard Gould avoids the core of the philosophic debate by defining principles or general propositions that can be tested in different areas. He eschews,
rightly perhaps, a discussion of the nature of the proof required, but seems
to imply that supporting evidence can simply be weighed, and a conclusion
reached that at times must be tentative. This is basically the approach labeled
Holmesian Detectivism recommended long ago (Johnson 1972 : 386f.). I do not

Reviews

257

agree with all the propositions and principles Gould has suggested, but will cite
two of the best-documented and most reasonable:
A "successful" adaptation is one that in the long run correctly assesses key resources
as potential limiting factors, that is, in terms of periods of greatest scarcity rather
than optimal availability, and responds appropriately [p. 109].
Behavior that might appear to be maladaptive at one level of interpretation (like the
disproportionate expenditure of time in hunting large game by desert Aborigines)
may be viewed as adaptive at another level (as, for example when large game serves
as a special staple to permit maximal aggregates of population, with consequent establishment of sharing networks) [pp. 109-110].

All these propositions can be studied and tested by archeologists working in
Texas and other parts of the south-central United States. In fact, the influence of
Living Archaeology on the rather stagnant archeological approaches presently
used in Texas is potentially enormous. In casting about for a useful work to review for the present volume, I chose Gould’s study because it appeared to offer
the greatest benefits to the reading audience. But before recommending the book,
I need to proceed to its main failure--the unnecessary attack on the use by archeologists of ethnographic analogy, substituting in its stead the study of anomalies.
This part of Richard Gould’s argument is not well done, since there is no
logical conflict between the use of analogies and anomalies that would make one
ever want to choose between the two. In fact, employing analogies is one possible
way of explaining anomalies, for the archeologist always makes use of some
knowledge about living people to interpret the past. We could not even identify
some prehistoric tools were it not for our knowledge about how historic people
manufacture and use artifacts. Are we really out in left field when we call a
pointed sliver of eyed bone a needle, just because this interpretation is based altogether and utterly on analogies with historic needles and an understanding of
their use? The fact is that Gould draws upon analogies throughout his book.
I have specific examples in mind when I say that Gould himself employs
analogy in interpreting Australian archeological information. His statement that
archeological base camps show the widest observable range of activities, performed by people of both sexes and all ages, draws on observed analogies in
residue and connected activities among people such as the Tikatika (pp. ! 32,
200). Though the analogy is a very general one, it is still an analogy. Also, the
recognition of Puntutjarpa Cave as a hunting trap depends on knowledge of hunting drives reported in the historic period (p. 183), and uses another analogy.
(Gould’s further employment of general analogies may be found on pp. 156, 176,
and 169.) What I think Gould wants to say, when he rejects analogies, is that the
postulating of propositions--in terms of general trends of behavior having to do
with minimizing life’s risks--is safer than suggesting by specific analogy the past
existence of patrilineages, totem worship, and the like. Any kind of analogy,
however, may legitimately be suggested, as long as the evidence is given in detail

258

Texas Archeological Society

and the low probability of some very specific analogies is advertized. Unfortunately, in his methodological exposition Gould threw the baby out with the bath,
but then rescued the little fellow for use in his general reconstructions.
In summary, Richard Gould’s Living Archaeology is a cleverly written and
useful little tome which, if studied, will certainly improve the framework of interpretation used by archeologists in the south-central United States. Though
many of his ideas, such as the importance of noting unusual changes in data,
have been around in other guises for years, his use of anomaly as a new label is a
heuristic device that adds importance to the study of divergence in archeological
residue. His breakaway from the inappropriate search for nomothetic regularities
(but for the wrong reason), together with the substitution of general propositions
or principles to be generally evaluated in many cases, saves his book from philosophic error. Also, the wealth of ethnographic information Gould summarizes
cannot but be useful to archeologists, who benefit from every new account about
the beliefs, resources, and environments of living primitives. The plethora of typographic mistakes in a book published by Cambridge University Press is a surprise, but is compensated for by a witty and lucid writing style that quickly leads
the reader past spelling boo-boos such as expecially.
LeRoy Johnson, Jr.
Austin, Texas

REFERENCES CITED
Gould, Stephen Jay
1982

The panda’s thumb: more reflections in natural history. W. W. Norton, New York
(orig. edition, 1980).

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1972
Problems in "avant-garde" archaeology. American Anthropologist 74(3):
366-377.
Lumley, H. de
1972
La grotte must6rienne de l’Hortus. Universit6 de Provence, Marseille.
Scriven, Michael
A possible distinction between traditional scientific disciplines and the study
1956
of human behavior. In Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. I.
H. Feigl and M. Scriven, eds. pp. 330-339.
1963

Critical study: the structure of science (Ernest Nagel, 1961). The Review of
Metaphysics 17: 403-424.

Yellen, John E.
1977

Archaeological approaches to the present: models for reconstructing the past.
Academic Press, New York.

Reviews

259

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
LeRoy Johnson is employed in the National Register Department of the Texas Historical Commission. He also served as curator of ethnology at the Museum of Natural
History, Univesity of Oregon. He has published occasionally on obsidian-hydration dating, numerical analysis, Texas archeology, and early Spanish exp!orations. Address: Texas
Historical Commission, P.O. Box 12276, Austin, TX 78711.

Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America.
Translated by Cyclone Covey. University of New Mexico Press.
1961. 160 pp. $6.95.
The names of the early Spanish explorers--Columbus, Cortez, Pizzaro,
DeSoto, Coronado--often seem more mythical than real. Often one is unaware
of the extensive infrastructure supporting their explorations and their capacity
for making the conquests they undertook. They seem to spring onto the stage of
American exp!oration from virtually nowhere. The reality, however, was somewhat more prosaic. The major explorations were based on earlier reconnaissances and documents such as captains’ logs and pilots’ notes. By 1527, the time
of the Panfilo de Narva6z expedition to Florida, the coast of the Gulf of Mexico
had been mapped, and Spanish settlements existed at Veracruz and Pfinuco on the
east coast of New Spain (Mexico). Indeed, Narva6z had participated in early explorations as sponsor, in his capacity as governor of Cuba, and personally, in his
expedition in 1520 against Cortez.
Accounts written by first-hand witnesses of the early explorations and later
colonists, military personnel, and officials provide an excellent data source on
the early Amerind cultures of the southern third of the United States and northern
Mexico. A knowledge of the Spanish documentation can provide prehistorical
archeologists deep insights into the functioning of the late prehistoric cultures
they study. Virtually every recent archeological report on the Caddo area I have
read speculates on the Caddo settlement pattern, but nearly always ignores Spanish descriptions of Caddo settlement seen as early as 1542 and mapped in 1691.
Likewise, there has been considerable discussion as to whether the Coahuiltecans
of South Texas used pottery in the protohistoric period. Cabeza de Vaca referred
to the use of ceramics in his Relaci6n. Over a period of 120 years the Spanish
explored much of what is now Texas and dealt with Indians in virtually all parts,
constantly writing reports and descriptions. By far the vast majority of these
documents have never been translated, apparently causing insurmountable difficulties for most prehistoric archeologists.
The reissue of Covey’s translation makes one of the earliest and most valuable documents on Texas and northern Mexico Indians readily available for the
first time in several years. Thus, the University of New Mexico Press is providing

260

Texas Archeological Society

a very valuable service and is to be applauded. One would hope that in the future
they will publish more such primary documentation.
Translation of any document from a foreign language is at best a difficult
undertaking. One must deal with archaic grammar and spellings and particularly
with words that are not often used today or which may have very specific technical meanings. Often the precise meaning of a word is critical to the understanding of a document. I know of one case in which an archeological project was
initiated in search of a structure which was in fact not a structure at all but a
doorway. The mistranslation in this case was an extremely common one based on
the first dictionary definition. Indeed, I do not know of a perfect translation of
any early document. Therefore, any reader of Covey’s translation or any other
should not wholly and unquestioningly accept a translation. In general, one can
use Covey’s translation as a good general translation with relatively few glaring
errors in the interpretation of the meanings of most words.
There are, however, serious drawbacks to the work. They center on two
points: proceedural matters and interpretation of the route followed by Cabeza de
Vaca after leaving the Florida panhandle. Covey has taken the original order of
chapters and transposed several of them and has extracted part of certain chapters and placed them within others. He states in his preface that this was done for
clarity and to enhance the logic of the account. Although he notes in the text in
brackets that he has done this, the need for this transposing proceedure is questionable. I have read the original Spanish version and find no great difficulty in
following the train of the account. Flashbacks are clearly indicated in the original. Covey has, in some cases, also changed chapter titles. There also are some
mistranslations of words. For example, the shipwreck survivors landed on an island they named Malhado, and Covey translates this as "the Island of Doom,"
whereas a more accurate translation, especially in the context of the shipwreck,
might be "ill found" or "wretched."
The second major problem lies with Covey’s interpretation of the route taken
by the survivors to arrive at their final destination. Although his interpretations
are clearly identified by being inserted in brackets in the text, the reader may find
it difficult to make an independent analysis without being influenced by his opinions. Major drawbacks in his interpretation include the juxtaposition of chapters,
labored explanations of why specific statements by Cabeza de Vaca could not be
true, and mistranslation of key passages. In order to use the observations made
by Cabeza de Vaca regarding Indian groups and customs, it seems critical to
know where he was while describing the various groups. Unfortunately one still
sees the Hallenbeck (1940) route (modified by Covey) cited as the acceptable
route of the Narva6z Expedition. Although Covey states that the route he proposes is based on archeological, geographical, and historical data, it is clear that
his proposed route contradicts much of the data available. Archeological and
ethnohistorical scholars (Alex D. Krieger and T. N. Campbe!l) familiar with
Texas and Northern Mexico accept a route nearly identical to the one I have
herein proposed (Figure 1) as an alternate to the Hallenbeck-Covey proposal.
Since the route is critical I will discuss it in some detail. Early in the work

Reviews

261

Cabeza de Vaca states that the immediate goal of the survivors of the expedition,
even before they departed the coast of Florida, was the site of P~nuco (p. 34).
Covey made an error in stating that Pzinuco has now been renamed Tampico. The
village of P~inuco still exists and Tampico was founded at a later date. Slightly
later it was stated that the goal of the survivors’ barges was to be the Rio de las
Palmas, now known as the Soto La Marina, the site of P~inuco (p. 48), and reiterated again (p. 59) after landing on the island of Malhado. Based in large part on
Cabeza de Vaca’s description of the island’s size, Covey identifies Malhado as
Galveston Island. However, this is an extremely poor basis for identification because historical documents indicate that the barrier islands are quite dynamic in
nature, constantly changing size and shape. The key to the location of the island
is found in the original Spanish version:
En fin, al cabo lo saqu6 y le pass6 el ancon e quatro rios que ay por la costa, porque
el no saNa nadar. Y ansi fuymos con algunos indios adelante hasta que llegamos a
vn ancon que tiene vna legua de traues y es por todas partes hondo, y por lo que del
nos parescio y vimos es el que llaman del spiritu sancto... [Nfifiez Cabeza de Vaca
1906:61].
Finally, at last I took him out and passed him over the bay and four rivers there are on
the coast because he did not know how to swim. Thusly we went ahead with some
Indians until we arrived at a bay one league across and deep in all parts. Because of
that it seemed and we saw that it is the one called Holy Spirit. [Ntifiez Cabeza de
Vaca 1906:62, 63].

The second bay certainly has to be the present Corpus Christi Bay and the first
would then be Matagorda Bay with Matagorda Peninsula (connected to the mainland in the nineteenth century) as Malhado Island (Figure 1). There are several
other reasons to suggest such a configuration but there is no need to belabor the
subject.
A series of errors appears, such as the statement that the prickly pear matures
from east to west rather than from south to north. The description of the monte
adjacent to the river of the nuts describes the brush country near the Nueces
River rather than the area adjacent to the Colorado River. Covey also consistently
misspells the San Saba River ("San Saber," p. 87). The description of the spiny
monte (p. 92) is not an appropriate description of the Texas hill country as he
contends, but of the south Texas brush country from Laredo south. On the page
following the description of the spiny monte is Cabeza de Vaca’s description of
the preparation of mesquite. There is historical documentation (Inglis 1964) indicating that the mesquite monte was confined to the lower Rio Grande valley and
to areas adjacent to south Texas water courses.
The arrival of Cabeza de Vaca at the Great River is another important key
locality (p. 101). At the river, Cabeza de Vaca’s group received gourd rattles as
gifts. Since it is Covey’s contention that the survivors were on the Concho River
at this point, far off course of the stated goal of P~inuco, he is required to argue,
rather unconvincingly, that the gourds had floated down the Rio Grande to be

262

Texas Archeological Society

picked up by traders finally arriving at the Concho River (p. 102). It seems more
likely that the survivors were on course toward the south and had encountered the
Rio Grande. Shortly after crossing the Great River the group saw mountains
some 15 leagues from the coast (p. 103). Again there is a quite unconvincing
argument supposing the mountains to be the Davis and Guadalupe Mountains¯
After arriving at the base of the mountains the Spaniards turned inland (104) and
again Covey indicates that the survivors were somewhere in west Texas. Cabeza
de Vaca (1906: 103-104) says
¯ . . y tomamos por lo llano circa de las sierras, las quales creyamos que no estauan
lexos de la costa. Toda la gente della es muy mala, y teniamos por mejor de
atrauessar la tierra, porque la gente que esta mas metida adentro es mas bien acondicionada y tratauannos mejor, y teniamos por cierto hallariamos la tierra mas
poblada y de mejores mantenimientos. Y nosotros caminamos por le rio arriba...
¯ . . and we went via the plain near the mountains which we believed were not far
from the coast. All the people there are bad and it would be better for us to cross the
mainland because the inland people live under better conditions and treated us
better¯ For certain we had to go to better populated land with better resources. And
we went up river...

Alonso de Le6n (1980: 15) assumes that the survivors passed near Cerralvo,
Nuevo Leon. In any event, the area north of P~inuco was the subject of slave raids
authorized by Governor Nufio de Guzmfin (Chipman 1967: 157) at this time and
was quite impoverished. Clearly the northern Huaxtecs had no use for more
Spaniards. The survivors then proceeded to a point where they found a mountain
seven leagues long covered with iron scoria near a beautiful river. It is suggested
that this point is the present site of Monclova, Coahuila, which is the major area
in northern Mexico for iron mining and smelting. It is situated near the Rio Salado de los Nadadores and at the foot of the Sierra de la Gloria.
In Covey’s translation Chapters 44 and 45 are reversed from the original version, apparently in order to justify his projection of the route of the survivors.
Chapter 44 describes a rabbit hunt using rabbit sticks and the recrossing of the
Great River¯ This area is most likely the area near and perhaps just west of
Amistad Reservoir where rabbit sticks, rabbit-skin robes, and skeletal remains of
rabbits have been found in dry archeological deposits¯
One certain point on the itinerary of the survivors was their arrival at La
Junta de los Rios (Presidio-Ojinaga), the confluence of the Rio Grande and the
larger Rio Conchos, at present Ojinaga (Chihuahua)--Presidio (Texas). Covey
suggests (p. 114) that this is present E1 Paso-Juarez and that they went upstream
to other pueblos, eventually following the Gila River into Sonora. In 1581 the
Rodriguez-Chamuscado expedition arrived at La Junta and the chronicler Gallegos said: "We asked them if any men like us had passed that way, and they
replied that long ago four Christians had passed through there¯ By the description
they gave us we saw plainly and clearly that it must have been Alvar Ntifiez
Cabeza de Vaca, because according to his relation [account] he had come by way

Reviews

263

of these people" (Castafieda, 1936, Vol. 1 : !63). Archeological and historical
sources indicate that the E1 Paso area was substantially depopulated and occupied
only by scattered bands of hunting and gathering peoples, Mansos and Sumas.
Likewise, archeological surveys by the Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation (September 1981) and by Charles A. Johnson II (1977) for
The University of Texas at E1 Paso indicate a lack of prehistoric agricultural villages in the area between La Junta and E1 Paso.
From La Junta, Cabeza de Vaca and his companions traveled to the Rio
Sonora or Rio Yaqui and thereafter encountered Spanish slave raiders operating
out of Culiac~n, recently founded by Nfifio de Guzmfin as a part of his new
colony of Nueva Galicia. From there they traveled to Guadalajara, the capital of
the new province, thence to M~xico, and embarked for Spain at Veracruz.
In conclusion, the reissue of Covey’s translation of Cabeza de Vaca’s Relaci6n de los Naufragios y Comentarios provides important data for the archeologist, ethnohistorian, and average reader regarding the protohistoric Indians of
Texas and Northern Mexico. The translation suffers from several serious flaws,
among which are the rearrangement of the sequence of certain chapters, occasional mistranslations, and the advocacy of an obviously erroneous route. Those
using this translation should be aware of these problems and should attempt, if at
all possible, to check the translation against a reprint of the Spanish original.
John W. Clark, Jr.
Austin, Texas

REFERENCES CITED
Castafieda, Carlos E.
1936

Our Catholic heritage in Texas, Vol. I, The mission era: the finding of Texas
1519-1693. Von Boeckmann-Jones, Austin.

Chipman, Donald E.
1967

Nfifio de Guzm~in and the Province of Pfinuco in New Spain 15 t 8-1533. Arthur
H. Clark, Glendale.

de Ldon, Alonso, Juan Bautista Chapa y el Gral. Fernando Sfinchez de Zamora
1980
Historia de Nuevo Leon con noticias sobre Coahuila, Tamaulipas, Texas y Nuevo
Mexico, escrita en el siglo XVII. R. Ayuntamiento de Monterrey 80-82. Monterrey, N.L.
Hallenbeck, Cleve
Alvar Nfifiez Cabeza de Vaca: the journey and route of the first European to
1940
cross the continent of North America. Arthur H. Clark, Glendale.

Inglis, Jack M.
1964
A history of vegetation on the Rio Grande plain. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department. Bulletin 45. Austin.

Texas Archeological Society

264

Johnson, II, Charles A.
!977

A preliminary appraisal of cultural and historical resources found along the Rio
Grande between Fort Quitman and Haciendita, Texas. E1 Paso Centennial Museum, The University of Texas at E1 Paso, Publications in Anthropology 5.

Nfifiez Cabeza de Vaca, Alvar
1906
Relacion de los Naufragios y Comentarios de Alvar Nfifiez Cabeza de Vaca,
Adelantado y Gobernador del Rio de la Plata. Libreria General de Victoriano
Su~irez. Madrid.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
John W. Clark, Jr., works as an archeologist in the Highway Design Division of the
Texas Department ot Highways and Public Transportation. His research interests include
historic sites, particularly Spanish colonial sites in Texas. He has conducted numerous
archeological surveys and excavations at prehistoric and historic sites. Address: Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division, 1 l th and
Brazos St., Austin, TX 78701.

Traces of Texas History; Archeological Evidence of the Past 450
Years. By Daniel E. Fox. Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.
1983. xx + 416 pp. Paper $12.95.
The book traces archeology at historic sites in Texas from the earliest investigations to the present. It is easily readable, not laced with tedious language or
technical jargon, and the author admits having specifically avoided "academic
arguments about method and theory." His approach has been to review hundreds
of written works pertaining to Texas archeology, concentrating on historic sites.
The result is an intermittent history, and it is written as much for the general
reader as for archeologists and historians.
Daniel Fox has put much effort into the book. It is largely a collection of
annotations of nearly every major report of archeological research at historic
sites in Texas, plus references to numerous other works. Researching these technical and often esoteric materials consumed a year of the author’s "nights, weekends, and holidays" while he maintained another full-time job. Few people tackle
such projects.
In the "Introduction" the author notes, among other things, the role of the
Texas Archeological Society in the development of archeology in Texas, from the
early limited popularity of archeology among a few enthusiasts to the important
avocational and professional occupation it is today.
The book presents discussions of particular sites in a general historical sequence rather than following the chronology of archeological investigations.
This layout makes pleasant reading and puts archeotogical research in a better

Reviews

265

popular and historical perspective than is obtained by poring through typical reports. The author has tried not to emphasize a particular region of Texas. A careful reading will make apparent the paucity of archeological research at historic
sites in many parts of the state.
From the first European contacts with Amerindians in what is now Texas,
Fox works his way to the present, ending the book’s main section with a chapter
on archeology at historic sites in urban areas of the state. The final chapter is an
essay on preservation in light of contemporary cultural resources management.
Two appendices follow. The first is "Recommended Readings," a list of general
published works pertinent to historic sites’ archeology in Texas and the second is
"References Cited." An index completes the book.
Despite the nontechnical approach there are many thorough descriptions of
architectural details and of artifacts from various sites. These usually are preceded by a synopsis of the site’s history and are accompanied by citations to the
research from which the information was gleaned. The book also is very well
illustrated with properly credited photographs, maps, and drawings from the
cited research works. The descriptions and illustrations probably will inspire
many readers to seek publications about specific sites.
I make these complaints about the book. One paragraph in the "Introduction" ends with the statement "What may seem like glaring historical omissions
simply result from the absence of archeological work in some areas." This disclaimer does not disguise the overemphasis given to data only available at The
University of Texas at San Antonio and written by Anne or Daniel Fox. The Fox
name would appear no more conspicuously than names of other historic sites researchers were it not for unpublished reports at that facility, manuscripts in preparation, "field notes on file," personal communications, and letters-to. Also, listing references by chapters may make the book more salable as a textbook, but
emphasizes works repeatedly cited. For a book whose subject is so broad, the
reader can expect an impartial effort to mention, at least bibliographically, the
existence of other obscure research results. And the use of in-text citations
should connote a sense of objective scholarly intent, an impression not well conveyed in seeing so many citations to the author’s own works.
Wayne Roberson
Manor, TX

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Wayne R. Roberson has worked for the Texas Historical Commission, on the research
faculty in the Department of Anthropology and Archaeology at the University of North
Dakota, and formerly was head of the Archeology Section at Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department. His research interests include historic sites and the ancient Maya calendar.
He is an investigator in the Office of the Texas Attorney General in Austin. Address: Rt. 2,
Box 12-C, Manor, TX 78653.

