bulletin of the

Texas Archeological Society
Volume 51

Published by the Society

Lubbock, Texas 1980

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous areas.
The Bulletin offers an outlet for the publication of serious research on
history, prehistory, and archeological theory. In line with the goals of the
Society, it encourages scientific collection, study, and publication of archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for the distribution to the members of
the Society. Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not
necessarily represent the views of the Society or editorial staff.

Officers of the Society 1979-1980
President: ANNE FOX (San Antonio)
President-elect: PAUL LORRAIN (Dallas)
Secretary-Treasurer: C.K. CHANDLER (San Antonio)
Editor: EILEEN JOHNSON (Lubbock)
Assistant Editor: CAROLYN GOOD (Galveston)
Newsletter Editor: PATRICIA WHEAT (Houston)
Immediate Past President: LESLIE DAVIS (El Paso)
Directors (in addition to the above): BARBARA BRUCE ATKINS (Del
Rio), JOHN HEDRICK (El Paso), JOHN HERBERT (Houston), THOMAS
R. HESTER (San Antonio), R.L. TURNER JR. (Ft. Worth), JAMES
WORD (Floydada).
Regional Vice Presidents: ROBERT SMITH (Stinnett), CLAUDE
BROWN (Lubbock), JAMES EVERETT (Arlington), ROBERT VERNON
JR. (Sherman), KENNETH L. BROWN (Houston), GRANT HALL (San
Antonio), ’EDWARD R. MOKRY (Corpus Christi), JOHN STOCKLEY
(Quemado), W.L. RICHMOND (Austin), OTTIS BOBBITT (San Angelo),
ROSE MARY ROGERS (Iraan), and RAY FREDLUND (Plaquemine, La.).

Memberships and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year. Dues are as follows:
Regular--S12.00; Chartered Societies and Institutional--S12.00; Contributing--$25.00; Life--S250.00. All members of the Society receive the
Bulletin, published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter mailed
about four times a year. A monograph series, Special Publications, also is
published by the Society. Back issues of the Bulletin, up to an including
Volume 39, that are still in print, may be obtained for $5.00 per volume.
Subsequent volumes are available at a cost of $12.50.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to
Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78285.
©Copyright by the Texas Archeological Society, 1980

Bulletin of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 51/1980

Eileen Johnson, Editor
Carolyn Good, Assistant Editor -- Book Reviews

Cover design by Gerald Urbantke

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT LUBBOCK~ TEXAS
1980

Table of Contents

Papers
Archeological Investigations at the Thomas F. McKinney
Homestead, Travis County, Texas: An Experiment in
Historical Archeology Part I
Michael McEachern and Ronald W. Ralph ..................................

5

Appendix A -- A General Introduction to the Vegetation and
Dominant Plant Communities of the McKinney Homestead,
Travis County, Texas
David H. Riskind .................................................. 128
Appendix B -- Gastropods of the McKinney Homestead
(41TV289), McKinney Falls State Park, Travis County, Texas
Raymond W. Neck ................................................ 136
Appendix C -- Investigations at the Horse Trainer’s Cabin
(41TV307), McKinney Falls State Park
Art Black ........................................................ 140
Appendix D -- Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
Excavations at the McKinney Homestead (41TV289):
Description of House Artifacts and Recommendations
for Architectural Reconstruction
Michael McEachern and Ronald W. Ralph ............................... 146
Appendix E -- Chemical Analysis of Sediments
Elaine Burleigh ................................................... 162
Appendix F -- Texas Archeological Society Field School
Excavations at the McKinney Homestead
Norma Hoffrichter ................................................. 164
Appendix G -- Cistern One Glass
Nancy Boice ..................................................... 168
Hypothesis Testing and Historic Preservation at Bea:~ Creek
Shelter, Hill County, Texas
Mark J. Lynott ...................................................... 209
Marks Beach, Stratified Paleoindian Site, Lamb County, Texas:
Preliminary Report
Kenneth Honea ..................................................... 243
The Material Evidence of Texas History
Daniel E. Fox ....................................................... 271

Notes
Attributes of Experimental Folsom Points and Channel Flakes
J.B. Sollberger and L.W. Patterson ....................................... 289
Notes on Trace Element Analysis of Obsidian from Hutchinson
and Roberts Counties in the Texas Panhandle
Jimmy L. Mitchell, Thomas R. Hester, Frank Asaro, and Fred Stross .............. 301
The Significance of Dart Point Stem Breakage
L.W. Patterson ...................................................... 309
Transport of Cultural and Non-Cultural Materials by Texas
Woodrats: Examples and Archeological Implications
Thomas R. Hester and T.C. Hill Jr ........................................ 317

Reviews
A Travel Guide to Archaeological Mexico, Robert D. Wood
Eunice Barkes ....................................................... 325
Ethnographic Notes on Indian Groups Associated with Three
Nations in Guerrero, Coahuila, Thomas N. Campbell
Kathleen K. Gilmore .................................................. 325
Documentary Sources for the Wreck of the New Spain Fleet
of 1554, David McDonald and J. Barto Arnold III
T.N. Campbell ...................................................... 327

Authors ........................................................... 329

Michael McEachern and Ronald

Ralph

ABSTRACT
The Thomas F. McKinney homestead and mill complex represents an upper class Anglo
rural occupation dating after the Texas Republic Period (1850’s) with subsequent occupation
by rural blacks. Pedestrian survey, archeological prospecting, and excavation by the Texas Archeological Society Field School and Texas Parks and Wildlife personnel defined prehistoric
occupations and historic structures along with background, historical, and environmental data.
Some prospecting techniques revealed probable additional archeological features. Survey and
excavation data helped minimize site damage during development of McKinney Falls State
Park.

INTRODUCTION
Early in 1974, the Texas Archeological Society approached the Texas
Department of Parks and Wildlife about the possibility of conducting one of
their annual field schools in a state park. The Department responded
favorably and suggested that the field school be conducted at McKinney
Falls State Park located about 7 mi southeast of Austin, Texas, in Travis
County. The park, named after an important hero of the Texas Revolt, was
not yet open to the public and under development. Park planners considered the investigation, preservation, and interpretation of the historic
McKinney homestead and mill ruins a primary objective of the interpretive
program. This objective became the focus of activity at the field school.
The 1974 Texas Archeological Society field school at McKinney Falls
State Park was envisioned as experimental. It was a social experiment which
attempted to demonstrate that teaching, professional archeology, and
amateur archeology could be combined to provide a viable service for the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department. It also was a series of experiments in
historical archeology. The field school was divided into several sections,
each with its own research design and objectives. These goals were set forth
in a guide distributed at the beginning of the field school (Ralph and
McEachern, 1974).

6

Texas Archeological Society

The first experiment, prospecting, explored the relationship between
several methods of detecting archeological features without resorting to excavation. The second experiment, house excavation, was conventional excavation with a sample predictive model. The third experiment, cistern excavation, attempted to explore the value of recent faunal collections from
historic sites. The fourth experiment, mill excavations, was a duplicate of the
second on a different structure. The fifth experiment, Cistern Two, started a
long term study of the rate of enrivonmental processes. Other sections of the
field school (mapping, photography, laboratory, and site survey) provided
necessary services and additional background information.

ENVIRONMENTAL NOTES
Geology
Geological information on McKinney Falls is based on work by Young
(1977). Various members of the Austin Formation can be recognized in a
geological section through the lower falls (Young et al., 1975: 5A). Starting
at the bottom of the section at stream level and proceeding upward, three
members, pyroclastic, McKown, and Pflugerville, are overlaid by about 1 m
of Quaternary gravel. The pyroclastic member consists primarily of green
clay (an iron bearing montmorillonite); it does not have formal
nomenclatural status. The pyroclastic materials were deposited as volcanic
ash falling into marine waters. Of the six known separate explosion craters,
Pilot Knob, located 2 mi to the southeast, produced the greatest amount of
pyroclastic material.
The McKown Member type locality, an old quarry 2 mi downstream from
the lower falls, is composed primarily of beds of calcarenitic limestone. This
member represents the beach facies around the old Pilot Knob volcano. An
old beach berm was preserved and exhumed just above the lower falls. The
Pflugerville Member type locality (Pflugerville, Texas) consists of limestones
deposited under shallow marine conditions as shown by the numerous
oysters present. The member contains one of the finest foraminiferal faunas
in the Texas Cretaceous.
The geology forms the framework of the physiographic setting and provided resources which attracted man to the area. The montmorillonites of
the pyroclastic member consist of alumina and silica sheets stacked with opposing oxygen layers, forming a weak bond with distinctive cleavage where
water causes expansion (Shepard, 1965:375-377). As a result, pyroclastic
rocks weather more rapidly than the McKown Member limestones, leaving
the limestones as the basic structure of the falls.
The montmorillonites probably were exploited by the Indians who used it
as a diet supplement (Newcomb, 1961:42). Experiments showed that
montmorillonite is easily carved and could have been used to fashion artifacts. However, due to the weak bond in montmorillonite, which expands
when wet, such artifacts could not be expected to preserve in most archeological sites.
Numerous chert nodules, found in the park, are eroded out of the Edwards Formation limestone located west of the park. The chert is of exceptionally fine quality which can be readily flaked. The McKown Member
limestones provide an excellent building material which can be sawed or

¯

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

7

handchiseled. The McKinney House and Mill are constructed of this
material.
Faunal Checklist
A checklist of animals (Table 1) which may occur at McKinney Falls State
Park or occurred there during historic times is based on actual faunal records
from Travis and surrounding counties (Kutac and Caran, 1976). The
presence of Eurycea latitans is from the BITE file (Biological Investigation of
Troglibitic Eurycea) of the Texas Speleological Survey (Austin). The bird
checklist (Table 2) is taken from actual sightings in the park (Kutac and
Riskind, 1977).
Faunal Observations
A faunal observation sheet was posted at the field laboratory for participants of the field school to record their sightings. An effort was made to
collect specimens, bring them to the lab where they were keyed to species,
and then released (Table 3). Several species were observed indirectly.
Meleagris gallopavo (turkey) and Canis latrans (coyote) were heard vocalizing; skunk was identified by its distinctive odor. Cryptotis parva (least shrew)
and Procyon Iotor (raccoon) were identified by recent skeletal remains.
Vegetation and Snail Fauna
Plant communities and snail, fauna of the McKinney Homestead are
discussed in appendices A and B.

CULTURAL SETTING
By the 1750’s, travelers on the San Antonio to Nacogdoches road, the
Camino Real, were passing about 15 mi southeast of the park; but these
Spanish travelers never settled the land. It was not until the 1830’s when
land was available to Anglo colonists that the area began to be settled.
Bastrop in 1837 was the largest town east of the frontier (Roberson,
1972:35), being a settlement of only a few families. By 1840, communities
were established in Austin and Comanche (at the mouth of Onion Creek).
In August, 1840, the battle of Plum Creek decimated the Comanches, and
pushed them westward beyond the Balcones Escarpment (Webb and Carol,
1952:307).
Travis County was created in 1840 and had sufficient population to
organize in 1843 (Texas Almanac, 1978:355). A population increase occurred between 1840-50, which resulted in Hays County being created out of
the southern part of Travis County in 1848. Population has reached 3,138
by 1850 in Travis County. Bastrop County had 3,099 and the newly
created Hays County boasted 387 inhabitants. The small communities of
Driftwood, San Marcos, Manchacha Springs, and Wimberley were
established by 1850. Austin was the capital of Texas and the closest large
town to McKinney’s homestead (Texas Almanac, 1978:185-187).
The 1850 U.S. Census for Travis County lists McKinney as a stock raiser
was $10,000 worth of real estate (Schedule 1, Roll 915). At this time,
McKinney had 14 slaves on his homestead. His brother James, a nearby
farmer, was holding 10 slaves (Schedule 2, Roll 918).
By 1860, six free inhabitants (Thomas and Anna McKinney, his mother

8

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1
Checklist of McKinney Falls State Park Fauna
Species
AMPHIBIANS
Ambystoma texanum
Ambystoma tigrinum
Plethodon glutinosus

Eurycea neotenes
Eurycea latitans
Scaphiopus holbrooki
Scaphiopus couchi
Hylactophryne augusti
Syrrhophus mamocki
Bufo woodhousei
Bufo valliceps
Bufo speciosus
Bufo punctatus
Bufo debilis
Acris crepitans
Hyla cinerea
Hyla chrysoscelis
Pseudacris clarki
Pseudacris streckeri
Gastrophryne olivacea
Rana catesbeiana
Rana berlandieri
Rana utricularia
REPTILES
Alligator mississippiensis
Chelydra serpentina
Sternotherus odoratus
Kinosternon subrubrum
Kinosternon flavescens
Terrapene carolina
Terrapene ornata
Graptemys versa
Chrysemys scripta

Common Name
Small-mouthed Salamander
Tiger Salamander
Slimy Salamander
Texas Salamander
Cave Salamander
Eastern Spadefoot
Couch’s Spadefoot
Barking Frog
Cliff Frog
Woodhouse’s Toad
Gulf Coast Toad
Texas Toad
Red-spotted Toad
Green Toad
Cricket Frog
Green Treefrog
Southern Gray Treefrog
Spotted Chorus Frog
Strecker’s Chorus Frog
Great Plains Narrowmouthed Toad
Bullfrog
Rio Grande Leopard Frog
Southern Leopard Frog

American Alligator
Common Snapping Turtle
Stinkpot
Mississippi Mud Turtle
Yellow Mud Turtle
Eastern Box Turtle
Western Box Turtle
Texas Map Turtle
Red-eared Turtle

Chrysemys concinna
Trionyx spiniferus
Hemidactylus turcicus

River Cooter
Spiny Softshell

Anolis carolinensis
Crotaphytus collaris

Green Anole
Collared Lizard

Holbrookia texana
Holbrookia lacerata
Sceleoporus olivaceus
Sceleoporus undulatus

Greater Earless Lizard
Spot-tailed Earless Lizard

Urosaurus ornatus
Phrynosoma cornutum
Cnemidophorus gularis
Cnemidophorus sexlineatus
Leiolopisma laterale
Eumeces obsoletus
Eumeces tetragrammus
Ophisaurus attenuatus
Gerrhonotus liocephalus
Leptotyphlops dulcis

Mediterranean Gecko

Texas Spiny Lizard
Fence Lizard
Tree Lizard
Texas Horned Lizard
Spotted Whiptail
Six-lined Racerunner
Ground Skink
Great Plains Skink
Short-lined Skink

Local Status
uncommon
rare or uncommon
common
common
rare
common
common
rare
common
uncommon
abundant
common
common
common
abundant
common
common
common
common
common
common
abundant
abundant

rare or historic
common
abundant or common
uncommon or rare
common
uncommon
common
uncommon
abundant or common
uncommon or rare
common
rare, introduced
abundant
uncommon
common
uncommon or rare
abundant
uncommon
common
common
common
uncommon
common
rare ?
uncommon

Slender Glass Lizard
Texas Aligator Lizard

uncommon or rare
common

Texas Blind Snake

common

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

Species
Natrix rhombifera
Natrix erythrogaster
Natrix fasciata
Storeria dekayi
Thamnophis sirtalis
Thamnophis marcianus
Thamnophis cyrtopsis
Thamnophis proximus
Tropidoclonion lineatum
Virginia striatula
Virginia valeriae
Heterodon platyrhinos
Diadophus punctatus
Coluber constrictor
Masticophis flagellum
Masticophis taeniatus
Opheodrys aestivus
Salvadora grahamiae
Elaphe guttata
Elaphe obsoleta
Pituophis melanoleucus
Lampropeltis getulus
Lampropeltis triangulum
Lampropeltis calligaster
Rhinochelius lecontei
Sonora episcopa
Tantilla gracilis
Micrurus fulvius
Agkistrodon contortrix
Agkistrodon piscivorus
Crotalus atrox
Crotalus molossus
MAMMALS
Didelphis marsupialis
Notiosorex crawfordi
Cryptotis parva
Blarina breoicauda
Scalopus aquaticus
Mormoops megalophylla
Myotis velifer
Lasionycteris noctivagans
Pipistrellus subflavus
Eptesicus fuscus
Lasiurus borealis
Lasiurus seminolus
Lasiurus cinereus
Lasiurus intermedius
Nycticeius humeralis
Tadarida brasiliensis
Dasypus novemcinctus
Sylvilagus floridanus
Sylvilagus aquaticus
Lepus californicus
Sciurus niger
Spermophilus mexicanus
Spermophilus variegatus

Common Name

Local Status

Diamondbacked Water Snake
Yellowbellied Water Snake
Broad-banded Water Snake
Texas Brown Snake
Texas Garter Snake
Checkered Garter Snake
Black-necked Garter Snake
Western Ribbon Snake
Lined Snake
Rough Earth Snake
Smooth Earth Snake
Eastern Hognosed Snake
Ringnecked Snake
Racer
Coachwhip
Striped Whipsnake
Rough Green Snake
Texas Patch-nosed Snake
Great Plains Rat Snake
Rat Snake
Bullsnake
Kingsnake
Milk Snake
Prairie Kingsnake
Texas Long-nosed Snake
Ground Snake
Flat-headed Snake
Texas Coral Snake
Copperhead
Western Cottonmouth
Western Diamondback
Rattlesnake
Black-tailed Rattlesnake

common
common
common
common
uncommon
common
common
abundant or common
uncommon
common
uncommon or rare
common
uncommon or rare
common
common
common
common
common
common
common
uncommon
rare or uncommon
uncommon or rare
uncommon
uncommon
common
common
common
common
uncommon

Opossum
Desert Shrew
Least Shrew
Shorttailed shrew
Eastern Mole
Leafchin Bat
Cave Myotis
Silver-haired Bat
Eastern Pipistrel
Big Brown Bat
Red Bat
Seminole Bat
Hoary Bat
Eastern Yellow Bat
Evening Bat
Mexican Freetailed Bat
Nine-banded Armadillo
Eastern Cottontail
Swamp Rabbit
Black-tailed Jack Rabbit
Fox Squirrel
Mexican Ground Squirrel
Rock Squirrel

abundant
possible
possible
historic
uncommon
possible
uncommon
possible
uncommon
possible
common
uncommon or rare
rare
rare
uncommon
abundant
common
abundant
uncommon or rare
abundant
abundant
abundant
common

common
uncommon or rare

9

10

Texas Archeological Society

Species
Glaucomys uolans
Geomys burarius
Perognathus merriarni
Perognathus hispidus
Castor canadensis
Reithrodontomys montanus
Reithrodontomys fulvescens
Perornyscus maniculatus
Peromyscus leucopus
Peromyscus boylei
Peromyscus pectoralis
Baiomys taylori
Sigmodon hispidus
Neotoma floridana
Microtus pinetorum
Rattus norvegicus
Rattus rattus
Mus musculus
Erethizon dorsatum
Myocastor coypus
Canis latrans
Canis lupus
Canis niger
Vulpes uulpes
Urocyon cinereoargenteus
Ursus americanus
Bassariscus astutus
Procyon Iotor
Mustela frenata
Mustela uison
Taxidea taxus
Mephitis mephitis
Spilogale putorius
Conepatus mesoleucus
Lutra canadensis
Fells onca
Felix pardalis
Felix concolor
Lynx rufus
Pecari tajacu
Odocoileus virginianus
Antilocapra americana
Bison bison

Common Name
Southern Flying Squirrel
Plains Pocket Gopher
Merriams’ Pocket Mouse
Hispid Pocket Mouse
Beaver
Plains Harvest Mouse
Fulvous Harvest Mouse
Deer Mouse
White-footed Mouse
Brush Mouse
White-ankled Mouse
Pygmy Mouse
Hispid Cotton Rat
Eastern Woodrat
Pine Vole
Norway Rat
Black Rat
House Mouse
Porcupine
Nutria
Coyote
Gray Wolf
Red Wolf
Red Fox
Gray Fox
Black Bear
Ringtail
Raccoon
Long-tailed Weasel
Mink
Badger
Striped Skunk
Eastern Spotted Skunk
Hog-nosed Skunk
River Otter
Jaguar
Ocelot
Mountain Lion
Bobcat
Collared Peccary
White-tailed Deer
Pronghorn
Bison

Local Status
rare
uncommon
possible
abundant
uncommon or rare
common
common
uncommon
abundant
possible
common
uncommon
abundant
rare
historic
common, introduced
abundant, introduced
abundant, introduced
rare
uncommon, introduced
uncommon or rare
historic
historic
rare
common
historic
common
abundant
rare
rare
historic
abundant
rare
uncommon
rare or historic
historic
historic
rare or historic
rare
historic
common
historic
historic

and his aunt, John Van Hagan [the horse trainer], and Minerva Fannin) and
21 slaves (Schedule 1, Roll 1306 and Schedule 2, Roll 1312) were living on
the property. McKinney’s personal wealth was $40,900, while his real
estate value had risen to $48,000.
McKinney had an assortment of structures and rock fence enclosures on
his land. A map of the Santiago del Valle grant, drawn in 1952 by Reynolds
Lowry, a McKinney heir, shows the location of many structures as Lowry
remembered them (Fig. 1). The following description of the cultural setting
is keyed to these numbers as the strucutures seem to be in approximately
the proper location.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

Table 2
Checklist of McKinney Falls State Park Birds
Scientific Name
Podilymbus podiceps
Pelecanus erythrorhynchos
Phalacrocorax auritus
Ardea herodias
Butorides virescens
Branta canadensis
Anser caerulescens
Anas acuta
Anas crecca carolinensis
Anas discors
Anas clypeata
Aix sponsa
Aythya affinis
CatharSes aura
Coragyps atratus
Ictinia mississipiensis
Accipiter cooperii
Buteo jamaicensis
Buteo lineatus
Buteo platyptenis
Buteo swainsoni
Circus cyaneus
Caracara cheriway
Falco sparuerius
Colinus virginianus
Meleagris gallopauo
Grus canadensis
Fulica americana
Charadrius vociferus
Pluvialis squatarola
Capella gallinago
Bartramia Iongicauda
Actitis macularia
Tringa melanoleucus
Tringa flauipes
Calidris minutilla
Larus delawarensis
Larus pipixan
Columba livia
Zenaida macroura
Columbina passerina
Scardafella inca
Coccyzus americanus
Geococcyx californianus
Tyto alba
Otus asio
Bubo uirginianus
Strix uaria
Asio flammeus
Caprimulgus carolinensis
Caprimulgus vociferus
Chordeiles minor
Chaetura pelagica
Archilochus colubris
Archilochus alexandri

Common Name
Pied-billed Grebe
White Pelican
Doubled-crested Cormorant
Great Blue Heron
Green Heron
Canada Goose
Snow Goose
Pintail
Green-winged Teal
Blue-winged Teal
Northern Shoveler
Wood Duck
Lesser Scaup
Turkey Vulture
Black Vulture
Mississippi Kite
Cooper’s Hawk
Red-tailed Hawk
Red-shouldered Hawk
Broad-winged Hawk
Swainson’s Hawk
Marsh Hawk
Caracara
American Kestral
Bobwhite
Turkey
Sandhill Crane
American Coot
Killdeer
Black-bellied Plover
Common Snipe
Upland Sandpiper
Spotted Sandpiper
Greater Yellowlegs
Lesser Yellowlegs
Least Sandpiper
Ring-billed Gull
Franklin’s Gull
Domestic Pigeon (introduced)
Mourning Dove
Ground Dove
Inca Dove
Yellow-billed Cuckoo
Roadrunner
Barn Owl
Screech Owl
Great Horned Owl
Barred Owl
Short-eared Owl
Chuck-will’s-widow
Whip-poor-will
Common Nighthawk
Chimney Swift
Ruby-throated Hummingbird
Black-chinned Hummingbird

11

12

Texas Archeological Society

Scientific Name
Megaceryle alcyon
Chloroceryle americana
Colaptes auratus
Centurus carolinus
Centurus auriflons
Sphyrapicus varius
Dendrocopos scalaris
Tyrannus tyrannus
Tyrannus verticalis
Muscivora forficata
Myiarchus crinitus
Sayornis phoebe
Sayornis saya
Empidonax flaviventris
Empidorax virescens
Contopus virens
Nuttallornis borealis
Riparia riparia
Stelgidopteryx ruficoUis
Hirundo rustica
Petrochelidon pyrrhonota
Progne subis
Cyanocitta cristata
Corvus brachyrhynchos
Parus carolinensis
Parus bicolor
Sirra canadensis
Certhia familiaris
Troglodytes aedon
Troglodytes troglodytes
Thryomanis bewickii
Thryothorus ludovicianus
Catherpes mexicanus
Mimus polyglottos
Dumetella carolinensis
Toxostoma rufum
Turdus migratorius
Catharus guttata
Catharus ustulata
Catharus minima
Catharus fuscescens
Sialia sialis
Polioptila caerulea
Regulus satrapa
Regulus calendula
Anthus spinoletta
Bombycilla cedrorum
Lanius excubitor
Lanius ludovicianus
Sturnus vulgaris
Vireo griseus
Vireo
Vireo
Vireo
Vireo
Vireo

bellii
solitarius
olivaceus
philadelphicus
gilvus

Miniotilta varia
Vermivora peregrina
Vermivora celata

Common Name
Belted Kingfisher
Green Kingfisher
Common Flicker
Red-bellied Woodpecker
Golden-fronted Woodpecker
Yellow-bellied Sapsucker
Ladder-backed Woodpecker
Eastern Kingbird
Western Kingbird
Scissor-tailed Flycatcher
Great Crested Flycatcher
Eastern Phoebe
Say’s Phoebe
Yellow-bellied Flycatcher
Acadian Flycatcher
Eastern Wood Pewee
Olive-sided Flycatcher
Bank Swallow
Rough-winged Swallow
Barn Swallow
Cliff Swallow
Purple Martin
Blue Jay
Common Crow
Carolina Chickadee
Tufted Titmouse
Red-breasted Nuthatch
Brown Creeper
House Wren
Winter Wren
Bewick’s Wren
Carolina Wren
Ca~on Wren
Mockingbird
Gray Catbird
Brown Thrasher
Robin
Hermit Thrush
Swainson’s Thrush
Gray-cheeked Thrush
Veery
Eastern Bluebird
Blue-gray Gnatcatcher
Golden-crowned Kinglet
Ruby-crowned Kinglet
Water Pipit
Cedar Waxwing
Northern Shrike
Loggerhead Shrike
Starling (introduced)
White-eyed Vireo
Bell’s Vireo
Solitary Vireo
Red-eyed Vireo
Philadelphia Vireo
Warbling Vireo
Black-and-white Warbler
Tennessee Warbler
Orange-crowned Warbler

J

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

Scientific Name
Vermiuora ruficapilla
Parula americana
Dendroica petechia
Dendroica magnolia
Dendroica tigrina
Dendroica coronata
Dendroica uirens
Dendroica fusca
Dendroica dominica
Dendroica pensyluanica
Dendroica castanea
Dendroica pinus
Seiurus aurocapillus
Oporornis formosus
Oporornis philadelphia

Common Name
Nashville Warbler
Northern Parula
Yellow Warbler
Magnolia Warbler
Cape May Warbler
Yellow-rumped Warbler
Black-throated Green Warbler
Blackburnian Warbler
Yellow-throated Warbler
Chesnut-sided Warbler
Bay-breasted Warbler
Pine Warbler
Ovenbird
Kentucky Warbler
Mourning Warbler

Geotblypis tichas

Common Yellowthroat

Icteria virens
Wilsonia pusilla

Yellow-breasted Chat
Wilson’s Warbler
American Redstart
House Sparrow (introduced)

Setophaga rutieilla
Passer domesticus
Sturnella magna

Eastern Meadowlark

Sturnella neglecta

Western Meadowlark

Xanthocephalus xanthocephalus
Agelaius phoeniceus
Ict~rus spurius

Yellow-headed Blackbird
Redwinged Blackbird

Icterus galbula

Orchard Oriole

Euphagus cyanocephalus
Cassidix major
Quiscalus quiscalua

Northern Oriole
Brewer’s Blackbird
Boat-tailed Grackle
Common Grackle

Molothrus ater
Piranga rubra

Brown-headed Cowbird
Summer Tanager

Cardinalis cardinalis
Pheucticus ludouicianus
Guiraca caerulea
Passerina cyanea
Passerina ciris
Spiza americana
Carpodacus purpureus
Carpodacus mexicanus
Spinus pinus
Spinus tristis
Spinus psaltria
Pipilo erythrophthalmus
Passerculus sandwichensis
Pooecetes gramineus
Chondestes grammacus
Aimophila ruficeps
Amphispiza bilineata
Junco hyemalis
Spizella passerina
Spizella pusilla
Zonotrichia querula
Zonotrichia leucophrys
Zonotrichia albicollis
Passerella iliaca
Melospiza lincolnii
Melospiza georgiana
Melospiza melodia

Cardinal
Rose-breasted Grosbeak
Blue Grosbeak
Indigo Bunting
Painted Bunting
Dickcissel
Purple Finch
House Finch
Pine Siskin
American Goldfinch
Lesser Goldfinch
Rufous-sided Towhee
Savannah Sparrow
Vesper Sparrow
Lark Sparrow
Rufous-crowned Sparrow
Black-throated Sparrow
Dark-eyed Junco
Chipping Sparrow
Field Sparrow
Harris’ Sparrow
White-crowned Sparrow
White-throated Sparrow
Fox Sparrow
Lincoln’s Sparrow
Swamp Sparrow
Song Sparrow

13

Texas Archeological Society

14

Table 3
Field School Faunal Observations
Scientific Name

Common Name

FISH
Ictalurus sp.

Catfish

AMPHIBIANS
Bufo woodhousei
Acris crepitans

Woodhouse’s Toad
Cricket Frog

REPTILES
Chrysemys sp.
Phrynosoma cornutum
Masticophis flagellum
Opheodrys aestivus
Pituophis melanoleucus
Lampropeltis getulus
Agkistrodon contortrix
Crotalus atrox
MAMMALS
Meleagris gallopavo
Cryptotis parva
Dasypus nouemcinctus
Sylvilagus sp.
Canis latrans
Procyon Iotor
Conepatus mesoleucus
Odocoileus virginianus

Pond Turtle
Texas Horned Lizard
Coachwhip
Rough Green Snake
Bull Snake
Kingsnake
Copperhead
Western Diamond Rattlesnake

Turkey
Least Shrew
Nine-banded Armadillo
Cottontail
Coyote
Racoon
Skunk
White-tailed Deer

The central structural feature is the two story stone house (1), located on
the north bank of Onion Creek just below its confluence with Williamson
Creek. Two large cisterns were constructed south of the house. The flour
mill (3) and millrace were southeast of these, on the same bank of Onion
Creek. A dam was constructed across Onion Creek just above the lower falls
(2). Several outbuildings, such as slave quarters (6), a barn, corn cribs, stock
pens, and outhouses were probably in proximity to the house. A hog pen
was downstream on the north bank of Onion Creek. The McKown quarry
was further downstream on the south bank.
The home of Van Hagan (7), McKinney’s horse trainer, and stonewalled
fields were across Onion Creek to the south. A limestone kiln was reportedly
downstream on the south bank of Onion Creek. A race track build by
McKinney supposedly was situated in the fork of Onion and Williams on
creeks (16). However, traces of this structure do not remain, probably
because the area has been disturbed by a gravel quarry and golf course (Fig.

1).
The hardrock bottom of Onion Creek just above the lower falls was a
natural crossing point for wagons. Known as McKinney Falls, this crossing
was used regularly by settlers in the area and may have connected with an
early wagon trail from Austin to the coast. The area around the McKinney
home is shown in Figure 2 as it exists today.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

Fig. I Map of Santiago del Valle Land Grant.

15

16

Texas Archeological Society

\

Fig. 2 Map of Homestead, Mill, and Darn (idealized reconstruction).

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

17

HISTORY
Thomas F. McKinney: A Biographical Sketch
Thomas F. McKinney, one of the first American colonists of Texas, was
an important leader and a hero of the Texas Revolution. Largely ignored in
Texas history, information on his early life is sketchy.
Thomas F. McKinney, the man for whom the park is named, was born in Kentucky in
1801. He moved to Missouri in 1821 with his family and there undoubtedly made the con~
nections which affected his later life. As a young man he entered the Santa Fe trade from
Missouri to the New Mexican capital, and eventually reached the Chihuahua trade centers.
In the early 1820’s he came to Texas as one of Austin’s first three hundred colonists. He
continued his trade with Chihuahua first from the San Antonio area and then from
Nacogdoches. It was in that east Texas town that McKinney reportedly married his first wife.
In the early 1830’s he had moved to the Galveston vicinity and had ceased his cross country
trading ventures (Ralph and McEachern, 1974:1-2).
In 1834, McKinney and Samuel M. Williams entered into a business partnership that was to have profound effects on Texas history (Frantz, 1952).
In 1835, McKinney and Williams obtained a charter for the first legally incorporated private bank in Texas, the Banco de Commercia y Agricultura
(Frantz, 1952). During the Texas revolt against Mexico, the McKinneyWilliams firm was a primary source of men, money, and supplies for the
Texas army. It financed over $150,000 or more than 10% of the total cost
of the revolution. The McKinney-Williams ships formed a part of the quickly
assembled Texas Navy which defended the coast and later transported
volunteers from New Orleans.
With the successful completion of the revolution, McKinney and Williams
proved to be the financial underpinnings of the Texas Republic. Texas
authorized McKinney and Williams to issue $30,000 in notes to circulate as
money. The bank used Negroes and real estate as collateral. In 1836,
McKinney, Williams, Michael Menard, and two other business associates,
set up the Galveston City Company; by 1838, they were selling real estate.
In 1836, McKinney was one of the nine men who signed the petition for
the first charter granted for a railroad not only in Texas but west of the Mississippi... These
men--Austin, Archer, Allen, Collingworth, Green, Henderson, Horton, Baker and McKinney--may not be accorded the honour of being called the paternal ancesters of our
railroads, but to them is rightly due the credit for the vision to conceive what the New
Republic needed (Reed, 1941:22).
The line, called "The Texas Railroad, Navigation and Banking Company,"
had a short and tempestuous life. It was attacked in its infancy by Anson
Jones primarily for its banking provision. In the nationwide financial panic of
1837, it and nearly every railroad project in the United States was wiped
out.
The character of McKinney’s business partner, Samuel M. Williams,
sheds some light on Thomas F. McKinney. Williams, like McKinney, is
seldom mentioned in Texas history. Williams may have been the most
disliked and distrusted leader of the time. In partnership with McKinney, he
was heavily involved in land speculation. Williams maintained distance between the frontiersmen and himself by living in a high aristocratic style, a
style of living which apparently was shared by McKinney (Henson, 1976).
Because of the widespread sentiment against banks and paper money,
McKinney’s and Williams’ bank dealings brought them criticism, culminating

18

Texas Archeological Society

in a 10 year lawsuit (1848-1858) and suspension of their bank by the Texas
Supreme Court (Webb and Carol, 1952:915). McKinney (1854) may have
been referring to this when he wrote to H.L. Kinney of Corpus Christi on
March 5, 1854:
I do not however exert myself as I used to do to make money and though it has its charms I
can not feel much anxiety to make it for if I do it would do me no good or not much and only serve to help those who would only the more desire my death in proportion to what I was
worth and bless me with their curses in proportion to what they received.
McKinney was elected to the Ist, 3rd, and 7th Legislatures. During the
1860’s, he was president of the Travis County Racing Association. He also
served for several years as a county commissioner. However, he was
defeated when he ran for the 9th Legislature in 1861 (Ralph and
McEachern, 1974:1-2).
His defeat in the 1861 election may have been due to the recent closing of
his bank and his Unionist leanings. "McKinney opposed secession but was
not as stubborn an opponent as many Travis County Unionists. He wrote
his younger--and fervently Southern--friend, Guy M. Bryan, that he
hoped to live out his life in quietude rather than in Revolution" (Bowen,
1974).
McKinney’s Unionist leanings do not seem to have stemmed from any
humanitarian interests. McKinney was a slaveholder and a slave dealer in
the sense that his bank used slaves as collateral. His antisecessionist beliefs
perhaps are better explained by his business interest.
The Civil War brought continuing problems for McKinney while he worked as a cotton buyer for the Confederacy. "Cotton trade in Texas and Mexico was chaotic, highly competitive, and purchasing agents and jurisdictions
overlapped. McKinney got involved in some personal and political embroglios stemming from the confused cotton situation" (Bowen, 1974).
The cotton business proved to be ruinous for McKinney after the war. He
died hopelessly in debt on October 2, 1873 and was buried in the Oakwood
Cemetery in Austin, Texas. A chronology of events (Table 4) that took
place on McKinney’s property was compiled from a variety of sources.
Interviews
When reconstructing the architecture of an historic site, the archeologist is
usually confined to excavation data and infrequent written accounts.
However, in this case, interviews with former inhabitants and a property
owner helped to fill in the sketch work of the archeologist. An interview with
Charlie Johns, who now lives in Pilot Knob, was particularly helpful.
The edited text of this interview follows:
Charlie Johns was born in 1885 or 1886, one of 10 children. He worked for James Smith,
as his father had before him~ he continued to work for him through the 1920’s. Johns was a
young man when he first lived in the "Old Rock House" (the McKinney House). He continued to live and work the place until he moved to the upper falls. Charlie’s grandfather,
Felix, was probably a freed slave; his grandmother was Clara Wheeler.
Charlie remembered a flood when he was young that was 2 ft deep on the front porch
and wiped out the log crib behind the house. This flood probably happened between 1890
and 1895. Charlie’s father grew corn, garden vegetables, and cotton. The cotton was
ginned on the home place and taken to Bluff Springs. Only in later years was Smith’s cotton
taken to Colton to be ginned. The McKinney place was worked by mules which were kept
at the "old Smith Home Place." Three to five milk cows usually were kept in pens across the
creek.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

19

Table 4
Chronology of Events on the McKinney Property
Date

Event

1832

Land on which McKinney house stands was first recorded in a 10 league grant
patented by Santiago del Valle.
Samuel M. Williams, acting for del Valle, sold nine leagues of the land to
Michael B. Menard.
Menard sold nine leagues of the land to Thomas F. McKinney.
McKinney moved to Travis County.
Horse trainer’s house was built
McKinney’s mill was opened.
House was built during this period, but construction was stopped by the Civil

1835
1839
1849
1851
1852
1853-61

War.

1864

Important political meetings to resolve conflicting state and Confederate interests in cotton and conscription took place in the house. Dignataries at the
meetings included Guy M. Bryan, representing General E. Kirby Smith who
commanded the Confederate Trans-Mississippi Department; Texas Governor
Pendleton Murrah; General E.B. Nichols, chief of the Texas Loan Agency
(working under Murrah and in conflict with the Confederacy); Judge Thomas
Devine of the Confederate District Court of Western Texas; and McKinney
(Bowen, 1974).
1869
Mill was destroyed by a flood.
1872
John Van Hagan left McKinney Falls for Long Island.
1873
McKinney died.
1873-81 Lower story was occupied by R.W. Lowry and Margaret Ann Taylor Lowry
(greatniece of McKinney).
1874
Anna McKinney Lowry was born.
1876
Reynolds K. Lowry was born.
Mary Nelson Lowry was born.
1878
1881
Lowry family and Anna Gibbs McKinney moved to a new home.
1885
Homestead was sold by Anna Gibbs McKinney to James Woods Smith.
1885-86 Charlie Johns was born and lived in the McKinney house.
1915
Charlie moved to the upper falls area while his mother stayed at the house.
1915
Charlie’s daughter, Charlie Mae Johns (Gentry) was born in the old Smith
place.
1920’s
Mrs. Johns moved out of the house.
1926
Albert Meeks moved into the house.
Charles Darby was born in the "old rock house."
1936
1942
Property was inherited by J.E. and Annie M. Smith; land was in their hands at
this time.
1940’s
House was abandoned and later burned.
J.E. Smith and his sister Annie donated the land to the people of Texas for use
1970
as a park.

Charlie’s account of the house covers the period 1900-1920’s. The house was build of
white stone with white painted plaster on the inside. Outside stairs with a hand rail led from
the lower to the upper porch and to the upstairs bedrooms. Both porches were wide
enough for sitting; the upper one was surrounded by a hand rail. Since the porch was 2 ft
above ground level, one step led from the lower porch to the front yard. To the west of the
porch was a dirt floored, wood enclosed room usually vacant, but occasionally used as a
smokehouse. The upper and lower fireplaces were functional, but cooking was done on the
cookstove in the kitchen (west room). A door opened from the kitchen onto the porch
(smokehouse?); the place had two other front doors.
The roof of the house and porch was made of shingles bought by James Smith. Raingutters were on and in good shape, although Charlie did not know if they led to the cistern.
The windows had white painted sashes, lead weights, screens, and shutters; the doors also
had screens. The yard was fenced off with a gate leading down to the lower falls. A ditch to
the east was used to dump ashes from the house.

2O

Texas Archeological Society

A road from the house to the mill continued down to the creek. Charlie used to pass by
the ruins of the mill when hauling water for the animals from the creek. He used mules and
wagons. Water for human consumption came from the cistern which was never used for
garbage. While visiting the TAS field laboratory, Charlie mentioned that his mother used
snuff as he pointed toward a group of bottles. "Yep, four dots--that’s the kind mother
used," he said. The snuff bottles were part of the garbage recovered from the cistern (probably deposited after 1920).
Charlie mentioned that hog fences were built of plank and topped with barbed wire. He
said that sometime in the 1920’s, several houses were built near the house for Charlie’s
family. Mules were used for corn and cotton cultivation, and the mule barn was located on
the "Old Smith place."
Another source of information was Albert Meeks, who was born in 1911
and moved into the McKinney house in 1936 when he was 15 years old.
His description of the house was basically the same as that of Charlie Johns’.
Albert noted
that the ceilings were made of wood. At one point in the interview, Albert mentioned a
mule lot north of the house; at another, he talked about a barn to the northeast. The
outhouse was also northeast of the house and a smokehouse (8 x 8 ft) was just I0 m north
of the house. It was used to cure two hogs a week. He pointed toward the golf course to the
west and said that there used to be an old cemetery over there. When he was plowing the
fields, he used to plow to it and turn around.
One of the last times he saw the house was in 1944, probably when it was inhabited by
Mr. and Mrs. Sandy Nixon. At that time, the floor was weak but the walls were still good.
He thought he remembered a flood in 1928 which reached the second floor of the house.
J.E. "Pete" Smith was a third informant. According to Smith,
Charlie John’s family was the last to live in the McKinney house; he thinks they left in the
1920’s. He confirmed that Charlie Johns had indeed lived in the McKinney house and on
the old Smith home place where Charlie Johns’ daughter was born in 1915. He further
commented that both the upper falls house and the old Smith home place are no longer
standing, and that the latter is partially burned. Smith indicated that the McKinney house
was burned by vandals in the 1940’s.

ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Previous Investigations
Two important sites in the area of the park were excavated by Suhm
(1955, 1957). The Smith rockshelter (Suhm, 1957), located near the center
of the park and included on the Interpretive Trail, contained both NeoIndian and late Archaic artifacts in a stratified deposit. Artifacts include arrowpoints, dart points, a boatstone, and pottery. From a series of radiocarbon dates from the site, the top of the deposit dates 220

+

70 B.P.

(TX-510; Velastro and Davis, 1970:271) and the lowest layer 1180 210 +
B.P. (TX-27; Tammers et al., 1969:145-146).
The Collins site (Suhm, 1955), located just off the park property, is an
open site deeper than 2 m in places. The site was divided into three levels
based on projectile point types. Pedernales, Bulverde, and Nolan points occur in the lowest levels; the upper levels complement and overlap the Smith
rockshelter data. These two sites provide a chronological sequence for the
park for the last 4,000-5,000 years. A few scattered finds indicate that the
park may have been occupied much earlier.
Additional investigation of the archeological resources of the park property was undertaken after the property was acquired by the State. Kegley
(1972) conducted a brief survey of the park. Sites were plotted directly on a
map for use in the master plan. Site numbers were not assigned and

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

21

diagnostic artifacts were not recovered. The survey was hampered by grass
cover and severe time limitations.
Another archeological survey of the area was conducted (Ralph and Loving, 1973) which included minor testing of several sites. The survey was
limited primarily to stake lines which marked planned road, house, and
utilities construction. The heavy vegetation cover present at that time of the
year effectively prevented the locating of all but the most conspicuous archeological features. It was recommended that an archeologist be present
during earth moving operations to prevent unnecessary destruction of archeological resources.
TAS Investigations
The 1974 investigations were carried out under a State of Texas Antiquities Committee Permit for Archeological Investigation, Number 53. The
permit originally was granted for "testing for all lines, excavations at the
’McKinney Homestead’ and mill site, testing for associated sites around
homestead and mill." However, due to the widespread destruction of archeological features within the park by construction activities, the investigation was expanded to include emergency archeology at prehistoric sites.
Extensive research was conducted by the Texas Archeological Society
(June 8-15, 1974) around the McKinney house and mill. Additional work
done by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (September 23 and October 11, 1974) was compatible with the research design established for the
TAS investigations (Ralph and McEachern, 1974).
Archeological excavations were conducted at the horse trainer’s cabin
(41TV307) during a five day period in July, 1974. A collection of artifacts
belonging mostly to the first quarter of this century was recovered (Appendix C). Additional results of Texas Parks and Wildlife Department investigations at the McKinney house and mill are in Appendix D.
Emergency archeological investigations took place (January 20-29,
1975) at 41TV314, a large prehistoric locality, after a significant portion of
the site was destroyed during construction activities. Several additional sites
were located during this time (Hudson, ms.) Additional surveys of the park
attempted to relate various fences to historic structures and updated site
survey forms (Medlin, ms.)
PROSPECTING
Research Design
Prospecting is used to mean the exploration of archeological deposits
without damaging the nonrenewable resources; the goal being to teach the
exploration of possibilities, not the excavation of probabilities. Two remote
sensing techniques and two chemical techniques were employed during the
TAS field school in an effort to prospect for traces of man. As stated in the
research design:
Archeological prospecting using the proton magnetometer, metal detectors, pH and
phosphate sampling are expected to define the kitchen area and outlying buildings without
disturbing the site. The primary results of the prospecting are expected to be locating archeological features. Their definition will depend on future excavations...
The prospecting crew will attempt to locate archeological features through several
physical and chemical methods. These methods include proton magnetometer, metal

22

Texas Archeological Society

detectors, pH and phosphate testing. They will construct maps showing the results of
various techniques and try to appraise the value of the different techniques (Ralph and
McEachern, 1974:3-4).

Grid S~,stern and Provenience
A grid system was established for the house and surrounding areas using
true north. True north was established by setting up a transit over a permanent bench mark buried in concrete (M.F.S.P. 3) and shooting a back sight
to another such bench mark (M.F.S.P. 4) located 589 m away at an angle of
16°42’18’, (angles and distances computed by Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department Engineering Branch). Ninety degree angles were turned and
points were established along these lines using a cloth tape for measuring
distances. After large reference blocks were established, stakes were placed
at 1 m, 4 m, and 5 m intervals, depending upon the type of investigation to
take place, i.e., excavation or surface survey.
The bench marks have known elevations which were changed to metric.
Secondary elevation points were established where needed, such as at window sills, southeast corner stakes, and the cistern. An arbitrary grid direction
was chosen for the mill to correspond to the wall lines at the structure. These
lines were extended to cover an area to be used for prospecting. The grid
was in 1 m units; when tied to the bench marks by a running survey, the
lines were found to run N 9°12’E. The survey also brought a known elevation to the mill to replace the arbitrary datum used for the first five days of
the field school.
All units were called or named by their southeast corners. The permanent
bench mark for the house was N100WI00 and all units corresponded to this
arbitrary designation. The mill system utilized letter designations for the
north-south lines which progressed from the west. The starting point H15 is
the outside southwest wall corner of the main mill room. This room straddled both the penstock and the wheel pit.
Proton Magnetometer Survey
A Varian proton magnetometer (M-50) with the sensor mounted atop an
aluminum pole 1.38 m long was used to detect underground features. Two
"in-site" surveys were run. The term "in-site" means a controlled systematic
survey that completely covers an archeological site. The first survey utilized
a 4 m and 5 m grid pattern established by staking a transit and tape grid
about the house. The other used a 4 m grid just west of the mill shaft. It
became apparent that setting up the grid took longer than recording the
data.
The results of the survey are presented in three overlay maps. The first
map (Fig. 3) delineates an old road west of the house which runs in a northeasterly direction. As the survey progressed from west to east, large
magnetic artifacts such as automobiles, tents, and trailers began to influence
the magnetometer. These artifacts were plotted rather than moved and the
resulting contours show the bias of the survey. The magnetometer was influenced by the above ground artifacts while reading the area thought to
have been the site of an outbuilding (barn?).
The second (Fig. 4) and third (Fig. 5) maps show two versions of the
same data taken west of the mill. The contours dramatically focus on the
hollow wheel pit and the vertical iron king shift. The third map (Fig. 5) is a

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

oo

o

t~

z

o

Fig. 3 House prospecting grid and proton magnotometer survey (first derivative).

23

24

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 4 Mill prospecting grid and proton magnotometer survey (first derivative).

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

25

0

o
o

Fig.

5

i

I

Mill prospecting grid and proton magnotometer survey (second derivative).

26

Texas Archeological Society

second derivative contour which uses a mathematical approach to "smooth
out" massive readings by averaging the four corners of a grid unit and plotting this average in the center of the unit.
Someone experienced in magnetic surveying should be present during a
survey (Arnold, 1980:8). Magnetometer data can be interpreted only by experts. However, a few notes, especially concerning the grid pattern, are applicable for those contemplating a survey.
The size of the grid is determined by two factors: the above surface interference and the subsurface features. The survey must stay at least 20 m
from interference items, such as automobiles. If above ground features are
present, their locations should be recorded so that the bias is understood.
Ideally, the grid used should be 1/3 to 1/5 the size of the expected
anomaly. Grids that are too small are adversely affected by statistical or random readings. The depth of the reading is approximately 1/3 the grid
space, e.g., a 4 m grid will read 1 1/3 m deep. A grid must be large enough
to give a good regional trend of contours unaffected by anomalies.
Anomalies should be surrounded by readings.
When contouring the data, a contour interval should be chosen that will
show the local density of magnetic variation, but which will not crowd
together, as contour lines do when approaching an anomaly. Machine contouring and second derivative mapping are best for showing data collected
during an "in-site" survey. Conventional contouring can use the less controlled points used in the search mode survey but results are speculative in
nature and the research design must emphasize initial prospecting for
anomalies (Arnold, 1980:4).
The second derivative map eliminates the lack of control edges within a
mapped area. A conventional contouring using plus and minus contours
must be done first and then compared with the second derivative map of the
same survey.
Metal Detector
A large crew with many different models of metal detectors did a detailed
survey of the 4 m and 5 m grid pattern which surrounded the house and the
4 m grid just west of the mill shaft. Four types of data were given value
numbers: surface (4), high intensity (3), medium intensity (2), and low intensity (1). Data were recorded on grid paper; metal rods, each flying a color coded value flag, were placed in the center of each hit (Fig. 6).
House surface artifacts were plotted and cataloged. A contour map was
made by totaling the intensity values for each square, but the results were
confusing at best. The total number of records per square was contoured
(Fig. 7). Areas of concentration stand out in bold relief: the road to the west;
the concentration to the north which probably represents the fence described by previous inhabitants~ and the "barn" to the northeast.
The mill survey shows concentrations of readings in units G6, CI0, and
K14 which remain unexplored at present. The eastern edge of the mill is
marked by the rapid decrease in readings (Fig. 8). A much larger area
around the mill could have been investigated if clearing brush and
establishing a grid had not consumed more time than had been allotted.
Even so, data from the metal Iocator survey were more gratifying than had
been anticipated.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

z,

,%

>w
>

w

"Z

+.-

O,

>
++.......

z

Fig. 6 House metal detector survey - hits.

27

28

Texas Archeological Society

z

~
~

J

r0

0
0..
o

O.

L

O,l

i

z

g

z
o

Fig. 7 House metal detector survey - contoured.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

i
i

! o

Fig. 8 Mill metal detector survey.

/
i

29

30

Texas Archeological Society

As a result of this study, several recommendations are made for future
studies. Only one detector or equally tuned models of the same detector
should be used. The map and resulting data should be contoured in a variety of ways. Examples include mapping total readings, total value readings,
only one value (such as high intensity), and only concentrations of readings.
Different maps should be compared, since each map has its own strengths
and weaknesses.
Artifacts
Artifacts recovered from the metal Iocator survey include 111 metal
specimens, which are further classified by function to facilitate description.
The categories include fasteners (25), containers (29), miscellaneous identiffed (37), and miscellaneous unidentified (20). Two ceramic sherds and
two glass bottles were found on the surface by surveyors and plotted.

METAL

Fasteners
CUT NAILS
Number of specimens: 9 complete, II fragments
Provenience: Various units (Table 5)
Description: Machine cut nails are divided into pennyweight and tabulated (Table 5).
WIRE NAIL
Number of specimens: 5
Provenience: Various units (Table 6)
Description: Nails are divided into pennyweights and tabulated (Table 6).

Containers
TIN CANS
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: N95W88(2), N96W94, N120W30
Description: Two specimens measure 13.5 mm in diameter and may be #303 tin cans.
TIN CAN FRAGMENTS
Number of specimens: 25
Provenience: N92W98, N94W98, N96W98(4), N98W88, N98W98, N100W88,
N100W98, N100W94, N100W96, N102W80, N102W96, N106W82, N106W88(2),
Nl10W66, NIIOW88, NII2W98(4), NI14WS0, NI24W98
Description: Fragmentary light gauge metal.
Miscellaneous Metal Artifacts
BAILING WIRE
Number of specimens: 11
Provenience: N90W96, N90W92, N94W82, N96W98, N98W98(2), NI02W98,
N104W96, N104W98, N108W82, NlI4W94
Description: Fragmentary except for specimen NI08W82 which has one strand joined
with four clockwise twists for a two wire bale.
Discussion: All specimens were located west of the house along the dirt road where
previous owner had been feeding cattle.
BARB WIRE
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: N100W84, NlIOW88, NI16W98
Description: Two-stranded wire, 2.5 mm in diameter, with machine cut single barbs; two
with single turns and one with a double turn-around.
Discussion: Although the house was flanked on the south and west by barbed wire fences,
only three fragments were found within the prospecting grid.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

31

Table 5
Cut Nails from Metal Locater Survey
Size

Number of
Specimens

3d
5d
6d

I
1
3

7d
12d

1
3

fragments

11

Provenience
N96W98
N116W98
N96W98, N98W84,
N114W84
N100W96
N96W98, N100W98,
N 104W98
N96W88, N96W98(2),
N98W98, N100W88,
N100W96, N100W98,
N102W92, NI00W86,
NI10W90, N116W98

Remarks
common
finishing
common
common
common

Table 6
Wire Nails from the Metal Locater Survey

Size
3d
8d
16d

Number of
Specimens

Provenience

1
3
1

N100W88
N96W98, N98W98(2)
NI06W92

Remarks
common
common
common

BUCKLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N94W84
Description: A D shaped steel buckle slightly flattened in the round with a 4 mm movable
pin bent around the base of the D. It would accept a 34 mm (I") leather strap.
COAT HANGER FRAGMENT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N110W94
Description: Fragment is 2 mm in diameter.
DOOR LOCK FRAGMENT
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: N110W50
Description: Cast iron fragment is 7.8 cm wide and measures 8.5 cm to the broken end.
This 2.5 mm thick plate covers the lock box, is aligned by 11 x 3 x 1 mm protrusion,
and fastens using a 6.5 mm countersunk flathead screw. It accepts an old-fashioned key
with a 5 mm shank and 23 mm protrusion to turn the bolt.
NUT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N92W98
Description: A 7.5 mm hole on a square nut 16.5 mm across with obliterated threads.
PIN
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N77W79
Description: Steel pin, 19.5 cm long; shank, 21 mm in diameter; head, 45 mm in diameter and 9 mm thick. A slot 20 mm long and 6 mm wide is located 9 mm from the small
end (Fig. 9a). This slot accepted a large retainer or keeper which is usually associated
with attaching a large piece of agricultural machinery to a tractor.

Texas Archeological Society

32

PLOW TINE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N116W80
Description: A hooked shank 12 mm in diameter flattens out into a steel-cupped tine or
hoe which is reinforced by a central rib along the bank. This specimen is a replaceable
farm equipment tool
POT OR KETTLE
Number of specimens: 7 fragments
Provenience: N94W84, N94W98, N96W96, N106W98, N108W86, N116W82,
NI24W98
Description: Cast iron fragments, two of which show shoulders 10 mm wide to support a
lid about 30 cm in diameter which fits over the contracting rim. The body flares to an
unknown diameter. Thickness is uniform at 3 mm.
Discussion: The specimens are unlike those in the Sears, Roebuck, and Co. Catalog
(1902:582-584) or those recovered from the Arkansas Post Branch (Walker,
1971:99-103).
RING (WITH BROKEN TAB)
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N104W90
Description: Steel ring, 17 mm in inside diameter, 25.5 mm in outside diameter and 2 mm
thick, with a broken protrusion 19 mm wide extending from one side of the ring. It is
reminiscent of a pop-top.
STANDARD FLATHEAD SCREW
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N102W96
Description: 63 mm long, tapering to a point. Threads 2.5 mm center to center extend 36
mm up from the point. Shank is 7 mm in diameter at the thickest point, while the flathead is 12.5 mm across.

0

b

0
a

Fig. 9 Metal detector survey artifacts: a. Pin; b. Stove fragment.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

33

STOVE FRAGMENT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N108W80
Description: Cast iron fragment of decorated wood burning stove, 2-4 mm thick~ slightly
curved along one edge; lacks identifying marks (Fig. 9b).
TINFOIL CIGARETTE PACKAGE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: NI08W80
Description: A plastic and tinfoil remnant of a Tareyton 100 cigarette package.
TOY TRAIN
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: N100W54, N87W93
Description: Cast iron fragment of a passenger or observation car and double wheel assembly for a toy train. This car was once 32 cm long and was made in one mold so that
any two halves (split in the middle) would fit together and be fastened by one rivet 58
mm long in the center. Each half has eight windows, 10 upper observation windows, a
platform (with two descending stairs) at each end, the name "CHICAGO ROCK ISLAND & PACIFIC . . ." in a zone above the main windows, and the number "62" or
"82" straddling the center of the car below the main windows. Each car would have had
four axles (rivets) and eight wheels, but none were recovered. The car stood
about 8.5 cm tall and 7.3 cm wide at the protruding stairs.
Discussion: The other half of this car and the locomotive to match were found in Level
303 of the cistern. Specimens were cleaned and stabilized and are on display at McKinney Falls State Park Visitor Center.
WASHERS OR SHIMS
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: N92W98, N96W98, N100W98, N102W96
Description: (Table 7)
Unidentified Metal Artifacts
CAST IRON FOOT (?) FRAGMENT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: NI00W90
Description: 29 mm wide and 8 mm thick with an 8 mm hole in the center.
Discussion: This artifact is perhaps a foot for a machine part.
CAST IRON FRAGMENT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N98W94
Description: 9.3 cm long, 1.8 cm wide tapering to a blunt point. Thickness at the edges is
2 mm, but a keel or thickening runs the length at the center which is 8 cm thick at the
broken end. The upper surface is slightly dished.
UTENSIL FRAGMENT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N118W54
Description: 78 mm long and 16 mm wide at the rounded end that tapers to 12 mm at the
broken end.
Discussion.: Although identifiable markings are not present, this fragment is thought to be a
fragment from an eating utensil.
Straps (classified by width)
44 MM STRAP
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: N110W96
Description: 68 mm long and 1,7 mm thick.
39 MM STRAP
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N130W20
Description: 40 mm long and 1.5 mm thick.

34

Texas Archeological Society

32 MM RIVETED STRAP
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N 114W94
Description: Strap stock, 2 mm thick, drilled and countersunk; three holes 4 mm in diameter each. Another piece of strap is riveted to the first. The second smaller strap is 15
mm wide and 2 mm thick. The rivet head is 4.5 mm in diameter and is on the side
opposite from the countersunk holes.
29 MM STRAP
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N130W20
Description: 58 mm long and 3 mm thick.
26 MM STRAP
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: N110W85(2), NI10W88
Description: One fragment, with two nail holes 2.5 mm in diameter punched from the
same side, is 1.5 mm thick. Another is bent into a question mark shape with three
countersunk holes, 4 mm in diameter, placed at the base. The matching strap fragment
(NI10W88) is broken at the third hole.
20 MM STRAP
Number of specimens: 6
Provenience: N94W96, N108W86, N110W86, N110W88, N114W96, N128W86
Description: All fragments are 1 to 1.5 mm thick and vary from 25 to 150 mm in length
except N108W86 which is 3 mm thick and 283 mm long. This latter piece has a hole 5
mm in diameter drilled and countersunk on each end and a 30° bevel on the upper
edges. A hole 7 mm in diameter was punched into the fragment from N114W96.
Discussion: N108W86 is well made and may be part of a machine.
19"MM STRAP
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N94W96
Description: Fragment, 1 mm thick, with edges rolled 4 mm to form a channel, and 50
mm long.
11.5 MM STRAP
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N92W98
Description: 1.5 mm thick and 25 mm long.
8.6 MM STRAP
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: N90W98, N94W92
Description: Fragments are 1.5 mm thick. One is 40 mm long and has a 2.2 mm hole
drilled 4 mm from one end. The other is 55 mm long.

Table 7
Washers or Shims from the Metal Locater Survey

Provenience
N92W98
N96W98
N100W98
N102W96

Inside
Diameter

Outside
Diameter

10.5
10.0
10.0
36.0

21.0
3.5
35.0
58.0

mm
mm
mm
mm

mm
mm
mm
mm

Thickness
0.3
1.0
2.0
0.7

mm
mm
mm
mm

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney. Homestead

35

CERAMICS
WHITEWARE SHERD WITH MAKER’S MARK
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N114W82
Description: From a vessel of undetermined form with the following maker’s mark irapressed on the surface: "WED . . . BEST CO . . ."
CROCKERY SHERD
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: NI26W84
Description: From a vessel of undetermined size and shape; sherd is unglazed on one side
and painted brown and salt glazed on the other.

GLASS
WATKINS PANEL BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N74W84
Description: Clear rectangular base with beveled corners (Fig. 10a); beveled basal edge,
straight sides, curved shoulders, tapering neck, and metal screw-on cap attached to rim
(Fig. 10b). Measurements: 214 mm high, 73 mm wide, inside diameter of the mouth
undetermined. Front panel embossed with "THE J.R. WATKINS CO." Bottom erabossed ’T’ inside a diamond and semicircles on either side with numbers "12", "8," and
VETERINARY PHARMACEUTICAL BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N108W84
Description: Circular amber colored base (Fig. 11a); straight sides, curved shoulders,
tapering neck, metal ring with stopper covers the rim (Fig. 11b). Measurements: 160
mm high, 51 mm in diameter, inside diameter of the mouth undetermined. Side embossed with calibrations from "50" to "250" mils. Bottom embossed ’T’ inside a circle
with numbers "7," "0," and "4."

Chemical Prospecting
A chemical analysis of sediments was conducted in different areas of the
park. The main purpose was to test this method of prospecting and to determine its value for subsurface investigation. The results are in Appendix E.

THE MCKINNEY HOUSE

Research Design
Teaching and the logistics of handling a large number of field workers provided the framework on which the research design was based. The primary
problem was splitting the excavations in such a way that the workers would
not be in each other’s way while at the same time concentrating personnel in
such a manner that adequate supervision could be provided by crew chiefs.
Based on these factors, the research design was explained in the field
manual (Ralph and McEachern, 1974:3).
Excavation in the McKinney house will be limited to the east room of the house. Most of
the house is protected by wall fall and the east room is the most vulnerable to unauthorized
excavation. Excavations are expected to yield small artifacts (which could slip between the
floorboards) and architectural features.
Two trenches extending from the house are planned to explore the nature of the occupation deposit. The occupation deposit is expected to be thickest close to the house and
diminish rapidly as it approaches the cultivated field. Evidence of the 1921 flood is also
predicted in this area.

36

Texas Archeological Society

Since excavation is a destructive process, care was taken to select
methods which would minimize destruction and at the same time yield maximum information. Excavation was conducted in 1 m2 units and carefully
trowled in 10 cm levels. The excavated matrix was dry screened through
1/4 in mesh screen and all cultural and fauna material was saved. Notes for
each excavation level were recorded on forms specifically designed for the
field school. General notes were taken by crew chiefs; at the completion of
excavations, summaries were prepared on all excavation areas.
Grid System and Provenience
Excavations were conducted within the master grid described in the metal
survey; all units were designated by that system during the field school.
However, to facilitate analysis and make the grid system easier to visualize,
another method of designating the excavation units is used in this report. All
units in the north trench are designed by the letter "N" and units in the east
trench by "E." Units in the east room are designed by "R", while the two
units in the northwest corner of the house are referred to by "NW" (Fig. 12).
Both R and N units are numbered from south toward north starting with
"I." Units from the east trench are numbered from west toward east. The
letter "s" refers to the surface, while "I" means the first level (0-10 cm), "II,"
the second level (10-20 cm), etc. Thus, the entry "Nls(2)" under Provenience in the artifact description refers to the surface of the first southernmost unit of the north trench. The number in parentheses means that two

m

Fig. 10 Metal detector survey artifacts:
a. Watkins Panel Bottle; b. bottle base.

Fig. 11 Metal detector survey artifacts:
a. Veterinary Pharmaceutical Bottle;
b. bottle.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

TAS EXCAVATION UNITS

41TV289
House

(Old Grid Coordlnates and New Designatlons)

North Trench
East Trench
East Room
Northwest Corner

.+~,,

+..,

w ss

w 7o

Fig. 12 Texas Archeological Society excavation units at McKinney House.

41TV289
House
Locations 1-22

0

I

’m
)e I elf

t

5

I

-}-. Loo
wss

71 F72
Fig. 13 Texas Parks and Wildlife excavation lots at McKinney House.

37

38

Texas Archeological Society

specimens were recovered from the unit. If a number is not present following the unit and level designation, only one specimen was recovered.
Excavations
Twenty one units were excavated in and around the house by the Texas
Archeological Society (Fig. 12). Additional work was carried out by the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department after the completion of the field school
(Fig. 13). The later work consisted of removing rubble from the house and is
described in detail along with recovered artifacts in Appendix D. The architectural information gained in the rubble removal is incorporated in the
following section. The TAS excavations at the house are described in Appendix F.
Architecture
The old McKinney House (41TV289) was a two story, cut stone building
with three downstairs rooms (east, west, and middle), a front porch, and
supposedly a built-on smoker/kitchen (Fig. 14). The metal Iocator study indicates the possibility of piping from the front porch to the two cisterns
and a structure (probably the historic barn) perhaps 30 m to the northeast.
Figure 15 shows the floor plan of the house after removal of rubble.
Photographs of the McKinney House (Figs. 16-20) were taken in 1943 by
Reynolds Lowrey, an heir of Thomas F. McKinney (Courtesy of Texas
Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin).
East Room
The east room is 2.7 m east-west and 5115 m north-south. It contains a
door opening south onto the porch, a door opening west into the middle
room to the northwest corner, two windows facing east, and one facing
north (Fig. 16). A fireplace and hearth is in the middle of the west wall;
above this were the second floor fireplace and joist pockets. A burned floor
lies between 157.17 m and 157.23 m elevation. A wooden sill still in place
but in poor condition is below the burned surface in the doorsill area between the east and middle rooms. The sill is resting on several limestone
slabs; the south end of the sill is butted against 1 x 4 in vertical blank.
Middle Room
The middle room is 3.7 m east-west and 5.2 m north-south. It has a door
opening onto the porch to the south, a door common with the east room, a
window to the south (east of the door), and a window facing north (Figs. 17,
18). A fireplace in the center east wall shares a common chimney with the
fireplace in the east room. Although smaller than its counterpart in the east
room, the fireplace is built of the same rock faced native limestone. A small
chimney or flue can be seen to the right of the main chimney in Figure 17.
This flue is in the middle of the west wall, but evidence of a fireplace or stove
parts was not found along the west wall of the middle room.
A burned floor was encountered at 157.27 m elevation by the fireplace
and at 157.25 m by the south door, the same elevation as the door sill. A
cache of nails, presumably fallen from the second floor or the attic, was
found in the southeast corner of the room on top of the burned floor. Remains of plaster were uncovered in the room corners and where the
limestone wall was scarred deeply enough to give the plaster a good hold.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

Fig. 14 Drawing, looking northwest, of McKinney House.

41TV289

HOUSE

PLAN

Niche

Floor

k

Fig. 15 Plan of House foundations.

Foundation

39

40

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 16 Photograph of McKinney House, looking southwest (Courtesy of Texas
Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin).

Fig. 17 Photograph of McKinney House, looking south (Courtesy of Texas Memorial
Museum, The University of Texas at Austin).

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

41

Fig. 18 Photograph of McKinney House, looking northwest (Courtesy of Texas
Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin).

Fig. 19 Photograph of McKinney House, looking north (Courtesy of Texas Memorial
Museum, The University of Texas at Austin).

42

Texas Archeological Society

The ends of burned floor joists protrude from the wall niches at the second
story.
West Room
The west room measures 5.27 x 5.27 m and is something of an anomaly.
Evidence was not found to indicate the remains of a stove or chimney,
although a small chimney or stove pipe arrangement can be seen in the
photographs (Figs. 17, 19). Figures 18 and 19 do not show windows or
doors in the stone facade because of the recent board and batten addition to
the porch. Excavation suggests that perhaps a doorway was located in the
south wall, but the doorsill is fragmentary and out of place. Four strange wall
niches were found in the standing walls. A burned zone is located 30-50 cm
below the floor level in the middle room, but no in situ floorboards were
located in the fill.
From the evidence, the floor rested on large floor joists, probably larger
than the second story floor joists (ca. 15 cm wide and 11 cm thick) and
smaller than the largest wall niche, 20 cm wide and 30 cm thick; the floor
was dimensional lumber no greater than 2 x 8 cm; the floor was cypress (see
construction materials section), and it probably stood between 157.85 m
and 157.98 m elevation. Furthermore, small test indications in the
northwest corner show typical kitchen midden (knife blade, meat hook, eggshells) 50 cm into the deposit (below the floor) where excavation was
halted. This material indicates the possibility of a root cellar or basement. If
future excavation proves this hypothesis, then access must have been
through the floor, since no outside access was demonstrable.

Fig. 20 Photograph of McKinney House, looking north (close-Up) (Courtesy of
Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin).

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

43

Front Porch
A partially enclosed front porch once spanned the entire front of the
house (14.5 m) and extended south approximately 3.15 m into the front
yard (Figs. 19, 20). Excavation was not attempted in this area when the
larger fallen wall stones were removed. TAS unit El, excavated 20 cm in
the sub-porch fill, did not reveal any architectural features.
Construction Materials
STONE
A native soft fossiliferous limestone was used in the construction of the
house. The material was supposedly from the McKown quarry about half a
mile downstream on the left bank (Young, 1977:2-43). However, the exact
source has not been located; on going quarry operations may have removed all evidence. The stone was cut with a circular saw 96-111 cm in
diameter and 4-10 mm wide, depending on the number of blades used at
one time. Large rectangular pieces were cut to be used as a capping stone
on the pediment of a two pitched roof. These pieces also were incorporated
into the construction as the facade using limestone rubble as fill.
Rock faced stone was formed with chisel and axe. The stone seems to
have weathered well, except in the fireplace, and appears well cemented
with mortar. An axe or pointed pick was used successfully to prepare the interior for plastering; plaster is still present in the corners and at various spots
on the walls of the middle room. Foundation stone is uniformly rock faced
stone blocks which were set into a builder’s trench, probably at a uniform
depth, and coursed up to a 157.07 cm elevation where the walls, inset
about 5 cm, began their first course. The east room fireplace has a native
(non-hewn) limestone and modern brick spark arrester.
WOOD
Cedar 0uniper), cypress, and pine were used, although it is difficult to say
which was used originally. The second story joists are cedar, rough cut one
or two sides (more commonly one side) and 11-15 cm thick. The east room
floor is shiplap 1 x 4 in pine; the middle room, 1 x 4 in tongue-in-groove;
the upstairs, dimension or milled cypress, 8 x 2 cm, length unknown. Roof
or rafters could not be discerned and Figures 17 and 19 show a corrugated
tin roof.
IRON
Hardware consisted of nails and hand-forged fireplace crane supports.
When the fireplace burned through between the two rooms, a metal shield
was placed in the back to separate the two fires. Both cut nails and wire nails
were recovered. A third of the cut nails were 4-penny or smaller. They were
used for finish work on doors, windows, and trim; one example was
recovered in a wooden wedge that was used to plumb and true a door or
window frame. About the same percentage of wire nails are present, indicating ongoing repair in later times.
Almost half the cut nails were 8-penny, which were commonly used in
framing and flooring. Over half the 8-penny nails were recovered from the
excavations in the east room. In later times, about 37% of the wire nails
were 8-penny and fewer finishing nails were used. This corresponds with

Texas Archeological Society

44

the introduction of roofing nails. The artifact section describes nail size and
number.
A few odd hardware fragments, such as door lock plates, door handles,
and strap hinges were recovered. However, their relationship to the house
temporally and spatially is not clear.
Fauna

Thirteen species of animals were recovered in the house excavations:
Bufo sp. (toad), Gallus gallus (chicken), Didelphis marsupialis (opossum),
Myotis sp. (mouse-eared bat), Sciurus niger (fox squirrel), Neotoma sp.
(pack rat), Sigmodon hispidus (cotton rat), Sylvilagus sp. (cotton-tail),
Dasypus novemcinctus) (armadillo), Sus scrofa (domestic pig), Capra sp.
(goat), Odocoileus virginianus (white-tailed deer), and Bos tarus (cow).
The faunal assemblage seems typical for a farm or country dwelling, with
a few exceptions. The absence of Mus rnusculus (house mouse) and Rattus
novegicus (Norway rat) is interesting; it is assumed that these species introduced from Europe had not yet become established around the house.
The presence of a burned Myotis (bat) is also of interest. Myotis is a frequent
inhabitant of abandoned buildings. It was apparently living in the house
when it was burned. The house may have burned during the day while the
bat was roosting or perhaps during the winter while it was hibernating. Charred mud dauber nests were recovered from the east room. They were
originally placed against the ceiling since there are impressions of coarse
wood grain on their flat sides. Table 8 provides more details.
Artifacts
A total of 3,215 artifacts was recovered from the house during the field
school. Another 23 lots (uncounted) of wood, plaster, and coal are discussed since they are direct by-products of man’s habitation.
Seventy percent of the artifacts are metal (2,239); the largest categories
are nails (1,364) and unidentified tin cans and scrap metal (654). Another
16% are ceramics (715); the remaining 14% are glass, lithics, buttons, and
miscellaneous. Window glass was weighed rather than counted to attempt
total numbers of panes. Miscellaneous bottle glass was not analyzed as the
sample was too large for the study time frame. Specimens are classified first
by material and then by function.
CERAMICS
Ceramics from the McKinney House consisted of 706 sherds of domestic
utensils plus a pipe stem, two doll parts, and six sherds from a toy tea set.
An attempt was made to classify the ceramics into earthenware, stoneware,
and porcelain, based on paste hardness (Durrenberger, 1965). However,
this attempt failed to divide the sherds into desired categories. The division
between earthenware and stoneware was made by arbitrarily sorting the collection into tableware and crockery. The earthenware category consists of
whiteware, yellowware, blueware, and lead glazed ware. The earthenware
category is further subdivided into decorated and undecorated.
In general, the ceramic collection was an expectable one. Examples of
early style ceramics include transfer printing, featheredge, and banded
decorations. The rather large amount of porcelain (20 %) appears unusually

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

45

Table 8
Faunal Remains from McKinney House
Provenience
Ell

EIII

E21

E31

E311

E41
E51
E511
NIII
N21

N211
N31
N611

N711
N811
N91
NWs
NWI

NWII

NWIII

NWIV

Species
10 unidentified fragments
Neotoma sp.

4 unidentified fragments
Bufo sp.
Neotoma sp.
Sylvilagus sp.
15 unidentified fragments
Gallus gallus
Didelphis marsupialis
8yluilagus sp.
Bos tarus
7 unidentified fragments
Syluilagus sp.
Bos tarus
2 unidentified fragments
I unidentified bovid-size
animal
1 round steak bone
Sus scrofa
1 unidentified fragment
Capra sp.
12 unidentified fragments
6 unidentified fragments
Sus scrofa
I unidentified fragment
20 unidentified fragments
I round steak bone
Capra sp.
14 unidentified fragments
Sus scrofa
5 unidentified fragments
33 unidentified fragments
Odocoileus uirginianus
Capra sp.
4 unidentified fragments
4 unidentified fragments
4 unidentified fragments
3 unidentified fragments
13 unidentified fragments
Sigmodon hispidus
Sus scrofa
2 unidentified fragments
Neotoma sp.
Sus scrofa
27 unidentified fragments
Neotoma sp.
Syluilagus sp.
Capra sp.
Bos tarus
Sus scrofa
6 unidentified fragments
Dasypus nouemcinctus
Sciurus niger

Elements
2 pelves, 2 tibae, 2
femora, 10 vertebrae,
~:alcaneum, metatarsal
humerus
2 ulnae, humerus, vertebra
vertebra, humerus
bill fragment
mandible
tibia (juvenile)
tooth
maxilla
pelvic fragment

canine
tooth

tooth

tooth
tooth

antler fragment
2 teeth fragments

femur
tooth
scapula, pelvis
metapodial
femur
calcaneum
carpal
scapula fragment (juvenile)
19 foot elements (juvenile)
vertebra
maxilla

46

Texas Archeological Society

Species

Provenience

RII
R31
R51

Capra sp.
Bos tarus
Gallus gallus
Sciurus niger
Myotis sp.
Sigmodon hispidus

Elements
3rd phalange
2 carpals, 2 phlanges
femur
humerus
humerus
tibia, femur

high (Fig. 21). However, when the McKinney wealth and status are considered, the marked presence of fine porcelain tableware is not surprising.
Earthenware (Tableware)
WHITEWARE (FIG. 22)
Undecorated Wash Basins
Number of specimens: 12 sherds (from 2 vessels)
Provenience: NlI(6), NIII, N2I, N2II, N31I, N6II, N811
Description: Three sherds from N311, N6II, and N811 are rim fragments from a large vessel. The remaining sherds fit together to form about 1/8 of a wash basin which was
approximately 35 cm in diameter and 10 cm deep.
Undecorated Cup Sherds
Number of specimens: 10 sherds (from at least 2 cups)
Provenience: E5I(2), NII(3), N31(2), N4I(2), N81
Description: Three rim sherds, two basal sherds, and five handle sherds from at least
two cups.
Undecorated Rim Sherds (Plates, Saucers, and Serving Dish)
Number of specimens: 51 sherds (from at least 18 vessels)
Provenience: E2I, E31I, E31II, E41(9), E41I, E5s, E51(20), Nll, N21(7), N2II(2), N31(2),
N3II(3), N4I, N7I
Description: There are 36 sherds from at least 15 plate sized vessels; 13 sherds from at
at least two saucer sized vessels; and two sherds from a possible serving dish.
Whiteware Bases (Plates, Saucers, and Platter)
Number of specimens: 34 sherds (from at least 15 vessels)
Provenience: E3I, E4I(ll), E4II, E5I(9), E5II(4), NII, N311, N4I(3), N7I, N8I(2).
Description: There are 27 sherds from at least 11 plate sized vessels; six saucer sized
basal sherds from three vessels; and a single sherd from a platter.
Whiteware Body Sherds
Number of specimens: 276
Provenience: E21(4), E31(5), E311(5), E3111, E41(62), E411(21), E51(61), E511(7),
Nli(7), NIII(3), N21(19), N211(5), N31(26), N311(11), N41(11), N51(8), N61(10),
N611(2), N711(2), NWI(5), R311
Description: Miscellaneous body sherds.
Printed Maker’s Marks
Number of specimens: 15 sherds (from at least nine vessels)
Provenience: E4I(4), E5I, NII, N2I, N3I(2), N31I(4), N41, N7I
Description: Identified marks are from A. Villeroy and Boch (four sherds from a cup or
small bowl) and B. M & S (one sherd) (Fig. 23c).
Unidentified marks: Three sherds from one vessel have the name" . . . VIN M.
KNOWLES CHINA CO." and "U.S.A." around a ship (Fig. 23b). One sherd has
most of the word "CHINA" and the monogram "S.G.E." (Fig. 23d). Six sherds
from at least three vessels are too incomplete to be readily identified. One of them
has part of a lion and the letters "IRO" (Ironstone) on it (Fig. 23a). Another sherd has
"AMERIC-" in green transfer print.
DiscussiOn: Villeroy and Boch were in Mettlach (Germany) in 1842 (Kovel and Kovel,
1953:136). Godden (1964:407) assigns the M & S monogram to Maddock and
Seddon, Newcastle Street, Burslem, England, dating 1839-1842.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

Undecorated white ware
Decorated white ware
Yellow ware
Stoneware
Lead glazed
Porcelain
Miscellaneous

0

I0

20

30

40

50

60

Percentage

Relative Frequency of Ceramic Wares

Fig. 21 Relative frequency of House ceramic wares.

UNDECORATED W}IITE WARE SHERD DISTRIBUTION

41TV289
HOUSe
0

5
meter

/~True

w~s

ws5

Fig. 22 Undecorated Whiteware sherd distribution at McKinney House.

47

48

Texas Archeological Society

Featheredge Plate
Number of specimens: 1 rim sherd
Provenience: E511
Description: One fragment from a plate with a scalloped rim that is edged in blue.
Discussion: Featheredge was most popular in the United States between 1790 and
1840 and commonly occurs in early 19th Century sites; it is rare after 1850
(Walker, 1971:108-109).
Monochromatic Transfer Printed Cup and Saucer
Number of specimens: 9 fragments (5 from 1 cup and 4 from 1 saucer)
Provenience: N21, N31(4), N311, N41(2), N81
Description: The sherds are printed in dark blue. Two rim sherds from a cup have a
hatched pattern and three body sherds have a floral pattern. The three rim sherds
from the saucer are hatched and one has part of a floral pattern.
Monochromatic Transfer Printed Sherds
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: Eli, E41, N2I
Description: Two sherds are transfer printed in brown. The other sherd is printed on
both sides in a light blue floral pattern.
Discussion: Monochromatic transfer printing was most popular in the United States
between 1790-1850 (Walker, 1971:16).
Polychrome Decalcomania
Number of specimens: 15 sherds (from at least 5 vessels)
Provenience: E21(2), E31, E3II(2), E41(3), E4II(3), E51(2), NWI(2)
Description: Three sherds are from a plate with a gilded edge and a floral pattern of
pink, red, blue, green, and yellow. Five sherds are from a bowl or dish with a
floral pattern of green, blue, red, and brown. Two sherds have a flower-anddiamond pattern in red, green, yellow, and black along the edges; one is from a
platter and the other from a bowl. Five sherds are from a cup and saucer with a

b

2

d
2

¢
Fig. 23 Printed maker’s marks on sherds recovered fi’om McKinney House.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

49

repousse edg~ and band on the cup with a floral and bird pattern in blue, green,
red, yellow, and black.
Discussion: The manufacture of polychrome decalcomania was started in England by
1845 and was fashionable by the mid-1800’s (Walker, 1971:121).
Banded Ware
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: NII
Description: The sherd has an applied blue slip band and is too small to determine
vessel type.
Discussion: Banded ware was used throughout the 19th Century but was popular
mainly between 1800-1850 (Walker, 1971:133).
Painted line
Number of specimens: 3 sherds (from 2 vessels)
Provenience: E4I(2), N7I
Description: Two specimens (E41) are from a bowl or serving dish with a blue line
painted on the edge overglaze. The remaining sherd is a basal fragment from a plate
or saucer with a red line underglaze.
Mottled/Painted
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N2I
Description: This small rim sherd is painted in blue and red underglaze, producing a
mottled red, white, and blue effect. The shape of the vessel was not determined.
Hand painted
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N2I
Description: The sherd is hand painted underglaze in red, green, blue, and black.
The specimen is too small to determine the pattern but the curvature suggests a bowl.
Gilded
Number of specimens: 16 sherds (from at least 4 vessels)
Provenience: E41(7), E41I(5), E5I(3), N5I
Description: Seven sherds are from a plate with a gilded band 5 cm wide along the
edge. Seven sherds are from a bowl with a repousse edge and gilded geometric
pattern. One sherd is from a cup with a repousse edge and gilded flower pattern;
while the remainder is from a saucer with a dot repousse pattern and gilded edge.
Repousse edged
Number of specimens: 14
Provenience: E41, E4II(2), E51(6), E5II, N21, N7I, N9I, NWI
Description: Rim sherds are from white plates that have molded or repousse decoration
only, consisting of patterns of lines and dots.
Blue specked
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: NIII, N2II, N31I
Description: The sherds are covered with tiny, irregularly spaced, light blue dots underglaze.
YELLOWWARE
Number of specimens: 22 sherds (from at least 3 vessels)
Provenience: E5I, NII(2), NIlI, N2I(3), N21I, N31(9), N31I(3), N4I, N7II
Description: Fourteen sherds are plain. One rim sherd has a repousse edge. Another
sherd is painted green underglaze in parts. The remaining sherds are banded ware
with brown, white, and black bands.
BLUEWARE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E51
Description: Blue glazed sherd from bowl or vase with repousse rose pattern.

50

Texas Archeological Society

LEAD GLAZED
Number of specimens: 28 sherds (from 2 vessels)
Provenience: E31II(2), E41(20), E4II(4), E51(2)
Description: Two sherds are from a bottle that is hand painted polychrome in green,
yellow, brown, and black. The remaining sherds are from a small plain bowl glazed
on the inside and along the outer edge of the rim.
Discussion: Lead glazed pottery of Mexican manufacture is common in Spanish Colonial
sites. Similar ware is presently made in Jalisco (Fox, 1974:55).
MISCELLANEOUS SHERDS
Number of specimens: ;3
Provenience: E5II(2), N21
Description: Unidentified sherds.
PIPE STEM
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: N611
Description: The specimen is fragmentary, including the stem and a small part of the bowl.
The beige paste is fine textured and slightly porous. Identified markings on the
specimen are lacking.
Stoneware (Crockery)
The house yielded a total of 43 sherds from at least six crocks or jugs. The
sherds vary from soft to medium paste, beige in color, and coarser in texture
than the white ware. Most of the sherds exhibit wheel marks and the majority are salt glazed. The sherds are typed on the basis of interior and exterior
finish.
BROWN GLAZED EXTERIOR/BROWN GLAZED INTERIOR
Number of specimens: 12 sherds (from at least 2 vessels)
Provenience: ESII, N211(2), N31(5), N41(2), N51(2)
Description: Eleven sherds appear to come from large crocks with one sherd from another
smaller vessel. Two fragments of an applied shaped handle were recovered.
WHITE GLAZED EXTERIOR/WHITE GLAZED INTERIOR
Number of specimens: 13 sherds (from at least 1 vessel)
Provenience: E21, E3s, E41(2), E51(4), ESII, N31(4)
Description: Sherds are from a large crock that was salt glazed on the exterior and interior.
One sherd is a rim fragment from a lid.
CREAM GLAZED EXTERIOR/BROWN GLAZED INTERIOR
Number of specimens: 11 sherds (from at least 2 vessels)
Provenience: ESII, Nli(3), N21(2), N211, N2111, N31, N311, N41
Description: Sherds are from large crocks that were salt glazed on the exterior and interior.
Five of the sherds have a blue paint underglaze on the exterior.
GRAY GLAZED EXTERIOR/GRAY GLAZED INTERIOR
Number of specimens: 2 sherds (from I vessel)
Provenience: N31, NSI
Description: Sherds are from a straight walled vessel with a salt glazed interior and
exterior.
YELLOW GLAZED EXTERIOR/YELLOW GLAZED INTERIOR
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N41
Description: Rim sherd from large crock.
UNFINISHED EXTERIOR/GLAZED INTERIOR
Number of specimens: 2 sherds (from 2 vessels)
Provenience: E51, Nll
Description: Specimens are both basal sherds. One has a white salt glazed interior; the
other a brown glazed interior.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

51

GLAZED EXTERIOR/UNFINISHED INTERIOR
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: NWs
Description: A crock lid sherd with blue and white splatter painted under a salt glaze.
Porcelain (Sherd distribution Fig. 24)
UNDECORATED RIM SHERDS (PLATES AND SERVING DISH)
Number of specimens: 22 sherds (from at least 3 vessels)
Provenience: Nli(5), NIII(2), N21(5), N211(3), N41(2), N61, N71, NSI, NWII(2)
Description: Most of the rims are too incomplete to be typed, but at least two plates and
one serving dish are represented.
UNDECORATED BASE SHERDS (PLATES AND SAUCER)
Number of specimens: 11 sherds (from at least 4 vessels)
Provenience: E41(3), NIlI, N21, N211(2), N311, N61, N91, N911
Description: Sherds appear to belong to two plates and two saucers.
UNDECORATED BODY SHERDS
Number of specimens: 81 sherds (from undetermined number of vessels)
Provenience: E21(2), E31, E311, E4s, E41(16), E411(4), E51(5), E511(3), Nli(4), Nlli(2),
N21(5), N211(2), N31(4), N311(2), N41(4), N51(3), N611(5), N71(4), N711(7) N81, N811(2),
N91(3), N911, NWI
Description: Miscellaneous unidentified body sherds.
UNDECORATED CUP SHERDS
Number of specimens: 14 sherds (from at least 3 cups)
Provenience: E21, E41(7), E411, E511(2), N21, N91, NWI
Description: Miscellaneous rim, basal, and handle fragments.
POLYCHROME DECALCOMANIA (CUP, SAUCER, AND VASE)
Number of specimens: 11 sherds (from 3 vessels)
Provenience: E31, E4s, E41(6), E411, E51, N41
Description: Five sherds from a cup with a red, yellow, blue, and green floral pattern. One
sherd appears to be from a saucer with the same pattern. Three sherds appear to be
from a vase with a green and red floral pattern.
HAND PAINTED SAUCER
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E51
Description: Sherd appears to be from a saucer hand painted in green overglaze.
GILDED BOWL
Number of Specimens: 2 sherds (from one vessel)
Provenience: E41, ESI
Description: Sherds seem to come from the same bowl which apparently had the entire
outside in gilded overglaze.
MAKER’S MARKS
Number of specimens: 3 sherds (from 2 vessels)
Provenience: E411(2), N31
Description: Two sherds fit together and have "... MADE IN.. /’ printed in green overglaze. The remaining sherd is apparently a saucer and has the letters "INY" printed in
green overglaze.
TOY TEA SET
Number of specimens: 6 sherds (from 5 vessels)
Provenience: E41(3), E411, ESI, N31
Description: Two of the sherds are from a miniature saucer; one from a miniature bowl;
three from a miniature teacup; one, the spout from a miniature teapot; and the remaining sherd from a lid.
DOLL PARTS
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: E41(2)
Description: Sherds are painted in black overglaze and from the size and shape are assumed to have come from a doll.

Texas Archeological Society

52

GLASS
Bottles
One whole specimens was recovered along with 18 necks, 20 bottle
bases, and eight jar necks. A bottle base was dated between 1904 to 1907
(Table 10). One neck is hand applied. Necks are illustrated as rim types and
not described.
GEBHARDT CHILl POWDER PANEL BOTTLE
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: E411
Description: Clear, rectangular base with beveled corners, beveled basal edge, straight
sides, slanted shoulders, straight neck, wire rim, and threads for a screw-on cap (Fig.
25). Measurements are 83 mm high, 39 mm wide, 19 mm inside diameter of the
mouth. Side panels are embossed "GEBHARDT EAGLE, CHILl POWDER"; bottom
embossed with an "I" inside the diamond.
Discussion: Manufactured by Illinois Glass Company between 1916-1929 (Toulouse,
1971:264).
BOTTLE NECK AND BASE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E21
Description: Clear, rectangular base, rear beveled corners, straight sides, straight
neck, wire rim, screw-on cap still attached (Fig. 26). Measurements are 127
mm high (estimated), 43 mm wide. Bottom embossed with a "W" inside a
diamond and "USA 40 18."
BOTTLE NECKS
Number of specimens: 17
Provenience: E41(2), E51(6), E511(2), N21, N31, N41, N71(2), N711, N811
Description: Table 9. Rim types are illustrated in Appendix G, Figure 1.
BOTTLE BASES

3

PORCELAIN DISTRIBUTION

41TV289
House

~PITrue

~

\\\\\\NN\\\\N~

3

wsl

Fig. 24 Porcelain distribution at McKinney House.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

53

Table 9
Bottle Neck Sherds from McKinney House
Inside Diameter of
Mouth

Provenience

Color

Rim Type

E41
E41
E51

aquamarine
purple
purple

15 mm
12 mm
undetermined

E51

purple

U
DD
neck with
wire rim
C

E51
E51
E51

purple
purple
clear

11 mm
13 mm
undetermined

E51
E511
E511
N21
N31
N41

clear
clear
green
purple
clear
clear

N71
N71
N711
N811

clear
purple
purple
amber

G
F
neck with
wire rim
EE
C
T
BB
C
neck with
wire rim
F
D
T
CC

undetermined

Remarks

embossed
"UNCES"
embossed
"2
I/2
FL"

undetermined
11 mm
12 mm
10 mm
21 mm
undetermined
undetermined
undetermined
undetermined
12 mm

applied neck

Number of specimens: 19
Provenience: E31, E3111, E51(4), N2s, N21(2), N31(3), NSs, N61, N71, NSII, N91, NWI, Rls
Description: Table 10.
EMBOSSED BOTTLE SHERDS
Number of specimens: 14
Provenience: E21, E41(2), N21(3), N31(2), N41(4), N711, NWIV
Description: Table 11.
Jars and Lids
JAR NECKS
Number of specimens: 8
Provenience: E3111, E41(3), E51, E511(2), Rll
Description: Clear jar neck fragments, with undeterminable measurements, threads for
screw-on caps. RII is a clear, melted jar with continuous thread for a screw-on cap, embossed "TRADE MARK VASELINE CHESEBROUGH NEW (YORK)."
JAR LID
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: E511
Description: White milk glass, circular base, undetermined diameter, embossed "JARS."
Discussion: It is possibly a Boyd cap for a Mason jar.
EMBOSSED BODY SHERDS
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: N21
Description: Clear, jar sherd, embossed "SEAL."

Texas Archeological Society

54

Table 10
Bottle Base Sherds from McKinney House
Provenience

Color

Shape of Base

Diameter

E31

amber

square

62 mm

E3111
E51
ESI
E51
E51
N2s
N21
N21
N31

clear
clear
clear
clear
clear
clear
amber
aquamarine
purple

circular
circular
circular
circular
circular
circular
circular
rectangular
circular

undetermined
undetermined
undetermined
undetermined
undetermined
undetermined
undetermined
undetermined
42 mm

N31
N31
N5s
N61
N71
NSII
N91
NWI

clear
purple
purple
purple
amber
clear
clear
aquamarine

circular
circular
circular
circular
rectangular
circular
circular
square

undetermined
undetermined
39 mm
undetermined
undetermined
undetermined
undetermined
63 mm

Rls

aquamarine

circular

undetermined

Remarks
embossed with 2 dots;
Garrett snuff bottle
embossed "MISTS"

inset panel
embossed "FAI
DEC 22 JULY 15 23"
embossed "1908"
embossed "172"
possible panel bottle
embossed "MILLVILLE"
beveled corners,
circular concave
depression in base
embossed "AB J L ";
manufactured by
Adolphus Busch
Glass Mfg. Co.,
1904-1907 (Toulouse, 1971:26)

3
j

¢m

Fig. 25 Gebhart Chili Powder Panel Bottle,
front and back view and base.

Fig. 26 Unidentified bottle neck and base.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

55

Table 11
Embossed Bottle Sherds from McKinney House
Provenience

Color

E21

clear

E41
E41
N21

clear
clear
amber

N21
N21
N31

purple
purple
purple

N3I

purple

N41
N41
N41
N41
N711
NWIV

clear
aquamarine
clear
amber
purple
clear

Remarks
panel bottle, front panel
embossed "B CAL RUP"
embossed "G T"
embossed "E B"
snuff bottle basal sherd,
embossed with 2 dots
embossed "LA"
embossed "NL SK"
panel bottle, side panel
embossed with decoration
of lines in rectangular
pattern
panel bottle, side panel
embossed-with decoration
of lines in rectangular
pattern
embossed "T"
embossed "81"
embossed "IS"
embossed "B DRUG"
embossed "N FR"
panel bottle, side panel
embossed "CAS"

Pressed Glass
LID
l~umber of specimens: I
Provenience: N91V
Description: Frosted, clear lid sherd with lip; geometric pattern.
Discussion: It is probably a bowl lid.
PRESSED GLASS SHERDS
Number of specimens: 17
Provenience: E41, E51(9), E511(2), N31(5)
Description: Five purple sherds, two milk glass sherds, ten clear sherds. Patterns include
five basket weave, eight geometric, and four undetermined. Vessel forms are not discernible.
Window Glass
Weight of specimens: 4.275 kg
Provenience: Table 12.
Description: Thickness of sherds varies between 2.5-3.5 mm but seems to be of two basic
sizes.

Discussion: Window glass was the most common artifact from the house. Panes were not
reconstructed. However, photographs (Figs. 15, 17, 19, 20) and dimensions of the window enclosures indicate the size and amount of glass to be expected. Total window glass
should be 48 kg for the house based on 4.8 kg per window. Nine percent was recovered
by excavating about 20% of the area of distribution (308 m2). If most of the windows are
to the north and east, as the photographs and architecture indicate, the percentage of
recovery is approximately correct.
The largest quantity of glass came from just outside the windows. The quantity becomes
less as one goes down and out from the house (Fig. 27). The window glass is outside the
structure and not inside. This distribution is to be expected when a house burns with
closed windows.

56

Texas Archeological Society

Table 12
Distribution of House Window Glass

S
Unit
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
NI
N2
N3
N4
N5
N7
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
NW
Totals

I

13

85
310
188
362
?
537
637
272
115
44
5
169
?
46
36
148
55

33

3009

20

(by

gin)

Level
II

Totals
III

IV

?
33

15

33

55

I0

85
310
886
362
41
788
782
272
115
44
5
169
20
46
36
148
166

1120

88

25

4275

698
?
41
236
112
?
?

The glass data are incomplete for two reasons: many lots were mixed with plain
bottle glass sherds and time did not allow for separation; much of the interior glass was
fused by the fire into lumps (containing metal and charcoal fragments) which could not be
tallied.
Miscellaneous Glass
LAMP CHIMNEY
Number of specimens: 9 (from at least 4 chimneys)
Provenience: N21(4), E41(2), N31(3)
Description: Rims are clear; thin glass with knobbed edges; slight differences in knobbed
edges.
SYRINGE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: NIl
Description: Clear glass; long cylindrical syringe 91 mm long, 14 mm in diameter.
VIAL
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: R1s
Description: Circular base, straight sides, curved shoulders; 10 mm in diameter.
GLASS LENS
Number of specimens: 2 (fit together)
Provenience: R31(2)
Description: Oval lens (35.7 x 27 x 2.5 mm) from a pair of eyeglasses.
CAMEO
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: R31
Description: Fragment of a pink mold made glass cameo; shoulder for setting the piece
into a brooch is present.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

57

UNIDENTIFIED GLASS FRAGMENT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: R51
Description: A domed piece of milk glass measuring 8 x 5.4 mm with a small hole in the
center of the flat back.
Discussion: Although it may be the head of a pin, none were found in the reference
catalog. It may also be a button fragment.

METAL
Ammunition
CARTRIDGES
Rimfire
Number of specimens: 19
Provenience: Table 13.
Description: Table 13.
Discussion: Of the 19 rimfire cartridges, all but four are .22 caliber. Rimfire .22 caliber
cartridges are neglected in the literature. Dates range from 1863 to the present. This
range is too late for mill dating and too insensitive for a turn-of-the-century chronology. Distribution (Fig. 28) of rimfire in the house excavations shows the early shells
clustered east of the house in a trash dump while the later shells are more surface
finds from close to or inside the house. References for Table 13 are Logan (1959>
190-191), Amber (1968:92), and Barnes (1969:345).
Center Fire
Winchester Repeating Arms Co..22 W.C.F.
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N611
Description: Brass case (bottle necked); 35.56 mm long; black powder load.
Discussion: This cartridge was introduced in 1885 and used in the single shot
Winchester at the turn of the century. It is now obsolete (Logan, 1959:106-107;
Barnes, 1965:239).

41TV289
House
meter

,

166

lr~

~

Fig. 27 Window glass distribution at McKinney House.

+ " ,oo

True

58

Texas Archeological Society

0

~ ~~
~ o ~oo
~oo ~

o
0
e-"

0

$

,~ ~ ~ ~
U

0

6

E

~,

0

~

~"

"

’~"

o~

.-

,~

~

~

8
O0
o~

e..

~o

~_~~..~
o~<~<=~

"=

.o~

=o

-0
"r-

Z~Z

z

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

59

Remington U.M.C. 9 mm Luger
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: E311(2)
Description: Brass case; 19.05 mm long.
Discussion: The cartridge was perhaps reloaded with a nickel plated copper primer
dating post-1902. The cupro-nickel decoy primer makes it post-1940.
Winchester Repeating Arms Co..32 W.C.F.
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N2s
Description: Brass case; 31.75 mm long.
Discussion: The cartridge dates 1882-present, although it is now almost obsolete.
It was originally designed for the Model 73 level action rifle. Most .32-20 rifles will
chamber and shoot this cartridge and the .32 Smith and Wesson Long and Short
plus other cartridges. Barnes (1969:46) indicates that this cartridge originally was
loaded in black powder.
United States Cartridge Co..38 S & W
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: N3s(2)
Description: Copper case, unknown length.
Discussion: The revolver cartridge was designed by Smith and Wesson in 1877 for
their hinged frame revolvers. U.S. Cartridge Co. was sold to National Lead Co.
in 1911 and cartridges may have been produced into the 1920’s (Amber,
1968:92). Both cartridges use a U.S. copper primer. The revolver was out of
time judging from the firing pin indention.
Union Metallic Cartridge Co..38 S & W, solid head
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E51
Description: A copper case too fragmented for measurement,

RIMFIRE

DISTRIBUTION

41TV289
House

Peters

(~

UMC Co
United States
Western

~)

Winchester

~True

[]
+.,,

wTO

4- ....

W~S

Fig. 28 Rimfire cartridge distribution at McKinney House.

60

Texas Archeological Society

Discussion: The cartridge dates probably 1880-1902 when Remington bought out
U.M.C. The solid head denotes that the primer pocket protrudes into the powder
chamber of the cartridge (Logan, 1959:104). This cartridge is a balloon head,
shot in a revolver with a fixed, well worn firing pin.
Shotgun
W.R.A. Rival
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: Rlll
Description: Winchester Repeating Arms Co. 10-gauge, brass case, 7.95 mm long.
Discussion: This cartridge dates late 1870’s-early 1900’s. It was changed to black
powder in 1894 (Amber, 1968:91). The cartridge (Fig. 29a) was found on
charred earth beneath the burned wood floor of the house.
Winchester Leader
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N51
Description: Smokeless 12-gauge, steel case, 24.64 mm long.
Discussion: It is a high base express load but a battery cup primer is not present. It
dates 1894-? and is offered in the 1909 Winchester Catalog (Amber, 1968:91).
The lack of a battery cup primer is something of an anomaly as all other ~hells
from this period use this type primer.
U.M.C. Co. New Club (Star Pattern)
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: Lot 16
Description: A Union Metallic Cartridge Co. 12-gauge, black powder load with a
case length of 8.763 mm.
Discussion: It dates to 1867-1910 (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962:82).
Remington Express
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: Lot 1, Lot 9
Description: Remington Arms Co. 12-gauge; 21.44 mm case length.
Discussion: It is probably a recent high base with a black powder load and a
battery cup primer (Fig. 29b). It dates in the 1930’s.
Remington U.M.C. Arrow
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: R51
Description: A 12-gauge shell, 26.19 mm case length.
Discussion: The cartridge dates to 1910-1960 (Amber, 1968:92). It is from a battery
cup primer shot in a pump action or slide action shotgun. The shotgun was in
bad shape (Fig. 29c).
Remington_ ELM_C_ Shurshot
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: Lot I
Description: A late model 12-gauge, black powder load with a case length of
12.7 ram.
Discussion: This shell (Fig. 29d) was listed in the 1936 Remington U.M.C. price list
and must be l~ter than the 1901 merger of Remington Arms Co. and Union
Metallic Cartridge Co. (Amber, 1968:91).
BULLETS AND SHOT
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: Table 14.
Description: Table 14.
Discussion: The ball suggests the presence of a percussion revolver in the McKinney
household. The lack of distortion suggests that this ball was never fired.

Fasteners
Fasteners include ~ails, tacks, staples, rivets, screws, bolts, barb wire,
buckles, hooks, padlocks, snaps, and hinges. Nails were the second most

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

61

Table 14
Bullets and Shot from the House

.22 caliber Long
or Long Rifle

R41

R51

1

I

Ell

E511

.44 caliber ball
#2 buckshot
(Eastern classification)

common artifact recovered from the house excavation, with more than
1,397 complete and fragmentary specimens in the collection. The total
number of wire nails is almost double that of cut nails, but complete
specimens were evenly divided between the two classes.
Complete specimens were classified as to pennyweight (d). Various U.S.
standards were tried, but the overlap of sizes through the years and the
variations in range found in the manufacturing process nullified efforts to use
a set standard. Nails were laid out and divided visually into close types.
Type distribution is plotted in Tables 15 and 16 and Figures 30 and 31.
The relative percentages of complete cut nails and wire nails are given
and the most common sizes used in the house are noticeable. Fifty-three
percent of the cut nails and 44% of the wire nails were recovered from
within the east room. The predominant types of cut nails are 2d and 3d

0 ~m

lj

a

0

I"
cm

b

c

,

d

Fig. 29 Shotgun cartridges: a W.R.A. Rival; b. Remington Express; c. Remington
-UMC Arrow; d. Remington - UMC ShurShot.

62

Texas Archeologica! Society

0

oo

o

0

OC

o6

0

,’-~0

o~

C’Xl~

kO,.-~

o~

tO

0-0

co

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

O0

¢o
o

*-~

O0
¢0

u~
r~

ba~
~9

¢o

0
p~

r~

r~

z
ox
z

oo
Z

z

.~ z

Z

¢o
Z
as
Z
~0
Z

laJ

¢0

~N

r

63

Texas Archeologicol Society

64

0
cO

LO

T-q
o,l

0

oo

o~

E

oo~

oo

0

0

"o
oo

"0

o

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

0

IC IC

0

t.D

tw3

<
Fo
CO

r~

,-t c’xl

z
Ox

Z
z
Z

8~o
.~ z

8~
~z
z
z
z
u~u~

Z

0,’-~

E
0

0

8
Q

,~

65

Texas Archeological Society

66

CUT NAILS
30"

Fig. 30 Cut nails at McKinney House, graph of size by percent.

WIRE NAILS

10

2d

3

4

5

6

7

8

t0

Common

12

16

20

30

40

3

4

Finishing

Fig. 31 Wire nails at McKinney House, graph of size by percent.

5

Roofing

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

67

(29%) and 8d (49%); the most common wire nails are 3d and 4d (39%),
8d (36%), and roofing nails (8%). The function of nails is discussed in the
architecture section. Distribution of nails shows the relative late age of the
dump in E4-E5 with 2% cut and 15% wire nails.
NAILS

Cut Nails
Number of specimens: 896
Provenience: Table 15.
Description: Table 15, Figure 30.
Discussion: Two lots, E21 and N21, were mixed in analysis. They are divided arbitrarily with the odd specimens placed in N21.
Wire Nails
Number of specimens: 463
Provenience: Table 16.
Description: Table 16, Figures 31, 32.
Discussion: Two lots, E21 and N21, were mixed in analysis. They are divided arbitrarily with the odd specimens placed in N21.
Tacks
Number of specimens: 5
Provenience: Eli(2), E31, E4II, NIlI
Description: Specimens from E1 have shanks 24 and 29 mm long. Shank lengths of
specimens from E4 and N1 are 21 and 14 ram. The upholstery tack from E31 has a
shank 13 mm long.
Staples
Number of specimens: 33
Provenience: Table 17.
Description: U shaped wire staples of four different sizes (Table 17).
MISCELLANEOUS FASTENERS
Rivets
Pants Rivets
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: N31, Nli(2), N91
Description: Three 17 mm diameter pants buttons. One has the inscription "Union
made." Another is encrusted with rust and is 14.8 mm in diameter. The rivet
buttons used on Levi Strauss pants today have these same dimensions.
Copper Rivets
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: NIlV
Description: Fragment of a copper rivet, male part, 11.2 mm in diameter.
Discussion: Slightly larger than those used today by Levi Strauss Co.
Screws

Iron Screw
Number of specimens: 5
Provenience: E51, Nll, NIlI, N31, R41
Description: Fragments of flathead wood screws with head diameters of 15.5, 13.3,
13.1, and 8 mm. A distal fragment came from R41.
Eye Screw
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N811
Description: 26 mm long and 13 mm in diameter (outside to outside of the eye).
Bolts
Carriage Bolts
Number of specimens: 2

68

Texas Archeological Society

Table 17
Distribution of Staples from the House (By Length)
Provenience
N2I
N2II
N3I
N41
NWI
N81
N8II
Eli
E31
E31I
E4I
E5I
RII
R31
R4I
Totals

21 mm

28-33 mm

36-39 mm

1
1

48 mm

Fragment

1

1

1
2
1
1
3
6

1
1
3
1
1

1
17

Provenience: E51, N21
Description: Two bolts measure 66 and 76 mm long with 11 and 12.3 mm
diameter shanks; the longer has a square nut 20.5 mm across.
U Bolts
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E31
Description: Round stock 9.7 mm in diameter with 40 mm of threads and a 44 mm
diameter (inside) across the base.
Chain
Chain, lightweight
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: Nll
Description: Eighteen rounded links of 4 mm stock.
Chain, link
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E21
Description: Heavy machine roller chain part, 59.5 x 29 x 9.6 mm with two holes
8.7 mm in diamater (Fig. 33.)

Nuts
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: E311, E41, E51, N21
Description: Square nuts with outside measurements of 19, 15.5(2), and II mm.
Washers
Number of specimens: 5
Provenience: Table 18.
Description: Circular washers of two types: flat and locking.
Rod and Washer
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E5I
Description: A rod 5 mm in diameter, 27.5 mm long; threads on one end, split on the
other. A fixed washer is attached 9.5 mm from the threaded end and two loose
washers 34 mm in diameter are between it and the split end.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

°

°

ol

0

c

(I)

ou
°m

LL

i

N

Z
O

E

U

m

u

I

0

E
E
0

~D

°~
Fig. 32 lllustration of wire nails from McKinney House.

U

69

Texas Archeological Society

70

Table 18
Washers from the House
Outside Diameter

Inside Diameter

Provenience

45.5 mm
13.0
18,5
12,0
20.0

15.5 mm
6.0
6.3
4.0
10.2

E21
E31
E51
N21
N51

Type
flat
locking
flat
flat
locking

Table 19
Iron Buckles from the House

Provenience

Length

Width

Stock
rectangular
round
rectangular
& round
round
rectangular
& round
rectangular
& round
--

E31
E41
E411

45 mm
25.5
36

22 mm
21
39

E411
E51

22
57

25.2
39,5

E51

47

28

E51

--

--

0
I

Strap
Size
14
13
32
19
23

Remarks
D shaped
for a light belt
or shoe
for a hame strap
buckle

19
25,5

2
cm

.Fig. 33 Chain link from McKinney House.

fragment

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

71

Barbwire
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E4s
Description: A single strand fragment of wire with double wrapped barbs; wire diameter
is 3 mm; barbs are of 2 mm stock and machine sheared to a point.
Buckles
Iron Buckles
Number of specimens: 7
Provenience: E31, E41, E411(2), E51(3) (Table 19)
Description: Clasp type buckles with single, double, and triple bars for use with
belts and harness (Table 19; Fig. 34).
Discussion: Buckles from the house came from the east trench toward the trash
dump. One type of buckle was used on a hame strap to keep a horse from
jumping its traces.
Overshoe Buckle
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N811
Description: Four hole overshoe buckle with a split rivet attachment: measures
47 x 14 x 1.3 mm, bent longitudinally for reinforcing.
Solid Buckle
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E41
Description: Three bars, 25 x 20 mm, of light rectangular stock for a light strap 13
mm wide (Fig. 35).
Suspender Buckle
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: E21, E41
Description: Round stock 3.4 mm in diameter, bent to attach shoulder strap to a
bib overall; accepts a 3 mm strap (Fig. 36).
Garter
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E41
Description: Round stock 2.2 mm in diameter, bent to attach stockings to a garter belt.
Grommet
Number of specimens: 5
Provenience: E4I(3), E5I, N3t
Description: Table 20.
Hooks
Iron Hook
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: E41(2)
Description: Hook at right angles to the eye of a 9 mm stock, 65 mm overall
length (Fig. 37).
Brass Hook
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E41I
Description: A bent brass piece 1.5 mm thick and tapering from a width of 21 mm.
This rounded end artifact, 56 mm in overall length, has two rivets holding on
another thin brass fragment; function unknown.
Adjustable Hook
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: NW4
Description: Triple rectangular bars accepts a 79 mm strap not thicker than 4 mm.
A semicircular protrusion with a 14 mm wide hook protrudes from the front for
quick attachment (Fig. 38).

72

Texas Archeological Society

b
a

d

e
0

CM

!

5
¯

f

Fig. 34 Iron buckles from McKinney House.

0

.m. . . . . . . . . . CM

Fig. 35 Solid buckle from
McKinney House.

2
Fig. 36 Suspender buckle from
McKinney House.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

73

Table 20
Grommets from the House
Provenience

Inside Diameter

E41(2)
E41
E51
N31

Outside Diameter

13 mm
10
12
12

2 specimens

6.0 mm
4.5
5.0
5.0

2 specimens
fragment
fragment
fragment

Padlock
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: NWI, NWII
Description: One (NWI) is a fragment (38.4 mm wide) from a small "Bull Dog" padlock
made of brass (Fig. 39a). The other specimen is 77 x 60 mm (NWII) with a spring
drop over the keyhole (Fig. 39b).
Discussion: The large specimen is similar to No. 9R2830 in the Sears, Roebuck & Co.
catalog (1902:546) for railroads, jails, etc. Cost was 58~.
Rings
Ring
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E41
Description: 38 mm inside diameter, 49 mm outside diameter (Fig. 40).
D Ring
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N91
Description: Nickel D shaped ring, 23.5 mm outside diameter of 3 mm stock; accepts a 15.5 mm strap (Fig. 41).

/

0
1

cm

2I

Fig. 37 Iron hook from McKi~ne~ House.

o
I

CM

i5

Fig. 38 Adjustable hook.

Texas Archeologica! Society

74

0
0

cm

|

I

5
I

cm

5
I

b

8
Fig. 39 Padlocks: a. Bulldog; b. unidentified.

0

2

m
Fig. 40 Ring from McKinney House.

Fig. 41 D ring from McKinney House.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

75

Safety Pin
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: E4I, E5I(2), Rll
Description: Two small fragments and a complete specimen from the southeast corner
of the east room. The complete specimen, 52 mm long, is made of brass stock 1.6
mm in diameter.
Shoe Eyelets
Number of specimens: 9
Provenience: E41(4), E411(3), NEI, N311
Description: Outside diameter of eyelets is 9 mm; inside diameter is 14.5 mm.

Strap

Hinge
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E3I
Description: Fragment has two drilled and countersunk 6 mm holes.

Shirt Snaps
Number of specimens: 5
Provenience: E31, E41(4)
Description: Male and female shirts snaps 11 mm in diameter with 32 dots around th?
collar of the protruding member of the male. These are fragmentary.
Containers
CANS
Open-the-top Cans
Number of specimens: 6
Provenience: N4I, N8II, N9II(3), R5s
Description: Rolled seam, open-the-top cans in fragmentary condition were found
about the house. Another 300 small unidentified fragments also were recovered from
almost every unit opened.
Discussion: Areas of concentration or patterning could not be discerned from the
distribution.
Powder Can
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: RII
Description: Top section of a talcum powder can with a revolving lid with holes in it;
specimen is burned.
Can Fragments
Number of specimens: 278 fragments
Provenience: Eli(30), E3I(21), E4s, E5I(3), N2I(30), N211(23), N31(28), N6I(38),
NIII(8), N8II(20), N9II(13), NWs(2), NWII(6), RII(30), R31(3), RSs, R51(48).
Description: Tin can or light metal fragments were recovered from almost every
unit open at the house. Areas of concentration or patterning could not be discerned
from distribution.
CLOSURES
Can Closure
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N9II
Description: Large cap (ca. 65 mm inside diamater) for a tin; rolled edge and lacking
threads, using 2 mm stock.
Discussion: May close a tea can such as offered by Sears, Roebuck & Co. (1902:14).
Wire Closures
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: E41, N2II, NWII(2)
Description: Wire twists and loops from bottle closures (Fig. 42).
Crown Cap
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: Ell, E51(3)
Description: Same type presently used on pop bottles.

76

Texas Archeological Society

Miscellaneous Metal Artifacts
BICYCLE PARTS--SPOKE AND TUBE VALVE
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: E51(2)
Description: Valve is 35 mm long, 8 mm in diameter at the threads; stem still inside; spoke
is fragmentary.
CAN KEY
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: E51
Description: Proximal fragment of a can opener (sardine) using 4 mm round stock (Fig.
43).
CARRIAGE PARTS
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: E41(2)
Description: Two stake irons, 19 x 3.5 mm stock, chamfered edges with two holes in
each; overall length 77 mm.
Discussion: Cost was 5’ in 1902 (Sears, Roebuck & Co., 1902:630).
COTTER KEY
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N311
Description: 57.5 mm long of stock 5 mm in diameter.
DISK
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E311
Description: 37 mm in diameter and 1.3 mm thick; slightly burned and corroded;
stamped in fancy letters "Luxor"; extremely light metal.
DOOR HANDLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N211
Description: Fragment for a lock set, which might accept a glass knob. A 6.5 x 6.5 mm
shaft extends 52 mm to a break at a drilled hole (Fig. 44).
EYED SPIKE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E51
Description: Hand wrought spike 140 mm long, pointed on one end and beaten into a
flat eye; 13 mm inside diameter x 23 mm outside diameter (Fig. 45).
FISHING WEIGHT
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: E2s, N9111
Description: Lead fishing weight with iron wire core terminating in a 3.5 mm eye. AIthough broken on the distal end, weight was originally 86 grams (3 ounces). The specimen from the north trench is a 20 mm lead disk; the line is threaded through a center
hole.
FORK
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: RSI
Description: Similar to fork #28R100 in the Sears, Roebuck & Co. Catalog (1902:281).
Discussion: The catalog fork was the first offered and the least expensive at 37~ for a set of
six knives and six forks.
GUSSET
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E21
Description: A subrectangular plate of 4 mm stock, bent 90 o; five drilled and countersunk
holes about 5 mm in diameter (Fig. 46).

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

77

I°
¢m

Fig. 42 Wire closure from
McKinney House.

2

Fig. 43 Can key from
McKinney House.

Fig. 44 Door handle from
McKinney House.

cm

-2
Fig. 45 Eyed spike from
McKinney House.

Fig. 46 Gusset from

UcKinney

House.

78

Texas Archeological Society

HARMONICA PART
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: ESI
Description: Brass harmonica reed plate with 10 holes; measures 94 x 25 x 1.4 ram.
HORSESHOE FRAGMENT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E21
Description: End fragment.
JACK
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N31
Description: Cast iron; fragment of a piece used in a child’s game of jacks.
KEY
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E41
Description: Proximal fragment of an old fashioned front door key.
KNIFE PART
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: Rls
Description: Center divider for a double bladed steel pocket knife.
LAMP FIXTURE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: Rll
Description: Brass collar with threads for lamp socket.
MEAT HOOK
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: NWIII
Description: S hook is 5.3 mm in diameter and 150 mm in overall length; could hang
on a 35 mm rod.
MILL PICK
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: NWII
Description: 200 x 35 x 31 mm; tapers to a chisel edge on each end with a 29 x 15 mm
hold for a handle. The chisel edge is at right angles to the handle (Fig. 47).
Discussion: The specimen is a Richmond pick illustrated in Wimberly (1965:22) and in
the Descriptive Pamphlet of the Richmond Mill Furnishing Works (1873). Richmond
picks were constructed of imported English steel by "pick masters that know their
business..." (Richmond Mill Furnishing Works, 1873:89).
PENCIL LEAD AND ERASER ENDS
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: Eli, EIlI, ESI, Rll
Description: Pencil leads 2.6 mm in diameter, one still stuck into an eraser holder. One
eraser holder is 20 mm long and has an 8 mm outside diameter; it has five crimp marks
near the top.
POCKET KNIFE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N9111
Description: Double bladed knife with handle 85.7 mm long; blades rusted shut. The knife
has a rounded butt, four rivets, and an unsharpened round back large blade (Fig. 48).
It is very similar to item #28R830 in the Sears, Roebuck & Co. Catalog (1902:487).
Discussion: The catalog (1902:487) advertises the knife: "no. 28R830--Our cheapest
Sears, Roebuck, and Company pocket knife.., not as heavy and strong as it should be
for rough usage, but makes an excellent jack knife for a boy, or for ordinary purposes.
Price each 23’ (if by mail, postage extra, 4 cents)."

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

79

Fig. 47 Richmond Mill pick from McKinney House.

SHRINK-ON COLLAR FOR GLASS LAMP
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: ESI
Description: Light gauge (0.5 ram) brass stock bent and crimped to fit over a glass lamp.
The collar has a 44.5 mm outside diameter constricting to a threaded hold 30.5 mm in
diameter. Threads ar~ 0.9 mm center to center.
Discussion: There were three burners (Gem, #1 Sun, and #2 Sun) listed in the Sears,
Roebuck & Co. Catalog (1902:801). Data could not be found to size this collar.
SPRING
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N41
Description: Fragment with an outside diameter of 18 mm and inside diameter of 12 ram.
TIN ROOFING FRAGMENTS
Number of specimens: 10 fragments
Provenience: RSs(10)
Description: Pieces of tin roofing too fragmentary to obtain dimensions. Charcoal and
pieces of rusted iron are attached to the down turned side.
Discussion: These fragments represent the roof or, more likely, patches on a wooden roof
at the time when the structure burned. Small nail holes appear randomly along the
edges.
WATCH BACK
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E41
Description: Specimen has a central 30 tooth gear 12.9 mm in diameter; made of copper.
The back is 40 mm in diameter and made of 0.8 mm stock. Small clips hold it to the
watch while a 1.8 mm hole provides access for the winding key.
Unidentified Metal Artifacts
BRASS CLASP
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N7II
Description: Small clasp or snap part made of 1 mm brass stock.
CAST IRON BASE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E31
Description: A fragment 54 mm in diameter with an 11.5 mm expanding hole in the
center; 4 mm hole along the edge used for attachment.

80

Texas Archeological Society

COPPER PLATED DECORATIONS
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: E3111, Nll
Description: Oval concho 59.5 x 30 x 1 mm silvered front with a zigzag fine line border
about 2.8 mm from the edge on this otherwise fiat, plain artifact. A 7.5 x I mm strap 29
mm long is soldered to the back, center to center. The free ends are bent to attach to a
square.
DISKS
Copper Disk
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E2s
Description: Elliptical, 25 x 32 mm of 1.4 mm stock with a 1.6 mm unifacially drilled
hole in the center.
Metal .Disk
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E311
Description: Tin foil, 21 mm in diameter and about 0.1 mm thick.
Discussion: Marks are not present and it may be a bottle cap seal.
DRILLED FOOT
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: E31
Description: Iron foot fragment, perhaps from a machine, drilled 10 mm in the center of a
piece of steel 28 mm in diameter.
HANDLE FRAGMENT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N21
Description: Specimen is of 2 mm stock.
LEAD FRAGMENT
Number of specimens: 1
Prove~ience: E31
Description: Specimen is a fragment of a poured disk of lead.
PATCH
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: E51
Description: Specimen is of lead stock 1 mm thick, cut pie shaped (quarter circle) with a
2.8 mm rolled edge.
Discussion: Markings or use marks are lacking; function is unknown.
SCRAP METAL
Number of specimens: 374
Provenience: Table 21.
Description: Unidentified fragments of scrap m~tal included in this category are tin can,
strap cast iron, steel, and wire of various ~auges. Specimens were not recovered
from units N9 or R2.
STOVE PARTS
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: E5s, N2s, N51
Description: Cast iron fragments. One piece is decorated with the mark "81 . . ." on the
inside; another is an upper piece flange for a stove lid 200 mm in diameter, and the
third is a leg or foot rest with two screwdriver headed (11.5 mm head diameter) bolts
sti] in place. Cast metal varies in thickness from 4 to 8 mm, even thicker for leg supports.
Discussion: A No. 8 stove lid is 200 mm (8 in) in diameter.
TOY UTENSIL
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: R2s
Description: Fragment is 31 mm long, with a zoned dot pattern decoration on each side.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

Cx~

Cx~

O0
CO

u’~

oo
cO

u~

oO

81

82

Texas Archeological Society

UNIDENTIFIED OBJECT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N91V
Description: A small, light lump of a black substance, perhaps anthracite coal.
BUTTONS
MILK GLASS
Number of specimens: 15
Provenience: Table 22.
Description: Thirteen buttons and two shirt studs ranging from 17.4 to 9 mm in diameter;
dished fronts and beveled back edges of a uniform nature.
CLEAR GLASS
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E51
Description: A 17.9 x 4.8 mm two hole button; front dished out in the center while front
and back edges beveled.
FACETED GLASS
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E411
Description: Burned, with a domed head and back slotted for a horizontal buttonhole;
measures 8 x 5.2 mm.
MOTHER-OF-PEARL
Number of specimens: 19
Provenience: Table 23.
Description: 8.3-19 mm in diameter; fragmented specimens appeared burned.
METAL
Number of specimens: 7
Provenience: Table 24.
Description: Two piece or composite buttons; front piece cups over the rear piece, the rear
portion having a metal loop attached for fastening. Specimens vary between 12.7-17.6
mm in diameter (Table 24; Fig. 49a,b).
MISCELLANEOUS
Brass and Mother-of-Pearl
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: E41, E51, N31
Description: Centrally pierced mother-of-pearl shoe buttons 8.5 x 3. I mm, with protruding brass loop; specimens appear burned.
Vulcanized Rubber?
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E41
Description: A 17.8 x 5 mm black, two hole button with a fiat back and a trilobed design
from which six lines radiate.
Wood
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E4I
Description: Fragment of a two hole (?) button with a dished (?) front and flat back.

LITHICS
Ninety seven chert artifacts were recovered in house excavations; 96 are
modified and unmodified flakes; one is a projectile point fragment. The
flakes are divided into three major categories: heavy percussion, light percussion, and pressure. The categories reflect the various steps in rendering a
chert nodule into a projectile point or other tool. All steps in the biface
manufacturing process are reflected in the collection. Production of thin
bifaces can be

inferred, although

thin bifaces were not

recovered.

The

j

McEachern and Ralph

--

McKinney Homestead

83

Table 22
Milk Glass Buttons and Shirt Studs from the House
Provenience

Diameter
(mm)

Thickness
(mm)

E2I

10.3

3.0

E31
E3I
E51

11.9
13.7
9.6

2.9
3.8

E5I
E5I
E51

13.7
16.0
11.9

3.7
4.2
3.0

N2I
N21I
N3II

9.0
11.9
11 9

2.7
2.9
6.0

NWII
NWIII
RII

17.4
11.9
12.5

5.0
3.2

R31
R41

15.2
13.7

3.7
3.5

Remarks
Four hole, white agate buttons
as offered by Sears, Roebuck & Co.
(1902:940).
Same as E2I.
Same as E21.
Shirt stud, ball top; front has
center indentation.
Same as E2I.
Same as E2I.
Four hole, fancy white button
(Sears, Roebuck & Co., 1902:940;
Roberson, 1974:Fig. 61M).
Same as above.
Same as E2I.
Single hole, horizontal to the
plane of the button.
Same as E21.
Same as E2I.
Shirt, stud, fragment; front has
center indentation and concentric
circles (Roberson, 1974:Fig. 61U).
Same as E21.
Same as E2I.

Table 23
Mother-of-Pearl Buttons from the House
Provenience

Diameter
(mm)

Thickness
(mm)

Front

Back

Remarks

Eli
Eli
E3II
E41
E4I
E41
E4I
E5I
E5I
E5I
ESI
E5I
E511
N31
N3I

10.5
19.0
19.0
16.5
11.2
11.2
10.4
8.2
10.4
10.4
10.4
10.5
11.2
14.2
8.3

2.4
3.0
3.0
3.0
2.0
2.2
1.9
2.0
1.8
2.4
1.5
1.4
2.0
2.5

flat
flat
flat
flat
fiat
flat
flat
fiat
flat
flat
flat
humped
flat
flat
rounded

N6I
NWII
R ls
RII

14.2
16.5

2.0
3.0

countersunk
slot
slot
countersunk
countersunk
countersunk
countersunk
slot
countersunk
countersunk
countersunk
countersunk
dished
countersunk
parallel
line decoration
dished
countersunk

flat
flat

14.2

2.5

countersunk

flat

two hole
two hole
two hole
four h61e
two hole
four hole fragment
two hole
two hole
two hole
two hole, beveled edge
four hole
two hole
two hole
two hole
single hole, horizontal to plane of button
two hole fragment
four hole
fragment
two hole fragment

Texas Archeological Society

84

Table 24
Metal Buttons from the House

E21

Diameter
(ram)
17.6

Thickness
(ram)
4.0

E51

14.1

Nll

Provenience

Front

Back

raised
design

flat

2.5

extreme
dish

thickened
and
stamped

14.1

3.0

thickened

Nli(2)

17.2

3.0

countersunk
with zigzag
pattern
zoned about
edge.
extreme
dish

N211

17.2

3.0

N31

12,7

4.0

extreme
dish
flat and
clothcovered

O

E

Fig. 48 Pocket knife from McKinney House.

thickened

thickened

Remarks
back stamp cut
and bent to form
attaching loop;
design is a bird
(bobwhite?) standing
on a limb (Fig. 49a).
Four-hole; inscription
"P.B. Co.
Patented Dec. 9,
1924."
Four hole.

Fragmentary backs;
design is a locomotive with three
driving wheels, two
5 pointed stars
below and a 5 pointed
star above locomotive
(Fig. 49b).
Same as above.
Brass attaching loop
protrudes from the
rear; faint cloth
pattern may exist
on front.

flat

e0

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

0
i

cm

I
i

0

cm

85

1
!

Fig. 49 Metal buttons from McKinney House.

presence of a burin blow on one of the flakes suggests microliths may have
been manufactured at the site. However, microflakes or blades were not
recovered since 1/4 in mesh hardware screen was used in excavation.
Some of the collection appears heat treated. Flake provenience is shown in
Figure 50.
HEAVY PERCUSSION FLAKES
Number of specimens: 5
Provenience: E311(2), E51, NIII, R4s
Description: Flakes with prominent bulbs of percussion produced by striking the core
near the edge with a hammerstone or possibly a billet. One edge of the flake from R4s
was retouched by scraping against another object.
LIGHT PERCUSSION FLAKES
Number of specimens: 17
Provenience: Ell, E211(3), E31, E311, ESI, E511, N211, N2111, N611(2), N81(2), N91(2),
NWIII
Description: Flakes with sinuous and long, lenticular platforms readily manufactured
with a billet. The flakes are lighter in weight and smaller than heavy percussion flakes.
PRESSURE FLAKES
Number of specimens: 6
Provenience: E511, N311(4), NWIII
Description: Small, thin flakes ranging in length 11-24 mm and 10-16 mm wide; thickest
specimen 2 mm. Flakes have thin, lenticular platforms, the largest of which is 5 x 2 mm.
A ridge runs from the central portion of the edge of the platform toward the distal end
of the flake on the dorsal side. Flakes of this type are made by applying pressure
directly behind a ridge created by the intersection of facets.

86

Texas Archeological Society

FLAKE DISTRIBUTION

41TV289
House

~True

Fig. 50 Lithic distribution in McKinney House.

FLAKE BLADE
Number of specimens:

1

Provenience: N311
Description: Flake is twice as long as it is wide (Fig. 51a). The specimen has a slightly
sinuous platform indicating that the flake was percussion struck while thinning a biface.
FLAKE FRAGMENTS
Number of specimens: 61
Provenience: EIII(3), E211(3), E31(5), E311(2), E3111(5), E51(8), E511(12), NIII, N2111(4),
N311(5), N611(3), N81(5), N91(4), NWV
Description: This category includes flakes which lack striking platforms, i.e., distal ends or
crushed platforms. Twenty-seven of the flakes (44%) have a sheen or pink tint that is
often considered a result of heat treating.
Discussion: Experiments in heat treating Texas cherts indicate that not all heat treated
material exhibit diagnostic changes (Hester and Collins, 1974). Actual instances of
heating maybe higher than indicated in the analysis.
NONDESCRIPT CHERT SPALLS
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: E51(2)
Description: Irregularly shaped pieces which result from faults in the material or lack of
control on the part of the knapper.
REJUVENATION FLAKE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N81
Description: A heavy percussion flake which was used to prepare a new set of platforms
after the previous platform was destroyed by a poorly executed blow which step fractured when struck with too little force (Fig. 51b).

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

0

87

2

cm

I

b
a

0
I

cm

2I

0

L,,,,,

¢rn

2

c
d
Fig. 51 Illustrated lithics: a. flake blade; b. rejuvenation flake; c. flake core; d.
Perdenales point base.
FLAKE GEOMETRIC
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E511
Description: A section from a thinning flake which was struck near the center on the dorsal
side breaking the flake into sections, Part of the negative cone is present on the
specimen.
FLAKE TOOL
Number-of specimens.~ t
Provenience: Ell
Description: A heavy percussion flake that was retouched by pressure flaking along distal
and proximal ends and lateral edge.
CORE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: NWI
Description: A light percussion flake which was retouched along a lateral edge and had
microblades or burins removed from the distal end (Fig. 51cL
PROJECTILE POINT BASE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: E31
Description: Base (Fig. 51d) of a Pedernales point (Suhm and Jelks, 1962).

MISCELLANEOUS HOUSE ARTIFACTS
Beads
PLASTIC TEARDROP
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N3I
Description: A teardrop shaped, pink, plastic, translucent bead measuring 16 x 10 x 5 mm
with a small hole through the top.

88

Texas Archeological Society

BLUE GLASS
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: Rll
Description: A round, faceted, glass bead measuring 5.5 mm in diameter; translucent
blue with one central hole.
RED GLASS
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N21
Description: An opaque, red, faceted glass bead with one hole through the 6 mm
diameter.
BLUE/BLACK GLASS
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: N31(2)
Description: Blue and black, faceted, glass beads, each 7.5 mm in diameter. The black
one is opaque and may be a burned blue bead.
Miscellany
COAL, ANTHRACITE
Number of specimens: 4 lots
Provenience: E31, E311, E51, E511
Description: Small chunks of coal were located in the area described by Charlie Johns as
the area for fireplace ash (trash ~ump).
Discussion: Coal burning stoves probably were used in the later phase of the house occupation. Coal was not used by McKinney, since it was not available from Pennsylvania until 1871 when rail service began in Austin Roberson, 1974:55).
LEATHER
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: E41, N31
Description: Boot heel fragments.
PERISHABLES
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: Rli(2)
Description: One bundle of fine, Z twist threading and a piece of tightly woven fabric; both
charred and recovered from the southeast corner of the house.
PLASTER
Number of specimens: 2 lots
Provenience: R4s, R51
Description: Two bags of charred plaster were saved from the excavation.
Discussion: The plaster is the same as samples from the wall and fill of the middle room.
PLASTIC COMB
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: E311
Description: Toothless fragment of a plastic pocket comb.
PLASTIC FURNITURE DECORATION
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: E21(4)
Description: Fragments of a flower pattern decoration for wooden furniture.
PLASTIC STOPPER
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: R51
Description: An artifact with the inscription "Pat. pending" on one side 15.5 mm in
diameter with horizontal ridges for reinforcement.
Discussion: It may be a fragment of a stopper for a small medicine container.
RUBBER TRICYCLE TIRE
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: E51(2)

j

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

89

Description: Fragments were recovered from the trash dump east of the house. Both
pieces are 17 mm wide and have three parallel ridges on the inside.
SLATE
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: E511(2)
Description: Two small pieces of blackboard slate, both 2.9 mm thick and smoothed on
both faces.
SPHERE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: N31
Description: A sphere 7.4 mm in diameter which has a small filled hole that does not
penetrate the diameter. It may be the plastic or ivory head of a hat pin,
WOOD
Number of specimens: 12 lots
Provenience: E2s, E21, E311, E3111, E41, E511, N211, NWI, NWV, Rll, R41, R51
Description: Miscellaneous pieces of charred wood and charcoal. Pieces were not large
enough to give dimensions. One wedge shaped fragment has a charred end with a cut
nail fragment in place.

CISTERN ONE

Research Design
The two cisterns appeared to be an ideal locality for recovering sma~l
animal remains and provide an excellent opportunity to demonstrate the
technique of fine wet screening. Cistern One was selected for excavation.
The predicted results

were

expressed in the field

guide

(Ralph

and

McEachern, 1974:3):
The upper portion of the cistern is expected to yield post 1940 artifacts representing debris
tossed into the cistern after it was abandoned. The lower portion of the deposit is expected
to contain fine sediments and the remains of small animals which worked their way into the
cistern while it was being used. Between the post 1940 deposit and the lower deposit, a silt
deposit representing the 1921 flood is expected. The lack of this deposit would indicate the
cistern was re-excavated (cleaned) after the flood.

Description
Two cisterns, located south of the McKinney House, were arbitrarily
assigned Cistern One (northern-most) and the other, Cistern Two. The
description is based on field notes.
It appears that the cisterns were dug about 5 m into the alluvial deposit. Uncut (hand
chiseled) stone was used to pave the bottom and sides; a rough, grainy mortar holds the
small limestone chinking. A plaster, which appears to have a greater content of lime than
the mortar, was then applied to the walls and floor (Fig. 52). The bottom of Cistern 1 is
slightly rounded. Wall thickness varies, judging from the slightly collapsed Cistern 2. The
walls of Cistern 2 are a single course of limestone about 30 cm wide, 10-30 cm long, and
5-15 cm thick.
It does not appear that the cisterns were connected to each other in any way. Filling procedures are unknown, but several possibilities are offered: 1) the cisterns were filled
simultaneously from gutters and piping at each end of the house; 2) a three way valve was
used to shuttle water from a single pipe to the house to the cistern which needed the water
most; or 3) it is remotely possible that water was pumped from a spring with no input from
the house.
It is doubtful that the cisterns were ever completely sealed. A wooden cover probably was
used. This cover would allow periodic cleaning and repair. There is some evidence that patching had been done as large areas were covered with additional puddles of plaster.

-- 157.05 meters
elevation

CISTERN :~1
IDEALIZED CROSS SECTION
Looking "lot t h

Plaster

UNEXC~VATED

I
meter

Fig. 52 Cistern One, cross-section.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

91

Excavation Methods
In preparation for excavation, a wooden platform was constructed over
the cistern to prevent walking on the cistern walls and dislodging rock on
workers 5 m below. Access was gained by a cable ladder; people were
belayed by a standard 7/16 in nylon climbing rope. Standard climbing
signals and knots were used. People working in the cistern wore hard hats at
all times.
A datum stake was placed in the center of the cistern and the deposit
divided into quadrants with grid lies running magnet north-south and eastwest. The southwest quadrant was carefully excavated in 10 cm levels using
a trowel. The matrix was placed in buckets and hauled to the surface with a
rope. On the surface, the matrix was dry screened; large artifacts and faunal
material were removed. After dry screening, the matrix was wet screened
through window mesh; remaining artifacts and fauna were collected and
sorted.
After sorting, the material was taken to the field lab where it was cataloged
in lots with one catalog number for each level. The catalog numbers are:
300--surface; 301--01-10 cm; 302--10-20 cm; 303--20-30 cm; 304-30-40 cm.
The Deposit
The surface of the deposit was covered with miscellaneous debris which
was removed and discarded. The matrix was homogeneous reddish brown
and soft with the characteristics of compost. The deposit apparently was
derived of decomposed organic matter with iron oxide from metal artifacts
giving it a rust color. The deposit extended 40 cm in depth and remained
homogeneous, with bottles, glass sherds, ceramics, bits of metal, and bone
scattered throughout the deposit.
~auna

The cistern deposit yielded an extensive faunal collection which included
the remains of more than 400 identifiable individuals. Thirty two species are
represented (Table 25). The large number of species recovered is due to wet
screening the matrix through a fine screen. It is estimated that dry screening
with 1/4 in mesh would have resulted in a 60% loss of available information.
Artifacts
More than 500 complete artifacts were recovered from the cistern. Included were: 17 ceramic vessels, more than 100 bottles and jars, 13 glass
vessels, 15 cartridges, 74 complete nails, 78 miscellaneous fasteners, 50
metal miscellaneous artifacts. The artifacts are classified first on the basis of
material and then by function. Buttons are an exception. They are classified
first by function and then by material to avoid splitting them into several
categories and making them difficult to locate. Glass artifacts are treated
separately in Appendix G.

CERAMICS
Earthenware (tableware)
WHITEWARE

92

Texas Archeological Society

Table 25
Faunal Remains from Cistern One (Number of Individuals by Species and Level)
Species
FISH
Lepisosteus sp.
Ictalurus sp.
Micropterus sp.
Lepomis sp.
Aplodinotus grunniens
Unidentified fish
AMPHIBIANS
Rana sp.
Bu.[o sp.
REPTILES
Chrysemys sp.
Terrapene sp.
Trionyx sp.
Elaphe sp.
Pituophis melanoleucus
Agkistrodon sp.
Crotalus sp.
Phrynosoma sp.

301

302

303

304

4-6
6-7
4
I~)- 12
1
10-12

10-12
7-8
3
9-11
2
17-21

6-9
4
6-8
7-9

15-17
1

15-20

33-38

6-8
6-8

11-13
8-9

8-9
4-5

I
6-7

3-4

7-10
4-5

I
5
1
i
4

I
I
2
4
I
2

Unidentified lizard

BIRDS
Gus sp.
Unidentified
MAMMALS
Didelphis marsupialis
Canis latrans
Sciurus niger
Perognathus sp.
Reithrodontomys sp,
Peromyscus sp.
Neotoma sp.
Sigmodon hispidus
Unidentified rodent
Sylvilagus sp.
Lepus caifomicus

1
1

2
I
1
1
1
2
1
8
11-13
4

1
2
4
25

1
2
I
8
4
1

Odocoileus sp.
Ovis sp.
Bos tarus
Sus scro]a

I
3
1
1

1
2

2
1
1
5
7
2
1
1
1

Cream Colored Ware Pitcher
Number of specimens: 38 sherds (fit together)
Provenience: 301(7), 302(29), 303(2)
Description: Off white, clear glazed, crazed pitcher with molded handle. The base is
oval in shape and has part of a maker’s mark showing part of a bird or eagle and the
lettes "PRE . . ." (Fig. 53). The vessel is about 25 em high, 21 cm long, and 18 cm
wide. Only a small portion of the rim remains.
Graniteware Pitcher
Number of specimens: 11 sherds (base reconstructed of seven sherds from one vessel)
Provenience: 301,302(4), 303(6)

J
McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

93

2
!

(~

cm

2

Fig. 53 Creamware colored pitcher design
Fig. 54 Polychrome Decalcomania plate
fragment from Cistern One.
design fragment from Cistern One.
Description: White, clear glazed vessel base with an oval shape about 17 x 14 cm and
of unknown height. The base has part of a maker’s mark below which appear the
initials "K. T & M" with the word "Granite" underneath.
Repousse Edge Cup
Number of specimens: 5 sherds (from one vessel)
Provenience: 303(5)
Description: White, clear glazed cup with a line, series of dots, and a second line repousse pattern running around the edge. The cup is 93 mm in diameter and 61 mm
high. The portion of the cup containing the handle is missing.
Monochromatic Decalcomania Cup
Number of specimens: 15 sherds (from one vessel)
Provenience: 303(13), 304(2)
Description: White, clear glazed cup with a blue monochromatic decalcomania floral
pattern on the inside and outside. The cup was slightly more than 4 cm in diameter
and of unknown height. The part of the cup with the handle is missing.
Polychrome Decalcomania Serving Dish
Number of specimens: 14 sherds (five of which fit together)
Provenience: 302(7), 303(7)
Description: White, clear glazed serving dish with polychrome decalcomania floral
design in pink, green, and blue. The dish was 34 cm high, about 26 cm wide, and
of unknown length.
Undecorated Whiteware Bowl
Number of specimens: 2 sherds (fit together)
Provenience: 301(2)
Description: White, clear glazed, shallow bowl without decoration. The bowl was
about 9 cm in diameter and 3.5 cm high.
Repousse Edge’Plate
Number of specimens: 22 sherds (fit together)
Provenience: 301(17), 302(5)
Description: Off white, clear glazed plate, with wavy line repousse decoration
around the,edge; 23 cm in diameter. An illegible name appears below a blurred
crown desig~n maker’s mark.
Polychrome Decolcomama Plate
Number of specimens: 5 sherds (from one plate)
Provenience: 303(5)
Description: White, clear glazed plate fragments with polychrome decalcomania in a
pink, green, and blue floral pattern and a repousse edge. The plate was about 9 cm
in diameter. A printed green maker’s mark under glazed with what appears to be an
illustration of an effigy vessel enclosed in a circle is on the bottom. Around the edge
of the circle are the words "SEMI-VITREOUS CHINA" (Fig. 54). The pattern is
similar to the pattern on the polychrome decalcomania serving dish.

94

Texas Archeological Society

Gilded edge Plate Sherds
Number of specimens: 3 sherds (from three vessels)
Provenience: 302(2), 303
Description: Rim sherds from white, cleared glazed plates decorated with gilding. Two
of the specimens also have repousse edges.
Undecorated Plate Sherds
Number of specimens: 3 sherds (from one plate)
Provenience: 302(3)
Description: Rim sherds from an undecorated, white, clear glazed plate.
Miscellaneous Undecorated Sherds
Number of specimens: 44 sherds
Provenience: 301,302(10), 303(25), 304(8)
Description: These sherds are too small to determine vessel form.
Hand painted Plate or Serving Dish
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Bottom of a plate or serving dish which is hand painted in an orange,
yellow, and green floral pattern. The following is printed in black underglaze on the
reverse of the sherd:
Blue Pledge
Hand Painted
Underglaze
--horn Potteries
MADE IN U.S.A.

BLUEWARE
Repousse Pitcher(?)
Number of specimens: 3 sherds (from one vessel)
Provenience: 302, 303(2)
Description: Fragments of a blue glazed pitcher (?) which has a repousse floral pattern.

Stoneware
Two Gallon Jar
Number of specimens: 24 sherds (reconstructed of 17 sherds from one vessel)
Provenience: 301(4), 302(19), 303
Description: Buff colored jar that is salt glazed on the interior and exterior but unglazed
on the bottom. It is 19.5 cm in diameter and more than 27 cm high. The number
"2" is printed in light blue underglaze on the side (Fig. 55).
Miscellaneous Crockery Sherds
Number of specimens: 14 sherds (from at least two vessels)
Provenience: 301, 303, 304(12)
Description: Miscellaneous sherds from jugs or jars which are salt glazed on both sides.
Porcelain
Gilded Lid
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: A gilded and repousse knob from the center of a cover or lidof a vessel.
The knob is 38 mm in diameter and 21 mm high.
Miscellaneous Sherds
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: 301, 302, 304(2)
Description: One of the sherds is from a cup or small vessel. Another has the number
"4" incised in it. The remaining sherds are plain.

Doll Parts
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 303(2)

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

95

Description: Sherds are irregular in shape and painted underglaze. One sherd has an
eye painted on it.
Brick
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: 301(2), 302(2)
Description: Four fragments of unmarked buff colored brick, pitted and burned; some retain
bits of mortar. They are uniformly fine grained with occasional pieces more angular,
temper (ca. 6.5 mm diameter) of a light green color and hardness of 7 on the Mohs scale.
Incomplete measurements are in Table 26.
Discussion: These fragments are similar to hearth bricks in front of the fireplace of the east
room encountered in subsequent investigations by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (Appendix D).
METAL
Cartridges
Stratified nature of the cistern is supported by the distribution of the shotgun shells (Table

27).
Rimfire
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 304
Description: Peters Cartridge Co., .22 caliber Short, with a brass case 10.74 mm long;
dating 1857 to present (Logan, 1959:189).
Shotgun (Table 27)
Winchester New Rival
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Winchester Repeating Arms Co., 12-gauge, 7.9375 case length (Fig.
56a); available from 1875-1930 (Amber, 1968:91).

L

cm

2
!

Fig. 55 Stoneware jar design fragment from Cistern One.

96

Texas Archeological Society

0
, cm

o

9~ml

°, ~m !.

a

b

I
f

o

d

h

cm

~m ,j1

o
I

cm

I

i

i

I

oL

I

f

0

I

C

e

°:m I

i

m

I

g

9cm]

J

Fig. 56 Shotgun shells from Cistern One: a. Winchester New Rival; b. Winchester
L’eader; c. Winchester Repeater; d. UMC Co. New Club; e. UMC Co. New Club; f.
, UMC Co. New Club; g. Peters Premier; h. Peters Referee; i. Peters League; j. Rein’, ’ington Peters.
Winchester Leader
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: 303
Description: A smokeless, 12-gauge load with a broken case; dating 1894 and
offered in the 1909 Winchester Catalogue (Amber, 1968:91) (Fig. 56b). This
cartridge was shot in a worn out, pump action shotgun.
Winchester Repeater
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 304
Description: Case length 11.1 mm, 12-gauge; date unknown (Fig. 56c).
U.M.C. Co. New Club
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 304(2)
Description: Union Metallic Cartridge Co., 12-gauge, black powder load with a’ case
length of 8.763 mm (Fig. 56d, f); dated 1867-1910 (Fontana and Greenlead,
1962:82).
U.M.C. Co. New Club (plain)
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 304(2)
Description: A 12-gauge, black powder load, 7.9375 mm case length (Fig. 56e).
Peters Premier
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: 302(4)
Description: The shell is 12-gauge with an extremely long case, 27.76 mm (Amber,
1968:91) (Fig. 56g).
Discussion: Peters Cartridge Co. (Kings Point, Ohio) produced shotgun shells from
1897-1934 when it was sold to Remington-U.M.C.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

97

Peters Referee
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: A 12-gauge, 7.9375 mm case length, with a semismokeless load;
referred to as an older type (Amber, 1968:91) (Fig. 56h).
Peters League
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: A 12-gauge with a case length of 7.137 mm (Fig. 56i). Referred to as
an older type with a range of 1897-1934 (Ambler, 1968:91).
Remington Peters
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: 300
Description: The 20-gauge, plastic case length is 12.7 mm and carried #6 shot
(Fig. 56ji.
Discussion: This shell dates after the 1935 Remington-Peters merger.
Fasteners
NAILS
Cut Nails
3d Common
Number of specimens: 7
Provenience: 302(2), 303(2), 304(3)
Description: Four complete specimens have shank lengths of 1 1/4 in.
6d Common
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 304(2)
Description: Specimens are in poor condition; shank length of complete specimen
is 1 15/16 in.
8d Common
Number of specimens: 7
Provenience: 302(2), 303(4), 304
Description: Three complete specimens; shank length of best specimen is 2 3/8 in.
10d Common
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 303, 304
Description: Shank length of the one complete specimen is 2 7/8 in.
Wire Nails
3d Common
Number of specimens: 5
Provenience: 302, 303(2), 304(2)
Description: Shank length varies from 1 1/2 in to 1 1/4 in and head diameter is
4-5 mm.
4d Common
Number of specimens: 6
Provenience: 302(4), 304(2)
Description: Shank length varies from 1 3/8 in to 1 1/2 in; shank diameter is 2-3
mm.

5d Common
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: 302(3)
Description: Shank length is 1 3/4 in.
6d Common
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 303(2)
Description: Shank length is 1 13/16 in.

98

Texas Archeological Society

7d Common
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: 303(3)
Description: Shank length varies from 2 1/6 to 2 1/4 in.
8d Common
Number of specimens: 23
Provenience: 302(9), 303(13), 304
Description: Shank lengths are about 2 1/2 in.
10d Common
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: 302, 303, 304
Description: Shank length is 3 in.
12d Common
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 303(2)
Description: Shank length is 3 1/4 in.
16d Common
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 303(2)
Description: Shank length is 3 3/8 in.
20d Common
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 302, 303
Description: Shank length varies from 3 3/4 to 3 15/16 in.
60d Common
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: 300, 302, 303
Description: Shank length is 5 7/8 in. The surface specimen (300) is a distal
fragment
6d Finishing
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Shank length is 2 in.
10d Double Head
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Shank length is 3 in.
Fragments
Number of specimens: 66
Provenience: 302(18), 303(33), 304(15)
Description: Fragments of cut and wire nails (Table 28).
Tacks
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 302(2)
Description: Wire tacks with shanks 15 to 19 mm long.
Horseshoe Nail
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: 49 mm long.
Staples
Galvanized Staples
Number of specimens: 8
Provenience: 302(3), 303(4), 304
Description: U shaped staples of three different sizes (Table 29).

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

99

Copper Staples
Number of specimens: 25
Provenience: 303(17), 304(8)
Description: Rectangular copper stock, 4 x 1.3 mm, is sheared to a point at each end
of a piece cut 37 mm long. This material is bent into a flaring U shape. Fragments
of leather are attached to most of the specimens from 303.
RIVETS
Rivet
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 303(2)
Description: One used rivet (15 x 6.8 mm, 10 mm head); the other unused (12.2
x 5.4 mm, 8 mm head).
PINS
Bobby Pin
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Fragment
Brass Straight Pins
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 302(2)
Description: Length is 29 mm; shanks are I mm in diameter.
SCREWS
Screw
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 302, 303
Description: The specimen from 303 is 19 mm long with a head 6 mm in diameter.
The other specimen is 30 mm long and a 11 mm diameter head.
BOLTS
Carriage Bolts
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 303, 304
Description: A bolt 75 mm long with a 17.5 mm diameter shank and 31 mm diameter
head. Specimen 303 is a fragment.
U bolt
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 304
Description: Fragment of flat base U bolt with 11 mm diameter head.
MISCELLANEOUS FASTENERS
Automobile Door Lock
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 300(2)
Description: Specimens consist of lock cover, latch shaft for knob, and associated
mechanical parts. Specimens are mirror images of each other. Dimensions are 178
x 156 x 93 mm (Fig. 57).
Barn Door Lock
Number of specimens: !
Provenience: 301
Description: Lock is a large, single eye hook of 5 mm thick stock. It has a washer 35
mm in diameter and 5 mm thick; a carriage bolt 49 mm long (43 mm without
head); and a 16.7 mm nut (Fig. 58).
Buckles
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: 301, 302, 303, 304
Description: Buckle from 301 is a belt buckle for a 31 mm strap (Fig. 59a). Buckle from

100

Texas Archeological Society

i
cm

Fig.

57 Automobile

door lock from Cistern One.

Fig. 58 Barn door. lock from Cistern One.

McEachern ancl Ralph - McKinney Homestead

101

302 is a clasp type suspender for a 40 mm strap (Fig. 59b). Buckle from 303 is a
clasp type belt buckle (Fig. 59c). Buckle from 304 is also a clasp type buckle made
from round stock (Fig. 59d).
Chain Cow Tie
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Piece of metal chain approximately 280 mm long with a metal handle 123
mm long attached to one end (Sears, Roebuck & Co., 1902:554).
Eyelets and Lace Hooks
Number of specimens: 30
Provenience: 301(2), 303(28)
Description: Small eyelets (4 mm diameter hole); some still attached to the leather
uppers. Four lace hooks for lacing the tops of boots and shoes.
Ring with Threads
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Teething ring shaped artifact with 10.5 mm diameter protrusion, 21 mm
long. Ring diameter is 34 mm (inside) and 48 mm (outside) (Fig. 60).
Containers
CANS
Rolled Seam Cans
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: 301(3), 302
Description: Cylindrical cans with rolled seams of the type in common use today (Table
30). Three cans of open top variety; can from 302 is threaded for a screw-on cap
(Fig. 61).
Hole-in.top Can
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: 302, 304(2)
Description: Cans that were made with a filler hole that was soldered in place after the
can was filled. The specimen from 302 is a top, 75 mm in diameter with a 45 mm
hole. One of the specimens from 304 is 101 mm in diameter and 123 mm high; hole
in the top is 57 mm in diameter. The other specimen from 304 is a top, 66 mm in
diameter with a 34 mm hole.
Soldered Can
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 302, 303
Description: Specimen from 302 is crushed almost beyond recognition; specimen
from 303 is a bottom with a soldered seam.
Pressed-on-lid Can
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Fragment of a rolled seam can, designed to take a press-on lid. Approximate diameter of the can is 80 ram.
Sardine or Seafood Cans
Type 1
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 302, 303
Description: Three piece, soldered, rectangular can 105 x 75 x 24 mm.
Type 2
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: 302
Description: Two piece, rolled seam, rectangular can, 105 x 75 x 23 mm.
Type 3
Number of specimens: I

Texas Archeological Society

102

Table 26
Brick from Cistern One
Width
(cm)

Level

Thickness
(cm)
5.9
6,1
5.8
5.5

10.0
9.2
9.8
9.5

301
301
302
302

Table 27
Shotgun Shells from Cistern One
Type

Level

301

300

303

302

304

1

Remington-Peters
Peters League
Peters Premier
UMC New Club (star pattern)
Peters Referee
Winchester Leader
Winchester New Rival
Winchester Repeater
{plain)
UMC New Club
Total

1
4
1

0

1

2
1
1
1

5

6

1
2
3

Total
1
1
4
3
1
1
1
1
2
15

Table 28
Nail Fragments from Cistern One
Cut

Wire

Unidentified

Totals

Level
302
303
304
Totals

5
11
8
24

11
17
5
33

2
5
2
9

18
33
15
66

Table 29

Galvanized Staples
Level

24 mm

302
303
304

1

28 mm

29 ram
2

4
1

Table 30
Rolled Seam Cans from Cistern One
Level

Diameter
(ram)

Height
(mm)

301
301
301
302

86
72
67
37

117
77
?
107

Comments
Complete
Complete
Top
Complete

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

0
R ....

3
4

cm

0
[

a

0
!

CM

cm

3

b

2
~

c
Fig. 59 Buckles from Cistern One.

0
~,,

cm

d

3

103

104

Texas Archeological Society

1
0
I

CM

O

f

cm

3

2

J

Fig. 60 Ring with threads from Cistern One.

Fig. 61 Rolled seam can (threaded)
from Cistern One.

Provenience: 302
Description: Bottom of oval, soldered can 109 x 71 ram; bottom indentation for a
key.
Type 4
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Two piece, oval, seamed can, 167 x 108 x 39 mm.
Spice Cans
Number of specimens: 7 (minimum)
Provenience: 301(2), 302(5)
Description: Small, rectangular cans with to!led seams and sliding perforated tops;
seven bases and four tops. None of the specimens are complete; lengths and widths
of the cans cannot be determined. Three sizesare present: 59 x 49 mm, 61 x 34 mm,
and 54 x 29 ram.
Tobacco Can
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 302, 304
Description: Top and base fragments of flip top tobacco tin. The specimen is 78 mm
long and 23 mm wide, height undetermined.
Black-and-White Ointment
Nu.rt~aer of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Round can, 47 mm in diameter and 17 mm high, with press-on lid.
Base of can is white with directions printed in black letters.
Paint Cans or Buckets
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: 302(3)
Description: Large diameter cans with side protrusions for handles; 11 fragments
from at least three specimens.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

105

Paint Can Handles
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: 303(3)
Description: Semicircular piece of wire with a hook to fit on the side of a paint can;
fragmentary.
Handles
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: 302(2), 303, 304
Description: Handles or bails for cans made from wire of various gauges. The two
handles from 302 seem to be from the same object.
CLOSURES
Press-on Lids
Type 1
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 302(2)
Description: Lids are designed to press into the top of the can. Five fragments of at
least two lids were found. The lids were approximately 145 mm in diameter and
are the size of a one gallon paint bucket.
Type 2
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: 301, 302, 303
Description: The lids are designed to fit over the top of the can. The lid from 301 is
76 mm in diameter and 21 mm high. The specimen is labeled "CALUMET
BAKING POWDER ABSOLUTELY PL...". The lid from 302 is 73 mm in
diameter and 14 mm high; specimen from 303 is 49 mm in diameter and 9 mm
high.
Sardine Can Lid
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Lid to a sardine can twisted around key; specimen is 83 mm long and 14
mm in diameter.
Can Closure
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Fragment of copper band 19 mm inside diameter, broken at the threads.

BUCKETS
Plain Bucket
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 300, 303
Description: Common buckets: specimen from 300 is 67 x 51 mm; the one from 303
is 57 x 36 mm.
Galvanized Bucket
Number-of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: The bucket is incomplete with only the crushed upper portion remaining.
The original diameter of the bucket was approximately 260 mm; rolled seams on
opposite sides; handle missing.
POTS
Aluminum Pot
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Partially crushed aluminum pot approximately 230 mm in diameter and
150 mm high; two handles on opposite sides,
Enameled Metal Chamber Pot
Number of specimens: 1

106

Texas Archeological Society

Provenience: 301
Description: The specimen is 128 mm high with an inside diameter of 88 mm and a
flared lip extending 22 mm from the side. The sides of the pot curve gently to a
118 mm diameter, flat base; handle on one side.
Enameled Metal Washbasin
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: This incomplete specimen originally was approximately 310 mm in
diameter and 90 mm high.
Buggy and Wagon Parts
BUGGY AXLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Steel buggy axle, narrow tract with an obscure stamp on the square part
of the shaft. The axle is 1600 mm long and the wheel tract is 1422 mm (Fig. 62).
Discussion: Sears, Roebuck & Co. (1902:362) shows this item as their standard 15/16 in
gear, narrow track (4 ft 8 in).
BUGGY JACK
Number of specimen: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: This item is an unidentified heavy steel artifact, 520 mm long and 39-65 mm
wide, made of machine drilled, rectangular stock, 43 x 11 mm (two pieces) and 26 x 15
mm (one piece): A riveted foot spaces the two 43 x 11 mm parallel bars which flare
toward the opposite end to accept a wooden handle which is held by two 95 mm carriage bolts. A pivot point (rivet) where the 26 x 15 mm bar is attched is about 200 mm
from the foot. This bar terminates in an eye which has a 130 mm carriage bolt. It appears that a 93 mm wooden block was attached here due to the nut pattern. Odd holes
are drilled in the bars to change the pivot point.
Discussion: A description of this artifact could not be found in the literature; but the heavy
foot, pivot, and handle suggest that it was used to lift heavy objects.
BUGGY TOP BRACE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Brace for convertible top of buggy which consists of movable arms and
pivots. The specimen is 918 mm long when fully extended.
CARRIAGE STEP
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Fancy, grooved carriage stop supported by a leg which trisects halfway up
into three smaller arms that terminate in 8 mm diameter drilled feet. Two carriage
bolts, 6.5 mm in diameter and 14.5 mm long, are in place. Both bolts retain nuts
which indicate the artifact was bolted to a board 21.5 mm thick.
Discussion: This specimen is unlike Sears, Roebuck & Co. steps (1902:362-379).
DRIVE CHAIN
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 300, 302
Description: There are two sizes of drive chain, both of 5 mm diameter stock. The surface
specimen (300) is for a 17.4 x 14.4 mm sprocket; the other for about a 10.5 x 9.3 mm
sprocket.
Discussion: The "Kenwood Endgate Broadcast Seeder" offered by Sears, Roebuck &
Co. (1902:682) was chain driven by "no. 34 link belting, I0 feet long, running onto a
sprocket wheel . . ." Many farm implements used link belting, an example being the
Sears "disk harrow and feeder attachment."
LEAF SPRING
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: The specimen is made from a metal bar stock measuring 39 x 7 ram. The bar

McEachern and Ralph

--

McKinney Homestead

19

0

0
-!
m
.!

W
m
F.

m

.4
J

Fig. 62 Buggy axle from Cistern One.

107

108

Texas Archeological Society

has rounded ends and is curved. It is 886 mm long and has a single hole which is
centrally located.
WAGON WHEEL HUB
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: The hub is 196 mm long and 112 mm in diameter (Fig. 63).
Miscellaneous Metal Artifacts
BARREL OR KEG HANDLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Two straps, 79 x 23 x 1.5 mm, each bent to accept a wire handle and joined
by two rivets to form an approximate 220 mm hoop. The 3.4 mm diameter wire is
bent into a flaring U shape and threaded through a 86 mm long wooden handle.
Discussion: The handles fits a small barrel, probably no greater than three gallons.
BUTT HINGE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Half of a hinge with three countersunk holes for flat wood screws; dimensions
are 81 x 56 x 16 ram.
CHANGE PURSE METAL RIM
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: U shaped specimen is 87 mm long; for a two compartment change purse
(Fig. 64).
COWBELL
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Bell is 133 x 114 x 52 mm with a metal loop extending 18 mm from the top;
clapper is missing (Fig. 65).
FISHHOOKS
Number of specimens: 5
Provenience: 301(3), 302, 304
Description: Specimen from 302 is a 3/0 limerick hook; one from 304 is a tip fragment
from a larger size hook. Three limerick hooks, sizes #8, #6, and #4 were found in 301.
Discussion: The limerick hook sold for 9¢ a box (100 count) in 1895 (Montgomery Ward
Catalogue, 1969:493).
FORK
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Heavily corroded, this specimen is 192 mm long; half of one of the tines is
missing.
GEAR
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Fragment of a ring gear, 280 mm in diameter, with teeth 22 mm long, 6 mm
deep; flaring 8-9.5 mm center to center; beveled outward at 10°.
HOE SHANK
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Metal shank for hoe; blade missing. Specimen is 199 mm long with a
socket 33 mm in diameter at one end.
HORSESHOES
Number of specimens: i0
Provenience: 301,302(2), 303(5), 304(2)
Description: Worn horseshoes of various sizes, all of which appear to be commercially
made.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

)
Fig. 63 Wagon wheel hub from Cistern One.

Fig. 64 Change purse metal rim from Cistern One.

109

110

Texas Archeological Society

/

/t1
0
I

cm

5
I

Fig. 65 Cowbell from Cistern One.

OIL LAMP BURNER
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Burner for a kerosene lamp which accepts a 19.5 x 1.5 mm wick; fits a 71
mm diameter lamp hole.
SAD IRON
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 304
Description: Specimen is 160 x 100 x 40 ram; handle broken (Fig. 66).
SPOON
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301

j
McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

111

Description: Specimen, probably enameled, is 269 mm long; a portion of the handle is
missing (Fig. 67).
STOVE PARTS
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 304
Description: Stove base fragment, 4.5 mm thick, with raised letters reading "...Y.
TROY, N.Y." Stove bolt diameter is 7.5 mm and the chamfered leg attached by a
narrowing slot support.
TOY TRAIN
Number of specimens: 10 fragments (fit together)
Provenience: 303(10)
Description: A cast iron locomotive and 1/4 of a passenger car were recovered. The
passenger car is 320 mm long, made in a one piece mol~.£with the inscription "Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific..." (RR or LINE). The locomotive is 245 mm long and 74
mm wide at the widest point. It has four 47 mm diameter drivers, four 24.5 mm carriers in front, three smokestacks, one head lamp, a waving engineering and fireman,
and a cow catcher with four horizontal bars. Two rivets (plus the four axles) held the two
mirror image pieces together (Figs. 68, 69).
Discussion: The Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad, or the Rock Island Line, was
chartered in 1822 and bankrupted in March 1975 (Time Magazine, March, 1975:72).
The Rock Island did not enter Texas until 1892. Ten years later, there were four short
subsidiary lines, the most important of which was the Rock Island and Gulf Line
terminating in Houston.
The toy locomotive and passenger car found at the McKinney Falls Homestead
could date to any time within the span. However, the location of the artifacts in the
cistern and the similarity of this artifact with the description in the Sears, Roebuck &
Co. Cataloge suggest that they were the toys of the Charlie Johns family and not
related to Thomas K. McKinney.
TRICYCLE WHEEL
Number of specimens: 3 fragments (from one wheel)
Provenience: 300(3)
Description: Fragments consist of the hub with some spokes and two fragments forming
the complete outside rim. The wheel was approximately 400 mm in diameter.
UMBRELLA
Number of specimens: 47
Provenience: 303(47)
Description: Fragments of an umbrella, with steel rod and paragon frame probably of
normal diameter (1200 mm). Main rod is 8.5 mm in diameter while extension arms
are U shaped; 3.9 mm greatest diameter.
Discussion: The umbrella was closed when found.
Unidentified Metal Artifacts
COMPOSITE BASE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Brass base is 40 mm in diameter, 2.8 mm thick, with two 4.3 mm holes
equally spaced between the center and edge of the base. A brass tube 11 mm in
diameter protrudes 6 mm up from the center. Inside this is a steel rod, 72 mm long,
threaded on the far end (large threads), and protruding 3.4 mm out the other side of
the base. A brass collar, 10 mm in diameter, is attached to the steel shank by three small
set screws. Two of the set screws hold small rectangular metal fragments.
Discussion: One of the most complicated pieces in the collection, the function is unknown.
FRAGMENTS
Number of specimens: 40
Provenience: 301(3), 302(15), 303(12), 304(10)
Description: Fragments of tin cans, scrap metal, cast iron, and wire. A small, heavy, well
rounded lump of iron about 16 mm in diameter and 30 mm long leaves a vermillion
streak on a stainless steel file.

112

Texas Archeological Society

i

/

/

!

0
I_
Fig. 66 Sad iron from Cistern One.

cm

5
!

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

0

Fig. 67 Spoon from Cistern One.

113

114

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 68 Toy locomotion from Cistern One.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

Fig. 69 Toy passenger car from Cistern One.

115

Texas Archeological Society

116

ROD
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Metal rod II mm in diameter and 313 mm long.

SEMICIRCLE AND BASE
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 302, 304
Description: Items are a footed surround, support, or ring. The ring is of an H channel
stock, 12.7 x 9.4 mm, describing a 290° circle. A straight base, 10.7 x 5.4 mm and ca.
30 mm in length, connects the circle. Two beveled feet’are attached to the base, each
about 14 x 13 mm. The inner surface of the circle base is beveled slightly, about 2°
away from obscure stamping on one side of the base. The inscription reads: "REED
JUNE 20 71 A" (Fig. 70). The 302 artifact is fragmentary. If there was an inscription on
the base, it is now obliterated.
Discussion: Although function is unknown, the items are very well made steel artifacts
that are perhaps machine parts.

STRAPS (CLASSIFIED BY WIDTH)
23 mm Strap
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 304
Description: Metal hoop, 191 mm in diameter, made from metal bar, 23 x 6 mm.
20 mm Strap
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 300
Description: Specimen is made from metal strap, 20 x 1 mm, which is slightly curved
in section and 740 mm long. A rectangular metal fastener is at one end. Near the
center, a bent nail with a 53 mm diameter harness ring is attached.
19.5 mm Strap
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Curving strap, 19.5 x 3.8 mm, with rounded ends and about 470 mm
long. A 4 mm hole is center drilled 6 mm from each end. A 30° dogleg appears 70
mm from one end. Six rivets are equally spaced (70 mm center to center) between
the dogleg and the other end (drilled hole). Another piece of 3 mm flat stock projecting 43 mm at right angles to the strap is attached (by two rivets, 38.5 mm center
to center) between rivets 4 and 5. This piece is drilled and another subtriangular
piece of 3 mm fiat stock is attached using a 6.2 mm diameter, round headed bolt,
washer, and six sided nut (13.8 ram). The subtriangular piece has four drilled holes:
two with rivets (holding on yet another 3 mm strap fragment) and two (3.7 mm diameter) along one edge. Rivet size (head) is: first strap, 8.7 ram; first flat stock, 10.0
ram; second flat stock, 6.5 ram. All rivets are placed from the same side.
Discussion: Function is unknown; pivot points and rivets suggest a cloth attached to
bows as in a convertible buggy top.

18 mm Strap
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Specimen is 35 mm long with five bolt holes of which three still
have bolts and nuts.
14 mm Strap
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Specimen is 36 x 14 mm and 652 mm long with rolled edges. Four
countersunk holes are present along the central axis.
Discussion: Item is perhaps an automobile window frame.
13.5 mm Strap
Number of specimens: 1

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

117

Provenience: 303
Description: Iron strap, 100 x 13.5 x 1.5 ram, with two wire nails, 24.3 mm long,
punched through. Wood fragments, with grain running parallel to the strap, surround the nails.
SUPPORT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Forked bracket, 16.5 mm long, of cast iron with four 6.4 mm diameter holes
for mounting. The bent bracket terminates in a pod reinforced with a built-up rim. A 10.6
mm hole penetrates this pod (Fig. 71).
Discussion: Specimen may be a piece for attaching a spring to a carriage body.
WIRE
Number of specimens: 69
Provenience: 300, 301(10), 302(25), 303(14), 304(19)
Description: Fragments of wire of various gauges.

BUTTONS
MOTHER-OF-PEARL
Number of specimens: 12
Provenience: 301(6), 302(3), 303(3)
Description: Table 31.
MILK GLASS
Number of specimens: 5
Provenience: 302(3), 303(2)
Description: Four white agate buttons, each with four holes, a dished front, and a
beveled back, were recovered. They measure 16 x 4 mm, 14.6 x 4 mm, 18.3 x 3.5
mm (from 302), and 15.9 x 4.1 mm (from 303). One fancy white agate button with a
decorated dished front, measuring 10.6 x 2.8 ram, came from 303.
Discussion: Sears, Roebuck & Co. (1902:940) does not specify any particular function.
COMPOSITE METAL
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 303(2)
Description: Rolled edge, two piece, metal buttons measuring 19 x 5 mm with fiat fronts
and metal pins protruding from one back. They may have been cloth covered and appear to have shirt snaps on the back.

LITHICS
Five lithic artifacts apparently of aboriginal manufacture were recovered
from the cistern.

They

were recovered from the same

level

and assumed

discarded at the same time. Similar artifacts are found on the surface around
the McKinney home and they likely came from the immediate vicinity. The

artifacts are all manufactured
local limestone.

from chert nodules which weather out of the

SPENT CORE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: The core was made from a stream rolled nodule which was probably about
10 x 8 x 8 cm before flaking. Several flakes were removed from one side with a hammerstone to produce a continuous striking platform from which a series of blades
(length at least twice the width) was detached. Platforms were crushed in blade removal. Regularity of the first flaking scars suggests the specimen functioned as a blade
core. One of the flakes step fractured. Six attempts were made to rejuvenate the core
by trying to strike increasingly thicker flakes which resulted in additional step fracturing
(Fig. 72a).
SECONDARY FLAKE
Number of specimens: 1

Texas Archeological Society

118

Table 31
Mother-of-Pearl Buttons from Cistern One
Level

Diameter
(mm)

Thickness
(mm)

Number of Holes

Front-

301

11.0
11.0
12.8
12.8
12.8
15.0
11.0
11.0
13.4
16.6

1.8
1.8
1.5
2.6
4.0
2.5
2.0
2.0
2.3
2.3

4
4
2
2
4
2
4
2
2
4

12.7
10.2

2.6
1.4

4
4

dished
dished
plain
slot
dished
dished
dished
dished
slot
countersunk
dished
(?)

302

303

Back
flat
fiat
fiat
beveled
flat
fiat
flat
flat
flat
flat
flat
(?)

Provenience: 303
Description: Flake is 76 x 62 x 23 ram. It was removed from a nodule with a hammerstone
striking a platform prepared by a previously removed flake. The earlier flake removal
formed a ridge along the junction of the flake scar and cortex on the surface of the
nodule.
FLAKE TOOL
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: The flake, 60 x 60 x 12 mm with a multifaceted platform, was removed
with a hammerstone. It is retouched along one lateral edge by percussion flaking.
THINNING FLAKE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: The flake, 24 x 19 x 3 ram, is fragmentary with th~ platform missing. Flake
thinness suggests it was probably a thinning flake struck with an a~t|er billet. Absence of
a platform precludes positive identification. A slight sheen indicates heat treating.
PROJECTILE POINT FRAGMENT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: The specimen is a stem fragment with an indented U shaped base (Fig. 72b).
Discussion: The fragment falls within stylistic range of the Pedernales point, estimated to
date within the 4000 B.C. to A.D. 1000 span (Suhm and Jelks, 1962:237).

MISCELLANEOUS
CERAMIC MARBLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Mottled brown, ceramic marble, 13.2-13.7 mm in diameter.
RHINESTONE WITHOUT SET
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Small rhinestone set, 5.8 mm in diameter, with eight faces.
CARRIAGE LAMP LENSES
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 302(2)
Description: One specimen is a rectangular, bevel edged lens 8 mm thick with a copper
channel surround, measuring 122 x 95 ram. Copper edge surround also holds on a

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

0

5
!

Fig. 70 Unidentified metal fragment from Cistern One.

o
i

cm

5
i

Fig. 71 Cast iron support from Cistern One.

119

120

Texas Archeological Society

0

cm

2

b

0
I

2
cm

j

8
Fig. 72 Lithic artifacts from Cistern One: a. core; b. base of projectile point.

back flange which, when pressed, fits inside an 80 mm diameter lamp. The lens was
positioned by the flange 26-28 mm away from the lamp. The other item is a round,
bevel edged lens, 7.5 mm thick and 137 mm in diameter.
Discussion: Many Sears, Roebuck & Co. (1902:625) carriage and surrey lamps employ
similar lenses. These lamps are of superior quality and design and utilized candle or
kerosene.
LEATHER
Number of specimens: 14
Provenience: 301,302(8), 303(5)
Description: Fraqments represent boot heels, vamp and top with cinch, and heel nails in
place; very deteriorated condition. One is possibly a rubber heel. The 301 specimen is
a leather strap tied with a leather thong.
NYLON SOCK
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Fragment of an orange nylon sock with holes in the heel and toe.
PLASTIC ROUGE CASE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: A base, 43 mm in diameter, had a mirror glued to the bottom (now gone)
and a small container, 25 mm in diameter and 6 mm deep, for rouge, some of which
is still in place. A cover lid screws on over this container and has "HR" (Helena Rubenstein) in the center.
POLITICAL PIN
Number 9_f_slaecimen~ 1
Provenience: 301
Description: A metal front curls over a wire ring, the ring terminating in a straight pin. A
celluloid cover encompasses this fragment of thin metal, but the inscription .is,gone.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

121

CISTERN TWO
Research Design
The Cistern Two experiment was added to the McKinney Falls agenda
after the field manual (Ralph and McEachern, 1974) was completed. The
top of Cistern Two had collapsed, creating a hole almost 2 m in diameter
and 4 m deep. The collapse created a safety hazard and need for the cistern
to be filled. A plan for filling the cistern was developed based on an example
of English archeology. Some work had been done on manufacturing archeological sites to provide a means of studying rates of various environmental processes. A barrow had been constructed with the design of
excavating small portions every 25 years to examine the development of the
soil profile, thus having applications in paleopedology (Underwood, 1969).
Methods
With the help of park personnel and a backhoe, a water heater and some
large tree trunks were removed from the surface of the cistern deposit. A
front-end loader was used to dump three loads of clean fill into the cistern to
seal off the original deposit. Walls were prepared and painted with-a white
base coat up to 2.3 m from the new floor (3.9 m from the surface). Artists
began conveying the message, through a plastic paint medium, that archeologists had been here. At the same time, artifacts were being collected
to build the archeological deposit. Artifacts representing a complete array of
material types currently in use (1974) were chosen to represent what could
feasibly be left after an archeological field investigation. A complete inventory was taken and is on file with the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
Clean fill dirt was added to the cistern to bring the level of the deposit up
to the middle of the painting to clearly establish the association of the second
layer of artifacts with the painting. Additional fill was then added to the
deposit to bring it up almost to the top of the cistern.
The deposit, now stable, safe for park visitors, and rendered unattractive
to potential vandals, will deteriorate in a fairly uniform medium depending
on the rates of decay for each material type and class of artifact. By the year
2024, the upper deposit will be 50 years old and eligible for inclusion in the
National Register for Historic Places (as currently defined). A much older
remnant will be preserved below and directly comparable to data derived
from the excavation of Cistern One. A portion of the original site was
preserved for future generations of archeologists, a new mode of studying
artifact decay initiated, and a material culture sample of a Texas Atcheological Society field school encapsulated.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The 1974 TAS field school was held June 8-15 and directed by Michael McEachern and
Ronald W. Ralph. Parks and Wildlife personnel, professional archeologists, and approximately
175 amateur archeologists combined their expertise and efforts in an integrated study of the
park’s archeological resources.
The successful completion of the 1974 field school and subsequent report were due to the efforts of many members of the Texas Archeological Society as well as the efforts of many other
individuals. We wish to thank the numerous individuals who contributed to this study and
recognize special efforts by certain people in parentheses after their name:
Barto Arnold III (lecture), Vickie Atkins, Pete Billae, Art Black (report), Nancy Boice

122

Texas Archeological Society

(report), Dick Bowen, Gregg Bowen, Nancy Bowen (history), Fred Brezik, Alton Briggs (proton magnotometer), Rebecca Brooks, Don Broussard, Gus (Radar) Bugnitz (philosophy), Billy
Bunch, Barbara Burger (supervision), Elaine Burleigh (report), Bob Burleson, Runi Burnett,
Jim Calvert (report), T.N. Campbell (lecture), Christopher Caran (modern fauna), Charles
Carr, Chris Carson, June Carter, Maureen Cavanaugh.
C.K. Chandler, Virginia Chandler, Jo Clifton, J.B. Colharp, Rick Curtis, Billy Davidson
(fauna identification), Helen Davis, Les Davis, Marguerete Davis, Dolores Dickinson, Roy
Dickinson, Dawn East, Anna Ericson, Ruth Ann Ericson, Bransford Eubank, Martha Eubank,
Mike Forester (drafting), Anne Fox (laboratory), Dan Fox, Jean Fullen.
John Fullen, Lou Fullen (politics), Marge Fullen, Dolly Ferguson, Norman Flagg, Loreen
Fredlund, Ray Fredlund, Susan Fredlund, Taffie Fredlund, Kathy Freydenfeldt (editor), Jesse
Graham, Doyle Granberry, Joanne Gavin, Kathleen Gilmore, Dick Green, Jane Green, Terri
Green, Gene Griffin, C.N. Hall, Mark Hall.
Alice Hamilton, Elizabeth Hamilton, Nan Hampton, Ann Hanna, Susan Hanna, Charles
Harris, Ann Harrison, Blake Harrison, R.K. Harrison, Bert Helm, Mark Helm, Robert Hemperly, Jane Hendrix, Angie Herbert, Beth Herbert, Dianne Herbert, Joan Herbert, Shirley
Herbert, James Herschberger (lecture), Thomas R. Hester (politics).
Tommy Hicks, Betsy Hill, Brenda Hill, Doris Hill, Mack Hill, Richard Hill, Floy Lee
Hoelscher, Rose Hoelscher, Norma Hoffrichter (report), Gerald Humphreys (supervision),
Berry Hutcheson (history), Jesse Graham, David Ing, Dailey Jones, George Kegley (politics),
Barbara Klatt, Jack Klatt, Mary Lou Klatt, Orion Knox (lecture and politics), Barbara Koeppe.
Paul Koeppe, Colleen Lamb (drafting), Shari Larason, Charles Locke, Miles Locke, Adrian
Lorrain, Dessamae Lorrain, Paul Lorrain, Dino Lowry (art work), Pam Lynn (typing and inspiration), Cynthia Martin, Rachelle Martin, Marianne Mayfield, Pam Mayfield, Cynthia McCown, Linda McCown, Pamela McCown, Daylon McCreeles, William Mclntosh, Jim
McMichael.
Logan McNatt, Thomas Medlin, Marsha Meridith, Joyce Meyers, Carolyn Mierzwa, Freda
Miller, Julia Mosley, Laurie Mosley, Marie Mosley, Mike Mosley, Sue Moss, Colleen O’Brien,
David O’Brien, E.T. O’Brien, Jennifer O’Brien, John O’Brien, Mark O’Brien, Mike O’Brien,
Thomas O’Brien.
Raymond Neck (report), George Nelson, John Payne, Martin Payne, E.A. Perry, Elizabeth
Perry, Andy Poynor (art work), Ona Reed, Bill Richmond (field school organization), David
Riskind (lecture and report), Wayne Roberson (politics), Louis Robertson, David Rutherford,
Jeanne Rutherford, Maidie Rutherford, Patrick Rutherford, Harry J. Schafer, Beverly
Schmidt, Fran Schmidt.
Karl Ann Schmitter, Renate Schweiger, Mark Sharp, Martha Sharp, Michael Sharp, Stenen
Sharp, Bonnie Shirah, Jim Shirah, Russel Singleton, Alan Skinner, Calvin Smith (lecture),
Greet Smith, Jimmy Smith, Robert Smith, Fran Sommer, Mary Standifer, Thelma Standifer,
Deborah Stickney, Francis Stickney (politics), Scott Stickney.
Teddy Lou Stickney, Dee Ann Story, Hall Story, J.R. Swink, Cozy Taylor, Karen Taylor,
Larry Taylor, Curtis Tunnell (politics, philosophy, lecture and friendship), Larry Turner, Patsy
Turner, R.L. Turner, Shirley Vander Veer, W.R. Vander Veer, Bob Vernon, Ralph Vinson,
E.A. Vogt, David Wallace, Nancy Wallace, Jim Warren.
Joyce Warren, T.E. Warren, Wade Warren, John Wayland, Rex Wayland, Sarah Wayland,
Doug Waylane, Norman Wehrli, Peggy Wehrli,. Dale Wells, Pam Wheat, Gary Wiggins,
Wallace Williams, Jane Wilson, Mike Wilson (park staff support), Dorothy Word, Jim Word,
Keith Young, Steve Zeman.

REFERENCES CITED
A. Baldwin Company, Ltd.
Catalogue of A. Baldwin and Co., Ltd. W. St. John Wolseley and A.
1891
Baldwin Co., New Orleans.
Amber, John T. (ed.)
1968
Gun Digest. 22nd ed. Gun Digest Company, Chicago.
Anderson, Ernest
1904
The Plant Societies of the Austin Quadrangle. Unpublished M.S. thesis,
University of Texas, Austin.

McEachern and Ralph -- McKinney Homestead

123

Arnold, J. Barto III
1980
The Magnetometer Survey. In: George Kegley, Archeological Investigations at Hueco Tanks State Park, El Paso County, Texas. Appendix II.
Texas Parks and Wildlife De vartment Report, 4000-242:1-8
Baldwin, Joseph K.
A Collector’s Guide to Patent and Proprietary Medicine Bottles of the
1973
Nineteenth Century. Thomas Nelson, Inc., Nashville.
Barnes, Frank G.
1969
Cartridges of the World. 2nd review edition. Gun Digest Company,
Chicago.
Bonnell, George W.
Topographic Description of Texas. Reprinted 1964, Texan Press,
1840
Austin.
Bowen, Nancy H.
Letter to Wayne Robertson, August 17, 1974. On file at Texas Parks
1974
and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Bowen, Nancy H.
1974
A Political Labyrinth: Texas in the Civil War - Questions in Continuity.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Department of History, Rice University, Houston.
Brose, David S. and David W. Rupp
The Custer Road Dump Site: An Exercise in Victorian Archaeology.
1967
The Michigan Archeologist, 13(2):37-128.
Caran, S. Christopher
1976
Annotated Checklist of the Mammals of Travis County. In: E.A. Kutac
and S.C. Caran, A Bird Finding and Nautralist’s Guide for the Austin,
Texas, Area, pp. 102-113. The Oasis Press, Austin.
Census of Travis County
1850
Manuscript Schedule 1 and 2, Texas State Archives, Austin. Microfilm
roll numbers 915 and 918.
1960
Manuscript Schedule 1 and 2, Texas State Archives, Austin.
Manuscript, roll numbers 1306 and 1302.
Durrenberger, E. Paul
Anderson’s Mill (41TV130): A Historic Site in Travis County, Texas.
1965
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 36:1-69.
Eidt, Robert C.
A Rapid Chemical Field Test for Archeological Site Survey. American
1973
Antiquity, 38(2):206-210.
Evans, Oliver
1795
The Young Mill-Wright and Miller’s Guide. Philadelphia.
Fontana, Bernard L. and J. Cameron Greenleaf
1962
Johnny Ward’s Ranch: A Study in Historic Archeology. The Kiva,
28(1-2):I-115.
Fox, Anne Adams
1974
Lead Glazed Ware. In: Kathleen Gilmore, Mission Rosario. Texas Parks
and Wildlife Archeological Report, 14:55-59.

124

Texas Archeological Society

Frantz, Joe B.
1952
The Mercantile House of McKinney and Williams, Underwriters of the
Texas Revolution. Bulletin of the Business Historical Society, 26:3-20.
1964

Freeman, Larry
Grand Old American Bottles. Century House, Watkins Glen.

Godden, Geoffrey A.
1964
Encyclopedia of British Property and Porcelain Marks. Crown
Publishers, Inc., New York.
The Illustrated Guide to Mason’s Patent Ironstone China. Praeger
1971
Publishers, New York.
Gould, F.W.
Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas A&M
1969
University. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station MP-585/rev.
Graham, W. (ed.)
1945
Galveston Community Book. Galveston.
Hampton, Ned.
1976
Annotated Checklist of the Amphibians and Reptiles of Travis County,
Texas. In: E.A. Kutac and S.C. Caran, A Bird Finding and Naturalist’s
Guide to the Austin, Texas, Area, pp. 84-101. The Oasis Press, Austin.
Hensen, Margaret S.
Samuel May Williams: Early Texas Entrepreneur. Texas A&M Universi1976
ty Press, College Station.
Hester, Thomas R. and Michael B. Collins
Evidence for Heat Treating of Southern Texas Projectile Points. Bulletin
1974
of the Texas Archeological Society, 45:219-224.
Hobart, James
1919
Millwrighting. 2nd Edition. McGraw-Hill Co., Chicago.
Hudson, William
McKinney Falls State Park: Lithic Resource Analysis. Manuscript on file
ms.
at Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Hughes, William Carter
The American Miller and Millwright’s Assistant. Harsha and Hart
1850
Printers, Detroit.
Hunt, C.B.
Dating of Mining Camps with Tin Cans and Bottles. GeoTimes,
1959
3(8) :8-10.
Jackson, A.T.
1971
Mills of Yesteryear. Texas Western Press, University of Texas, El Paso.
Kegley, George III
ms.
McKinney Falls State Park: A Preliminary Workup of the Archeological
Resources. Letter on file at Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Austin.
Kovel, Ralph B. and Terry H. Kovel
D~ctionary of Marks-Pottery and Porcelain. Crown Publishers, New
1953
York.
Kuchler, A.W.
Potential Natural Vegetation of the Coterminous United States.
1964
American Geographical Society, Special Publication 36:1-116.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

125

Kutac, Edward A. and D.H. Riskind
1977
Birds of McKinney Fails State Park: A Field Checklist. Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department, Austin.
Kutac, Edward A., and S. Christopher Caran
1976

A Bird Finding and Naturalist’s Guide for the Austin, Texas, Area. The
Oasis Press, Austin.

Lee, Ruth Webb
1946
Early American Pressed Glass. Ferris, New York.
Logan, Herschel C.
1959
Cartridges. Bonanza Books, New York.
Lorrain, Dessamae
1968
An Archaeologist’s Guide to Nineteenth Century American Glass.
Historical Archaeology, 2:35-44.
Lowrey, Reynolds K.
1942

Photographs, map, and text from Reynolds Lowery Collection. Texas
State Archives, Austin.

Marston, C.W. (compiler)
1975
Galveston City Directorie. Shaw and Blaylock, Galveston.
McKee, Harley J.
1973

Introduction to Early American Masonry, Stone, Brick, Mortar, and
Plaster. Columbia University, New York.

McKinney, Thomas F.
Letter to H.L. Kinney. On file, Milford P. Norton Papers, Texas State
1854
Archives, 2-23/958, Austin.
Medlin, Thomas
McKinney Falls State Park: A Partial Archeological Survey. Manuscript
n.d.
on file at Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Mercer, Henry C.
1968

Ancient Carpenter’s Tools. 4th ed. Bucks County Historical Society,
Doylestown, Pennsylvania.

Montgomery Ward and Company
1895

Catalogue and Buyer’s Guide No. 57. Reprinted 1969, Dover Publications, New York.

Nelson, Lee H.
Nail Chronology As an Aid to Dati,~g Old Buildings. American Associa1968
tion for State and Local History. Technical Leaflet, 48:1-112.
Price, Jorjanna
A Bit of Texas History Not Found in the History Books. Houston Post,
1975
February 2.
Ralph, Ronald W. and Charlie Loving
197"3
McKinney Falls State Park: Archeological Testing. Field notes on file at
the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Ralph, R.W. and M. McEachern
1974
TAS Field School 1974. Speleo Press, Austin.
Reed, S.G.
A History of the Texas Railroads. St. Clair Publishing Company,
1941
Houston.

126

Texas Archeological Society

Richmond Mill Furnishing Works
1873
Descriptive Pamphlet of the Richmond Mill Furnishing Works. Nordyke,
Marmon and Co., Richmond, Indiana. Telegram Steam Printing Co.,
Richmond.
Roberson, Wayne Reed
1972
The Study of Extinct Rural Communities in the United States: A Test of
Feasibility. Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
The Carrington-Covert House: Archeological Investigations of a 19th
1974
Century Residence in Austin, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Report, 25:1-.
Sears, Roebuck and Company
The 1902 Sears, Roebuck and Co. Catalogue. Reprinted 1969, Crown
1902
Publishers, Inc., New York.
Shepard, Anna O.
Ceramics for the Archaeologist. Carnegie Institution of Washington,
1965
Publication 609: I.
Suhm, Dee Ann
Excavation at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of
1955
t~eTexas Archeological Society, 26:7-54.
Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas
1957
Journal of Science 9(1):26-58.
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions: Texas Ar1962
cheological Society Special Publication, 1:1-299.
Texas Almanac
Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide, 1978-79. H.E. Belo Corp.,
1978
Dallas.
Tharp, B.C.
1952
Texas Range Grasses. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Time Magazine
1975
Wreck of the Rock Island. Time Magazine, 75:72. March 31, New
York.
Toulouse, Julian H.
1969
Fruit Jar. Thomas Nelson, New York~
1971
Bottle Makers and Their Marks. Thomas Nelson, New York.
Underwood, Frank
1969
Paleo-Pedology: Method and Theory. Paper presented at the 1969
Symposium on Pedology and Quarternary Research. May 13-14. Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
del Valle, Santiago
1846
Map #1884, Thomas F. McKinney’s Ranch. State Archives, Austin.
Van Rensselaer, Stephen
Early American Bottles and Flasks. Transcript Printing Company. Peter1926
borough, New Hampshire
Vaughan, G.T.
Letter to Wayne Roberson. Photocopy on file, Office of State Ar1971
cheologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

McEachern and Ralph - McKinney Homestead

127

Walker, John W.
1971
Excavation of the Arkansas Post Branch of the Bank of the State of
Arkansas. Southeastern Archeological Center, Division of Archeology,
National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of Archeology and Historic Preservation, Washington.
Watson, Aldren A.
1968
The Village Blacksmith. Thomas Y. Crowell Company, New York.
Webb, Walter Prescott and H. Bailey Carol, eds.
1952

The Handbook of Texas, Two Volumes. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Werchan, L.E., A.C. Lowther, and Robert N. Ramsey
1974
Soil Survey of Trauis County, Texas. United States Department of
Agricultural Soil Conservation Service, Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C.
Wimberley, C.W.
1965

Stone Milling and Whole Grain Cooking. Von Boeckmann-Jones Press,
Austin.

Young, Keith, D.S. Parker, and E.C. Jonas
1975
Stratigraphy of the Austin Chalk in the Vicinity of Pilot Knob. Field trip
guidebook, 9th Annual Meeting, South-Central ’Section, Geologic
Society of America. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas,
Austin.
Young, Keith, Diana Grundig, M.A. Jordan, Donald F. Parker, and Bill Williams
Guidebook to the Geology of Travis County. The Student Geology
1977
Society, University of Texas, Austin.

128

Texas Archeological Society

INTRODUCTION
The immediate environs of the McKinney Homestead may be described
in terms of five polymorphic and somewhat intergrading plant communities.
The contemporary plant communities at McKinney Falls State Park have
been significantly altered from the natural prehistoric vegetation. Nevertheless, the landscape is characterized in terms of potential natural vegetation. Anthropogenic influences upon the plant communities, however, are
briefly mentioned.
The McKinney Homestead is included within the Blackland Prairies
Vegetational Area (Tharp, 1952; Kuchler, 1964; Thomas, 1969). Such
small scale vegetation mapping has obvious and understandable limitations.
Detailed analysis of a grassland relict was published by Lynch (1962, 1971)
for an area several kilometers to the west of the McKinney Homestead.
Anderson (1904) presented the only detailed map of the plant associations
in the immediate vicinity of the McKinney Homestead. He classified the area
as: Chalk Prairie (including a Chalk Hill type) of the Grand Prairie Society;
Black Prairie of the Black Prairie Society; and a riparian community subsumed within the Colorado Drainage System Society (including the Stream
Margin, Gravel Terrace, and Alluvial Bottom Associations).
Lynch (1968) developed a checklist of the flora for the region but did not
include community type descriptions. Collins et al. (1975) recently described the community types of the Blackland Prairie north of the Colorado
River. Their discussion applies to the McKinney Homestead as well.
The Homestead is located east of the Balcones fault and the Edwards
Plateau, within the Balcones fault zone. The physiography is reminiscent of
the hilly, dissected margins of the Edwards Plateau. In large measure, the
site is ecotonal between the true prairie grasslands of the Western Gulf
Coastal Plains and the evergreen woodlands of the Edwards Escarpment.
East and north of Onion Creek, the relatively level uplands are
characteristic of the southern and western portion of the Blackland Prairies.

Riskind -- Vegetation of McKinney Homestead

129

Blacklands also occupy approximately 40% of the upland terrain west and
south of Onion Creek. The permanently flowing Onion and Williamson
creeks and their associated geomorphological features add a third major
dimension to the biotic communities of the area. This dimension is a riparian
woodland (or forest if the overstory canopy is closed).

DOMINANT PLANT COMMUNITIES
The dominant plant communities of the site can best be discussed and
delineated within the framework of the recently completed soils survey of
Travis County (Werchan et al., 1974). A generalized soils and potential
vegetation type map is presented in Figure 1.
Houston, Lewisville, Altoga, and Heiden clayey soils of the level to gently
rolling uplands (0-8% slope) surrounding the McKinney Homestead supported climax plant communities which can be included within the
Blackland Prairie. The binding dominant for this variable true prairie community was little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium). Co-dominants were
such species as big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii), Indiangrass
(Sorghastrum avenaceum), Canada wildrye (Elymus canadensis), Texas
wintergrass (Stipa leuchotrica), tall dropseed (Sporobolus asper), silver
bluestem (Bothriochloa saccaroides), side oats grama (Bouteloua curtipendula), and numerous other less conspicuous grasses and forbs. In prehistoric
times, woody plants would have been unimportant community components.
Most of these upland soils were highly productive, relatively deep, and
arable. The native prairie vegetation was grazed off at an early date and
replaced either by pasturage or by food or fiber crops. Most of the former
prairielands are heavily invaded by: mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa var.
glandulosa), especially on deeper soils; cacti (Opuntia spp.), Ashe juniper
(duniperus ashei); broomweed (Xanthocephalum sp.); seepwillow (Baccahris neglecta); annual grasses and forbs; and weedy perennial grasses
such as Texas wintergrass, Johnson grass (Sorghum halapensis), purple
threeawn (Aristida purpurea), buffalo grass (Buchloe dactyloides), curley
mesquite (Hilaria belangeri), hairy grama (Bouteloua hirsuta), and silver
bluestem. They can be categorized as old field, successional communities.
The large alluvial terrace adjacent to the McKinney Homestead is included within this community. Due to a more favorable moisture regime, this site
may have been an open cedar elm woodland. The slope due east of the
McKinney Homestead is badly eroded and choked with dense stands of
mesquite, snakewood (Col~rina texensis), algerita (Berberis trifoliolata),
Texas persimmon (Diospyro~ texana), prickly ash (Zanthoxylum hirsutum),
Iotebush (Zizyphus obtusifolia), prickly pear, and pencil cactus (Opuntia leptocaulis). Ashe juniper is included as a faciation of the Blacklands community. However, in former times, a woody component was probably well
represented on this site, especially on the steep slopes (> 10%).
Shallow, rocky uplands generally characterized as having Tarrant soils
were vegetated by open savannahs (with up to 20-30% canopy cover) with
live oak (Quercus fusiformis), cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia), and netleaf
hackberry (Celtis reticulata) as overstory dominants and with mid and tall
grasses as the dominant ground cover. Cedar, bumelia (Bumelia

130

AgB
AgC2
BtB
FhF3
Fo
Fr
HeC2
HeD2
LcA
LcB

Md
PaC

PaC2

?aE

TaD

Texas Archeological Society

HnA

Altoga silty clay,
i to 3 percent slopes
Altoga silty clay, 3 to 6
percent slopes, eroded
Burleson gravelly clay
i to 3 percent slopes
Ferris-Heiden complex, 8 ~o 20
percent slopes, severely eroded
Frio silty clay loam
Frio silty clay loam, frequently
flooded
Heiden clay, 3 to 5 percent
slopes, eroded
Heiden clay, 5 to 8 percent
slopes, eroded
Lewisville silty clay,
0 to i percent slopes
Lewlsville silty clay,
i to 2 percent
slopes
Mixed alluvial
land
Patrick soils,
2 to 5 percent
slopes
Patrick soils,
2 to 5 percent
slopes, eroded
Patrick soils,
5 to i0
percent
slopes
Tarrant
soils,
rolling

HnB
HoD2

Houston Black clay,
0 to i percent slopes
Hourton Black clay,
I to 3 percent slopes
Houston Black
gravelly clay,
2 to 8 percent slopes,
eroded

PaC2-,

TaD

gC2

/

SOl LS
HcKinney Fal is

j~

State Park

¯ HeC2

I True
3000

HeC2"
.~.FhF3

I FEET
0t

i000

L

......

2000

Fig. 1 Soil and vegetation types at McKinney Falls State Park (base map and soils
courtesy of USDA).

Riskind - Vegetation of McKinney Homestead

131

lanuginosa), netlead hackberry, hog plum (Prunus rivularis), shin oak
(Quercus sinuata var. breviloba), persimmon, spring herald (Forestiera
pubescens), fragrant suma (Rhus aromatica var. flabelliformis), poison ivy
(Rhus toxicodendron), soapberry (Sapindus saponaria var. drummondii),
Virginia and plateau creeper (Parthenocissus virginiana and heptaphylla),
mustang grape (Vitis mustangenis), greenbrier (Smilax bona-nox), turk’s
cap (Malvaviscus drummondii), and others would have been and are present in this community.
Due to heavy exploitation of the grasses in this upland community and
subsequent overgrazing, the woody plants, especially the brushy species,
have migrated onto sites formerly dominated by the perennial grasses. The
contemporary landscape, formerly open savannah, is composed of thickets
with spring herald, algerita, Mimosa borealis, snakewood, Iotebush, prickly
pear, pencil cactus, netleaf hackberry, and greater densities of live oak and
cedar elm and of woody vegetation in general. What was formerly savannah
is now a woodland with a dense, brushy understory.
Upland areas of Tarrant soils where the woody vegetation has been entirely removed in order to increase grazing potential is also within this community type (in terms of potential vegetation). These grassland openings are
dominated by grasses such as buffalograss, side oats grama, curley mesquite, tall dropseed, Johnson grass, and silver bluestem. Prickly pear, pencil
cactus, twisted-leaf yucca (Yucca rupicola), and numerous annual and
perennial forbs are conspicuous. The majority of this upland plant community is located south of the McKinney Homestead on the south side of
Onion Creek.
Adjacent to Onion Creek, especially to the east of the creek on the upper
slopes upstream from the upper falls, there is a distinct plant community
which occupies the shallow Patrick soils of the chalky ridges. Formerly, this
location was occupied by a savannah community with plateau live oak and
mid and tall grasses as dominant (little bluestem, Indiangrass, big bluestem,
etc). Today, Ashe juniper is dominant as is a brushy component including
the rare Texas peach bush (Prunus minutiflora).
This community is typical of the Edwards Plateau. Twisted-leaf yucca, a
plateau endemic, is a conspicuous component of the chalky ridge plant
community. Juniper and live oak are considered indigenous as should
Texas kidneywood (Eysenhardtia texana), algerita, snakewood, skunkbush,
spring herald, Texas persimmon, and Prunus rivularis. Contemporary densities of these species, particularly Ashe juniper, have increased manyfold as
a consequence of exploitative land use practices. Little bluestem and side
oats grama formerly dominated the grassy vegetation, whereas today Texas
needlegrass (Stipa leucotricha) is dominant. This community is considered
as aspect of the uplands savannah.
Upland gravel deposits, usually mapped as Quaternary gravel terraces,
are represented due west of the McKinney Homestead. Soil designation has
not been assigned to the deposit since the soil along with the gravel has long
since been removed. Anderson (1904) includes the gravel terraces within
his Colorado Drainage System Society. However, the distinctly upland
community was vegetated with post oak (Quercus stellata), cedar elm, and
hackberry as the overstory dominants of an open woodland. Bumelia was

132

Texas Archeological Society

also a component of the overstory in this community.
In the climax potential, mid grasses, especially little bluestem, would have
dominated the herbaceous community. Included would have been species
such as purpletop (Tridens flavus), big bluestem, Indian grass, and a variety
of forbs and other grasses. In climax conditions, this community was, most
likely, the least diverse of all community types represented in the environs of
the McKinney Homestead.
The remaining dominant plant communities can best be described within
a generalized and broadly interpreted riparian category. The riparian community fluctuates in composition and physiognomy along a gradient of
available moisture, substrate depth and texture, and exposure. Minimum
development of this community is found within intermittent drainages on
the uplands. Maximum development occurs along the banks, floodplain,
and lower talus slopes of the entrenched-Oaion-,- Rinard,~ and Williamson
creeks. It is delineated on soils maps as either Frio soils or as Mixed Alluvial
lands (Werchan et al., 1974). Soils of small, intermittent drainages are not
mapped due to limitations of the graphic scale.
Intermittent upland drainages can best be described as cedar elmhackberry-live oak-woodlands. Facies of this community include hackberry
woodlands and/or cedar elm woodlands. As the available moisture, soil
depth (fertility), and/or stream gradient increases, the density and species
diversity of the woodland increases to the point that a closed canopy
develops and more mesic species are included.
These species include: American elm (Ulmus americana); pecan (Carya
illinoinensis); Arizona walnut (Juglans major)~ red mulberry (Morus rubra);
elderberry (Sambucus canadensis); Eve’s necklace (Sophora affinis); cottonwood (Populus deltoides); Mexican plum (Prunus mexicana); deciduous
holly (flex decidua); mustang grape; roughleaf dogwood (Comus drummonddii)~ Virginia creeper (Parthenocissus quinquefolia); plateau creeper;
hawthorne (Crataegus sp.); redbud (Cercis canadensis var. texensis);
bumelia~ Texas ash (Fraxinus texensis); eastern red cedar (Juniperus virginiana); red haw (Viburnum rufidulum); buckeye (Aesculus pavia var.
pavia); Mexican buckeye (Ungnadia speciosa); wafer ash (Ptelea trifoliata);
poison ivy; dewberry (Rubus trivialis); clematis (Clematis texensis). Other
mesic indicators are: green dragon (Arisaema dracontium); white avens
(Geum canadense); and inland sea oats (Chasmanthium latifolium).
Osage orange (Maclura pomifera), privet (Ligustrum sp.), chinaberry
(Melia azedarach), and Japanese honeysuckle (Lonicera japonica) are recent introductions to this community. The dominant species of the intermittent drainage community grade into and are often indistinguishable from the
dominants present in the scarp woodland community.
A distinctive variant of the riparian community, a scarp woodland, is
found on the slopes of the entrenched drainages, especially Onion and
Rinard creeks. Oaks (Quercus texana, Q. fusiformis), cedar elm, hackberry
(Celtis laevigata), Texas ash, red buckeye, wafer ash, redbud, beargrass
(Nolina lindheimeriana), Texas persimmon, Mexican buckeye, roughleaf
dogwood, Arizona walnut, beautyberry (Callicarpa americana), boneset
(Eupatorium havanense), and redhaw~dominate. Ashe juniper and eastern
red cedar occur in this assemblage. Brambles (Smilax spp.), plateau

Riskind -- Vegetation of McKinney Homestead

133

creeper, peppervine (Ampelopsis arborea), mustang grape, and poison ivy
are conspicuous members of this community. Dominant grasses found in
this community are Canada wildrye, melic (Melica nitens), side oats grama,
little bluestem, Indiangrass, and occasionally eastern gamagrass (Tripsacum
dactyloides) .
At the more xeric extremes, this community grades into the cedar elmhackberry-live oak community of the intermittent drainages. At more mesic
sites, this community intergrades with the mixed hardwood (cedar elm
dominated) floodplain community.
The best development of the riparian community is on the deeper, frequently flooded, floodplain or alluvial soils of Onion Creek (Frio soils) where
the community changes slightly to become a cedar elm-hackberry gallery
forest. Eastern cottonwood, pecan, bumelia, box elder (Acer negundo),
American elm, Osage orange, chinaberry, elderberry, redhaw, mustang
grape, Virginia creeper, deciduous holly, and roughleaf dogwood are some
of the more conspicuous associates. Occasionally, such xeric species as
mesquite, Texas persimmon, and Ashe juniper occur, usually in forest
openings.
Dominant grasses in the floodplain community, depending on microenvironmental conditions, are Canada wildrye, vine mesquite (Panicum obtusum), eastern gamagrass, little bluestem, inland sea oats, bushy bluestem
(Andropogon glomeratus), several species of Panicum, and a variety of
other less conspicuous grasses, sedges, and forbs.
The streamside community which occurs along the margins of Onion
Creek is perhaps the central feature of the McKinney landscape. This bald
cypress (Taxodium distichum) community occupies only a narrow band
along Onion Creek. Green ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica), sycamore (Plantanus occidentalis), and black willow (Salix nigra) are the dominant
overstgry associates. Buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis) and lead tree
(Amorpha ~uticosa) are dominant in the shrub stratum. In terms of importance, the community is characterized as Fraxinus-Salix-Taxodium-Plan.
tanus although at any one point Taxodium or others may be dominant.
Substrate variation accounts for dominance variation.
The streamside community extends a short distance up Rinard Creek but,
for the most part, is lacking along the lower portion of WiUiamson Creek.
Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) and eastern gamagrass are potential tall
grass associates of the streamside riparian community. Only relict stands remain at present.
The remaining aspect of the riparian community is mapped as mixed
alluvial land (Fig. 1). In the site area, this zone is confined to the very lowest
portion of the entrenched Williamson Creek and to Onion Creek
downstream from the upper falls. From the upper falls downstream, the
valley fill is composed of transported limestone gravels; there are situations
wherein typical floodplain terraces with deep alluvial (Frio) soils and
associated vegetation have developed.
Deep gravel deposits support a distinctive, and, for the most part, seral
community which is characterized not only by species composition but by
large areas of bare gravel and open canopy. This community is composed of
a plant assemblage capable of adapting to dynamic, oftimes destructive, tur-

134

Texas Archeological Society

bulent flooding, i.e., severe environmental/habitat stresses. The degree of
turbulent flooding and the extent and dimension of the gravel deposits have
probably increased in recent years. This increase is due, in large measure, to
an increase in water runoff and subsequent increased stream discharge
associated with urbanization. Nevertheless, the environment within which
the contemporary plant communities exist was present, probably to a lesser
extent, in earlier times.
Dominant arborescent species in the mixed alluvial mapping unit are
sycamore, green ash, bald cypress, black willow, and pecan. The community may be characterized as Plantanus-Fraxinus-Taxodium. Few trees or
shrubs survive to maturity. Continual regeneration and even aged stands of
saplings are expected. Both cedar elm and American elm are unimportant
community components of the tree stratum.
Dominant shrubs are those species best adapted to the harsh, dynamic
habitats of the gravel shoals. Little walnut (Juglans microcarpa), buttonbush, indigobush (Amorpha fruiticosa), seepwillow (Baccharis neglecta),
leafy brickellbush (Brickellia dentata), and sesbanias (S. drummondii and S.
macrocarpa) occur.
Conspicuous vines, brambles, and subshrubs include mustang grape,
peppervine, dewberry, and orange xexmenia (Xexmenia hispida). Important grasses and forbs include switchgrass, maximilian sunflower (Helianth us
maximiliani), American waterwillow (Justicia americana), frogfruit (Phyla
incisa), and numerous other grasses, forbs, and sedges. Johnson grass,
chinaberry, and Jerusalem thorn (Parkinsonia aculeata) are exotics which
are now community components but which were absent in former times.
As vegetation stabilizes the gravel bars and as sediments accumulate, the
successional trend proceeds toward the development of a more mesic
floodplain community. Scouring floods that erode as well as deposit gravel
bars maintain a dynamic successional community.
It is difficult to evaluate the prehistoric plant community composition at
the streamside because the community was continually disturbed by
flooding (a natural agent) as well as by harvesting of bald cypress and hardwoods during historic (industrial) times. There remain few analogues for
comparison.
SUMMARY
Notwithstanding several additional minor plant communities not described, the McKinney Homestead is generally characterized in terms of the
dominant terrestrial plant communities. All of the communities except those
found on the steep slopes were influenced and profoundly modified by
humans (particularly the once productive grasslands) to the extent that the
community composition and infrastructure was changed to a remarkable
degree. Although both the prehistoric and historic Amerindians did their
part to modify their environment, it was not until the time of McKinney and
his Anglo precursors of the 19th Century that environmental modifications
could be described as deleterious to environmental quality.
The McKinney site is juxtaposed upon a varied and, in former times, a
highly productive natural environment. The site is ecotonal between the Edwards Plateau to the west and the Blackland Prairies to the east. A distinc-

Riskind -- Vegetation of ]VlcKinney Homestead

135

tive streamside/riparian community traverses the site adding a diverse mesic
component to the environmental setting. Anthropogenic influences from
prehistoric times to the present, but most remarkable during McKinney’s
era, have dramatically changed the composition, structure, and distribution
of the dominant plant communities at the McKinney Homestead.

REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, Ernest
The Plant Societies of the Austin Quadrangle. Unpublished Master of
1904
Science thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
Collins, O.B., F.E. Smeins, and D.H. Riskind
1975
Plant Communities of the Blackland Prairie of Texas. In: M.K. Wall
(ed.), Prairie: A Multiple View. University of North Dakota Press, Grand
Forks.
Kuchler, A.W.
1964

Potential Natural Vegetation of the Coterminous United States.
American Geographical Society Special Publication, 36:1-116.

Lynch, Brothe~ Daniel, C.S.C.
1962
Study of Grassland Mosaic at Austin, Texas. Ecology, 43(4):679-686.
1968
Plants of Austin, Texas. St. Edwards University Press, Austin.
1971
Phenology, Community Composition and Soil Moisture in a Relict at
Austin, Texas. Ecology, 52(5):890-897.
Tharp, B.C.
1952
Texas Range Grasses. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Thomas, Gerald W.
1969
Texas Plants--An Ecological Summary. In: F.W. Gould, Texas Plants:
A Checklist and Ecological Study. Texas A&M University,
Miscellaneous Papers, 585p/revised:7-14.
Werchan, L.E., A.C. Lowther, and Robert N. Ramsey
1969

Soils Survey of Travis County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.

136

Texas Archeological Society

Raymond Wo Neck

INTRODUCTION
The excavation lots examined totaled 2,451 land snail shells representing
14 species (Table 1). In addition, three aquatic snail shells representing an
additional two species were found. All of the macrosnails found living at this
site today are represented in this sample. These species are to be expected
in a riparian woodland bordered by grassland in the ecotonal area of central
Texas where the Blackland-Grand Prairies meet the Texas Hill Country.
The scarcity of freshwater gastropods (three specimens all in the lower terrace) indicates that these did not result primarily from flood debris but are
samples of natural assemblages.

SPECIES COMMENTS
All species are native except Rumina decollata, a native of the Mediterranean areas of northern Africa and southern Europe. This species is extremely common in Central Texas today. This species was recorded from Travis
County by Strecker (1935). Specimens of R. decollata obtained "from the
campus of the University of Texas" were utilized in the fall of 1923 for experimental purposes by Garth and Mitchell (1926).
The time of initial introduction into Travis County is unknown, but it is
probably no earlier than the late 1880’s. Singley (1893) did not record this
species from the state. Introduction probably came later as Pilsbry (1905)
reviewed the world range of this snail but did not list any collections from
Texas. The first Texas report was by Camp (Ferriss, 1914) from
Brownsville; other Texas localities were not mentioned although Ferriss
(1914) compared the specimens to those from Louisiana and South
Carolina. The scarceness of R. decollata in the house area samples (0.4%)
in comparison to the mill site (4.5%) indicates that this snail entered the area
via downstream transport and was not introduced inadvertently by actions
of the McKinney family.
Archeological investigations such as this are potentially important sources
to pinpoint when R. decollata became established in various areas.

Neck -- Gastropods of McKinney Homestead

137

Table 1

Gastropods from 41TV289
Species
Helicindiae
Helicina orbiculata (Say)
Succineidae
Succinea luteola Gould
Catinella vermeta (Say)
Zonitidae
Glyphyalinia paucilirata (Morelet)
Mesomphix friabilis (Binney)
Zonitoides arboreus (Say)
Spiraxidae
Euglandina singleyana (Binney)
Achatinidae
Rumina decollata (L.)
Bulimulidae
Rabdotus dealbatus dealbatus (Say)
Rabdotus mooreanus (Pfeiffer)
Polygyridae
Polygyra mooreana (Binney)
Polygyra texasiana texasiana (Moricand)
Practicolella berlandieriana berlandieriana (Moricand)
Mesodon roemeri (Pfeiffer)
Planorbidae (aquatic)
"Helisoma trivolvis (Say)
Biomphalaria obstructa (Morelet)

However, there is an inherent problem. Even if the layer from which the
deepest shells are found could be dated accurately, the burrowing habit of
this snail would complicate the situation. In Travis County, this species has
been found in several archeological excavations of pre-European sites.
These include the Smith Rockshelter, (Suhm, 1957), just across Onion
Creek from the McKinney house, and the Barton Spring site (Reddell,
1965). Estimates of time of arrival of this snail would most likely be on the
early side. Arrival in Travis County would most likely be after 1915 and no
later than 1923.
Two Rabdotus species are present in these samples: Ft. dealbatus Say and
mooreanus Pfeiffer. The former is characteristic of riparian woodlands while
the latter occurs most commonly in prairies. These species occur together in
many areas and hybridize. Both species and hybrids are present in the sample examined.
Aged shells are difficult to determine to species because of staining and an
apparent fading of markings. Experiments were conducted in an attempt to
make the markings more distinct. Although some snails could not be determined, most could be assigned to one or the other taxon. The figures indicate that dealbatus is more common on the lower terrace while
mooreanus is more common on the upper terrace. The same relationship
exists today. Detailed examination of Ftabdotus from archeological sites

138

Texas Archeological Society

should provide essential information on the history of hybridization of these
two species.
The McKinney House apparently allowed an expansion of the area colonized by Mesodon roemeri. This species is well represented in the mill
(lower terrace) area but is less common in the house (upper terrace) area.
All snails found in the upper terrace are from very near the surface; in the
lower terrace, this species is found at least down to the third layer. The
McKinney House and associated materials (boards, stone, etc.) provided
retreats which protected the snail from dessication by solar radiation. The
same phenomenon can be observed today in Austin.
Several remarks need to be made concerning standard methods of obtaining molluscan samples. Samples in this study were sifted through I/4 in
mesh screen. Thus, all minute snails are lost. Many of these, particularly
various species of Gastrocopta (Pupillidae), could give important clues to
paleoenvironmental conditions. These data are not as essential at this site as
in older pre-European sites. In prehistoric sites, such specimens would be
essential for paleoenvironmental reconstruction.
Utilization of a smaller screen size also would retain fragments of larger
shells. Collections from deeper levels tended to contain only Rabdotus spp.
The shells of other medium sized species, e.g. Polygyra texasiana, apparently fragment at some point in time and depth. Helicina orbiculata composed about 30% of the total sample but few were found in deeper levels.
There is no reason not to expect these species in such assemblages.
SUMMARY
All snails to be expected in a riparian woodland bordered by grassland in
central Travis County are represented in the excavated samples.
Assemblages are the same as present. Effects of the McKinney family’s activities on the snail fauna appear to be minimal with the exception of one
species which was able to expand somewhat and utilize cover in the house
area. The appearance of the single non-native species was probably not
associated with the activities of the McKinney family. Utilizing a smaller
screen size would improve the sampling technique.

REFERENCES CITED
Ferris, James H.
1914
Rumina decollata in Texas. Nautilus, 28:11.
Garth, T.R. and M.P. Mitchell
The Learning Curve of a Land Snail. Journal of Comparative
1926
Psychology, 6:103-113.
Pilsbry, Henry A.
1905
Rumina decollata L. Manual of Conchology, 17:212.
Reddell, James R.
1965
A Checklist of the Cave Fauna of Texas. I. The Invertebrata (exclusive
of Insecta). Texas Journal of Science, 17:143-187.

Singley, J.A.
Texas Mollusca. Annual Report of the Geological Survey of Texas,
1893
4:299-343.

Neck -- Gastropods of McKinney Homestead

139

Strecker, John K.
1935
Land and Freshwater Snails of Texas. Transactions of the Texas
Academy of Science, 17:4-44.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1957
Excavations of the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas
Journal of Science, 9:26-58.

140

Texas Archeological Society

INTRODUCTION
Archeological excavations were undertaken in McKinney Falls State Park
at the Horse Trainer’s Cabin (41TV307) between July 22 and July 26,
1974. This structure is believed to represent the living quarters of John Van
Hagan, Thomas McKinney’s horse trainer, during all or some portion of the
period 1851 (or 1852) to 1872.
An investigation of the standing structure to recover easily disturbed data
was necessary because of possible site disturbance during park development
and due to the proximity to proposed camping and picnicking areas. A crew
of six from the Historic Sites Branch of the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department carried out limited archeological excavations assisted by several local
volunteers. Information on the cabin’s structural remains and a representative sample of artifa~ts~ primarily representing the uses of the building during the early 1900’s, were recovered.

METHODOLOGY
Initial inspection of the site indicated that park development activities then
in progress had already disturbed much of the area immediately adjacent to
the structure. However, the structure was still fairly undisturbed except for
minimal use by construction workers as a lunch area.
The roof had previously fallen into the structure interior and most of the
peripheral walls were collapsed; only the north wall of the building was fairly
intact. The remains of the roof were removed by hand and accumulated
mulch fill cleaned out. Brush and other debris were removed from around
the exterior of the structure.
Cleaning revealed several wooden floor sleepers running north/south
and spaced about 3 ft apart. The sleepers were used as natural north/south
grid lines for dividing the room into units for excavation, each unit being approximately 3 ft sq (Fig. 1). Selected units along the walls were excavated
either partially or completely. Units also were excavated outside the two entrances in the hopes of revealing possible porches or door steps. Other units
to the south and north of the structure were excavated to check for rock
walls such as the one abutting the southwest corner. Two crossing trenches

Black -- Horse Trainer’s Cabin

\

Fig. I Plan of foundation showing excavation units.

141

142

Texas Archeologica! Society

were excavated outside the south wall to test a scattered rock mass thought
to be the remains of a fallen chimney or a possible second room.
Fill was passed through I/4 in screen and collections were bagged by unit
and returned to the Parks and Wildlife Department Archeology Lab for
cleaning and cataloging. Relative elevations were calculated on the basis of
an arbitrary elevation of 100 feet established on the surface of a nearby
manhole cover.

STRUCTURAL REMAINS
The cabin’s exterior dimensions were approximately 28 ft 10 in by 16 ft 9
in. The two foot thick walls were built of rough shaped limestone blocks
forming separate interior/exterior faces and laid with a mud mortar. Occasional tie stones spanning the width of the wall hold the two faces together.
The interior cavity of the wall contained rubble fill set in a mud mortar.
Some lime/sand mortar pointing is still visible on the interior of the north
wall and traces of a scoring line can be seen in the surfaces of the mortar
joints.
The only known early photograph of the cabin is one taken in 1942 by
Reynolds Lowry (Fig. 2). This photograph shows the cabin gabled at both
the north and south ends with a shingled roof later covered over by corrugated metal roofing. The cedar shingled roof was constructed of cut
wooden beams using cut (square) nails in the construction. The later metal
roofing was attached with wire nails.
Windows and doors details are almost unknown as artifacts from these
features were not recognized. Figure 2 shows that the east door was constructed of vertical boards and probably hinged on the right hand or north
side with large strap hinges. The single window in the photograph is covered
by a piece of corrugated metal; details are not visible.
The archeological remains of the cabin revealed little data. Two doorways
of different widths are present in both the east and west walls. Traces of
three window openings are found in the same walls: one to the south of the
door in the west wall; and two, one to either side of but at different distances
from the door, in the east wall. The window to the south of the east door
was filled with stone and concrete sometime before 1943.
A single fireplace of unknown dimensions is located in the center of the
south wall. Little remains except the opening of the fireplace and a portion
of the east coving interior face. The fireplace extruded or extended outside
the structure from the exterior of the wall an undetermined distance. The indicated fireplace (Fig. 1) is therefore mainly hypothetical, based on a common plan of extruded fireplaces.
The flooring was modern I x 6 to I x 8 in tongue and groove pine boards
attached to 2 x 10 in sleeper joists with wire nails. The sleepers were approximately 3 ft apart and rested on a prepared surface. The original floor was an
uneven packed earth floor at approximately the same level (or slightly lower
through compacting) as the first coarse of the stone wall. Before the wooden
flooring was laid, a tan to orange sand was used in the lower spots to provide a level surface for laying the sleepers. Artifacts indicate that this could
have occurred at almost any time in the late 19th or early 20th centuries.
The hearth of the fireplace was then raised to the level of the flooring by

Black - Horse Trainer’s Cabin

143

Fig. 2 Photograph of Cabin, looking west (courtesy of Texas Memorial Museum, The
University of Texas at Austin).

building it up with flat laid stone. A rough chronology of building events is
given in Table 1.
STONE FENCES
Although McKinney’s estate was large, only a portion within a large bend
in Onion Creek was rock fenced and used for specific types of pasture
(perhaps to keep mares and foals separated from the herd). These rock
fences were built of dry laid, tabular limestone slabs, starting with a double
wide course of larger slabs about 2 ft wide at the base. Successive courses
used smaller slabs as the fence narrowed to a truncated pyramid. Some
rough field stone occasionally was used in the upper courses. Most of the
stone fences have fallen and little remains except for long mounds of rocky
rubble. One section of fence near the middle of the park is still standing to
the original height of about 5 ft.
A rectangular corral measuring about 80 ft by 260 ft is near the center of
the rock fence which forms the south boundary of the state park. The site is
overgrown heavily with trees and thick under brush. Exact dimensions could
not be taken due to the deteriorated condition of the fence and poor visibility. A low, double wide, single course of dry laid limestone blocks abuts the
south side of the southwest corner of the cabin This one course of stone is
the only fence remains near the cabin.
ARTIFACTS
Artifacts reflecting the original occupation of the cabin were not found
within the structure. Several cast .36 caliber lead balls found along the interior of the east wall may relate to the early occupation although their uncorroded condition would indicate otherwise. One pink spongeware sherd

144

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1
Chronology of Building Events

Events
1850/1870--Original construction of limestock rock and mud mortar structure with shingle
roof.
1900/1920--Three events (non-sequential): shingle roof covered with corrugated iron
sheeting; repointing and replastering; fireplaces and chimney fell (or dismantedl)
and opening rebuilt with stone.
Post 1920-- Structure used for hay storage at least into the 1940’s.
Post 1950-- Collapse of roof and general disintegration of walls.

may date to the early occupation, but it was found a short distance west of
the structure.
The identifiable artifacts, primarily bottles and glass sherds, date to the
late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Mcleans Volcanic Oil Liniment bottle
(Fig. 3a) has a manufacturer’s mark used by the Illinois Glass Co. between
1916 and 1929 (Toulouse, 1971:264). The manufacturing technique of the
Harter’s Soothing Drops bottle (Fig. 3b) and dating on the product, indicate
a date range from the 1870’s to mid-1910’s (Devner, 1968:42).
A number of agriculturally related artifacts such as baling wire fragments
reflect the building’s use as a storage shed or barn at a later date.

SUMMARY
Based on scanty historical data and limited artifactual material, two occupational periods are indicated. The first is the presumed occupancy by
Thomas McKinney’s horse trainer, John Van Hagan, between 1852 and
1872, as reported by Reynolds Lowry. The second occupation was in the
late 1880’s, lasting, possibly intermittently, into the 1910’s. Afterward, the
structure was used as an agricultural or ranching support facility.
The house originally had a dirt floor or a wooden floor which was later
removed. The second floor was modern tongue and groove boards supported by joists. The collapsed roof has rafters with shingles (cedar) and
(later) sheet iron. Square 4d nails were used in the roofing; round wire nails
in the second floor.
The first building stage was of stone mortared with local sandy sediment.
The original walls were later flush pointed or plastered with a lime/sand
mortar; scoring gave it the appearance of squared courses. Evidence of
plastering was not found on the exterior of the house. The original height
from the (dirt?) floor to the underside of the ceiling joists was about 7 ft 7 in;
the later height from plank floor to ceiling was about 6 ft 10 in. Evidence of
outbuildings was not noted.

REFERENCES CITED
Devner, Kay
1968
Patent Medicine Picture. Tombstone Epitaph, Tombstone, Arizona.
Toulouse, Julian H.
1971
Bottle Makers and Their Marks. Thomas Nelson, New York.

Black -- Horse Trainer’s Cabin

0
i

145

1cm

a

o

lcm

b

Fig. 3 Bottles from the Cabin: a) McLeans Volcanic Oil Liniment bottle; b) Harter’s
Soothing Drops bottle.

146

Texas Archeological Society

APPENDIX D

Reconstruction

INTRODUCTION
This report details excavation, artifacts, and recommendations at the
McKinney Homestead and Mill (41TV289) located on the banks of Onion
Creek about 7.5 mi southeast of Austin (Travis County, Texas). Over 60
mandays were expended in efforts to remove the rubble overburden (wall
fall) from the three room house and explore the deposit of the mill wheel
house in an effort to determine the motive power of the mill. About 40 cu m
of overburden was removed from the house and 20 cu m of deposit was excavated in the mill wheel house during the months of September and October 1974.
The primary emphasis is to make architectural recommendations to Texas
Parks and Wildlife architects and describe those artifacts from the house
which were not covered in previous work. Only brief attempts are made to
describe the architecture and setting as full descriptions are in the main
body.
ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Previous Investigations
Previous investigations within~ McKinney Falls State Park area concentrated on prehistoric archeological sites (Suhm, 1955, 1957) or surveys and
minor testing (Kegley, 1972; Ralph and Loving, 1973) designed to clear
areas for park development.
Extensive investigations at McKinney Falls State Park were undertaken by
the Texas Archeological Society from June 8 to June 15, 1974 during the
Society’s annual field school. The TAS work was focused on the historical
aspects of the park and concentrated on the McKinney Homestead com-

McEachern and Ralph - TP&W Excavations

147

plex. During the field school, an intensive archeologica! survey was conducted in the park and a number of historic and prehistoric sites were
located and recorded.
Archeological prospecting was conducted around the McKinney house
and mill utilizing a proton magnetometer, metal detectors, and pH and
phosphate chemical tests. Excavations at the house consisted of a meter
wide trench along the inside east wall of the east room, a trench running east
from the southeast corner of the house, and a trench north from the north
wall or back of the house. Excavations in the east room produced burned
flooring, two possible floor joists, and miscellaneous artifacts. The two
trenchs outside of the house revealed foundation construction features and
a shallow occupation layer about 20 cm deep containing numerous artifacts,
including pressed glass, medicine bottles, metal artifacts, and ceramics.
Over 1300 man days went into this phase of research.
Excavations at the mill consisted of shallow cuts to define architectural
features and a deep cut into the wheel pit. The main structure and outlying
features were detailed with machinery related artifacts recovered in all
locales. The deep cut stopped short of the main turbin machinery due to
lack of time.
Emergency archeological investigations were directed by McEachern
(Hudson, ms) January 20-29, 1975, at site 41TV314, a large prehistoric
site located on park property. A significant portion of the site ~vas destroyed
during construction activities. Several additional sites were located during
this time.
Archeological excavations were directed by Roberson (Black, Appendix
B) at the horse trainer’s cabin (41TV307) during a five day period in July
1974, using Parks and Wildlife personnel and local volunteer amateur archeologists. A moderate collection of artifacts belonging mostly to the first
quarter of this century was recovered and architectural details were defined.
Additional surveys of the park were conducted by Calvert in an attempt to
relate various fences to historic structures; and by Medlin who attempted to
update all site survey forms. Field notes are on file at Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department.
Texas Parks and Wildlife Investigations
The Historic Sites and Restoration Branch of the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department conducted investigations at the Thomas F. McKinney House
and Mill to determine actual needs to stabilize and preserve the house before
the park was opened to the public. The field work was conduqted between
September 23 and October ,11, 1974, with a crew of four peolJle and occasional volunteers. Twenty ~ight mandays went into clearing and mapping
the house and 32 mandays ~(plus 8 mandays of volunteer labor) were utilized in removing fill in the mil! shaft. Work was carried out under Antiquities
Permit Number 53.
The Parks and Wildlife investigations of the house consisted of clearing
the rubble from the house down to the surface of the occupation zone. In
addition, two small test units were excavated into the occupation deposit.
When surface artifacts were encountered, they were placed in lots which
corresponded to general areas of the house (Fig. 1). The excavation grid
and elevation were established previously during the field school investiga-

148

Texas Archeological Society

tions and were based on Texas Parks and Wildlife Department monuments.
All work was conducted using metric units.

McKINNEY HOUSE ARCHITECTURE
The old McKinney House (41TV289) was a two-story, cutstone building
with three downstairs rooms (east, west, and middle), a front porch, and
supposedly a built-on smoker/kitchen (Figs. 14-20, main text). Work was
accomplished on the main house structure only. The rooms, porch, and
construction material were described in the main text.

McKINNEY HOUSE ARTIFACTS
Wood
The wood artifacts consist of fragments of joists and planks used in the
construction of the east room of the house. Most of the wood is burned or
badly decomposed; in only a few cases could the actual dimensions of the
boards be reconstructed.
JOISTS
Number of specimens: 4 fragments
Provenience: lots 6, 7, 8, 12
Description: All fragments covered are remains of second story joists which remained in
the joist pockets when the house burned. The joists are manufactured from logs; in
one case, finishing cuts occur on two sides at right angles to each other while the remaining logs were finished on only one side. The joists cut on one side are 15 cm
thick; the specimen finished on two sides is 11 cm.

41TV289
House
5
i
meter

~True

Fig. 1 Texas Parks and Wildlife excavation lots at McKinney Homestead.

McEachern and Ralph -- TP&W Excavations

149

BEAMS
Number of specimens: 1 fragment
Provenience: lot 12
Description: A fragment of one beam finished on three sides with the remaining side
burned was found in the porch area. Dimension of the intact side is 6.5 cm; the remaining side was greater than 6 cm.
Discussion: The original use of the beam in the construction of the house is unknown
but it could have been used as a first story joist.
PLANKS
Number of specimens: 16 fragments
Provenience: lot 12(7), 14(4), 15(2), 16(I), 22(2)
Description: The widest plank is 8 cm in width (not necessarily the actual width of the
original planks). Fragments are uniformally 2 cm thick.
Discussion: Plank fragments are assumed to be the remains of the second story floor.
MISCELLANEOUS BOARDS
Number of specimens: 4 fragments
Provenience: lot 4, 9, 15(2)
Description: Cut end fragments of four boards. Three have tapered cuts or tongues; the
remaining piece is beveled for use in a corner.
UNIDENTIFIED WOOD
Number of specimens: 16 fragments
Provenience: Lot 2, 3(2), 9(2), 10(2), 12(5), 14(2), 22(2)
Description: Too fragmentary for further comment.

Metal
NAILS
Of all the artifacts recovered, nails were the most common and divided into two classes: wire nails and cut nails. Nails were classified as to pennyweight (abbreviated d) when complete enough. There are a variety of diffe~’ent standards for length versus pennyweight (Table 1). Standards include: U.S. 1876, 1897, 1931 (Walker, 1971:69); Simmons (1884);
Baldwin (1891); and Unknown (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962:56). The
1931 U.S. standard was used for wire nails and the 1876 U.S. standard for
cut nails. However, the house was constructed before the U.S. standards
were established. Lengths given show the variations in range that are normally expected in any manufacturing process (Table 1).

Wire Nails
Wire nails first came into use in the United States during the 1850’s
(Nelson, 1968). Earlier wire nails were popular in small sizes intended for
use in making cigar boxes and other items. These earlier nails had bulbous
heads and were generally eccentric in relation to their shanks. It was not until the 1890’s that wire nails became the predominate type. They have never
completely replaced cut nails which are still used for some purposes. Wire
nails from the house are all of the modern type (Table 2).
Cut Nails
Cut nails of the type found in the McKinney House were manufactured
from about 1830 to the

present (Table 3).

NAIL FRAGMENTS
Number of specimens: 109
Description: All of the nails which were too incomplete for classification are presented in
Table 4.

Texas Archeological Society

150

Table 1
Nail Length Standards (Measurements in Inches and Fractions of Inches)

Size

U.S.
1876

Simmons
1884

2d
3d
4d
5d
6d
7d
8ci
9d
10d
12d
16d
20d
30d
40d
50d
60d

15/16
1-1/8
1-3/8
1-9/16
1-13/16
2-1/16
2~5/16
2-9/16
2-11/16
2-15/16
3-7/16
3-3/4
4-3/16
4-5/8
5-1/16
5-9/16

1
1-i/4
1-1/2
1-11/16
2
2-3/16
2-1/2
2-3/4
2-13/16
3-1/8
3-11/16
4-I/8
4-I/2
4-15/16
5-7/16
5-15/16

Baldwin
1891
1-5/16
1-9/16
1-1/16
2-1/4
2-9/16
2-3/4
3
3-3/16
3-3/4
4-I/4
4-5/8
5-1/16
5-9/16
6-1/8

U.S.
1897

U.S.
1931

Unknown
1876-88?

1
1-I/4
1-1/2
1-3/4
2
2-1/4
2-1/2
2-3/4
3
3-1/4
3-1/2
4
4-I/2
5
5-1/2
6

1
1-1/4
1-1/2
1-3/4
2
2-1/4
2-1/2
2-3/4
3
3-1/4
3-1/2
4
4-1/2
5
5-1/2
6

1
1-1/4
1-I/4
1-3/4
2
2-1/4
2-1/2
2~3/4
3-1/4
3-1/4
3-1/4
4
4-1/2
5
5-1/2
6

Table 2
Wire Nails From House
Number of
Specimens

Nail Types
Common 16d
Common 9d
Common 8d
Common 7d
Common 6d
Common 4d
Common 3d
Roofing 3d"
(Galvanized)
Finishing 8d* ’
Finishing 5d
Round Head 9d *" *

Provenience
(Lots)

27
2
27
1
2
2
1
19

14,
15,
13,
15
13,
18
18
14

I
13
1

14
14
17

16
18
14, 15, 18
15

"The size of head is 9/32 compared to 5/32 for the 3d common nail from lot 18.
"*Finishing nai!s differ-from common nails in head size. Finishing nails have a smaller head
than thelarger common nail heads.
* * "Round head nails are rounded on the top as opposed to the flat head which is found on
common nails.

STAPLES
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: lots 13, 16
Description: Staples are U shaped and 32 mm in length.
Discussion: Specimens are of the variety commonly used to secure wire to fences.
MISCELLANEOUS METAL ARTIFACTS
BRASS OBJECT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 17

McEachern and Ralph -- TP&W Excavations

151

Table 3
Cut Nails From House
Number of
Specimens

Nail Types
Common 2d
Common 8d
Common 5d
Common 3d
Common 2d
Finishing 8d

Provenience
(Lots)

8
10
2
4
7
7

4, I0, 15, 18
14, 15, 18, 19
12, 14
18
13, 15, 18
13, 14, 16, 18

"Finishing nails are distinguished from common nails by a smaller size head.

Table 4
Nail Fragments From House
Provenience

Cut Nails

Wire Nails

UnidentKied

14
15
17
18
19

I
9
26
36
1

0
6
15
27
7

0
4
2
I
0

Totals:

64

42

7

Description: Brass plate 60 x 26 x I mm has four unequal sides and a triangular hole.
Discussion: Part of an unidentified, unknown, composite artifact.
BUTT HINGE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 20
Description: Hinge is rusted closed and measures 95 x 46 mm in the closed position.
There are three mounting holes in each half of the hinge.
BUTTON
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 19
Description: Button is 23 mm in diameter and was attached by a rivet.
CAN LID
Number of specimens: I fragment
Provenience: lot 18
Description: Lid is of the push-on variety and was about 120 mm in diameter.
CARRIAGE BOLT AND NUT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 18
Description: Bolt is 61 mm long with attached nut.
CIRCULAR IRON OBJECT
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 9
Description: Object is 67 mm in diameter and 7 mm thick.
CLAMP
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 1
Description: Cast iron clamp is in the shape of a half cylinder with one side secured by
two metal hooks and another through a hole in a metal plate. Object is 73 by 66 by 5
mm with interior diameter of the cylinder 42 mm.

152

Texas Archeological Society

Discussion: The clamp could have been used to secure a pipe or hold an axle or shaft
in place.
COPPER BUSHING
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 22
Description: A circular copper bushing with an outside diameter of 49 mm and inside
diameter of 33 ram; two notches at opposite ends.
COPPER TUBE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 1
Description: Collapsed copper tube 143 mm in length with a rolled seam.
CORRUGATED TIN
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 13
Description: Corrugated tin with a 4d common wire nail in it.
Discussion: This specimen is a type commonly used for roofing.
FASTENERS
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: lot 18
Discription: One of the specimens is a loop; the other is a fragment from the same gauge
wire.
Discussion: The complete specimen was used on a garter or girdle to attach nylon
stockings and the fragment is assumed to have come from the same garment.
HOOK LATCH
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 14
Description: Specimen is 60 mm in length.
Discussion: Artifact is the latch portion of the hook and eye latch commonly used on
screen doors.
IRON BAR
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: lot 13
Description: One is 133 x 37 x 7 mm tapered at one end with three holes in it. The other
is 335 x 25 x 6 mm and has a hole drilled in one end.
Discussion: The former may be part of a hinge.
JAR LID
Number of specimens: 5 fragments
Provenience: lot 1
Description: Fragments are from a zinc canning jar lid manufactured by Atlas Glass Co.
Discussion: The Atlas Glass Co. was first established in 1896; it was not until after the
company combined with the Wheeling Metal Co. in 1901 that Atlas zinc lids were made
(Toulouse, 1969:362).
KNIFE HANDLE (?)
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 2
Description: Fragment is a 49 x 21 x 5 mm piece of steel.
Discussion: It may have been the tang of a knife handle,
MODERN BUTT HINGE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 14
Description: Hinge (Ideal #23) is chrome plated and unused.
Discussion: It is an obviously recent addition to the deposit and post dates the burning of
the house.
RECTANGULAR METAL PLATE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 12

j

McEachern and Ralph -- TP&W Excavations

153

Description: A piece of sheet metal 62 x 31 mm has four holes in it and a rivet in one of
the holes.
ROLLER
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 13
Description: A small wheel 37 mm in diameter and 12 mm wide.
Discussion: It is similar to the type found in coasters.
ROUND HEAD SCREW
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: lot 14
Description: Specimen is 32 mm in length.
SPOON
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 5
Description: Spoon was once plated over brass. It has a crown emblem and labeled 24j
& C24.
THREE-CORNERED FILE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 18
Description: The triangular shaped file is 76 mm long with the width of each side 18 mm.
WASHER
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: lot 9
Description: Washer is 35 mm in diameter with an 11 mm hole.
WIRE
¯ Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: lots 14, 18
Description: Each specimen consists of two pieces of wire twisted together.
Discussion: Short pieces of wire may have been classified as nail fragments.
WIRE HANDLE
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: lot 13
Description: Handle is manufactured from 4 mm wire.
Discussion: It is suitable for a bucket or other object 30 to 35 cm across.
UNIDENTIFIED SCRAPS
Number of specimens: 42
Provenience: All lots
Description: 36 scraps of iron, 1 zinc fragment, and 5 bits of copper.
CARTRIDGES
WINCHESTER REPEATING ARMS CO. 38, S&W
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 4
Description: 38 caliber centerfire cartridge for Smith & Wesson revolver.
Discussion: Smith & Wesson manufactured their first 38 caliber centerfire revolver in 1865
but intense production did not begin until 1876 (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962:82).
UNION METALLIC CARTRIDGE CO. 12 GAUGE NEW CLUB
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 16
Description: Shotgun shell primer and base.
Discussion: Fontana and Greenleaf (1962:80) describe a similar cartridge and date it between 1867 and 1910. The cartridge is advertised in the Fall 1900 Sears Roebuck and
Company Catalog.
REMINGTON-UMC 12 GAUGE
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: lots I, 9

Texas Archeological Society

154

Description: Shotgun shells with plastic casings.
Discussion: Recent origin.

Glass
BOTTLES
GEBHARDT CHILE
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: lot 1
Description: Clear panel bottle 99 x 43 x 32 mm with the side panels labeled "GEBHARDT EAGLE and CHILl POWDER." Maker’s mark on base is a diamond with an
’T’ inside.
Discussion: The diamond ’T’ maker’s mark was used by the Illinois Glass Co. from 1916
to 1929 (Toulouse, 1971:264).
MRS. STEWARTS BLUEING
Number of specimens: 17 sherds from 1 bottle
Provenience: lots 2, 4, 8
Description: Bottle neck is seamed with an inside diameter of 16 mm. The circular base is
69 mm in diameter and marked with a diamond ’T’ maker’s mark.
Discussion: Illinois Glass Co. 1916 to 1929 (Toulouse, 1971:264).

BOTTLE FRAGMENTS
BOTTLENECK A
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: lot 18
Description: Amber seamed neck with a mouth diameter 13 mm and an aluminum screw
on lid.
Discussion: Bottle cap is of the same type as ones presently found on inexpensive wines.
It is a recent addition to the archeological deposit.
BOTTLE BASE A
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 13
Description: The brown base is 85 mm in diameter and has the following numbers in the
center: 107 over 58.
Discussion: This base probably goes with Bottleneck A and is of recent origin.
BOTTLE BASE B
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 9
Description: The clear base is approximately I00 mm in diameter and about 6 mm thick.
An embossed circle 12 mm in diameter is in the center of the base. The embossed
number 6 or 9 is to one side, 18 mm from the circle.
BOTTLE BASE C
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: lot 10
Description: A clear fragment of base with maker’s mark of a diamond ’T’ within a circle.
Discussion: The maker’s mark used by the Owens Illinois Glass Co. from 1929 to 1954
(Toulouse, 1971:403).
BOTTLE BASE D
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: lot 13
Description: A clear fragment of a base about 90 mm in diamefer with the following
maker’s marks: A circle around the letter J and 132 3/4.
BOTTLE BASE E
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 9
Description: A clear fragment of base of undetermined size labeled "... aglas."
Discussion: The ’~Duraglas" trademark has been used by the Owens Illinois Glass Co.
since 1940 (Toulouse, 1971:403),

McEachern and Ralph - TP&W Excavations

155

BODY SHERDS GROUP 1
Number of specimens: 8
Provenience: lots 10, 11, 19, 18
Description: Specimens are all very light green.
BODY SHERDS GROUP 2
Number of specimens: 13
Provenience: lots 10, 11, 15, 16, 18
Description: Specimens are clear glass. One fragment has the number 16 painted in white.
BODY SHERDS GROUP 3
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 15
Discussion: Brown fragment, probably goes with Bottleneck A and Bottle Base A.
BODY SHERDS GROUP 4
Number of specimens: 9
Provenience: lots 1, 2, 4, 8, 9, 10, 18
Description: Sherds are slightly opalized and clear.
BODY SHERDS GROUP 5
Number of specimens: 7
Provenience: lots 19, 18
Description: Specimens are all clear and very thin, about 1 mm in thickness. Four of the
specimens are melted.
BODY SHERDS GROUP 6
Number of specimens: 8
Provenience: lots 15, 17, 18, 19
Description: Specimens are melted; seven are clear and one is light green. The largest is a
92 mm blob with fused charcoal.

JAR FRAGMENTS
RIM A
Number of specimens: 2 fragments from 1 jar
Provenience: lot 10
Description: The clear fragments represent about I/3 of the complete rim of the screw on
variety. The inside diameter of the mouth is 58 mm, the size of a canning jar.
RIM B
Number of specimens: 2 fragments from I jar
Provenience: lots 8, 10
Description: The clear rims are from a jar about 58 mm in diameter with a ridge along the
lip and a second ridge 10 mm below the lip. There is a seam through the rim.
Discussion: The rim is for a spring clip type of closure.
RIM C
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 10
Description: The jar had a screw lid and the body has faceted sides with a slight shoulder.
Discussion: The clear fragment is too small to reconstruct the diameter of the mouth. It
may be a pickle jar.
LID A
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: lot 11
Description: The white lid is 65 mm in diameter and 4 mm thick. It is labeled "GENUINE
BOYD’S CAP FOR MASON JAR" around the edge of the jar. The lid has an H over A
maker’s mark.
Discussion: The H over A maker’s mark was used by the Hazel Atlas Glass Co. circa 1920
(Toulouse, 1969:24).

156

Texas Archeological Society

MISCELLANEOUS GLASS
PRESSED GLASS
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 21
Description: The clear fragment of pressed glass appears to be part of a lid with scalloped
edge.
Discussion: The pattern is imitation pressed glass. Examples of this style could not be
found in Lee (1931) or Revi (1964). The piece is probably late, i.e., 1930.
GLASS BUTTON
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: lot 17
Description: The white button is 15 mm in diameter and has four holes.
WINDOW GLASS
Number of specimens: 71
Provenience: Table 5
Description: Clear, dirty yellow, blue, or green fragments of window pane. They vary
from 2.5 to 3.5 mm in thickness and are often fused into indistinguishable blobs from
fire.
Discussion: Window pane glass distribution followed the pattern established by the TAS
excavation (see main text).

Ceramics
Ceramic classification is based on three categories: I) hardness of paste as
reflected by its porosity; 2) color of paste; and 3) decoration. As much as
possible, the classification follows the basic rules listed by Powell
(1962:34-35). The small size of the collection makes a more refined
classification impossible.
The ceramics can be considered earthenwares based on hardness of
paste. (Lardner, 1832:67) and tongue test (Durrenberger, 1965:9). Eight of
the 10 sherds are of medium paste and considered cream colored wares.
The remaining sherds are hard paste of the ironstone type.

CREAM COLORED WARES
PLAIN
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: lots 5, 17
Description: The sherd from lot 5 is glazed; the other sherd is an unglazed rim fragment
from a small cup.
MOLDED
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: lots 3, 17
Description: White glazed ceramic with raised design.
Discussion: A tim and body sherd from lot 17 appears to be from a washbasin (8.3 cm
diameter and approximately 4.8 cm deep). The remaining sherd is from the rim of a
plate.
HAND PAINTED, GROUP 1 (UNDERGLAZED)
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 16
Description: Sherd is hand painted in blue.
Discussion: Specimen is commonly referred to as "blue and white" (Godden 1964:xviii).
HAND PAINTED, GROUP 2 (OVERGLAZED)
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 5
Description: The sherd is from the side of a cup and decorated with a floral pattern etched
into the glaze and hand painted over the glaze in green and red. The rim is gilded in
gold. There is a trace of molding remaining near the bottom of the cup.

McEachern and Ralph -- TP&W Excavations

157

Table 5
Window Pane From The House
Provenience

Clear

2
4
10
11
15
16
17
18
19
Totals:

Green

Yellow

Blue

Unid.

1
1
3
1
6
10
3
3
28

2
I
4
2

Melted

Total

1

1

2
1
2
4
6
8
25
15
8

8

71

1
4

5

6
12
2

2
11

3

8

12

TRANSFER PRINTED
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: lot 5
Description: The sherd is printed in brown.
DECALOMANIA
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 5
Description: Specimen is a rim sherd from a bowl or serving dish decorated along the rim
with a red, yellow, green, and black pattern. The rim is molded in scalloped fashion
gilded with gold.

MISCELLANEOUS CERAMICS
IRONSTONE
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: lot 22
Description: Sherds are underprinted with J & G Meakin’s "Ironware China" maker’s
mark which included the name "England."
Discussion: The mark indicates a post 1890 date for the sherds (Godden, 1964:427).
CERAMIC BUTTON
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 17
Description: Button is white, 11 mm in diameter, and has one central hole

Miscellaneous
LEATHER
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 9
Description: Specimen is too fragmentary for identification. A line of perforations from
sewing are present along one edge of the object.
CORK
Number Of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 17
Description: Cork is 25 mm diameter and 16 mm thick.
GRAPH MARKER
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: lot 14
Description: Specimen is 11.5 mm in diameter and 31 mm long. It is sharpened on otw
end and broken on the other.

158

Texas Archeological Society

PLASTIC BUTTON
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: lot 17
Description: Specimen is 14.5 mm in diameter and has two holes.
PLASTER
Number of specimens: 8
Provenience: lots 18(2), 15(6)
Description: Burned cement-sand mortar.
Discussion: Fragments of mortar which were used to repair the house walls.

McKINNEY HOUSE RECONSTRUCTION
The builder’s trench was dug and the foundation of rough cut native
limestone was coursed up to grade. The first cutstone course was laid, tied
at the corners and cross-walls, and the doorsills were placed. Coursing continued as stone become available, resulting in differing craftsmanship from
area to area. Windows, opening inward, were enclosed and lintels placed as
the structure grew. Capping stones on the ends and two cross walls climbed
to the gabled roof beam. The intricate double fireplace with upstairs heater
kept pace with construction and became the stabilizing factor for the structure.
McKINNEY HOUSE

RECOMMENDATIONS

East Room
Set a stone larger than 110 x 15 x 15 cm inside and against the south
door. When finished with stabilization and repointing, fill with pea gravel,
about 20 cm deep (ca. 3.0 cu m). Scaffolding or booms used during
reconstruction must be blocked or placed on plywood to protect the archeological deposit. Excavation may not proceed below 157.19 meters
elevation without an archeologist present. If supervision is inadequate or
vandalism a problem, hurricane chain link fence can be overlapped on the
floor before adding the gravel.
Middle Room
It is recommended that a stone larger than the doorway be set just inside
the room as with the east room, and pea gravel (ca. 3.8 cu m) added after
stabilization and repointing. The wood floor must be protected from workers
and scaffolding by using plywood or blocks. Excavation shall not proceed
below 157.28 m elevation without an archeologist present.
West Room
It is recommended that excavation not occur in this room without an archeologist present. The standing walls require stabilization and the south,
west, and half of the north walls need rebuilding to at least a m high. Pea
gravel should be placed 15 to 20 cm thick in this room after stabilization and
rebuilding (ca. 5.5 cu m).
Porch Area
It is recommended that excavation not be attempted below the existing
ground surface and that the archeological fill be further protected from man
and nature by placing 15 cm of topsoil over the entire front (7.8 cu m) and a
cover crop planted to retard erosion.

McEachern and Ralph -- TP&W Excavations

159

Cistern
An open cistern immediately south of the house presents a special problem as it is very rich in artifacts and fauna and should not be disturbed.
Without disturbing the deposit, a locked grate should be placed over the
mouth to protect the public from accidental falls.
General
An archeologist must be present if any excavation is to be attempted
within 10 m of the house or mill. This presence is to insure the protection of
the known resources (cistern, piping, barn) and the unlocated resources
(slave quarters, slave cemetery, and dump). A parameter fence may be
necessary to protect the stabilized ruin from vandalism.

McKINNEY MILL
Architectural Summary
The complex consists of a dam, mill race, penstock, wheel house, and
tailrace. The superstructure, possibly two story, straddled the
penstock/wheel house pit while pilaster (piers) and wall lines indicate additional structures or retaining walls.
Excavation showed that water diverted from Onion Creek to the penstock
was channeled via a wooden fore bay which cut through a large crosswall into the wheel house where it turned a 4 ft diameter metal and wood horizontal turbine. The possibility of another turbine being present in the wheel
house needs further attention. Spent water exited south back to Onion
Creek by way of a tunnel (tailrace) beneath the mill.
Results of Parks and Wildlife excavation and mill artifact descriptions are
incorporated into the main body text.
Recommendations
It was intended originally to recommend that the wheel pit and tailrace
tunnel be completely excavated and an interpretive trail be placed through
the ruins. The flood on November 18, 1974 proved that maintenance could
be a costly and on-going expense to the department. Furthermore, when
elevations were taken, it became apparent that the water table is above the
bottom of the wheel pit and exit tailrace. Rechannelization of Onion Creek
would be necessary to keep the wheel pit from ponding. Recommendations
are for backfilling the wheel pit to an elevation of 146 m (to preserve the turbine, wood, and odd metal artifacts still in the ground but now exposed to
the elements), with clean sand or sandy-loam and further investigation be
left to a future date when expertise and funding are more readily available.

REFERENCES CITED
A. Baldwin Company. Ltd.
Catalogue of A. Baldwin and Co., Ltd. W. St. John Wolseley and A.
1891
Baldwin Co., New Orleans.
Durrenberger, E. Paul
Anderson’s Mill (41TV130): A Historic Site in Travis County, Texas.
1965
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 36:1-69.

160

Texas Archeological Society

Fontana, Bernard L. and J. Cameron Greenleaf
1962
Johnny Ward’s Ranch: A Study in Historic Archeology. The Kiva,
28 (1-2):1-115.
Fontana, Bernard
1965
The Tale of a Nail: On the Ethnological Interpretation of Historic Artifacts. The Florida Anthropologist, 18:3(2):85-102.
Godden, Geoffrey A.
Encyclopaedia of British Pottery
1964
Publishers, Inc., New York.

and Porcelain

Marks.

Crown

Hudson, William
ms.
McKinney Falls State Park: Lithic Resource Analysis. Manuscript on file
at Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Kegley, George
1972
McKinney Falls State Park: A Preliminary Workup of the Archeological
Resources. Letter on file at Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Austin.
Lardner, Dionysius
1832
A Treatise on the Origin, Progressive Development, and Present State
of the Manufacture of porcelain and Glass. The Cabinet Cyclopaedia,
16:1-159. Carey and Lea, Philadelphia.
Lee, Ruth Webb
1931
Early American Pressed Glass. Ferris, New York.
Nelson, Lee H.
1968

Nail Chronology as an Aid to Dating Old Buildings. American Association for State and Local History, Technical Leaflet, 48:1-112.

Powell, B. Bruce
1962

Classification of Ceramics from Historic American Sites. Newsletter of
the Southeastern Archeological Conference, 9(2):34-35.

Ralph, Ronald W. and Charles I. Loving
1973

McKinney Falls State Park: Archeological Testing. Field notes on file at
the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.

Revi, Albert C.
1964

American Pressed Glass and Figure Bottles. Thomas Nelson Inc.,
Nashville.

Simmons, Hardware Company
1884(?) Simmons Hardware Catalogue. St. Louis, Missouri.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1955
Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, 26:7-54.
1957
Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas
Journal of Science, 9(1):26-58.
Toulouse, Julian H.
1969
Fruit Jars. Thomas Nelson Inc., New York.
1971

Bottle Makers and Their Marks, Thomas Nelson Inc., New York.

McEachern and Ralph -- TP&W Excavations

161

Walker, John W.
1971
Excavation of the Arkansas Post Branch of the Bank of the State of
Arkansas. Southeast Archeological Center, Division of Archeology, National Park Service. U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of Archeology and Historic Preservation, Washington, D.C.

162

Texas Archeological Society

APPENDIX E

Chemical Analysis of Sediments

Elaine Burleigh

INTRODUCTION
The purpose of doing the chemical analysis of sediments was to test this
technique of analysis in the field with application to archeology. A barn and
stock pen were believed to have existed northeast of the existing house site.
Phosphate and pH determinations were done in an effort to locate and
define these areas. These analyses also were conducted on samples from
rockshelters submitted by the survey crew.
SAMPLING AND TESTING METHODS
The sampling methods used are as follows. The area of the barn and
stock pen were sampled on a grid. The surface was scraped clean with a
trowel about 18 in from the southeast corner stake in each unit. A handful of
sediment was scooped up with a trowel and placed in a labeled paper bag. A
second sample was taken at the 16-18 in level. The sediment was very dry
and hard. An auger was used to drill to the 16 in level and a coring tool was
used to sample the remaining 2 in. This material was bagged separately.
Samples brought in by the survey crew from rockshelter sites were taken at
various depths from surface to 90 cm.
The following testing methods were used. PH values were determined on
a Beckman model G battery operated pH meter, using a semimicro combination pH electrode (silver/silver chloride internals). The meter was standardized to a pH 7 buffer. Samples, prepared by adding two parts distilled
water to one part sediment, were stirred and allowed to settle twice. The
electrode was inserted into the liquid portion of the prepared sample and the
value read from the meter.
The method used to determine phosphates is described by Eidt (1973).
The samples analyzed were very dry, high in organic matter, and high in
carbonates. Samples were broken up inside their bags by pounding them
with a hammer on a flat surface. About half a teaspoon of pulverized sediment was placed in a small, flat, plastic container and broken up even finer
by mashing it with the handle of, a stainless steel teaspoon. A couple of
drops of distilled water were added and mixed until the sample was of a
mealy consistency. Approximately 50 mg of this mixture was placed on the
center of the filter paper and test solutions added.
The bubbles formed by the evolution of gas on addition of the acid solution usually carried the lightweight organic matter farther out from the center

Burleigh - Chemical Analysis

163

of the filter paper than was desirable. This situation tended to mask both the
color intensity and density of the color pattern. This problem was solved by
turning the filter paper over at the end of the 2 minute developing period
and reading the underside. The diameter of the circle of blue color was not
measured because a circle was rarely formed. The intensity of the blue color
and the percentage of completion of the circular pattern were chosen as the
indicators of phosphate concentration. After analyzing six to eight samples,
a value scale was established from zero phosphate to strong phosphate.

RESULTS
Very small differences were found in the pH values in the entire area
tested. Values for the 16-18 in level were a pH of 8.6 + 0.3 for the surface,
a pH of 8.3 + 0.2. PH analysis of sediments were not a useful tool for archeological site surveying at the McKinney Homestead. The values are subject to too many variables, such as uneven sediment composition, buffering
from limey sediments, and past and present vegetation.
The results of the phosphate tests agree with the results of the other tests
used on the site (Fig. 1). However, a much larger area should have been
sampled and tested to adequately define the different areas. Samples from
the rockshelter sites gave good results. Strong phosphate results were obtained on samples from the visible midden area and weak phosphate results
were obtained from below the visible midden area. The phosphate test
method could be used successfully as an aid to locating and defining sites in
the field.

REFERENCES CITED
Eidt, Robert C.
1973
A Rapid Chemical Field Test for Archaeological Site Survey. American
Antiquity, 38(2):206-210.

41TV289

Prospecting

Grid

Fig. 1 Results of phosphate testing at McKinney House.

164

Texas Archeological Society

APPENDIX F

Texas Archeologicai Society Field

School
Excavations at the McKinney

Homestead

INTRODUCTION
Rock rubble which filled the east room of the McKinney Homestead was
sketched in place before its removal away from the east wall (Fig. 1). A 1 m
trench was laid out along the east wall and four 1 m squares opened. The
goal was to find floor and sub-floor construction details, materials, and
associated artifacts. Joist pockets, floor construction, evidence of original
charred flooring (6 in shiplap, machine cut), two north south running beams
(possibly floor joists) possibly supported by rock piers, plaster rubble (some
painted white), pieces of tin roofing, and miscellaneous artifacts (such as
square nails, glass, ceramics) were recovered. A fine, thin, brown deposit
appearing on top of some of the burned flooring was burned linoleum. The
original flooring was not found. It either burned, deteriorated, or was ripped
up before the second floor was put in the room.
EAST ROOM
Excavation to the original ground surface under the floor of the east room
revealed limestone rubble probably left by stonemasons during house wall
building and before floor construction (Fig. 2). A few larger rocks were
placed on top of the ground, presumably to hold the floor joists. A sill running along the east wall (inside the house) extends into the interior of the
room along the east wall. However, it is not level enough to have been used
to hold the easternmost north-south joist.
The original use of this room is unknown. It has a large fireplace which
could have been used for cooking. However, significant artifacts were not
found to pin down the function of the room. Placement of a test pit on the
west side of the room near the fireplace might prove useful.
The original fireplace was made smaller by filling with stones on either
side; the opening was lowered, probably to make a more efficient source of
heat. Perhaps if the use of the room had changed to that of a bedroom, the
fireplace was made smaller.

l-loffrichter - TAS Excavations

165

41TV289
HOUSE

Units & Wall Fall

Fig. 1 Rock rubble and TAS excavation units at the McKinney Homestead.

41TV289

HOUSE

EAST 2OOM
N~Ih ProH*

Fig. 2 East room profile at the McKinney Homestead.

The lower east room perhaps was never plastered, except for the ceiling
between the beams. Small nails on the walls are about the right distance out
from the wall to hold the net backing for wallpaper; if the nails were in
plaster, they would be further out from the wall. Remains of plaster on the
walls in this east room are lacking. However, plaster is clearly visible on the
walls of the room above. Plaster found in the floor rubble could be ac-

166

Texas Archeological Society

counted for by having fallen from the upper room or possibly the ceiling.
Charlie Johns, when asked about the house, said he remembered a
beautiful beamed ceiling and no plaster in the east room.
Pieces of an old fashioned type of corrugated tin roofing were uncovered
in the northernmost square. The 1942 pictures (Figs. 16-18, Main Text)
show a corrugated tin roof, but it is not possible to tell what kind of tin.
When an old house is covered with a tin roof, the roofers put the tin right on
top of the old roof. If there were gutters on the house, the corrugated tin
roof would have covered them.
The north/south beams that were uncovered in the east room line up
with the location of the second story floor joist pockets. However, they are
probably not the original floor joists. They could be the second story joists
that have fallen or they could be the replaced joists for the first floor.
SOUTHEAST CORNER TRENCH
A trench I m wide was laid out at the southeast corner of the building to
look for evidence of other structures and significant artifacts. The foundation
at that corner consisted of a block placed on mortar, a building sill added,
and then courses of rock laid on top. An attempt was made to find the
builders’ trench outline (trench dug for the foundation blocks), but it was not
seen in the profiles. Medium sized rocks which must have been placed as
trench fill were found alongside the foundation blocks.
In the first square of this trench (E2), a lens of gravel or pebbles appears in
profile on the north, east, and part of the south walls. The adjacent square
where the gravel probably plays out was not excavated. The lens appears to
lack structural importance from the standpoint of the building itself.
Three other 1 x 1 m squares were excavated in the east trench.
Miscellaneous artifacts include: pressed glass, glass medicine bottles, metal
artifacts, and hand painted ceramics. Artifacts were very scarce below 13-15
cm. There was a very definite sediment change at this level. The upper level
was clay loam, very hard when dry. The lower level was less compact, a
more reddish brown, with some filled in wormholes.
Ash lenses appeared in Units E3, E4, and E5. Charlie Johns said they used to dump trash east of the building in a depression and then let it wash
away. That could be close to the building or 20-30 m away.
OTHER UNITS
A I x I square (El) was opened south of the building at the southeast corner, which would have been under the porch. Few artifacts were located but
the full corner of the foundation was exposed. Original plans were to run the
trench far enough out from the house to pick up part of the porch foundation, but this was not done. The remains of pilaster foundations were found
next to the house at ground level and perhaps represent some of the rocks
on which the front porch posts rested. The imprint of the stairs that served as
entry to the second floor porch and upstairs of the house was clearly visible
in the soft limestone wall.
A trench was placed north of the house extending out from the window; 8
I/2 I x 1 m squares were excavated. The house foundation was exposed in
the first 1/2 m north. The foundation under the window was much deeper

Hoffrichter -- TAS Excavations

167

than the foundation at the southeast corner of the house and a sill was lacking. The measurement from the top of the block in the first course of stones
to the bottom of the foundation is the same at both the southeast corner and
north wall.
The magnetometer and metal detector survey showed clearly that there
was nothing structural in line with the trench. However, had the trench been
placed a few meters to the east, the remains of a structure probably would
have been intersected.
Two squares were opened at the northwest corner of the building to
reveal the corner foundation and part of the west room. Flooring was not
found. However, a number of interesting artifacts were recovered which
seem to confirm that the room functioned as a smokehouse or kitchen. A
meat hook, three pronged fork, large animal bones, eggshells, ceramics,
glass, and a lock with a key were found inside the house; eggshells also were
found outside the house. These artifacts were different from those found in
other areas of the house. A larger sample would reveal more about the function of this room.

Texas Archeological Society

168

APPENDIX G

Cistern One Glass

Nancy BoJce

INTRODUCTION
The Cistern One collection of bottles and jars consists of 34 whole
specimens,

65 necks,

68 bases,

and a number of glass sherds. The

classification system is based on artifact function. It includes the following
categories: snuff bottles, wine and spirit bottles, beer bottles, soda/mineral
water bottles, panel and patent medicine bottles, pharmaceutical bottles,
and bottles with various or unknown uses. The jars were placed into two
categories: plain jars and lids; fruit jars and lids. After the remaining glass
sherds were sorted by color and excavation level, they were weighed.
Artifact descriptions were kept to a minimum. They read from the bottom
of the artifact upward to the rim. Rim types are illustrated (Fig. 1) rather than
described. Measurements refer to the overall height of the artifact, the width
if it is square or rectangular (measured at the greatest distance across the
base), the diameter if it is round; also given is the inside diameter of the
mouth.

ARTIFACTS
BOTTLES
Snuff Bottles
GARRETT SNUFF BOTTLES
Number of specimens: 15 (3 complete bottles, 6 rims, and 6 bases representing at least
9 bottles)
Provenience: 300(4), 301, 302(7), 303(2), 304
Description: Amber colored, square base, straight sides curving inward to the rim, no
neck, rim type S. Measurements: 99 mm high, 60 mm wide, 24.5 mm inside diameter
of mouth (Fig. 2).
Discussion: Two, three, or four dots in various patterns occur on the bases of these bottles.
"These dots do not indicate the strength of the contents but are only maker’s marks of
piece work bottle blowers" (Vaughan, 1971). The use of snuff appears to have been a
commonly accepted practice. "In the early 30s and later the use of snuff was quite
general. It was not bad form to indulge in it. Snuff was sold in grocery stores and by
druggists as well as at many taverns" (Van Rensselaer, 1926:36). These bottles could
have been the property of Charlie Johns’ mother as she was a known snuff user.
Wine and Spirits Bottles
OLIVE GREEN WINE BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 302(2)
Description: Circular base with a 35 mm deep concave kick up bottom, sides tapering
outward to the shoulder, neck tapering inward to rim type W. Measurements: 253 mm

Boice -- Cistern One Glass

169

high, 71 mm diameter, 17 mm inside diameter of mouth (Fig. 3).
Discussion: Kick up bottoms are formed when a pointed rod pushes the semifluid glass
center upward in the base. "Late 19th century bottle bottoms have low kick-ups or
none at all except for champagnes or other spirits that require strong resistance
against internal pressure to prevent breakage" (Freeman, 1964:491).
DARK GREEN WINE BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 23 (two bottles)
Provenience: 302(14), 303(17), 304(2)
Description: Circular base with a concave bottom and sides tapering inward to rim type T.
Measurements: 244 mm high, 695 mm diameter, 16 mm inside diameter of mouth
(Fig. 4a).
LIGHT GREEN WINE BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Circular base, sides tapering outward to the shoulder, neck tapering inward
to rim type U. Measurements: 293 mm high, 30 mm diameter, 16 mm inside diameter
of mouth (Fig. 4b).
WINE BOTTLE NECKS
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: 302(3)
Description: All have long, slender, tapering necks. Two are olive green with rim type T;
13 mm inside diameter of mouth. One is dark amber with rim type W; 13 mm inside
diameter of mouth.
WINE BOTTLE BASE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Small olive green sherd shows circular base and convex bottom with
straight sides.
WHISKEY BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Amber colored, oblong base, straight sides curving out slightly from the base,
curved shoulders, short tapering neck, rim type X. Measurements: 173 mm high, 75
mm wide, 13 mm inside diameter of mouth. Front embossed "FEDERAL LAW FORBIDS SALE" and "HALF PINT." Bottom embossed "D 733 12 73 BALL 44" (Fig. 5).
Discussion: Manufactured by Ball Bros. Co. 1888-1969 (Toulouse, 1971: 66-67).
ROCHESTER DUFFY MALT WHISKEY BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 3 (2 necks, I bottom sherd)
Provenience: 302, 303(2)
Description: Amber colored, circular base, straight sides, curved shoulders, short neck,
rim type N. Estimated measurements: 260 mm high, 76 mm diameter, 13 mm inside
diameter of mouth. Front embossed "THE DUFFY MALT WHISKEY COMPANY
ROCHESTER N.Y. USA," with a large elaborated "D" and "C." Bottom sherd embossed "Aug. 24" (Fig. 6).
Discussion: An identical Duffy bottle found at the Custer Road Dump site (Michigan)
has the same patent date, Aug. 24, and also has the date "1886" embossed on the
bottom (Brose and Rupp, 1967:90).
SPIRIT BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 2 (1 neck, 1 base)
Provenience: 302, 303
Description: Amber colored, circular base, sides tapering outward to curved shoulders,
tapering neck, rim type M. Measurements: 261.5 mm high (estimated), 78.5 mm
diameter, 20 mm inside diameter of mouth. Neck and base are assumed to be from the
same bottle (Fig. 7).
HALF PINT SPIRIT FLASK
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303

Texas Archeological Society

170

F

E

I

G

J

i[

K

N

L

ot

C m

3

...... I

BOTTLE NECK TYPES
Fig.

1

Illustrated rim types.

Description: Aquamarine, flattened hexagonal base, slender horseshoe shape, sides
tapering outward to curved shoulders, rim type M. Measurements: 148.5 mm high,
60 mm wide, 10 mm inside diameter of mouth (Fig. 8).
Beer Bottles
MODERN NO-DEPOSIT, NO-RETURN QUART BEER BOTTLES
Number of specimens: 5 (3 necks, 2 bases)
Provenience: 300(5)
Description: Amber colored, circular base, sides not present, curved shoulders, tapering
neck, rim type V. Measurements: 80 mm diameter, 19 mm inside diameter of mouth.
Bottoms embossed: "15," circle with an ’T’ inside, "5", "GB-1812" (Fig. 9).
Discussion: Manufactured by Owens Illinois, Inc. in 1958 or 1968 (Toulouse, 1971:
403-406).

Boice -- Cistern One Glass

T

171

~

u

Y
2

CC

BE

DD

cm
EE

3
I

BOTTLE NECK TYPES

Fig. 1 (con’d) Illustrated rim types.
12 OZ. BEER BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 2 (I neck, I base)
Provenience: 302, 303
Description: Amber colored, circular base, straight sides tapering slightly outward to
curved shoulders, tapering neck, rim type U. Measurements: 242 high (estimated),
65 mm diameter, 12 mm inside diameter of mouth. Bottom embossed "1425 8"
(Fig. 10).
BEER BOTTLE NECK
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: 303
Description: Amber colored, rim type U. Measurements: 12 mm inside diameter of
mouth.

1 72

Texas Archeological Society

12 OZ. BEER BOTTLE BASE
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: 301(2), 303, 304
Description: Circular bases, straight sides tapering slightly outward, curved shoulders.
Specimen 301: Amber; 64 mm diameter; embossed "A 28" and "N" inside a square
(Fig. 11a). Specimen 301: Light green; 64 mm diameter; assumed to be a beer bottle.
Specimen: 303: Amber; 64 mm diameter; embossed "1413 23." Specimen 304:
Amber; 64 mm diameter; embossed "R & Co K" (Fig. 11b).
Discussion: Manufacturer for specimen 304 unknown, but dated 1880-1900. It is thought
that this bottle was made with a post mold and hand finished for cork stoppers; possibly import beer (Toulouse, 1971:439). Specimen 301 (embossed) was manufactured
by Obear-Nester Glass Co. from 1915 to present (Toulouse, 1971:373-375).
Soda/Mineral Water Bottles
LIGHT GREEN SODA/MINERAL WATER BOTTLE
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: 302
Description: Round base, sides straight to the shoulder, neck tapering slightly, rim type
V. Measurements: 230 mm high, 63.5 mm diameter, 16 mm inside diameter of mouth.
Bottom embossed "WF&SMIL 17" (Fig. 12).
Discussion: Manufactured by William Franzen & Son, 1900-1929 (Toulouse, 1971:536).
CLEAR SODA/MINERAL WATER BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 2 (1 neck, I base)
Provenience: 300, 301
Description: Circular base, straight sides, tapering neck, rim type U, white swirl design.
Measurements: undetermined height, 70 mm diameter, 12 mm inside diameter of
mouth. Bottom embossed "A T."
SODA/MINERAL WATER BOTTLE NECK
Number of specimens: 5
Provenience: 302(4), 303
Description: Light green, tapered necks, rim type U. Measurements: 17 mm inside
diameter of mouth. One specimen from 302 has a metal crown cap still attached.
SODA/MINERAL WATER BOTTLE BASE
Number of specimens: 12
Provenience: 300, 302(7), 303(3), 304
Description: Round bases, sides taper outward to the shoulders (Table 1, Figs. 13, 14).

0

J
Fig. 2 Garret Snuff bottles’.

Boice -- Cistern One Glass

Fig. 3 Olive green Wine bottle.

Fig. 4 Wine bottles: a) dark green; b) light green.

Fig. 5 Whiskey bottle.

173

Texas Archeological Society

174

i

5

om

!

/
/

\
\

J
J

Fig. 6 Rochester Dully Malt Whiskey bottle.

0
I

cm

Fig. 7 Spirit bottle.

Boice -- Cistern One Glass

l
Fig. 8 Half pint Spirit flask.

0
!

cm

Fig. 9 Modern No-Deposit, No-Return Beer bottle base.

5
!

175

176

Texas Archeological Society

o

I

m

3

0

crn

3I

b
Fig. 10 12 oz Beer bottle.

Fig. 11 Beer bottle bases: a) Specimen
301; b) Specimen 304.

J
Boice - Cistern One Glass

f°

cm

3

1

Fig. I2 Soda/Mineral water bottle.

177

178

Texas Archeological Society

0
L

¢m

. . . .I

8

0
L_

¢m

3

C
o

cm

3
I

b
Fig. 13 Soda/Mineral water bottles: a) Specimen 302, light green; b) Specimen 303,
aquamarine; c) Specimen 304, light green.

Boice - Cistern One Glass

179

a

o
t

¯
o
I

0
i

/
cm

om

,!

3
i

Cm

5
!

i

" :’/ ....... \".+...:::..’
’.

::

+"

i~

¯ +

~+++..

cm

+t

Fig. 14 Soda/Mineral water bottles: a) Specimen 302, light purple; b) Specimen
300, light green; c) Saxlehners Bitterquelle; d) Specimen 302, light green.

180

Texas Archeological Society

SAXLEHNERS BITTERQUELLE MINERAL WATER BOTTLE BOTTOM
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Olive green, circular base with a concave bottom, sides tapering slightly outward. Glass has a roughened outer surface. Measurements: 76 mm diameter. Bottom
embossed "SAXLEHINERS BITTERQUELLE" and "HUNYADI JANOS" (Fig. 14c).
Discussion: Manufactured by Andreas Saxlehner 1863-1900. This bottle held "water
with a gentle laxative property, Bitterquelle meaning Bitter Spring" (Toulouse,
1971:257).
Panel and Patent Medicine Bottles
PANEL BOTTLE A
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Clear, rectangular base with beveled corners, beveled basal edge. Front,
sides, and rear inset panels, straight sides, tapering neck, rim type F with a wire 33 mm
down the neck. Measurements: 163 mm high, 43 mm wide, 11 mm inside diameter of
mouth. Bottom embossed with a "T" inside an oval (Fig. 15a).
PANEL BOTTLE B
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Clear, rectangular base with slightly beveled corners,
inset panels, straight sides, convex shoulders, tapering neck,
ments: 141 mm high, 49.5 mm wide, 13 mm inside diameter
bossed "5," and an "N" inside a square (Fig. 15b).
Discussion: Manufactured by Obear-Nester Glass Co. from 1915

beveled basal edge, no
rim type Y. Measureof mouth. Bottom emto present. The square

with an "N" inside was put into use when machine operations began (Toulouse,
1971:373-375).
WATKINS PANEL BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 2 (1 complete, 1 neck)
Provenience: 300, 301
Description: Clear, rectangular base with beveled corners, beveled basal edge, front inset panels, straight sides, tapering neck, rim type B. Measurements: 209 mm high,
72 mm wide, 15 mm inside diameter of mouth. Front panel embossed "WATKINS
TRIAL MARK"; bottom embossed "5" and a "34" inside a diamond (Fig. 16).
PFEIFFER CHEMICAL CO. PANEL BOTTLE
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: 303
Description: Aquamarine, rectangular base with beveled corners, beveled basal edge,
front and side inset panels, sides tapering slightly inward, convex shoulder, tapering
neck, rim type B. Measurements: 153 mm high, 52 mm wide, 12 mm inside diameter
of mouth. Front embossed "PFEIFFER CHEMICAL CO. NEW YORK, ST. LOUIS."
Bottom embossed "755" inside a diamond (Fig. 17a).
MORLEY BROTHERS DRUGGISTS PANEL BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 3 (1 neck sherd, 2 body sherds)
Provenience: 302, 303(2)
Description: Amber, base and inset panels missing, convex shoulders, straight neck,
rim type M, hand finished. Measurements: 166 mm high (estimated), 63 mm wide
(estimated), 15 mm inside diameter of mouth. Front embossed "MORLEY BROS.
DRUGGISTS" and a picture of a mortar and pestle (Fig. 17b).
PANEL BOTTLE NECKS
Number of specimens: 4
Provenience: 302(3), 303
Description: Convex shoulders and tapering necks (Table 2).
PANEL BOTTLE BASES
Number of specimens: 5
Provenience: 301,302(2), 303(2)
Description: Rectangular bases, beveled corners, beveled basal edges, straight sides,
front, side, and rear inset panels (Table 3; Fig. 18).

Boice - Cistern

One Glass

181

VOLCANIC OIL LINIMENT BOTI’LE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
~
Description: Light green, square base, beveled corners, straight sides, slanted shoulders,
straight neck, rim type B. Measurements: 16 mm high, 34 mm wide, 12 mm inside
diameter of mouth; embossed (each word to a side) "DR. J.H. McLEAN’S/VOLCANIC/OIL/LINIMENT"; bottom embossed "7" and a diamond with "I" inside
(Fig. 19a).
Discussion: Manufactured by Illinois Glass Co. 1916-1929 (Toulouse, 1971:264).
KRESS AND OWENS BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Clear, oval base, straight sides, rounded shoulders, straight neck, rim type
H. Measurements: 101 mm high, 46 mm wide, 9 mm inside diameter of mouth.
Shoulder embossed "KRESS & OWENS NEW YORK CLYCOTHYMOUNE’;
bottom embossed "MBW USA" (Fig. 19b).
Discussion: This bottle is assumed to be a patent medicine bottle manufactured by Millville Bottle Works 1903-1930 (Toulouse, 1971:349).
BROMO-SELTZER BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 304
Description: Cobalt blue, circular base, straight sides, curved shoulders, tapering neck,
rim type C. Measurements: 103 mm high, 43 mm (estimated) diameter, undetermined diameter of mouth. Front embossed "BROMO-SELTZER EMERSON DRUG
CO BALTIM(ORE?); bottom embossed "14" (Fig. 20a).
ELY’S CREAM BALM BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Amber, rectangular base, beveled basal edge, straight sides, slanting
shoulders, neck widens, rim type AA. Measurements: 65 mm long, 32 mm wide
(estimated), undetermined diameter of mouth. Front embossed "ELY’S CREA
¯ . . BALM" (Fig. 20b).
Discussion: An ad for Ely’s Cream Balm appeared in the Ithaca Daily Journal on
January 3, 1880, as a remedy for head colds. Manufactured by Ely Pros, Owego,
New York (Baldwin, 1973:166).

Pharmaceutical Bottles
USONA PHARMACEUTICAL BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Light green, oval base, straight on back side, beveled basal edge, straight
sides, concave shoulder, tapering neck, rim type G. Measurements: 117.5 mm high,
43 mm wide, 9 mm inside diameter of mouth. Back embossed with calibrations in cubic
centimeters, fluid ounces, and "3 ii"; bottom embossed "USONA".
BLUE RIBBON PHARMACEUTICAL BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Clear, oval base, straight on back side, beveled basal edge, straight sides,
concave shoulder, tapering neck, rim type A. Measurements: 134 mm high, 146 mm
wide, 10 mm inside diameter of mouth. Front embossed "QUALITY PURITY"; back
embossed with calibrations in cubic centimeters, fluid ounces, and "3 ii"; bottom embossed "BLUE RIBBON" (Fig. 21a).
Discussion: Manufactured by Standard Glass Co. ca. 1920-1930 (Toulouse, 1971:87).
PHARMACEUTICAL BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Clear, oval base, straight on back side with beveled corners, beveled basal
edge, straight sides, concave shoulders, tapering neck, rim type E. Measurements:
151 mm high, 49 mm wide, 13 mm inside diameter of mouth. Back embossed with

Texas Archeological Society

182

Table 1
Soda/Mineral Water Bottle Bases from Cistern One
9

Provenience

Color

Inside
Diameter
of Mouth
(ram)

300

Light green

62

302

Light green

undetermined

302
302
302
302
302

Aquamarine
Light green
Light green
Light green
Light green

62
66
66
undetermined
65.5

302

Light purple

58

303
303

Light green
Aquamarine

undetermined
64

303

Light green

64

304

Light green

64

Remarks ¯
embossed "AB J 1 (Fig. 14b);
manufactured by Adolphus
Busch Glass Manufacturing
Co. 1904-1907 (Toulouse,
1971:26).
embossed "WF & S," circle
with "18" inside.
embossed "A. B. Co. B 24."
embossed "14 5 4."
embossed triangle.
front embossed "AUSTI(N) TEXAS";
bottom embossed, double triangles
(Figs. 13a, 14d).
front embossed "REGISTERED
AUSTIN BOTTLING WORKS
AUSTIN"; bottom embossed,
double triangles (Fig. 14a).
embossed "W."
embossed "A.B.G.M.CO. J 14"
(Fig. 13b). Manufactured by
Adolphus Busch Glass Manufacturing Co. 1886-1928
(Toulouse, 1971:26).
embossed "W F & S 13 MIL."
Manufactured by William
Franzen & Son 1900-1929
(Toulouse, 1971:536).
embossed "SB & G CO 10"
(Fig. 13c). Manufactured
by Streator Bottle and
Glass Co. 1881-1905
(Toulouse, 1971:461).

calibrations in cubic centimeters, fluid ounces, and "3 ii" (Fig. 21b).
PHARMACEUTICAL BOTTLE BASES
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 300, 302
Description: Clear, oval bases, straight on back side with beveled corners, beveled basal
edge, straight sides, concave shoulders. Specimen 300 is 53 mm wide; bottom embossed "ASEPTIC." Specimen 302 is 40 mm wide.
Miscellaneous Bottles and Sherds
PAPOOSE BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 300, 302
Description: Clear, circular base, sides tapering outward from base, dipping inward,
tapering outward to the shoulders, curved shoulders, tapering neck, rim type Z. Measurements: 169 mm high, 43 mm diameter, 9 mm inside diameter of mouth. Front
embossed "PA-POOSE A.Z. ZATAPAIN & SONS INC NEW ORLEANS USA";
bottom embossed "A.Z. ZATAPAIN & SONS INC NEW ORLEANS USA DESIGN
PAT" (Fig. 22a).

Boice - Cistern One Glass

183

Table 2
Panel Bottle Necks from Cistern One

Specimen

Color

Rim Type

Inside Diameter
Of Mouth
(mm)

302
302
302
303

Clear
Clear
Purple
Purple

B
C
D
D

11
12
11
12

Table 3
Panel Bottle Bases from Cistern One

Specimen

Color

301

Clear

302
302
303
303

Clear
Clear
Amber
Aquamarine

Inside Diameter
Of Mouth/Remarks
39 mm wide; front embossed "PHI... ST.
JOS ASSURES . . ."; bottom embossed
"12" and a diamond with a half
circles on top and bottom and
an ’T’ in the center (Fig. 18).
62 mm wide
43 mm wide
undetermine width
undetermined width; front embossed
"... E PLAINS’S REMEDY", on side
"AIN MED CO."

OBLONG BASE BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Clear, oblong base, straight sides, rounded shoulders, short thick neck,
undetermined rim with metal screw cap attached. Measurements: 202 mm high, 83
mm wide, undetermined inside diameter of mouth. Bottom embossed "MADE IN
USA 2M" (Fig. 22b).
PRICE-BOOKER BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Light green, planoconvex base, three straight sides, curved back side,
beveled basal edge, straight sides, curved shoulders, thick neck, rim type R. Measurements: 230.5 mm high, 72 mm wide, 31 mm inside diameter of mouth. Front panel
embossed "PRICE-BOOKER MFG CO. HOUSTON, TEX."; bottom embossed "I"
inside a diamond (Fig. 23).
Discussion: Manufactured by Illinois Glass Co. 1916-1929 (Toulouse, 1971: 264).
CIRCULAR BASED BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Clear, circular base, straight sides, rounded shoulders, straight neck, rim
type J. Measurements: 142 mm high, 49 mm wide, 9 mm inside diameter of mouth
(Fig. 24).
EMBALMERS FLUID BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Purple, square base with rounded corners, straight sides, curved shoulders,
tapering neck, rim type U. Measurements: 202 mm high, 62 mm wide, 13 mm inside

184

Texas Archeological Society

, ,,,,,

0
0
I

cm

3
!

I

cm

;-: ...;;

b
8
Fig. 15 Panel bottles: a) Specimen 300; b) Specimen 301.

5
,I

Boioe - Cistern One Glass

Fig. 16 Watkins Panel bottle.

185

Texas Archeological Society

186

diameter of mouth. Front embossed with calibrations in fluid ounces and "THE EMBALMERS SUPPLY CO., WEST PORT, CONN."; bottom embossed "C" (Fig. 25).
Discussion: Dated to ca¯ 1915 according to Charlie Johns.
FLUID BOTTLE A
Number of specimens: I
Provenience: 300

’,

3

I

:"::"

~

II

,

,
’

"""
""’~’~’"
-,\’- ..........

".’2-

,’?
A:--.-.-.-::.°!.

,

!
!

0

om

I

,{

*.

.... :;.:::.o..

¯ °

.

b

°.o

a
Fig. 17 Panel bottles: a) Pfeiffer Chemical Co.; b) Morley Brothers Druggists.

Boice - Cistern One Glass

187

Description: Aquamarine, circular base, straight sides, slightly curved shoulders, straight
wide neck, rim type I. Measurements: 91 mm high, 43 mm wide, 24 mm inside diameter of mouth. Neck embossed "2 1/2 FLUID OZ."; bottom embossed "2" (Fig. 26).
FLUID BOTTLE B
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 300, 301
Description: Clear, circular bases, straight sides, rounded shoulders, thick short necks, rim
type I. Measurements: 144 mm high, 62 mm wide, 18 mm inside diameter of mouth.
Shoulder embossed "8 FLUID OZ" (Fig. 27). Bottle from 301 has "5" embossed on
bottom.
FLUID BOTTLE C
Number of specimens: 3 (3 body sherds)
Provenience: 301(3)
Description: Clear, oblong base indented in front and back, sides tapering, rounded
shoulders, undetermined rim. Measurements: 125 mm wide (estimated). Front, sides,
and back embossed with a straight line pattern; bottom embossed with large "O" with
diamond "7 1 4."
Discussion: Manufactured by Owens Illinois Glass Co. 1929-1954 (Toulouse,
1971:403)~
BIXBY BOTTLE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 304
Description: Aquamarine, square base with rounded corners, sides taper outward,
semicircular shoulders, thick short neck, rim type C. Measurements: 100 mm high,
60 mm wide, 20 mm inside diameter of mouth. Two sides embossed "PATENTED
MCH 6 83"; bottom embossed "BIXBY 8 6" (Fig. 28).
MISCELLANEOUS BOTTLE NECKS
Number of specimens: 28
Provenience: 301(5), 302(16), 303(4), 304(3)
Description: Table 4.
MISCELLANEOUS BOTTLE BASES
Number of specimens: 24
Provenience: 300, 301(2), 302(16), 303(3), 304(2)
Description: Table 5.
MISCELLANEOUS EMBOSSED BOTTLE BODY SHERDS
Number of specimens: 15
Provenience: 301(5), 302(10)
Description: Table 6.

°,~
"°~’ .......................... i

""

"

~,~,,..:~

Ja

...

se

~:

. ¯. -.

. " .: ..

Oa

Fig. 18 Panel bottle base and front.

188

Texas Archeological Society

Table 4
Miscellaneous Bottle Necks from Cistern One

Provenience

Color

Rim
Type

Inside
Diameter
of Mouth
(ram)

301
301
301
301
301
302
302

clear
light green
clear
clear
light green
light green
clear

M
B
H
F
L
U
M

13
11
9
11
40
15
21

302
302
302

light purple
clear
clear

O
G
F

16
12
10

302
302
302
302

clear
clear
clear
clear

D
B
F
L

15
15
12
25

302
302
302
302

light purple
aquamarine
light green
clear

C
F
P
L

12
19
22
24

302

clear

L

23

302

light purple

L

24

302
303
303
303
303
304
304
304

amber
clear
clear
clear
light purple
aquamarine
clear
clear

D
M
G
N
M
F
F
F

13
29
9
12
13
31
9
30

Remarks

line design around
neck at shoulder

has wire rim 23 mm
down neck

has band below rim
approximate
measurement

approximate
measurement
approximate
measurement
approximate
measurement

has wire rim 30
mm clown neck

Jars And Lids
JARS
Forbes Brothers Jar
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Clear, octagonal base, eight panel sides tapering inward, semicircular
shoulder with five bands, rim of a continuous screw thread for a screw cap. Measurements: 102 mm high, 63 mm wide, 40 mm inside diameter of mouth. Bottom
embossed "FORBES BROS. ST. LOUIS I" (Fig. 29).
Round Base Jar
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Clear, round base with wide curved band, straight sides of 14 panels,
wide band rim with screw threads on inside of rim. Measurements: 184 mm long,
62 mm wide, 51 mm inside diameter of mouth. Bottom embossed "10" (Fig. 30a).

Boice -- Cistern One Glass

189

Table 5
Miscellaneous Bottle Bases from Cistern One
Provenience

Color

Base
Shape

Dimension

Embossed

300
301
301
302
302

clear
clear
clear
light green
clear

oblong
oblong
round
round
round

97 mm wide
43.5 mm wide
81 mm wide
55 mm wide
72 mm diameter

302
302
302
302

clear
clear
clear
clear

round
round
rectangular
concave/
rectangular

302

clear

rectangular

302
302

clear
dark green

circular
circular

302

light green

circular

302

purple

rectangular

302

clear

rectangular

302

light green

rectangular

302

light green

rectangular

302

clear

rectangular

302

clear

circular

303
303

light green
clear

oval
oval

303
304

purple
light green

circular
circular

304

aquamarine circular

71 mm diameter
73 mm diameter oval design
62 mm wide
"g" and diamond with "I" inside;
undetermined
manufactured by lllinois Glass
width
Co. 1916-1929 (Toulouse, 1971:264)
undetermined
"11"
width
"806 03"
40 mm wide
inset panel on side
undetermined
width
"MIL"
undetermined
width
undetermined
width
undetermined
width
undetermined
width
undetermined
width
undetermined
"B" & "H" with "A" inside,
width
"5662"; manufactured
by Hazel Atlas Glass
Co. 1902-64 (Toulouse,
1971:239)
"CAPPA CITY.ONE FULL
88 mm wide
QUART M"
"E 510 A"
64 mm wide
"L.C. & R. CO."
undetermined
width
32 mm diameter
"MIL M"
undetermined
diameter
undetermined
diameter

"DES PAT 3 3R APPLIED FOR"
"7 2 07 8"
"B"
squarish symbol with "J"
inside "4424 9";
manufactured by Knox
Glass Bottle Co.
1932-53 (Toulouse, 1971:271)

Milk Glass Jar
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: White, square base with rounded basal edge, two rounded bands, straight
sides, two rounded bands at upper edge, continuous screw thread for a screw cap.
Measurements: 81 mm long, 61 mm wide, 49.5 mm inside diameter of mouth
(Fig. 30b).

190

Texas Archeological Society

Table 6
Miscellaneous Embossed Bottle Body Sherds
Provenience
301
301
301
301
301
302
302
302
302
302
302
302
302
302
302

Color
clear
clear
green
aquamarine
aquamarine
aquamarine
aquamarine
green
aquamarine
green
green
green
aquamarine
clear
light purple

Embossed (Incomplete)
"AL MARK PA"
"NAME"
"AU"
"LA .... SH"
"S"
"SE"
"A"
"MONTICELLO"
"A .... H"
"S"
"E"
"ED"
"ON"
"NC"
"STAU CONG A. MILL AUSTIN
TE(XAS?)"

Vaseline Jar
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 302, 303
Description: Clear, round base, rounded basal band, straight sides, rounded shoulders,
round band, rim is a continuous screw thread for screw cap. Measurements: 61 mm
high, 45 mm wide, 29 mm inside diameter of mouth. Front embossed "TRADE
MARK VASELINE CHESEBROUGH NEW YORK," bottom embossed "25"
(Fig. 30c).
Small Round Base Jar
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Clear, round base, rounded basal band, straight sides, rounded shoulders;
rim is a straight band for snap-on cap. Measurements: 41 mm high, 49.5 mm wide,
39 mm inside diameter of mouth. Bottom embossed "2," circle with an "I" inside,
"7 27."
Discussion: Manufactured by Owens Illinois Inc.; maker’s mark used since 1954 (Toulouse, 1971:403).
Miscellaneous Jar Necks
Number of specimens: 7
Provenience: 301, 302(6)
Description: Rim sherds (Table 7).
Jar Base
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: 302(3)
Description: Clear, circular bases. One specimen has a 45, mm diameter. Another
has a 46 mm diameter; embossed "NO 7 PAT INU DEC 22 19 JULY 17 19 M."
The third has an undetermined diameter.
JAR LID
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Milk glass white, fiat circular lid, straight inset sides fitting inside the jar.
Measurements: 53 mm diameter. Top embossed "ARTESIA CREAM WACO
TEXAS" (Fig. 31a).
Fruit Jars And Lids
FRUIT JARS

Boice - Cistern One Glass

191

Atlas Fruit Jar
Number of specimens: 2
Provenience: 300, 302
Description: Aquamarine, circular base, straight sides, rounded shoulders, short wide
neck, rim missing. Measurements: 101 mm diameter (estimated). Front embossed:
"ATLA’; bottom embossed "ATLAS TRADE MARK REG EZ SEAL" (Fig. 31b).
Discussion: Manufactured by Atlas Glass Co. 1896-1964 (Toulouse, 1969:2).
Ball Fruit Jar
Number of specimens: 8
Provenience: 302(5), 303(3)
Description: Aquamarine, base missing, straight neck; rim is two continuous threads.
Measurements: 93 mm diameter, 62 mm inside diameter of mouth (Fig. 32).
Kerr Fruit Jar
Number of specimens: 4 (1 base, 3 body sherds)
Provenience: 300(4)

...... .

.

’5~::.
o
g :~:.

f

cm

.~;~..

"? ° .~

Fig. 19 Patent medicine bottles: a) Volcanic Oil liniment; b) Kress and Owens.

3

192

Texas Archeological Society

Description: Clear, circular base, straight sides. Measurements: 110 mm diameter.
Front embossed "KERR" in script; bottom embossed "KERR GLASS MFG CO
SAND SPRINGS OKLA 6 AT U 3 915".
Discussion: Manufactured by Kerr Glass Manufacturing Co. 1912-1946 (Toulouse,
1969:306).
Fruit Jar Necks
Number of specimens: 6
Provenience: 300(2), 301(3), 302
Description: Table 8.

7
!

/
0

\

I

0
I

crn

,

t
I
I
t
|
I
I
I
|

3
I

I
I

0
I

a

cm

b

Fig. 20 Patent medicine bottles: a) Bromo-Seltzer; b) Ely’s Cream balm.

3
i

Boice - Cistern One Glass

193

Table 7
Miscellaneous Jar Necks from Cistern One

Provenience

Inside
Diameter
of Mouth
(ram)

Color

301

clear

undetermined

302

clear

undetermined

302

clear

undetermined

302

clear

300

302

purple

24

302

milk glass
white
aquamarine

undetermined

302

undetermined

Remarks
Possibly threaded
for a screw-on cap.
Two wide bands, top
one stepped inward.
Rounded band possibly
threaded for a screw-on
cap.
Rounded band at bottom
of neck, continuous
threads for a screw-on
cap.
Rounded shoulders;
continuous threads
for a screw-on cap.
Rounded band; continuous
thread for screw-on cap.
Straight neck; indented;
flat banded lip.

Table 8
Fruit Jar Necks from Cistern One

Provenience

Inside
Diameter
of Mouth
(mm)

Color

Remarks

300

clear

undetermined

Circular continuous

300

clear

52

Rounded shoulders;
wide band; continuous
threads.

301
301

clear
clear

undetermined
undetermined

One wide band.

301

clear

53

302

aquamarine

60

threads.

One wide band;
continuous thread.
One wide band;
continuous thread.
One wide band,
continuous thread.

Embossed Fruit Jar Sherds
Number of specimens: 3
Provenience: 300, 301,302
Description: Specimen 300 is clear; body sherd; embossed "AL." Specimen 301 is
aquamarine; body sherd; embossed "S HOULDER SON." Specimen 302 is clear;
body sherd; embossed "AS."
FRUIT JAR LIDS
Fruit Jar Lid A
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Milk glass white, fiat, circular. Measurements: 65 mm diameter. Top
embossed "GENUINE BOYD CAP FOR MASON JARS" (Fig. 33).

194

Texas Archeological Society

Fruit Jar Lid B
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Gray, metal color rim sherd; Mason zinc cap.

t

0
I

)

cm

b

a
Fig. 21 Pharmaceutical bottles: a) Blue Ribbon; b) Specimen 302.

3

Boice -- Cistern One Glass

Ei il

o

Fig. 22 Miscellaneous bottles: a) Papoose; b) oblong base.

5

195

196

Texas Archeological Society

/

~!~ ~i~,
.o

!.}-==

#

!s. .........

!.~ ..........
....

i.22!..~.J

...-’-x..f3

i~25=n

Fig. 23 Price-Booker bottle.

Boice - Cistern One Glass

197

LIGHTENING CLOSURE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: One piece of metal wire, curved with fittings for side of fruit jars. Measurements: 92 mm curved width.
Discussion: A lightening closure consists of loop neck tie wires and a bail piece which
fits over the top of the glass lid (Toulouse, 1969:466).
MISCELLANEOUS GLASS BOTTLE AND JAR SHERDS
Weight: Table 9.
Provenience: Table 9.
Description: Glass sherds in six colors weighing 7.43 kg.

PRESSED GLASS
Pressed glass is defined as glass with sharply defined, impressed patterns
on the exterior and a smooth interior surface (Lorrain, 1968:38). It is made
by pressing hot glass into piece molds. The pressing machine was patented
in 1827; however, it was not until the 1940’s that pressed glass was produced in large quantities (Lorrain, 1968:39). It commonly was found in most
households, but "was never what you would call an aristocratic product with
a pedigree worth preserving" (Lee, 1946:vii).
Whole specimens were not recovered from the excavations. Specimens
are fire polished with a smooth finish. Some colored glass is present, but
none of the patterns can be identified. This situation indicates a late date,
approximately 1900-1930. Classification is based on vessel form. Patterns
are very briefly described as none are well known. There are four vessel
forms represented: bowls, bowl lids, goblets, and stems.

Bowls
SHALLOW BOWL
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Clear, shallow bowl with flattened rim, 37 mm high. Pattern consists of "S"
curves in a circular pattern on the base, with circles on the rim.
SMALL BOWL
Number of specimens: 8 (one bowl)
Provenience: 302(3), 303(5)
Description: Clear, shallow, small dish with scalloped rim; 42 mm high, 103 mm
diameter. Pattern consists of geometric interlocking circles (Fig. 34).

Fig. 24 Fluid bottle.

198

Texas Archeological Society

.. ¯.+*. ....

¯;;,+

o

~-¯¯¯z:’¯

~ ,- ...... ~ ".~;~:

¯;

~, :........; !..’...

¯

: £.,.,’~:!
~

......

i~":.~

% ~.." o= .::.’=. ~.:.:-!~

......

¯ 2::;

ii i

"iZ. c:r:" ~:"
~ ~?~

"- ~. .--’:-;;
~-..’L~-~

~ ;.::.:...o.:

Fig.

25

Circular based bottle.

Boice -- Cistern One Glass

’h
J

\
:v"

0
.!

cm

199

~j" ..-’a..~.i..o!~t::~jj

3
!

._./
0
,l
Fig. 26 Embalmers Supply Company.

cm

Fig. 27 Fluid bottle.

3
!

200

Texas Archeological Society

t r~

Fig. 28 Bixby bottle.

Boice - Cistern One Glass

0
I

em

3
I

"..’: :..

Fig. 29 Forbes Brothers jar.

201

202

Texas Archeological Society

J

a
_

b

o
I,,,

Cm

5
I

.....~)~L
0
I

¢m

5
I

o

f

cm

3

Fig. 30 Jars: a) round base; b) milk glass; c) Vaseline.

Boice - Cistern One Glass

....~;:.
~"... Oo

"L

¯.?.=

..-:
~o

¯ . :.:,! .::
’..~o

. ,-...

¯ . ,..

:..{--:.:
¯. ¯ .q.o

"-.

..::.~:
’.,’.%

0

Fig. 31 Jar and lid: a) milk glass lid; b) Atlas fruit jar base.

5

203

204

Texas Archeological Society

o~.¯

I

I

I

I

I
I
I

I

I
I

I

I

I

0
t
Fig. 32 Bail fruit jar.

¢ITl

5
I

Boice - Cistern One Glass

205

Goblets

GOBLET
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Clear, wine goblet and stem, base missing; 50 mm inside diameter of rim;
floral pattern is filled in with small hexagons.
GOBLET RIM
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 303
Description: Clear, goblet rim; 73 mm inside diameter of rim; geometric pattern.
Lids
CLEAR LID
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Clear, fragment of a curved lid with a lip; probably a bowl lid; diamond and
leaf pattern.
Stems
CABLE STEM
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 301
Description: Purple, rectangular body attached to a tapered stem, cable pattern on stem.
STEM AND BASE
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 302
Description: Clear, eight sided stem with base, 49 mm high; base has geometric
diamond pattern with scalloped basal edge.

Fig. 33 Fruit jar lid.

206

Texas Archeological Society

COMPOTE STEM AND SHERDS
Number of specimens: 26 (one bowl)
Provenience: 300, 301(2), 302(22), 303
Description: Aquamarine, tapered, partially hollowed stem; glass is 8 mm thick. Rim
sherds indicate large body of thick glass. Ribbed pattern on stem; floral pattern on body.
Sherds
PRESSED GLASS SHERDS
Number of specimens: 26
Provenience: 301(3), 302(16), 303(7)
Description: Three purple sherds and 23 clear sherds; 24 geometric patterns. Vessel
forms are not discernible.

WINDOW GLASS
WINDOW GLASS
Number of specimens: 155
Provenience: 301(27), 302(71), 303(17), 304(40)

Fig. 34 Pressed glass bowl.

Boice - Cistern One Glass

207

Description: Window glass sherds varying from 1.5 to 3.1 mm thick (between 1/16 in
and 1/8 in) of the following weights: lot 302, 122 grams; lot 303, 572 grams; lot 304,
149 grams.
Discussion: Sherds from 301 were inadvertently discarded during the field school and not
weighed. Sherds probably are from house windows.

MISCELLANEOUS GLASS
LAMP CHIMNEYS
Number of specimens: 89 or more (1 base, 4 rim styles, 84 body sherds representing
at least 4 chimneys)
Provenience: 302(85), 303(4)
Description: Table 10.
MILK GLASS LAMP CHIMNEY
Number of specimens: 22 (one chimney)
Provenience: 302(19), 303(2), 304
Description: White, milk glass lamp chimney with embossed scroll type pattern; painted,
red and green floral pattern.

Table 9
Miscellaneous Bottle and Jar Sherds (Weights in grams)
Color
Clear
Brown
Green
Aquablue
Purple
Dark Green
Total

300

301

302

303

304

Total

615
139
62

86
137

3216
774
1134
180
32
68

267
149
185
92

111
47
54

49

19

4295
1246
1435
279
39
136

5404

742

231

7430

7
7
823

230

Table 10
Lamp Chimney Fragments from Cistern One
Sherd Type
And
Provenience

Color

Diameter

Rim (302)

clear

63 mm inside rim

Rim (302)

clear

51 mm (approximate)
inside rim

Rim (302)

clear

52 mm (approximate)
inside rim

Base (303)

clear

80 mm inside base

Rim (303)

frosted

50 mm (approximate)
inside rim

Body (303)

frosted

Remarks
Thin glass with
a scalloped
edge; 1 sherd.
Thin glass with
a knobbed
edge; 3 sherds.
Thin glass with
knobbed edge;
5 sherds
Thin glass;
1 sherd.
Thin glass with a
smooth edge;
2 sherds.
84 thin glass
sherds.

208

Texas Archeological Society

GOBLETS
Number of specimens: 5 (2 stems, 1 base, 2 rim sherds)
Provenience: 301,302(4)
Description: Clear, drinking goblets; 81 mm inside rim diameter.
STEM
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 304
Description: Clear, thick stem, 40 mm long; probably a compote dish.
DRINKING GLASS
Number of specimens: 4 (one glass)
Provenience: 301(4)
Description: Olive green depression glass tumbler with a base; 70 mm in diameter; erabossed pattern in zigzags and triangles in rows.
GLASS HANDLE SHERD
Number of specimens: 1
Provenience: 300
Description: Handle of clear glass for a vessel. Vessel form was not identifiable.

REFERENCES CITED
Baldwin, Joseph K.
1973
A Collector’s Guide to Patent and Proprietary Medicine Bottles of the
Nineteenth Century. Thomas Nelson, Inc., Nashville.
Brose, David S. and David W. Rupp
1967
The Custer Road Dump Site: An Exercise in Victorian Archaeology.
The Michigan Archeologist, 13(2):37-128.
Freeman, Larry
1964
Grand Old American Bottles. Century House, Watkins Glen.
Lee, Ruth Webb
1946
Early American Pressed Glass. Ferris, New York.
Lorrain, Dessamae
1968
An Archaeologist’s Guide to Nineteenth Century American Glass.
Historical Archaeology, 2:35-44.
Toulouse, Julian H.
1969
Fruit Jar. Thomas Nelson, New York.
1971
Bottle Makers and Their Marks. Thomas Nelson, New York.
Van Rensselaer, Stephen
1926
Early American Bottles and Flasks. Transcript Printing Company, Peterborough, New Hampshire.
Vaughan, G.T.
Letter to Wayne Roberson. Photocopy on file, Office of State Ar1971
cheologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

ABSTRACT
The value of an explicit, problem oriented research design for cultural resource management
research is documented in a description of evaluative testing at a Central Texas rockshelter.
The research design incorporates regionally significant hypotheses about changes in paleoenvironment, technology, and settlement/subsistence activities. Test implications relating to the
hypotheses are used to guide field and laboratory research; data collected during the study are
considered in terms of the specific hypotheses. The site is evaluated in regard to its significance
to regional research concerns.

INTRODUCTION
The growth and development of contract archeology as a significant and
valid part of archeological research has been a slow and gradual process.
Despite its past association with emergency salvage operations, modern
contract research has the potential to be well planned, organized, and highly
effective. General fact gathering under the guise of salvage is no longer acceptable; the dichotomy between pure research and contract/salvage archeology is becoming less viable. Conservation archeology requires that any
expenditure of a resource be economical and oriented toward the solution
of substantive problems. This circumstance requires the use of a fully
developed and carefully planned research design (Goodyear et al., 1978).
Research contributions of an evaluative testing program conducted at a
Central Texas rockshelter under the sponsorship of the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers is summarized. The research design of the project was developed
to permit examination of several research problems relating to interpretation
of regional prehistory. The potential of the National Register of Historic
Places as a preservation tool for significant cultural resources also is
documented.
Bear Creek Shelter (41H117) is located in the Bear Creek drainage, a
tributary of the Brazos River in Central Texas. The site was recorded by the
River Basin Surveys prior to the construction of Lake Whitney (Stephenson,
1970). It was evaluated on the basis of a 22 ft x 5 ft trench through the main
part of the shelter. Very few artifacts were recovered and the site was judged
to be a short term campsite unworthy of additional consideration.
In fairness to the River Basin Surveys, the limited time and money
available coupled with the presence of several other large, well stratified

210

Texas Archeological Society

rockshelters in the area probably explains the conclusions they reached
(Lynott, 1980a). Thus, the River Basin Surveys used the allocated time and
funding to investigate the site and evaluate it against a general set of
research concerns and the potential of other rockshelters in the area. These
same types of significance judgments are currently a part of conservation archeological research.
Construction of the original Lake Whitney failed to inundate the site on a
regular basis until the lake was enlarged during the middle 1970’s. The site
was monitored and the immediate erosional damage inflicted upon it by
wave action from the lake recorded. Large numbers of artifacts were exposed by the erosional process. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers was
notified of the potential significance of the site.
The site was nominated to the National Register of Historic Places by the
Archaeology Research Program at Southern Methodist University. Negotiations between the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, representatives of the
State Historic Preservation Officer, and the Archaeology Research Program
resulted in the initiation of a small scale testing program (Lynot~, 1976). This
testing operation revealed at least 2 m of stratified cultural deposits. The
U.S. Army Corps of engineers sponsored additional evaluative studies
(Lynott, 1978).
RESEARCH DESIGN
Bear Creek Shelter is situated on the south side of Bear Creek about a
mile east of the Brazos River. The shelter is situated in the side of a
limestone bluff about 25 m from the current channel of Bear Creek. At conservation level, water impounded by the Whitney Dam covers the floodplain
and much of the talus slope in front of the rockshelter (Fig. 1). Only a limited
portion of the cultural deposit usually is exposed. The shelter faces toward
the west, with the long axis of the shelter running roughly north-south. The
overhang covers approximately 225 sq m with an additional 300 sq m of
talus slope deposit in front of the shelter (Fig. 2).
The site is situated in the Grand Prairie biotic province. The native
uplands of this area are dominated by tall grass prairie, while the floodplains
are a mosaic of meadows among hardwood forests. The site is situated near
the edge of the prairie and the bottomland forest. The area around the site
today consists of juniper, hackberry, mesquite, and oak overstory, with a
pasture grass understory. The area has been altered by historic agricultural
activities.
The testing program provided sufficient background about the kinds of
data which might be preserved to permit the generation of a relatively
specific research design (Lynott, 1976). Major goals of the testing program
were to gather data relating to the research and management potential of
the site. Generally, this information relates to the depth, content, and
preservation of the rockshelter deposit. More specifically, the project was
designed to test four hypotheses relating to interpretive problems of Central
Brazos River prehistory.
With the current trend toward regional archeological analysis, the nature
of prehistoric occupations in rockshelters of the Central Brazos River
drainage has become a significant concern. Rockshelters are relatively com-

Lynott -- Bear Creek Shelter

Fig. 1 Bear Creek Shelter with Lake Whitney at conservation level.

Fig. 2 Bear Creek Shelter with Lake Whitney at an unusually low level

211

212

Texas Archeological Society

mon in this area of the basin and constitute an important part of the
prehistoric adaptive system.
Excavation of area rockshelters prior to 1970 focused mainly on
chronology building, which was the single most important regional concern
at that time. Since then, the development of Central Texas archeology has
generated a new set of research concerns. These concerns focus on the
functional nature of rockshelters as part of the prehistoric adaptive systems
of the Central Brazos River basin. In the last four decades, most of the large,
well stratified rockshelters in the area have been extensively excavated by
archeologists or vandals. Bear Creek Shelter offers an opportunity to examine the changing nature of a rockshelter occupation.
The hypotheses and test implications were generated from regional archeological literature and existing research concerns. They form the basis for
the research design which guided the evaluative testing program at Bear
Creek Shelter. The research design was developed prior to the initiation of
fieldwork at the site. Field and laboratory investigations were directed
toward the collection of data which reflected upon the pertinant research
concerns identified in the research design. These hypotheses by no means
exhausted all potential research concerns in the Central Brazos River Valley.
However, they are relevent to recent area studies. Although the hypotheses
are somewhat interdependent in regard to the interpretation of regional
prehistory, each hypothesis is presented and evaluated independently of the
others.
The research design focuses on four aspects of change in the natural and
cultural environments of the Central Brazos River Valley. These four areas
are climate, technology, subsistence, and site function as it relates to settlement patterns. Data collected from the Bear Creek Shelter was not sufficient
to prove or reject any of these hypotheses for the Central Brazos area.
However, these data do contribute to a better understanding of regional
problems.
The first hypothesis deals with the nature and timing of climatic changes in
the Central Brazos River Valley. From the literature (Bryan, 1969, 1977;
Shafer, 1977; Bryan and Shafer, 1977; Ritchie and Slaughter, 1972), it
was hypothesized that major ecological and climatic changes in the Central
Brazos River Valley occurred at the end of the Pleistocene/early Holocene
(10,000 B.P. - 7000 B.P.), during the Late Archaic substage (ca. 3000
-2500 B.P.), and at the end of the Early Neo-American substage (750
B.P.). Recognizing that rockshelters represent specialized and potentially
protected ecological situations, it was anticipated that regional climatic
changes would be manifested in the archeological record at the site. These
climatic changes would be reflected in fossil pollen profiles, macrobotanical
remains, depositional processes, vertebrate faunal remains, or invertebrate
remains.
The second hypothesis deals with the nature of technological change in
the Central Brazos River Valley. Traditionally, the ~change f~om use of the
atlatl to use of the bow and arrow has been viewed as a major development
associated with the beginning of the Neo-American stage. In a study of
changes in lithic tool manufacture in the Lake Whitney area, Skinner and
Gallagher (1974) observed a shift from biface reduction (associated with
dart point production) to a core and flake technology (associated with arrow

Lynott - Bear Creek Shelter

213

point production). It was hypothesized that these technological changes are
common to the entire Central Brazos River Valley and are interpretable
within the Bear Creek Shelter sequence.
In testing the hypothesis, it is necessary to assume that similar sizes of raw
material are available throughout the prehistoric period. Given this, it is anticipated that core and biface technologies will produce equal amounts of
primary debitage. Interior and possibly secondary elements will be more
numerous in biface reduction technologies, but average flake size will be
smaller. Conversely, interior and secondary elements will be fewer but
larger in core and flake technologies. Average number of dorsal flake scars is
expected to be higher and frequency of faceted platforms greater in biface
than in flake production technology. It is expected that a biface technology
will result in the discard of broken and unacceptable bifaces, while flake
technology will be reflected in a large number of exhausted and partially exhausted cores.
The study of culture change in Central Texas generally has focused upon
changes in projectile point styles. Shafer (1977) proposed a more extensive
model of technological changes in response to a regional climatic and
ecological shift. The third hypothesis considered during the study of the
Bear Creek Shelter was generated from that model.
The third hypothesis is that major changes occurred in the Central Brazos
River basin adaptive systems at about 750 B.P. Prior to this time, nomadic
hunting and gathering aimed at exploitation of bottomland resources was
the dominant subsistence strategy. After 750 B.P., local economic patterns
shifted to horticulture and bison hunting. Associated with this economic shift
was a shift from smaller seasonal camps to larger more sedentary villages. It
is hypothesized that the function of rockshelters also changed at this time.
Assuming the hypothesis is correct, it is anticipated that there will not be
major changes in the lithic assemblage, faunal and floral assemblages, or
feature types present prior to the Late Neo-American occupation of the site
(ca. 750 B.P.). During the Late Neo-American occupation, horticultural remains, bison scapula hoes, bison remains, end scrapers, four edge beveled
bifaces, blades, flake drills, and large leaf shaped bifaces will increase
significantly. Nature and number of occupational features and reflected activities will change with the shift from smaller temporary camps to larger
more sedentary habitation sites. If the settlement patterns of the Central
Brazos River Valley changed about 750 B.P., it is expected that the nature
of rockshelter occupations in this area changed in some discernable way.
The final hypothesis tested at Bear Creek Shelter also concerns the functional nature of rockshelters in the Central Brazos River basin. A list of
potential hunting and gathering activities which might pertain to prehistoric
occupants of the Central Brazos River Valley was generated. The list was
refined to include only those activities which could be recognized given anticipated preservation conditions at Bear Creek Shelter. These potentially
recognizable activities include cooking, animal food processing, plant processing, manufacture of perishable products (basketry, bone tools, etc.),
primary lithic procurement, rough lithic tool manufacture, finished lithic tool
manufacture, and disposal of the dead.
The fourth hypothesis proposes that the nature of activities at Bear Creek
Shelter changed through time. Furthermore, it was hypothesized that not all

214

Texas Archeological Society

potential activities were conducted during any single occupation.
Implementation of a test of the hypothesis required that attributes
characteristic of the hypothesized activities be identified. Cooking would be
recognized by burned and fire cracked rock, charcoal, ash, burned food remains, ceramics encrusted with burned food, and hearths. Primary lithic
procurement would be recognized by unmodified raw material, cores with
few flake scars, large numbers of primary flakes, hammerstones, and
debitage with very few dorsal flake scars.
Rough lithic tool manufacture would be identified by hammerstones,
cores, large quantities of lithic debris, high frequencies of secondary
debitage and broken, roughly shaped bifaces. Finished lithic tool manufacture would be identified by hammerstones, bone or antler flaking tools, large
quantities of interior debitage, broken preforms, small interior pressure
flakes, well developed bifaces, unused lithic tools, and a relatively high
number of dorsal flake scars on debitage.
Animal food processing would be recognized by tools with edge damage,
animal remains, cut and butchered bone, and small interior resharpening
flakes. Plant food processing would be recognized by manos, metates, nutting stones, mortars, plant food remains, and lithic tools with edge damage.
Recognition of manufacture of perishable products was entirely dependent
upon preservation conditions but would include complete and partially complete wooden tools, basketry, etc. Disposal of the dead would be identified
by intentional human burials. Since some attributes pertain to more than
one activity, activities must be identified by combinations of attributes.
Implementation of the research design was affected by contractual obligations, funding limits, and an interest in economical expenditure of the
resource. A total of 11 1 m square units were excavated in controlled 10 cm
levels. Arbitrary levels were utilized because natural stratigraphic units were
generally large and contacts between natural strata were not distinguishable
during excavation. A total of 28.1 cu m of matrix from these units was sifted
through I/4 in hardware cloth (Fig. 3). A 25% sample of each arbitrary level
from two of the units was fine screened through 1/16 in mesh. Temporal
constraints prohibited total excavation of all units; culturally sterile geological
deposits were reached only in unit 1. Figure 4 illustrates the location of test
units in relation to the shelter deposit. The following data are designed to
provide specific information relating to the hypotheses under consideration.
A complete description of field and laboratory methods was provided
elsewhere (Lynott, 1978).

FIELD AND LABORATORY DATA
The depositional environment of Bear Creek Shelter was not fully
studied, but observations of local topography and site stratification were
made. The westward facing nature of the shelter permits considerable
precipitation and some wind blown sediments to be deposited at the mouth
and talus slope. Overhang depth is sufficient to curtail great amounts of
precipitation and most wind blown sediments from reaching the rear of the
shelter. The bulk of the sediments deposited at the mouth and talus slope
appear to be a combination of slopewash from surrounding limestone bluffs,
roof fall, and wind blown sediments.

Lynott - Bear Creek Shelter

Fig. 3 Test excavations inside Bear Creek Shelter.

[]

ZXCAVATZO U,IT

[]

eACK,OE Ta~C.

CONTOU~ ~UTE~VAL=~CU
~
0

N
~0

THE BEAR CREEK SHELTER(41HZIT)F
~

Fig. 4 Topographic map of cultural deposit at Bear Creek Shelter.

215

216

Texas Archeological Society

Slightly different depositional conditions existed at the rear of the shelter.
Exfoliated limestone from the roof and rear forms the basis of the natural
deposit. Since less precipitation reached the shelter rear, individual strata
show little sign of leaching and are visually more distinct than those at the
front of the shelter.
The top strata within the shelter were very light colored layers of decomposed limestone. Occasional, thin, discontinuous sheets of darker, organic
sediments were encountered within this zone. This deposit covered a dark
organic layer containing a high density of artifacts. Lighter organic
sediments wei~e under this dark layer. Differences between sedimentary
layers in the upper 3.5 m of the profile (Fig. 5) mainly are attributable to the
amount of organic material present in the deposit. In sharp contrast to these
layers, the lowest stratum in the profile is a sandy "deposit which may be a
result of alluvial deposition. The only artifacts were associated with thin,
discontinuous sheets of dark midden deposit.
In an effort to quantify the distribution of limestone roof spalls, field investigations recorded the cumulative weight of unburned limestone spalls
for each arbitrary excavation unit and level. There is a slight increase in the
amount of roof spalling with relative depth in the deposit. However, it is
greatly overshadowed by the increase of roof spalling from the mouth to the
rear of the shelter. Roof spalling data support the observation that differing
depositional environments existed at the front and rear of the shelter.
Hand and machine excavated units at the base of the talus slope revealed
considerable disturbance, presumably from wave action. The black clay
layers in this area appear to be a combination of natural and cultural
sediments, overlying a light brown sediment. The natural stratification of the
shelter is illustrated in Figure 5.
Analysis of the vertical distribution of field and laboratory data suggests
that several occupational zones are recognizable (Fig. 6). These zones correspond generally with known chronological phases in Central Texas
prehistory. Since artifacts were distributed vertically throughout the deposit,
evidence for long term shelter abandonment is lacking. Artifacts were not
concentrated in any level that could be recognized as a floor or sedentary
occupation. Relative frequencies of cultural material, changes in artifact
styles, radiocarbon dated charcoal samples, stratification of the deposit, and
sediment chemistry were used to correlate excavation levels and interpret
the cultural sequence.
The earliest occupation is attributed to the Middle Archaic substage. It was
recognized as a sheet midden overlying what appears to be alluvial sandy
clay and waterwashed limestone cobbles. This midden was recorded at
about 4.0 m below surface. It lies a meter below a feature dated at 2450
B.P. Extrapolation from stratigraphically more recent radiocarbon dates in
the sequence suggests that the Middle Archaic occupation zone spans the
period 4950 B.P. to 2950 B.P. This span roughly corresponds with phases
V and VI at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir on the Lampasas River (Sorrow et
al., 1967) and Clear Fork and Round Rock Phases (Weir, 1976).
The next occupation of the shelter is attributed to the Late Archaic
substage. It overlies the Middle Archaic zone and varies in thickness from 40
to 60 cm. A radiocarbon date from the upper part of this zone indicates an
age of 2500 B.P. A radiocarbon date from the middle of this zone in unit 11

Lynott - Bear Creek Shelter

217

.~.: DARK GRAY ORGANIC SOIL

..f- MEDIUM GRAY ORGANIC SOIL

DECOMPOSED
I ROOF FALL

LIMESTONE

¯ .* DECOMPOSED LIMESTONE
"¯, MOTTLED ORGANIC SOIL
LIGHT GRAY ORGANIC SOIL

~\
GRAY ORGANIC
:~ MEDIUM
WITH LIMESTONE
ROOF SOIL
FALL

~ U~STURREO ZONE
]T~ GROWN DANDY SOIL WITH
~?’~ DECOMPOSED LIMESTONE
DROWN ALLUVIUM

BLACK

2M.

THE BEAR

YELLOW" BROWN CLAY

CREEK SHELTER (41HII7)

Fig. 5 Stratigraphic profile of test units at Bear Creek Shelter.

Fig. 6 Interpreted cultural sequence at Bear Creek Shelter.

ZONE

218

Texas Archeological Society

(4275 + 140 years B.P.) appears much too early for material recovered.
Rodent activity or possibly prehistoric human activity may be responsible for
the poor context of this date. Overall, the span of the Late Archaic occupation is estimated at 2950 B.P. to 2150 B.P. This span corresponds roughly
with phase VII at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir (Sorrow et al., 1967) and the
San Marcos Phase (Weir, 1976).
The third occupation of the site is the Transitional Archaic substage. Two
separate occupations were recognized in units 1-5, but the distinction between these occupations could not be made in units 10-13. The lower of the
two occupations, Transitional Archaic II, varies in thickness from 50 to 70
cm. Transitional Archaic I overlies Transitional Archaic II and varies in
thickness from 30 to 50 cm. The Transitional Archaic substage comprising
the two occupations corresponds with the early part of the Twin Sister Phase
(Weir, 1976) and phase VIII at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir (Sorrow et al.,
1967). Transitional II is believed to represent the period from about 2150
B.P. to 1750 B.P., while Transitional I is estimated at 1750 B.P. to 1450
-1350 B.P.
The next recognizable occupation of Bear Creek Shelter is attributed to
the Austin Phase. This occupation zone is the early phase of the NeoAmerican or Late Prehistoric stage and spans the period from 1450 - 1350
B.P. to about 750 B.P. This occupation zone varies from 50 to 80 cm in
thickness. Four radiocarbon dates from this zone (Table 2) are consistent
with this estimate.
The final prehistoric occupation of the rockshelter is attributed to the
Toyah Phase, which is the later phase of the Neo-American stage. This occupation zone varies from 70 to 100 cm in thickness and probably dates
from 750 B.P. until about 350 B.P. The Toyah Phase occupation is capped
by a layer of recent sterile sediment.
A total of 25 occupational features were recognized during the course of
the testing campaigns. The majority were concentrations of burned rock and
sediment. Other classes of features included a sheet midden, a human interment, mussel shell concentrations, and snail shell concentrations (Table 3).
The majority of these features were relatively small and indicated limited
use. Evidence of distinct living floors was not encountered; it seems unlikely
that any sedentary or semisedentary occupation occurred in the shelter.
Laboratory analysis of flaked lithics consisted of technological classification of lithic debris and morphological classification and microscopic examination of tools. Twenty eight cores were classified into six types based
upon number, character, and placement of striking platforms (Table 4). A
total of 6864 flakes, 2091 proximal flakes, 364 blades, and 11,720 pieces of
non diagnostic shatter were recovered. Lithic debris was examined for the
following attributes: percentage of cortex on the dorsal surface, type of striking platform preparation, number of flake scars on the dorsal surface,
length, width, thickness, and weight (Tables 5, 6). These attributes were
selected because they related directly to the hypotheses and test implications
under consideration.
Flaked lithic tools included chert and quartzite pieces that exhibited
retouch modification. These pieces were classified using a standard morphological typology (Shiner, 1974) and examined under a 30x binocular

Lynott -- Bear Creek Shelter

219

microscope for evidence of edge damage. Edge damage classes were
adopted from Greiser (1977). A quantitative summary of flaked lithic tools is
presented in Table 7. Other manufactured and modified objects recovered
from the site included ground and pecked lithic tools, modified bone and
shell ceramics, and unmodified rocks brought into the shelter by man (Table
8).
Sixteen pollen samples were collected using methods ~’ecommended by
Bryant and Holz (1968). None yielded sufficient pollen to permit a 200
grain count. Consequently, paleoenvironmental interpretations based upon
pollen analysis are limited. Indications are of a relative consistency in the
species indentified throughout the occupation of Bear Creek Shelter (Table
9).
Macrobotanical remains recovered consisted mainly of charred wood;
fine screening did recover a limited sample of seeds (Table 10). Seed remains are primarily hackberry and occur throughout the occupational sequence. Identification of larger fragments of charred woods include oak,
hackberry, cedar, elm, sycamore, mesquite, and either hickory or pecan.
There appears very little variation in composition during the occupation of
the site (Table 11). Paleoenvironmental interpretation of the macrobotanical
remains suggests an extensive hardwood-floodplain forest existing in the
vicinity of the site throughout most of its occupation. An extensive forest
probably was present in the bottomlands of lower Bear Creek and the nearby Brazos River.
Vertebrate faunal remains from Bear Creek Shelter are comprised of
birds, fish, reptiles, amphibians, and mammals (Murry, 1978). The overall
composition of the faunal remains coincides with the interpretation of an
associated floodplain forest. White-tailed deer, eastern cottontail rabbit, and
turtle seem to represent the most important economic species (Tables 12,
13). Presence of several types of migratory birds indicates September
through May exploitation. Limited prairie species recovered include bison,
meadowlark, and several rodents. Significant changes in the composition of
the faunal assemblage are not notable during the occupation of the site.
Overall, the faunal evidence is indicative of a bottomland forest environment and bottomland riverine exploitative pattern throughout the occupation of the rockshelter.
Invertebrate faunal remains are comprised of snails and freshwater
shellfish. Two species of gastropod were recovered, both of which indicate
riparian environments. Mesodon roemeri (Pfeiffer) is a deep riparian
woodland snail. It was recovered from every occupation zone recognized in
the stratigraphic sequence. This snail was far less common than were the remains of Rabdotus mooreanus (Pfeiffer), which occurred in large numbers
in almost every excavation unit. Rabdotus rnooreanus (Pfeiffer) occurs on
river terrace deposits in sparsely wooded areas near water. The high frequency of this snail coincides with the dominance of non aboreal pollen
noted from the limited pollen counts.
Thirteen species of pelecypods were recovered and identified from Bear
Creek Shelter (Table 14). Proptera purpurata (Lamarck), Obvaria olivaria
(Arfinesque), and Crytibaias tamicoensis (Lea) are predominant in terms of
number and frequency of occurrence in all cultural zones. These and other
common shellfish recovered from the site prefer large river and stream

220

Texas Archeological Society

Table i
Limestone Roof Fall as measured in Kilograms
Depth

Excavation Units

(cm)
1
3O
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
2O0
210
220
230
240
25O
260
270
280
290
3OO
310
320
330
34O
350
360
370
380
390
4OO
Average
Kg/level

10
2
2
3
3
2
1
1
10
16
1
13
8
14
33
18
28
10
8
32
10.8

2

6
4
3
3
7
10
15
7
9
2
2
3
4
9
51
9
8
0
14
10
8
9
6
9
7
18
32
55

11.1

3

4

5

5
5
I
1
17
17
4
6
2
9
2
32
23
30
10
5
2
0
40
40
6
2
14
1
1
2
25
19
3
5
14

7
6
1
6
3
5
4
3
3
1
1
2
5
16
5
5
4
6
30
10
10
6
9
30
42
57
60
162
20
35
33
78

20
20
20
20
1
22
1
4
1
22
2
1
2
40
10
10
53
14
29
31
105
105
53
31
13
48
27
210
210
210
150
150

11.4

20.8

51.1

10

32
32
13
13
13
14
2
1
0
4
11
17
17
14
41
41
41
21

18.1

11
6
2
2
2
10
19
8
8
5
10
3
3
10
11
16
23
15
7
1
2
7
17
8
8
35
18
63

11.8

12
1
5
7
2
9
13
5
6
3
1
61
12
9
21
8

10.9

13

\

5
3
4
9
8
8
I0
5
14
20
21
24
26
9
3
3

10.8

habitats. Although bottom habitat preferences differ somewhat among the
pelecypods recovered, all preferred habitats were present in the Brazos
River and lower Bear Creek throughout most of the site occupation.
Overall, the shellfish remains exhibit relative consistency from the Middle
Archaic through Toyah occupations.
RESEARCH INTERPRETATIONS
Hypotheses and test implications were generated to investigate changes
in prehistoric adaptation patterns in the Central Brazos River Valley. Cur-

Lynott -- Bear Creek Shelter

221

Table 2
Uncorrected Radiocarbon Dates From Bear Creek Shelter
Context
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit

2
2
3
3
5
5
10
10
II
11
11
12

Occupation
Transitional I
Late Archaic
Austin
Transitional I
Austin
Transitional II
Austin
Transitional II
Toyah
Toyah
Late Archaic
Austin

Estimated Age
1570
2380
1380
1340
950
1770
1030
2110
630
770
4150
1130

B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.

+
+
±
±
±
+
+
±
+
±
+
±

60
220
100
60
50
140
50
150
50
100
140
50

Sample Number
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX

2942
2965
2940
2941
2962
2964
2961
2959
2939
2963
2958
2960

Table 3
Summary of Occupational Features (Volume excavated)
Toyah Focus Occupation Zone (7.5 cu m)
Unit 11--small concentration of burned rock, charcoal, burned bone, and mussell shell;
small concentration of burned rock, large amount of charcoal.
Unit 12--small concentration of unburned mussel shell and some bone; concentration of
burned rock overlying a charcoal concentration.
Unit 13--small concentration of snail shells.
Unit 10--small area of burned sediment and burned rock.
Austin Focus Occupation (5.7 cu m)
Unit 1--concentration of burned rock and some charcoal extending into side wall.
Unit 3--concentration of burned rock covering about 30 cm in diameter; small concentration of burned rock and oxidized sediment.
Unit 5--small concentration of snail shell and bone; small concentration of burned rock
and charcoal extending into north wall of excavation unit.
Unit 10--small area of burned sediment and charcoal.
Unit 12--small area of burned rock and charcoal; burned rock and burned sediment with
charcoal covering about 0.5 sq m.
Unit 13--small area of burned rock, burned sediment ash, and charcoal.
Transitional Archaic Occupation Zone I (2.0 cu m)
Unit 2--relatively large concentration of burned rock and charcoal.
Unit 3--burned rock concentration covering about 1.0 sq m.
Transitional Archaic Occupation Zone II (3.0 cu m)
Unit 4--small concentration of burned rock and charcoal.
Unit 5--human interment lying on left side facing west; small concentration of charcoal
and burned rock.
Transitional Archaic Occupation Zone--undifferentiated (1.0 cu m)
Unit lO--small concentration of burned rock, burned sediment, and charcoal.
Late Archaic Occupation Zone (3.5 cu m)
Unit 2--medium size concentration of burned rock and charcoal.
Unit 11--small concentration of burned rock overlying concentration of charcoal,

Middle Archaic Occupation Zone (5.4 cu m)
Unit 1--thin sheet midden lens.
Unit 3--small concentration of burned rock.

222

Texas Archeological Society

Table 4
Cores From Bear Creek Shelter

o~
E"

mE

~o~U
oK

~, ~
o"~

~

=~o~

o ~

o

"~
’~

oO

o

b-

Toyah Focus Zone
Austin Focus Zone
Transitional Archaic Zone I
Transitional Archaic Zone II
(undifferentiated)
Late Archaic Zone
Middle Archaic Zone

3
I
0
1

0
I
I
0

2
1
0
0

0
0
0
2

3
3
I
0

1
1
I
0

9
7
3
3

0
0

2
0

0
2

0
0

1
0

0
0

3
2

TOTALS

5

4

6

2

8

3

28

rent archeological models for Central Texas in general, and Central Brazos
River Valley in particular, suggested that a major climatic change at about
750 B.P. resulted in a drastic change in adaptive strategy (Shafer, 1977;
Skinner et al., 1978). Other extant models are concerned with the
settlement-subsistence patterns of the prehistoric Brazos River basin. With
this emphasis on models dealing with paleocology and exploitation of past
environments, the research at Bear Creek Shelter was directed toward these
important concerns. Data available from Bear Creek Shelter offer the opportunity to improve significantly the understanding of prehistory in the
Central Brazos Basin by supporting or contradicting these hypotheses.
Hypothesis One
It was hypothesized that major ecological and climatic changes in the
Central Brazos River Valley occurred at the end of the Pleistocene (10,000
-8000 B.P.), during the terminal part of the Archaic period (2950 B.P.
-2450 B.P.), and at 750 B.P. The climatic change at 10,000 B.P. appears
to be widespread and associated with the final retreat of the alpine and continental glaciers of North America. The archeological record at Bear Creek
Shelter does not contain occupational or ecological data that can be attributed to this period. Consequently, this aspect of the hypothesis cannot
be tested.
Climatic change during the terminal part of the Archaic stage was proposed in a study of the geologic history of nearby Aquilla Creek (Ritchie and
Slaughter, 1972). This study indicated that a degradational period ended
and the modern aggradational period started at about this time. This time
period is thought generally to precede the beginnings of technological innovation leading to the concentrated use of the bow and arrow rather than
the atlatl. A major climatic change may have been associated with the
changes in technology.
The hypothesis of a major climatic change in Central Texas at about 750
B.P. was proposed by Shafer (1977). This climatic change was seen as a
major drying period that increased the amount of grassland habitat in Cen-

Lynott - Bear Creek Shelter

~a;4eqs
a!$souSe!@uoN

suul~ ~qB!aM a~eiaAv

uJuJ ssau~la!q~ a6~anv

0

LuuJ q;P!A~ a~elanV

~oo~O ~
u~u qJ, Bua-I aBeianv

0~

~

s~ea£ a:~el::l leS~OG
]o zaqu~nN aBe~aAV

O4

sap~l~

o~00~.~,~

OD

u’3

~

O3

~0

sa~lel::l leU~!XO~d

sa~lel::l

0

0

0

NN~
,.-..c~

,-.~_

,--’ ~.~

o~oo ..~eN o
oo._o:~<

223

224

Texas Archeological Society

dd~gg

dd

00000

O0

% stwoJa~Id
pa~aa~al-!~InlN

~mm~

.

% stuIoJagld
pa~aa~:I [~apaq!cI

% stmoJl~Id u!~ld

% stuao:gRld xa~aoD

VO

% sluatual3 ~a~tu!ad
~0

% s:~uatual3 &~puoaaS

O~

~o~

~

~

O0

0

% sluatual3 ao!aaluI
~d~dd

4~

000
NNN

~.~

’~

oo~

~
NN~.~

00

~

~

~

w~.~ o.~ ~<

Lynott - Bear Creek Shelter

~0~

O0 ,~"~

~

¢"4 ,,-’~

O0

O3

OD04

~

O3

~

CO

04",’-4

CO

~

ua

O~

~0~@

0

0

©
..Q
~O
~-,.

,

e,,,

0 0 0
NNN

~O
o~

o~

~’~’~’~o
o~

"5

#.

~

0 {& 0 0
N

~

’-N.~

~o

._ .o .£
.- .- .~
.~ .~_~
~m

co

225

226

Texas Archeological Society

Table 8
Provenience of Ceramics, Manuports, and Ground and Pecked Lithic Tools.
"7O

o
o

~

~

"~

~

0

~
.~o

co
.1
0

Toyah Focus Zone
Austin Focus Zone
Transitional Archaic Zone I
Transitional Archaic Zone II
Transitional Archaic Zone
(undifferentiated)
Late Archaic Zone
Middle Archaic Zone

1
2

TOTALS

3

1
2
5
2
1

2
1

1
1

2
0

1

1
12

2

1
4
7
3
1

2

1

1

18

Table 9
Summary of Palynological Analysis

E

o~

~

~

o

.~<

~

~

l:L

12/7
0/2
5/7
3/19
5/26
10/10
6/10
7/13

4
2
2
34
4
5
2
24

7
1

2

6
1
5

8/5
5/3
7/16

4
5

1
5

86

1
1
30

O

Toyah Focus Zone
Austin Focus Zone

Transitional Archaic Zone I
Transitional Archaic Zone II
Transitional Archaic Zone
(undifferentiated)
Late Archaic Zone

TOTALS

.o

1--,

E

o

1

33
5
16
58
35
31
20
49

2
2

I

4
1

Middle Archaic Zone
2/0
70/118

~

~

1
6

5

I

18
22
24
2
3
316

tral Texas, resulting in an increase in the number of bison (Dillehay, 1974).
This drying period was proposed as an explanation for decreased use of the
tributary valleys after 750 B.P. in the Central Brazos River drainage (Skinner et al., 1978). Presence of a major drying trend at about this time in the

Lynott - Bear Creek Shelter

227

Central Plains was documented by Bryson and Baerreis (1968).
Paleoclimatic indicators which were studied from Bear Creek Shelter include natural stratification and sediment chemistry, fossil pollen, charcoal
remains, seed remains, and vertebrate and invertebrate faunal remains.
The natural stratification and sediment chemistry of the excavated cultural
deposits in the rockshelter are believed to consist of wind blown sediments,
slopewash0 and exfoliated limestone. Deposits toward the rear of the shelter
consist of a higher proportion of exfoliated limestone, while deposits at the
front consist of a higher proportion of material brought into the shelter by
wind and/or rain. This pattern becomes established shortly after the earliest
occupation of the shelter and continues through the final prehistoric occupation. Although the basal layers of the deposit may contain some evidence of
water deposited sediments, there is little evidence of a sharp change in
depositional processes that can be attributed to climatic change.
Analysis of sediment samples for the identification of fossil pollen in Bear
Creek Shelter was disappointing. Preservation of fossil pollen was poor, but
some pollen was identified. Samples were far below the number of pollen
grains needed to make statistically valid interpretations. However, species
represented in the samples were generally consistent from sample to sample.
The identification of charcoal from the shelter suggests that a mature
floodplain forest was near the site beginning with the earliest occupation and
continuing through the last prehistoric occupation. Some minor compositional changes in this forest may have occurred. Oak and hackberry are major components of the exploited parts of the floodplain forest in every occupational zone. The only group of charred wood which changes
significantly at 3000 B.P. - 2500 B.P. and 750 B.P. is the Juglandaceae,
which includes pecan and hickory. The total sample of this group is quite
small. It is impossible to determine whether the changes noted are due to
sample size or minor changes in the environment. Considering the fairly
consistent presence of trees such as oak, hackberry, and elm, it seems
unlikely that a significant climatic or ecological change is represented.
Analysis of vertebrate faunal remains also failed to provide any significant
evidence of climatic change during the prehistoric occupation of the
rockshelter. The majority of vertebrates identified prefer a riverine or bottomland forest habitat. A few grassland species were identified, but these are
too limited in number to interpret a climatic change at any point in the sequence.
Making climatic interpretations from freshwater shellfish remains is more
difficult than interpreting other kinds of paleoenvironmental data.
Pelycopods present in the rockshelter are totally dependent upon the kinds
of shellfish habitats in the area and collecting habits of the shelter occupants.
The limited changes in relative frequencies of the pelycopods could be a
result of minor changes in area stream flows, but the majority of identified
species in each occupational zone prefer large streams or rivers. It appears
that collecting habits were oriented toward major waterways throughout the
prehistoric period, with little effort being directed toward collecting shellfish
from minor tributaries.
Quantitative data on gastropods were not collected; relative frequency of
the two identified species cannot be compared. Despite this, both species

228

Texas Archeological Society

o~

Oq

O~lt~..

oq

oOOq

oo
,,.~ oo

Lo

~o~"

~0

’~0~

oo

r, ,- ~
0 0 0
NUN

0 0
NN

o

o

"~0
:,~,N

0 0 ~ ~
,,.,,~
o o o~~--~~< ~,

~-<

~

Lynott - Bear Creek Shelter

9qV£0£

0~0~0

~

0

¯ ds S!llaD

"ds sndoso~d

¯ ds snunlnld

"ds sna~an0

"ds sn~ad!unp

"ds SmUlF1

(SUalBn£ 1o n42nD)
a~aa~pu~IBn£

0 0 0
NNN

~,-~,-~,-~:
N

~

~

~N

.-N._~

.u
~o

~.<~
0

~

~

~

t~

-

~ o

229

230

Texas Archeological Society

Table 12
Vertebrate Fauna Recovered from Quarter Inch Mesh Screen

oO

o
E-

r~
BIRD
Unidentified bird
Anas carolinensis
Anas cf. acuta
Order Falconiformes
Family Corvidae
Meleagris gallopavo
Colinus virginianus
Callipela squamata
Regulus calendula
SturneUa sp.
Parus carolinensis
FISH
Unidentified Fish
Lepisosteus sp.
Ictalurus sp.
Lepomis sp.
REPTILES
Unidentified turtle
Chrysemys sp.
Tryonyx spiniferous
Family Colubridae
Natrix sp.
Coluber constrictor
Lampropeltis sp.
Crotalus sp.
MAMMALS
Large artiodactyle
Small mammal
Bison bison
Ovis aries
Odocoileus virginianus
Scalopus aquaticus
Lagomorpha
Lepus californicus
Sylvilagus floridana
Sciurus niger
Geomys bursarius
Perognathus sp.
Castor canadensis
Sigmodon hispidus
bleotoma floridana
Pitymys pinetorum
Canis latrans

45
17
3

20

7

6

4

18

4

1

1
1

I

14

2
1
1
1
I
1

2
I
1
1
I
I

17

4
1

9
1
3

2
1

2

2

1
2
2
2

3
1

118
17
6
1

I

5
34
7
8

112
1
34

166

7

46

34

18

21

11

4

2

14

2

2

I

1

1
9
I
5

3
5

I

1

2

6
20
4
6

169
17
3
1
42

176
20
1

30

41

4

508
89
6
1
110
110
7
5
42
8
37
13
3
94
33
14
3

1
17
I
6
5
29
10
1

2
1

2

1

2
1
I0
6
2
I
19
6
3

45
1

32
7

41
15
1

15
29

3

10

2

7
1
9
I

8
1
1
1
2
2
6
3

9
6
1

21
7
5

I

1

2
4

1

5
1
3
3

4
2
3
4
6
2
2
I0
3
1

415
1
60

Lynott -- Bear Creek Shelter

231

Vertebrate Fauna Recovered from Quarter Inch Mesh Screen

"~

~0

<
0
Procyon Iotor
Mephitis rnephitis
Lynx rufus
Unidentified carnivore
Burned Bone
TOTALS

1
3
1
6
96

1
1
3
142

69

1
46

26

1
42

57

0

3
4
2
11
478

560

507

55

139

133

165

133

17

1709

1

1

have similar habitat preferences and occur in every occupation zone within
the shelter deposit.
The paleoenvironmental data which are available from Bear Creek
Shelter dates from roughly 5000 B.P. to about 450 B.P. Available data suggest a prolonged period of consistent climate and depositional conditions.
This situation does not preclude the possibility that climatic changes occurred elsewhere in Central Texas during this time period. Climatic interpretations are complex and a shift to wetter or dryer conditions in one area
may not necessitate a similar shift throughout Texas. Additional data are
needed from the area to determine whether the stable climatic conditions interpreted for Bear Creek Shelter are representative of the Central Brazos
drainage as a whole.
Hypothesis Two
The second hypothesis was originally proposed and tested by Skinner
and Gallagher (1974) at the Bowling Pin and Indian Springs sites at ’Lake
Whitney. The Bowling Pin site is a Neo-American campsite, while the Indian Springs site is a Late Archaic campsite. Comparison of the flaked lithic
debris, cores, and bifaces suggested that a technological shift from biface
reduction in the Archaic stage to flake production from cores in the NeoAmerican stage could be distinguished. A positive correlation between
biface technology and atlatl dart points, and core and flake technology and
arrow points may be significant in the hypothesized technological change.
Bear Creek Shelter offered the opportunity to test this hypothesis in a situation where occupational zones from the time periods in question were
situated in a stratified context. Presence of Transitional Archaic phase occupations at Bear Creek Shelter offered the opportunity to determine
whether the hypothesized change was gradual or abrupt.
Examination of data in Table 13 indicates that very little change occurred
in the technological elements during Archaic, Transitional Archaic, and

232

Texas Archeological Society

Table 13
Vertebrate Fauna Recovered from Fine Screen

u~

o
FClass Osteichthyes
Lepisosteus sp. - Gar
Order Cypriniformes
Ictalurus sp. - Catfish
Morone sp. Temperate
basses
Class Amphibia
Order Anura
Scaphiopus cf. holbrooki
hurteri - Hurter’s Spadefoot Toad
Class Reptilia
Trionyx spiniferus - Spiny
softshell turtle
Order Squamata
Family Colubridae
Natrix sp. - Water snake
Coluber constrictor - Racer
Lamporpeltis sp. - King
snake
Thamnophis sirtalis Garter snake
Family Crotalidae
Family IguanidaeIguanid
Class Ayes
Class Mammalia
Order Lagomorpha
Syluilagus floridana Eastern cottontail
Order Rodentia
Sciurus niger - Eastern
fox squirrel
Geomys bursarius - Plains
pocket gopher
Perognathus sp. - Pocket
mouse
Sigmodon hispidus - Hispid
cotton rat
Pitymys pinetorum - Woodland or pine vole
Peromyscus sp. - Deer mice
Order Carnivora
Mephitis mephitis Striped skunk
Order Artiodactyla
Odocoileus virginianus Whitetail deer

9

2
17

8

11

2
II

21

20
1

I

2
13

4
97
1

3
13

1

23
6
11

13
1
5
6

164

19

6
I
1
I

2

187

I

2

3

1

1

2
1

5

2
8
7
1
1

3

1
30
1

6

I

2

3

6

12

1
1

4

4

1

6

3

1

31

6

7

1

1

7

8

15

11

29
46
1
1

1
9
1

I

57
1

2

2

7
1

44
2
11
18

11
3

3O

Lynott - Bear Creek She[ter

233

Vertebrate Fauna Recovered fTorn Fine Screen

Small mammals
Large artiodactyl
Carnivore

7

9

1

2
1

4
11

4
30
1

Neo-American occupations of the shelter. A high core/biface ratio is
thought to be indicative of a core technology, while a low ratio indicates a
biface technology. The limited variation (Table 15) indicates that the highest
ratio is associated with the Late Archaic zone, while the second lowest ratio
is associated with the Austin zone. This situation is the opposite of what was
predicted by the hypothesis.
Examination of relative frequencies of facetted platforms and average
number of dorsal flake scars reveals limited variation between the occupation zones in question. The only significant variation in flake weight and
length between the occupation zones is the low average size of flaking debris
in the undifferentiated Transitional Archaic zone. The anticipated increase in
size of flakes associated with core technology in the Austin and Toyah zones
is generally lacking.
Evaluation of this hypothesis assumes that the same range of flaked lithic
manufacturing activities occurred consistently at the site throughout its occupation. Examination of data relating to Hypothesis 4 provides some support for this assumption. It appears that the total manufacturing sequence
for flaked lithic tools is not present at the site. Solid evidence to support the
interpretation of a technological change from biface reduction technology to
core and flake production technology is lacking.
It is possible that the limited sample of excavated area biased the evaluation. However, the large size of the lithic sample and consistency of
technological elements through all occupations seem to be more than coincidence. It is proposed that core and biface technologies were in use
throughout the prehistoric occupation of Bear Creek Shelter.
Hypothesis Three
Shafer (1977) proposed that the most significant technological change
during the prehistoric period in Central Texas was related to the abrupt transition from the Austin to Toyah Phase. A major climatic change in Central
Texas at about 750 B.P. is thought to have resulted in a major increase in
the grassland habitat favorable to bison. During the Archaic period and the
Austin Phase, prehistoric economy in Central Texas was heavily oriented
toward exploitation of bottomland and riverine resources.
This hunting and gathering population was nomadic, living in small
bands. With the climatic shift and increase in locally available bison, the entire economy and settlement systems of Central Texas changed. Group size

234

Texas Archeological Society

Table 14
Identifiable Pelecypod Remains

o;

N

N

o

o

o
N

N

N

"~-

"~

"~ "~

~
<

~
<

~._
<E

o
~
u

.u

E

<

~

"-

(13
J

<

U. tetralasmus
C. parva
L. teres
L. r. Siliquoidea
Q. quadrula
K flaua
A. plicata
P. purpurata
O. olivaria
C. tampicoensis
T. uerrucosa
M. gigantea
T. macrodon
L. sp.
TOTALS

o

=

~

~

7
5

4
13
8

2
1
2
1

1
5
1
1

20
51
72
53
3
1
1
1

8
29
34
37
1

9
24
48
76
6

1

3
1

227

116

175

1

1
11
37
52
14
2

129

1
36
62
34
4

5
5
20
7
I

1

I
I

1
9
32
2O
3
I
54
189
312
241
18
1
6
4

148

41

891

1
5
2
1

1
1

7
24
20
1

55

O

Table 15
Combined Data from Coarse and Fine Screen Samples Relating to the Test
Implications of Hypothesis Two

~-

wE
z8

~

>o

o

2.7
2.6
2.5
2.7
2.6

.25
.16
.33
.23
.11

.131
.147
,162
.142
.145

1.9
1.4
1.2
1.5
1.2

21.3
18.9
19.0
19.9
16.9

2.6
2.4

.33
.22

.200
.128

1.5
1.5

19.1
19.1

<c~
Toyah Focus Zone
Austin Focus Zone
Transitional Archaic Zone I
Transitional Archaic Zone II
Transitional Archaic Zone
(undifferentiated)
Late Archaic Zone
Middle Archaic Zone

o

~

<

Lynott - Bear Creek Shelter

235

increased and populations became more sedentary, occupying more
established village sites. The economy shifted away from hunting and
gathering in the river valleys and emphasized horticulture and bison
hunting. The settlement and subsistence change produced an hypothesized
change in Central Texas lithic tool technology.
Evidence of change in the vertebrate faunal remains is lacking. Floodplain
forest dwelling animals are dominant throughout the prehistoric period.
Bison remains are limited in number but are present in the Late Archaic,
Transitional, Austin, and Toyah zones. Evidence of a bison hunting
economy is lacking. Throughout Northcentral Texas, bison remains from
archeological sites are outnumbered greatly by remains of white-tailed deer.
There is some evidence for slight increase in bison exploitation in Northcentral Texas during the late prehistoric period (Lynott, 1980b). However, it is
not sufficient to postulate a bison hunting economy.
Evidence of horticultural remains or tools is lacking. Limited horticultural
remains were recovered through more extensive excavations at nearby Pictograph and Kyle sites (Stephenson, 1970; Jelks, 1962) but are not interpreted as representing an economic dependence upon horticulture. Fine
screen sampling at Bear Creek Shelter produced a small quantity of charred
hackberries, but overall exploitation of plant resources appears to have been
secondary to hunting.
Examination of lithic tools revealed little evidence of change in the kinds
of tools used between the Austin and Toyah occupations. There is a slight
increase in the relative frequency of blades, but not a real change in the frequency of end scrapers, flake drills, or leaf shaped bifaces. Four edge beveled knives are absent. Lithic tool technology seems to change very little
between the end of the Austin and beginning of the Toyah Phase. The only
significant change seems to be the style of the projectile points found in each
zone.

Based upon evidence from Bear Creek Shelter, it does not seem
reasonable to accept the hypothesized economic and settlement change for
the Lake Whitney area of the Brazos River basin. Floodplain forest and
riverine exploitation by small groups of hunters and gatherers seems to continue throughout the prehistoric period. The pattern may apply to other
areas of Central Texas.
Hypothesis Four
This hypothesis proposed that eight different activities were conducted at
Bear Creek Shelter during the prehistoric period. Not every activity was expected to occur during each occupation. It was anticipated that site function
changed through time.
Interpretations must be considered tentative because they are based upon
the assumption that the excavated sample is representative of everything
which occurred at the site. Since only a small portion of the site was excavated, this assumption is tenuous. However, by pursuing the testing of
this hypothesis, it is possible to interpret some of the activities which were
conducted at the site and provide a model of changes which may have occurred in site use during the 4500 year period.
Cooking was a significant activity during each of the temporal periods
represented at the site. Concentrations of burned and firecracked rock were
present within each of the occupation zones. Charcoal was abundant

236

Texas Archeological Society

throughout the cultural sequence and burned animal bone was recovered
from every occupational zone. Burned sediment was noted in Toyah,
Austin, and Transitional Archaic zones. Ash was noted only in the Austin
zone. Food encrusted ceramics were not recovered.
Evidence indicates that primary lithic procurement was absent or of
minimal significance during each of the occupational stages. Unmodified
chert cobbles are absent from the lithic collections in each occupational
zone. Primary elements are a small part of the total lithic debris throughout
the sequence, while cores, rough bifaces, and hammerstones are relatively
uncommon.
Rough lithic tool manufacture seems to have been a consistent part of the
prehistoric activities at Bear Creek Shelter. Hammerstones and cores are
scarce in occupation zones, but bifaces are relatively plentiful throughout the
sequence. Unused tools, or tools without edge damage, occur in every occupational zone. Secondary elements occur far less frequently than interior
elements in every occupational zone, but they always represent at least 25 %
of the debitage. This activity does not seem to have produced as much
debris as the final stages of toolmaking activities, but occurred consistently in
each occupational phase.
Lithic, antler, and bone flaking tools are rare at Bear Creek Shelter. This
situation may be due to the limited areal sample or a result of reuse and
prehistoric curation of these tools. Although these aspects of the test implications for finished lithic tool manufacture are lacking, other aspects are
present for most of the occupation zones.
Interior elements occur in high frequency in all zones, and flaked lithic
tools with edge damage occur in every zone. However, preforms are
relatively limited from undifferentiated Transitional Archaic and Late Archaic zones. The relatively high frequency of preforms in the Transitional
Archaic I and II zones indicates that sampling bias may be responsible in
part. Finished lithic tool manufacturing was important during most of the
prehistoric occupation of the site, but was relatively less important during the
Late Archaic and possibly Transitional Archaic phases.
Animal food processing was a significant activity throughout the
prehistoric occupation of the rockshelter. Bone and shell remains are common in every occupational zone. Lithic tools with edge damage which may
have been used for butchering occur in every zone. Examination of the fine
screen lithic debris sample does not exhibit fully the large number of small interior flakes. The few large flakes in every sample greatly skewed the sample.
In contrast to the importance of animal food processing, evidence for
plant food processing is minimal. Ground stone is rare at the site and grinding implements occur only in the Austin zone. The only .significant plant
food remains recovered through fine screening were hackberry seeds. Some
of these are uncharred and were probably introduced into the deposit by
natural means. Consistent absence of relevant data indicate the limited importance plant food processing played during all phases of the prehistoric
period at Bear Creek Shelter.
Objects recovered from Bear Creek Shelter that could possibly fit into
manufacture of perishable products are four modified bone and two
modified shell artifacts. Lithic tools used to make such objects probably are

Lynott - Bear Creek Shelter

237

present; but without perishables, it is not possible to recognize these activities. The manufacture of perishable products must be considered an
untested part of the prehistoric activities conducted at the site.
A human grave was uncovered at Bear Creek Shelter in the Transitional
Archaic II zone. Evidence of an intrusive pit was not noted, but it is possible
that this burial represents an interment by later residents of the site. A large
mass of limestone rubble which was situated about 20 cm above the burial
may have served as a rock cover for the grave. Interment age is estimated at
19.50 to 1450 B.P.
The major focus of activity throughout the use of the site seems to be
cooking, animal food processing, and rough and finished stages of lithic tool
manufacture (Table 16). Consistency of average flake dimensions, average
number of dorsal flake scars, and platform preparation indicate a consistency in the types of chert flaking activities throughout the occupation.
Evidence of long term occupation during the prehistoric period at Bear
Creek Shelter is lacking. The site seems to represent a series of short, intermiitent habitation, occurring consistently over a period of almost 5000
years.

CONCLUSIONS
The archeological record at Bear Creek Shelter has important implications for the interpretation of Central Brazos River prehistory. Archeological
investigations at the site were designed to test four hypotheses relating to
changes in climate, technology, and settlement-subsistence patterns in the
Central Brazos region. Of central interest to the study was the role of
rockshelter occupations within the regional adaptive system.
Rockshelters are relatively common in the Central Brazos River drainage,
particularly in the Lake Whitney area. Research at a variety of sites (Jelks,
1953, 1962; Long, 1961; Stephenson, 1970; Watt, 1978) produced a
reasonably well established chronology for the Central Brazos Valley.
However, knowledge about the position of rockshelter occupations within
the regional settlement and subsistence system is limited. Investigations at
Bear Creek Shelter were directed toward this topic.
To insure that specific data relating to regional research concerns were
collected, archeological investigations at Bear Creek Shelter were aimed at
testing four hypotheses. About 2% of the site was excavated and evaluation
of the four hypotheses suffers from a small sample. Interpretations are offered on the basis of the limited excavated sample being representative of
site data.
The first hypothesis proposed that climatic changes in the Central Brazos
River basin occurred during two periods. Data from Bear Creek Shelter included gastropods, pelycopods, vertebrate faunal remains, macrobotanical
remains, fossil pollen, and sediment chemistry. Data showed considerable
stability throughout the occupation of the rockshelter. If climatic changes did
occur, they were minor and not recognizable in the archeological record.
The second hypothesis proposed a major change in flaked lithic tool production technology at the end of the Archaic period. Prehistoric occupants
of the area shifted from a biface reduction to a core and flake production

238

Texas Archeological Society

Table 16
Summary of Interpreted Activities

~- ~

.~_ o~

.~

-o

~

o o
Toyah Focus Zone
Austin Focus Zone
Transitional Archaic Zone I
Transitional Archaic Zone II
Transitional Archaic Zone
(undifferentiated)
Late Archaic Zone
Middle Archaic Zone

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

~"

o.

X

technology. Both forms of lithic tool manufacture were utilized throughout
occupation of the shelter.
The third hypothesis proposed major technological changes occurring in
the Central Brazos River basin adaptive patterns at about 750 B.P. Relevant
data did not provide evidence of technological or subsistence changes. Exploitation of a diffuse group of bottomland fauna represents the dominant
economic pattern from the Middle Archaic phase until the end of the
prehistoric period. Evidence of a shift to any significant kind of horticultural
economy is lacking and evidence of plant food processing is limited.
The final hypothesis proposed a variety of prehistoric activities
recognizable from material remains. Data indicated that cooking, animal
food processing, and rough and finished lithic tool manufacture were
primary activities conducted at the site during every occupation. Plant food
processing and disposal of the dead were occasional activities. There is little
evidence for the primary procurement of lithic raw material. The nature of
occupations at the site appear to indicate a series of short term usages over a
considerable period of time. Evidence of a prolonged single occupation or a
prolonged abandonment is lacking.
On the basis of these interpretations, the site is considered a hunting
camp. It is uncertain whether the shelter was used for only one season of the
annual round or was inhabited regularly throughout the year. Activities and
site function inferred at Bear Creek Shelter may not be representative of
other shelters in the Central Brazos basin. Restudy of existing collections are
needed.
Grinding slabs and manos are present at Kyle (Jelks, 1962:55) and Pictograph shelters (Stephenson, 1970:140-141) suggesting that plant food
processing was an important activity at these sites. Features at these sites are
more substantial in size and frequency than those at Bear Creek Shelter.
Presence of slab lined cists or hearths at those sites may mean that the oc-

Lynott - Bear Creek Shelter

239

cupations there were more regular or prolonged than inferred for Bear
Creek Shelter.
Due to the size limitations of rockshelters in this area, it is unlikely that any
shelter served as a permanent base camp for a population of any size. Some
rockshelters probably were used as temporary hunting camps while others in
more favorable locations served as seasonal camps for several family
groups. The westward facing position of Bear Creek Shelter may have
made it a less desirable winter camp than more sheltered localities.
The hypothesis testing format utilized in testing and evaluating Bear
Creek Shelter demonstrated that data relating to a series of problems which
are important to the interpretation of regional prehistory are preserved at the
site. Recognizing the significance of Bear Creek Shelter, the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers chose a mitigative procedure designed to stabilize and
preserve the site. The Corps plans to stabilize the site deposit with a liquid
concrete solution (Galm, 1978). When the solution dries, it should seal the
cultural deposits and prevent further erosion from wave action of the lake.
Not only does this decision preserve an extremely significant cultural
resource, it offers the opportunity to monitor the affect of partial inundation
on archeological remains over a prolonged period. Similar examples of in
place preservation of significant archeological remains are relatively rare.
A well defined program of significance evaluation which incorporates the
testin~g of regionally important hypotheses with the gathering of management data provides an effective means of demonstrating and evaluating
significance (Raab and Klinger, 1977). The archeological resource base in
the United States is diminishing too rapidly to permit salvage excavations to
be conducted without a fully developed research design. Contract archeologists have an obligation to the profession and public to make their
work contribute to the interpretation of significant research problems. The
future of American archeology is dependent upon the profession’s ability to
make serious research contributions from contract projects and incorporate
research concerns with in place preservation of significant cultural resources.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Spatial constraints require that I offer only general thanks to the large number of friends and
colleagues that have made this paper possible. I would like to specifically express my gratitude
to Allie Majors, William Harrell, and Don Weise of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Fort
Worth) for their support of this study. I would also like to thank Eldon and Loretta Corkill for
their efforts at monitoring the impact of wave action on Bear Creek Shelter. Jeffrey Richner
made helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper and Lynn Frankowski provided monitoring assistance and advice throughout my involvement with the site. Dr. S. Alan Skinner served
as Principal Investigator for the project. Phillip Murry identified the vertebrate fauna and Dr.
Richard Fullington the invertebrate fauna. Macrobotanical and palynological samples were
identified by Kathleen Volman and Donna Chapman. The fine drawings were prepared by
Melodie Tune. Dr. F.A. Calabrese and members of the Midwest Archeological Center provided
much needed technical assistance in the production of this report. Finally, the author wishes to
acknowledge the influence of the late Dr. Mark Grady upon the outcome of this study. Dr.
Grady’s concern for the preservation of significant archeological resources served as an inspiration during the 1978 testing and report preparation phases of the project. Any value contained
in this paper can be largely attributed to these individuals, while shortcomings or errors are the
sole responsibility of the author.

240

Texas Archeological Society

REFERENCES CITED
Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr.
1969
Late Full-Glacial and Postglacial Pollen Analysis of Texas Sediments.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Texas, Austin.
A 16,000 Year Pollen Record of Vegetational Change in Central Texas.
1977
Palynology, 1:143-156.
Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr. and R.K. Holz
1968
The Role of Pollen in the Reconstruction of Past Environments. The
Pennsylvania Geographer, 4(i):11-19.
Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr. and Harry J. Shafer
The Late Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A Model for the Ar1977
cheologist. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 48:1-26.
Bryson, R.A. and D.A. Baerreis
Climatic Change and the Mill Creek Culture of Iowa. Journal of the
1968
Iowa Archaeological Society, 15-16:1-358.
Dillenhay, Tom D.
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
1974
Plains Anthropologist, 19(65) :180-196.
Galm, Jerry R.
1978
Archaeological Investigations at Wister Lake, LeFlore County,
Oklahoma. University of Oklahoma, Archaeological Research and
Management Center, Research Series, 1:1-279.
Goodyear, Albert C., L. Mark Raab, and Timothy C. Klinger
1978
The Status of Archaeological Research Design in Cultural Resource
Management. American Antiquity, 43:159-173.
Greiser, Sally Thompson
1977
Micro-analysis of Wear patterns on Projectile Points and Knives from the
Jurgens Site, Kersey, Colorado. Plains Anthropologist,
22(76):107-116.
Jelks, Edward B.
1953
Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas Attheological Society, 24:189-207.
The Kyle Site, a Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
1962
Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Atcheology Series, 5:1-i15.
Long, Joseph K. III
Three Central Texas Aspect Sites in Hill County, Texas. Bulletin of the
1961
Texas Archeological Society, 30:222-252.
Lynott, Mark J.
1976
Preliminary Report on Test Excavations at the Bear Creek Shelter at
Lake Whitney, Texas. Southern Methodist University Archaeology
Research Program, Research Report, 94:1-17.
An Archaeological Assessment of the Bear Creek Shelter, Lake
1978
Whitney, Texas. Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research
Program, Research Report, 115:1-109.
1980a The Dynamics of Significance: An Example from Central Texas.
American Antiquity, 45(1) :117-120.
1980b Prehistoric Bison Populations of Northcentral Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, 50:89-101.

Lynott - Bear Creek Shelter

241

Murry, Phillip A.
1978
Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains. In: Mark J. Lynott, An Archaeological Assessment of the Bear Creek Shelter, Lake Whitney,
Texas. Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program,
Research Report, 115:48-70.
Raab, Mark L. and Timothy C. Klinger
A Critical Appraisal of "Significance" in Contract Archaeology.
1977
American Antiquity, 42(4):629-634.
Ritchie, R. and B. Slaughter
1972
Geological Reconnaissance of the Aquilla Creek Reservoir Basin. In:
S.A. Skinner, The Natural and Cultural Environmental Resources of the
Aquilla Creek Watershed, Hill County Texas, pp. 148-156. Report submitred to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers by the Institute for the
Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Shafer, Harry J.
Late Prehistory of Central Texas. Bulletin of the South Plains Ar1977
cheological Society, 3:18-24.
Shiner, Joel L.
1974
Standard Morphological Typology. The Record, 30(2):1-7.
Skinner, S.A., M.L. Bartsch, K. Huckabay, and C. Shaw
1978
An Evaluation of Archaeological Resources at Aquilla Lake. Report submitred to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth by the Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Skinner, S. Alan and Joseph G. Gallagher
1974
An Evaluation of the Archaeological Resources at Lake Whitney, Texas.
Southern Methodist University, Contributions in Anthropology,
14:1-94.
Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
1967
Excavation at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers.of the Texas Archeological Salvage Program, 11: I- 148.
Stephenson, Robert L.
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central
1970
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 40:37-257.
Watt, Frank H.
Radiocarbon Chronology of Sites in the Central Brazos Valley. Bulletin
1978
of the Texas Archeological Society, 49:111-138.
Weir, Frank A.
1976
The Central Texas Archaic Reconsidered. In: T.R. Hester (ed.), The
Texas Archaic: A Symposium. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report, 2:60-66.

Kenneth Honea

ABSTRACT
The Marks Beach site in Lamb County exhibits parallels in specific stratigraphic details and
cultural data to both the Lubbock Lake and Blackwater Draw Locality No. I sites. It is assumed
reasonable that successive units in the three sites are culturally analogous and_essentially contemporaneous. A Bison antiquus pelvis fragment from a diatomaceous unit at Marks Beach
was radiocarbon dated at 9920 + 380 years BP; samples from an apparently equivalent unit at
Lubbock Lake were dated to the same period.

INTRODUCTION
The Marks Beach site (provisional designation TT5) is located to the
southeast of Earth (Texas) in Lamb County on the Llano Estacado. Exploratory excavations were conducted during the summers of 1968, 1969,
and 1970 by student teams from Texas Tech and Northern Illinois universities. The site is situated in a recent blowout or deflation hollow on the north
bank of an east to west bend of Blackwater Draw at an altitude of 1102 m
(3650 ft). The irregular course of the draw in the area follows a northwest to
south pattern, veers west a short distance in the vicinity of the site, and then
continues to the southeast (Earth Quadrangle Map, U.S.G.S. 7.5 minute
topographic series).
The site area, known as the Sand Hills, is characterized by numerous
dunes and drifting sands, which block the course of the draw in spots. These
sands belong to the Tivoli-Brownfield series, which bisect the central portion
of Lamb County from west to east. The former series occurs as dunes up to
25 m in height (Newman, 1962:3, 20-21).
The importance of Marks Beach lies in shared geomorphic and
stratigraphic similarities to both the Lubbock Lake site (E. Johnson, 1976),
located about 50 miles downstream in Yellowhouse Draw near the confluence of Blackwater and Yellowhouse draws, and Blackwater Draw
Locality #1 (Hester, 1972), 50 miles upstream in New Mexico. Analogues
occur over much of the Llano Estacado in respect to general geomorphology and gross stratigraphy, aiding in stratigraphic and cultural correlations of sites and palaeoenvironmental interpretations (C. Johnson,
1974:81) (Fig. 1).

244

Texas Archeological Society

M i÷5
Fig. 1 Map of Llano Estacado showing locations of (I) Blackwater Draw Locality No.

1, (2) Marks Beach (both on Blackwater Draw drainage), and (3) Lubbock Lake (in
Yellowhouse Draw).
Marks Beach is situated on a bank of what during the Late Pleistocene
had been a perennial stream. The stream dried up gradual by the end of this
epoch and was accompanied by local development of ponds. With extended periods of increasing dessication and development of dunes, the site
came to be occupied by a small marsh. This minor moist period was followed by another drying period, characteristic of the landscape today.
Postulated intermittent seepage springs, perhaps issuing from gravels
beneath caprock outcrops in the north edge of the site, may have been instrumental in making the location a choice way station through time (Fig. 2).
Seepage springs still occur in the region.
Two distinctive dune trends are evidenced at the site. The modern one is
along the east and southeast margins of the site and an older one on the
northeast and east margins. The latter underlies the former in part.

Honea - Marks Beach

245

Surface evidence of cultural activities at the site is indicated by numerous
exposed cobble hearths, bone, and lithic concentrations (Fig. 2). This
material occurred in modern sands above the preserved margins of the terminal marsh deposits at the leeward base of the dune on the east, southeast,
and south inner margins of the blowout. The disturbed basin surface of the
blowout exhibited a scattering of lithic debitage, tools, and occasional
sherds. Most were probably derived from recent sands occupying the basin
prior to deflation.
A number of apparently older bone accumulations, not clearly associated
with cultural remains, were observed during initial survey. They were
eroding out of the upper portion of the marsh deposits below the level of the
recent sands. Indications of Pleistocene sediments or cultural activities were
not seen on the surface.
Because of the situation of Marks Beach in the Blackwater Draw
drainage, it seemed possible that exploratory excavations would yield
cultural and stratigraphic sequences that could, at least in part, be correlated
with those known from both Lubbock Lake (Johnson, 1976; Plolliday and
Allen, in press) and Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1 (Hester, 1972).
Preliminary evaluation of the resultant data suggest such a correlation is well
founded.
EXCAVATION PROCEDURES
Surface cultural materials were noted and recorded on the south and east
preserved margins of the terminal marsh deposit and on the wind scoured
leeward slope of the modern dune. These cultural features were associated
with several late prehistoric occupations (probably successive) and may occur in a stratigraphic context. They were recorded, mapped, and cultural
and faunal materials retrieved. Excavations were minimal. Only shallow surface skimming with flat shovels was carried out since penetrating excavations were to be conducted only in the blowout and along its margins.
Blocks of one or more site provenience numbers were used during each
of the three seasons work to identify materials~ features, and excavation
units. The numbers were applied serially each year and gaps were intentionally left in the numbered sequence from year to year to separate each
seasons work. Each numbered phenomenon was recorded on appropriate
forms and in the field catalog and mapped. During initial surface and excavations (1968), the number block 1 to 60 was used. The number 80
(1969) designated a deep test pit. The block of numbers 85 to 96 were used
in excavation (1970). Random surface finds not associated with particular
artifact concentrations or features were assigned the provenience number 0.
Exploratory penetration excavations or tests, in the form of trenches or
pits, were undertaken in the southwestern quarter of the site in areas identiffed as excavation units 35, 40, 41, 42, 43, and 44 (Fig. 2). Arbitrary i0
cm excavation levels initially were employed. Once distinctive stratification
was apparent, digging proceeded by natural levels. Where thickness warranted, natural levels were subdivided into 5 cm or less levels.
Excavation unit 35 was the first 20 x 1 m north-south oriented test trench
excavated to a 1 m depth to explore stratigraphy. It was located on the
south inner margin of the blowout. Excavation in a final 1.5 m unit at the

Texas Archeological Society

246

north end of this unit was extended to a depth of 2.5 m, where sandy
diatomaceous earth was encountered. The west profile (Fig. 3) of this trench
was drawn.
Excavation unit 40 is comprised of two 2 x 2 m northeast and northwest
test pits at the north end of unit 35. They were separated from it and each
other by I m balks. Both were excavated to a depth of 3.5 m below surface,
to a point about I m below the uppermost diatomaceous surface. A profile

\
\

\
\

\
\
\
\

O9
<~

Fig. 2 Map of Marks Beach showing location of excavation units, caliche outcrops,
deflation basin, "beach", and younger Series I and older Series II dunes. Contour interval is 2 rn.

Honea -- Marks Beach

247

(Fig. 4) was drawn of the east wall of the northeast test pit and a series of
paired sediment samples taken from each stratigraphic unit. Unit 41, a 3 x 5
m test pit, was to the north of these excavation units (separated by a I m
balk). It was excavated to the upper surface of the diatomaceous earth.
Excavation unit 44, a 20 x 1 m test trench, further to the east, was excavated to a 1 m depth to further explore stratigraphy of the upper
sediments. It was located 12 m to the east and parallel to unit 35 (Fig. 2).
St rat a

ZONES

vA Secti on
VB
4
5
@
7

D

VA

5.0 m

2
3a
3b

IVB

C

4
IVA
III B

12.0 m

7
2

MB

vA
7
8

B

lib
~m

4
5
@
7

IVA

IIIB

A

10

o.o!

1;o 11
meters

Fig. 3 Representative profile of west wall of excavation unit 35 at O. O- 3.0 m (A), 6.0
- 9.0 (B), 12.0- 15.0 m (C), and 15.0- 18.0 m (D) intervals. PointA O.Ois at north
end of trench. Strata numbering follows that employed in field (1-11). Strata zonal
ordering follows that devised in data synthesis.

248

Texas Archeological Society

Stratigraphies of the two excavation blocks essentially were the same. Unit
43 was a 2 x 5 m test pit (due north of unit 44 and separated by a I ra balk)
excavated to the surface of the diatomaceous earth. The stratigraphic profile
compared favorably with that recorded in the northeast unit of unit 40 to the
west.

ZONES

££
££

U nexcavated

m÷te~s
Fig. 4 Profile of east wall of excavation unit 40, northeast test pit. Strata numbering
follows that employed in field. Unnumbered unit at profile top is recent blow sand.
Profile right edge is south and located about I m north of point ,4 0.0 at north end of
excavation unit 35 profile. Zonal designations are those devised in data synthesis.

Hones -- Marks Beach

249

Excavation unit 42 was a 20 x 1 m test trench..k was located about 5 m to
the north of unit 41 and was oriented southwest - northeast. Total excavation depth was 2 m. A profile was drawn of the north wail.
The following units were excavated in the northeast part of the blowout
basin close to the caliche outcrops: 52, 80, 94 AE, and 94 NR (Fig. 2). Units
52 and 80 are 2 x 5 m test pits excavated to a depth of 4.5 m below the
blowout surface into the top of the gray sand below the diatomaceous complex. The two excavation units were separal-ed by a i m baulk. A Bison antiquus bone bed was discovered in the upper diatomaceous complex in the
west halves of both pits. All excavated bone blocks were carefully mapped,
encased with reinforced plaster, and removed from the site. They were
subsequently opened in the laboratory, excavation was completed, and
bones preserved with butvar or shellac. The east stratigraphic profile of unit
52 was drawn (Fig. 5).
Excavation unit 94 AE was a 5 x 3 m test pit due west of units 52 and 80.
It was excavated to the diatomaceous level on which the bison bone bed was
situated in the units to the east. These units and 94 AE were separated by a
1 m balk. Bones were not found but the diatomaceous surface was entirely
covered with what may be hoof prints of the killed bison. The profile of a
prehistoric water well was discovered in the southeast corner of this pit.
Excavation unit 94 NR, 9 m to the south of 94 AE, was a 5 x 3 m test pit.
It was excavated to 5 m below the surface of the blowout basin into the
underlying gray sands. Excavation unit 96, a 4 x 1.5 m test trench, north of
unit 80, was excavated to a depth of 2 m in the base of the fossil dune.
Surface cultural features discovered during the initial survey (1967),
others exposed by later deflation (1968, 1970), and all phases of excavation
were photographed. Documentation includes: bison bone bed in various
stages of exposure and recovery (slides and a film), proposed bison hoof
prints, prehistoric well, and distant and close-up views of stratigraphic profiles and contact surfaces of various sedimentary units. The laminated
diatomaceous complex in the east wall of unit 52 is photodocumented,
some shots taken from a distance of only 5 cm to show structural detail.
Field numbering of strata at the site (lowest number at top of column) has
been retained since excavations are to continue. They have been correlated
in Table 1 with designations of specific sedimentary units (lowest number at
bottom of column). Thirty strata were recognized and recorded in the field in
various excavation units in the blowout basin and along its margins. They
are assignable to five major sedimentary complexes.
A bench mark or datum point for establishment of horizontal and vertical
controls during survey and excavations was established at an arbitrary location on a level, firm area on the southcentral margin of the blowout above
and away from the loose blowout sand.
An extensive series of sedimentologic and palynologic samples was taken
from profiles in key sections of Marks Beach. Where of sufficient thickness,
paired sedimentologic and palynologic samples (± 0.5 kg) were removed
from the contact surfaces of stratigraphic units and successively, the upper,
middle, and lower portions of each stratum. In some cases, a stratum was
sampled two or three times in different areas of the site for later comparative
studies.

250

Texas Archeological Society

Strata

ZONES
7
9

llIB

11

Ilia

12

:[ 3

:[4,
:[5
:[@

II

c::::) BONE
BED

30
0.0

1.0
meters

Fig. 5 Profile of east wall of excavation unit 52. Bison antiquus bone bed lay on
stratum 16 surface at west end of this and excavation unit 80.

Honea - Marks Beach

251

Radiocarbon samples were recovered from Zones II through V in various
parts of the site. Charcoal and ash samples taken from post Pleistocene
deposits (Zones III and V) were generally sufficient weightwise. Charred
bone fragments were collected when charcoal was rare or nonexistent. For
control purposes, unburned bone samples also were taken frequently. The
fossil dune in the northeast quadrant of the site, which may be coeval with
Zone III, also was sampled. A series of samples were taken from deep strata
producing carbonaceous materials. Unburned bone samples were taken in
these zones for control purposes.

STRATIGRAPHY
The provisionally established geological units, numbered oldest to
youngest, follow (Table 1).
Zone I: massive deposit of compact, unstratified, grayish calcareous sands. The upper contact
surface is eroded. Auguring in excavation units 52, 80, 94 AE, and 94 NR showed the deposit
to be greater than 2 m in depth. Faunal remains were not discovered. Neither basal gravels nor
bedrock were reached in testing.
Zone II" complex of laminated beds of sandy diatomaceous earth and diatomite of variable
thicknesses in different parts of the site. Most of the beds exhibit even horizontal lamination but
some are undulate and swirled. A thick bed of sandy diatomite, containing extinct faunal remains, is situated in the upper section of the complex in excavation units 52 and 80 (Fig. 5).
The lowest subunit of the complex, directly under the bone bed, rests unconformably on Zone
I. This subunit is rich in carbonaceous, peaty, vegetal matter.
While the contact surfaces of subunits in most of this sedimentary complex are conformable,
both the upper and lowermost subunits represent erosional surfaces. The zone is about 2.0 m
thick in the immediate area of the bone bed. Exploratory tests into this zone were made in excavation units 94 NR and 40 to the southwest, further offshore in the former bed of the pond.
Testing revealed a lack of faunal and carbonaceous materials and increasingly sandier
diatomaceous earth laminae that were much more widely separated from one another by sandy sediments (Fig. 4). The most extensive exploration of the complex was carried out in excavation units 52, 80, 94 AE, and 94 NR. Phenomena observed in the first three are suggestive
of a former pond margin.
Zone III: complex of semiconsolidated, stratified, black and gray to greenish clayey to silty
sediments (lower unit: A) and friable reddish to tan or gray sandy (upper unit: B) sediments of
about 3.0 m thickness. The lower unit is initially carbonaceous, then gleyed and yellow motfled; it contains abundant root casts. The upper unit is of progressively more sandy texture, has
fewer root casts, and is oxidized in part.
Contact surfaces in the complex vary from conformable in the lower unit to erosional in the
upper unit. The topmost, deflated, subunits of Zone III B comprise the present central basin of
the blowout. Excavations showed that component parts of the whole complex are preserved intact only along the inner east and south margins of the blowout, undisturbed under the Zone IV
complex (Fig. 3).
Zone IV: complex of friable, tannish to dark gray, sandy, aeolian and marsh sediments of
about 0.8 m depth. The lowest unit (A) is composed successively of brown sand, yellowish
white silt, and gray sand. Contact surfaces of the two lower subunits are conformable while that
of the third eroded.
The upper unit (B) is made up of grayish green silt (lower) and grayish to black carbonaceous
silt subunits. The latter contains abundant small land snails. Contact surface between these
subunits and surface of the top subunit are erosional. Compact upper surface of the grayish to
black subunit of this zone is preserved mainly along the inner south and southeast margins of
the blowout basin, producing a flattish bench or beach effect (Figs. 2, 3).
Zone V: modern tannish to brownish dune sands along the east, southeast, and south margins
of the blowout. The deposit is comprised of lower (A) compacted, stratified, humus stained,
near recent and upper (B) loose, recent sands. The dune is oriented to the east-southeast side
of the blowout. Maximum height is about 10 m above the blowout basin (Fig. 2).

252

Texas Archeological Society

CALICHE OUTCROPS, SPRINGS, AND ANCIENT DUNE
Gravels at the base of two caliche outcrops may have played a substantial
role in attracting prehistoric visitors to the site area. It is hypothesized the
gravels were an aquifer, giving rise to seepage springs. Springheads still occur in the region, e.g., Springlake and Sodhouse springs near Earth. The
rock outcrops are local expressions of the widespread Llano Estacado
caprock caliche (pedogenic calcrete) and are of Miocene/Pliocene age.
The caliche outcrops are situated on the north margin of the present
deflation hollow (Fig. 2). During the Late Pleistocene, they probably were
situated closer to the then existing north bank of Blackwater Draw and were
considerably more exposed to view than now. Presently, they are covered
partially with dune sands. The two outcrops are separated from one another
by a sandy saddle 45 m wide. The northwest one (larger) is oblong and
oriented approximately southwest-northeast; the northeast one (smaller) is
irregularly shaped.
The saddle is covered to an unknown depth with a consolidated dune
(orange hued) deposit. The highest point is about 8 m above the blowout
basin. It contains cultural and faunal detritus in at least the scoured upper
subunits. Lithics are typically Wind polished. This aeolian deposit may be
associated with one of the lower deposits in the blowout basin, perhaps one
of the oxidized subunits of Zone Ill.
The sedimentary complexes containing the most abundant faunal and
cultural assemblages of all periods seem to be located in proximity to the
outcrops (Fig. 2). Springheads may have originated at the base of the
caliche formation, attracting occupants. They also may have played a role in
local ponding phases and sedimentation processes at the site. The
prehistoric wells at the site in Zone Ill are believed associated with the possible springs.
A small exploratory test trench (excavation unit 96) was placed in the
northeast margin of the blowout at the south base of the upward sloping
fossil dune deposit (Fig. 2). The uncovered stratigraphic units are similar in
color and texture to those of Zone III buried in the blowout basin but contain
more abundant cultural detritus.
Heavily lime cemented caliche gravels were encountered below Zone III
at a depth of about 2 m. The gravels sloped upwards at about the same 20°
angle as the fossil dune surface. The gravels were not excavated beyond this
point.
A 50 cm diameter, circular grayish area encountered (free of conglomerate) in the test trench floor may be a small ancient water well. The
caliche conglomerate may represent either of two events. The gravels may
be fragments eroded from the nearby caliche outcrops that have moved
downslope. They also could represent a high on shore remnant, or facies, of
an ancient fluviatile gravel formation primarily associated with the basal
Zone I gray sands (Fig. 6).
The oxidized orangish sands of the fossil dune in the saddle are older than
the modern dune. Orientation of the two dunes is different: that of the latter
is to the east-southeast, the former to the north-northeast. A major shift in
wind direction is indicated (Reeves, 1965). Deposition of the older oxidized
sands probably can be correlated with the Zone Ill sedimentary complex

Honea - Marks Beach

253

©

Z

Z
Fig. 6 Hypothetical cross section sketches of east walls of excavation units 96 (a) and
80 (b). Diagram a shows gravel encountered at base of Zone III as shore facies of gray
sand. Gravels are shown in b as materials eroded downslope from caliche caprock
outcrops.

254

Texas Archeological Society

now buried in the basin. Similar oxidized sands occur in subunit B of this
complex in all excavation units.

CULTURAL AND FAUNAL SEQUENCES
Cultural and faunal materials were sparce in excavation and stratigraphic
units with two exceptions. Exceptions are: the bison bone bed of Zone II and
extensive late prehistoric camp debris of Zone V A. Lithics were not found
with the former. If there was an associated camp, it was situated elsewhere.
Zone I" sterile to a depth of 2 m.
Zone II: the dismembered, arranged, well preserved bones of a mature, butchered Bison antiquus lay scattered on the surface of one of the upper diatomaceous earth units of excavation
units 52 and 80 (Figs. 5, 7). The bones were covered with a very hard, thin layer of calcrete. A
series of possible large hoof prints, perhaps representing trampling by the creature, are preserved on the same surface near the bones in adjoining excavation unit 96 AE (Fig. 7). The surface
exhibits a scattering of ash, charcoal flecks, and vegetal impressions. The entire bone feature
and possible prints were covered by 30 cm of nearly pure, unstratified diatomite. This sedimentary subunit is overlain, in turn, by several, increasingly sandy, laminae of diatomaceous earth
(Fig. 5).
Disjointed bones include the pelvis, sacrum, a scapula segment, femur, radii, vertebrae,
metacarpals, and metatarsals. Several of the latter were longitudinally broken and exhibit percussion marks. The cranium, with articulated atlas and cervical vertebrae, lay dorsally on a pile
of ribs and scapulae. The frontals exhibit several possible massive concussion areas above the
orbits (Fig. 8). The fracture areas, however, may be due to erosional damage from ground conditions (E. Johnson, personal communication).
The mandibles lay detached in front of the cranium, the left resting symmetrically on top of
the right. The edge of a small, partially surface polished, possible bone tool, made from a non
bison ungulate scapula, protruded longitudinally from under the lower edges of the stacked
mandibles (Fig. 9). Due to poor preservation and incomplete cast excavation, it has not been
entirely freed of matrix. Identification as a tool is speculative.
A stack of eight ribs were evenly placed with distal ends one over the other and proximal articular ends resting on the ground in a V shaped configuration (Fig. 10). Parallel placed
metacarpals lay near the rib stack. The pelvis lay several meters from the cranium-mandibles-rib
concentration; it served as a radiocarbon sample in lieu of charcoal. A second bison pelvis was
discovered in excavating a large bone block from the bed in the laboratory (1980), suggesting
two bison may be present (Fig. 11).
Projectile points or lithic tools were not recovered during excavation of the bison bone
feature. A small chert flake found among the bones is considered dubiously associated with
them.
The butchered bison remains, possible bone tool, and charcoal flecks are indicative of
cultural activities by a small Paleoindian population. A bison was trapped on the muddy bank of
an early Holocene pond, perhaps lamed by stunning (cranial fractures), killed, and
dismembered. The bison, perhaps mired, was approached and attacked from downwind. The
possible bone tool may have been used in the butchering process to detach the mandibles, extract the tongue, and strip meat from the carcass.
The lowest laminated diatomaceous sections of this zone contained scattered faunal remains
but not direct evidence of human presence.
Zone III: diffuse cultural materials occur in all members of both subunits A and B. Materials include caliche cobble hearths in excavated basins, a water well, small (burned and unburned)
broken bone, bone tools, three projectile points, scrapers, bifacial lithic tool fragments (rare),
flaking debitage, hammerstones, and abrading stones. The fauna consists of bison (Bison sp.),
pronghorn antelope (Antilocapra americana), and other small mammals. Bone in the zonal
base (III A) is mineralized.
A possible water well was discovered at the base of Zone III B in the southeast corner of excavation unit 94 AE. About a quarter of it was situated within the unit. The unexcavated portion appears as a silhouette in the profile wall (Fig. 12). A wall peel was taken.
Diameter was about 1.5 m and depth 2.5 m. The vertical shaft walls were well preserved and
the bottom (disturbed) was probably basin shaped. The well had been sunk into Zone II
sediments, possibly an aquifer at the time. The well fill was composed of a humus and ash

Honea -- Marks Beach

255

0

0
oO

7!! ,===+

W
<

+=

©

Fig. 7 Map of excavation units 52, 80, and 94 AE showing horizontal location of
Bison antiquus bone bed, possible bison hoof prints, and later water well: 1) water.
well, dug from base of Zone III B; 2) possible bison hoof prints; 3)parallel placed
metatarsals; 4) paired bison mandibles; 5) bison skull lying dorsally on broken ribs
and vertebrae; 6) scapula; 7) stacked ribs; 8) pelvis; 9) cracked tibia. Items 2-9 are
situated on a diatomaceous earth surface in upper part of Zone II that represents an
ancient pond edge. Southwest corner of excavation unit 80 was expanded to permit
recovery of bison skull block.

256

Texas Arcbeological Society

Fig. 8 Views of Zone II Bison antiquus skull bone block in laboratory after clearing of
diatomite mantle: top)from distance; bottom) close up showing possible concussion
marks on frontals between orbits. 10 cm scale intervals.

Honea - Marks Beach

257

Fig. 9 Views of paired Bison antiquus mandibles in Zone II: top) in situ at time of
discovery; middle) bone block in laboratory after clearing diatomite; bottom) possible
bone tool under lower edges of mandible (arrow).

258

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 10 Stacked Bison antiquus ribs in Zone II (in situ). Cracked femur adjoins ribs on
right; patella located right of crossed ribs. Trowel is 25 cm long.

Fig. 11 Poorly preserved pelvis cleared,of matrix mantle in laboratory (1980). Scale
interval is 10 cm.

Honea - Marks Beach

259

Fig. 12 Silhouette of water well in southeast corner of excavation unit 94 AE, dug
fTom base of Zone III B down into Zone II.

stained sandy sediment containing a few bone scraps. Artifacts were not recovered. The former
ground level margin of the well was quite hard packed, perhaps from trodding by users. Rapid
filling of the well after abandonment is likely since wall slumping is absent.
The water well appears, on the basis of stratigraphic evidence from this and other parts of the
site, to have been dug from Zone III B and in use during the Archaic period. The possible unit
96 well also was situated in the Zone III B base.
Zone IV: culturally sterile; fauna includes bison (Bison sp.), pronghorn antelope, a canid, and
small ~nails.
Zone V: subunit B is sterile. Subunit A (stratified) exhibits numerous caliche cobble hearths in
excavated basins, clay lined (rare) and unlined storage pits, hackberry seed caches, broken
bone (predominantly bison), tortoise shells (rattles?), and lithic artifact concentrations (Fig. 13).
An infant burial with a turquoise pendant necklace and two partial adult burials (femur and
cranial fragment) were recovered. Features occur mainly along the east and southeast margin
of the blowout, especially on the leeward slope of the modern dune.
Other material includes Washita arrowpoints, bone tools, abrading stones, manos, grinding
slab fragments, heavy duty chopping and scraping tools, flake scrapers, lithic debitage, sherds,
worked turquoise and malachite, and limonite. Flaked lithics are of chert brought in from some
distance, e.g., Tecovas from the No Trees area to the southwest, Edwards Plateau from the
southeast, and Alibates from the north.
Pottery indicates contact with Puebloan and possibly Mogollon groups to the northwest and
southwest respectively. Ground stone tools of sandstone and heavy tools made of silicified
caliche are of local materials. Successive ephemeral occupations of nomadic hunter-gatherers
are indicated. Fauna consists of modern bison (Bison bison), unidentified small mammals, and
reptiles.

DIAGNOSTIC CULTURAL REMAINS
Due to their diagnostic value, projectile points and ceramics discovered in
the site and at other nearby surface sites are discussed. They have been subjected to preliminary analyses.

260

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 13 Views of cultural features uncovered by deflation in Zone V A at base of
Series I dune in southeast quarter of site: top) charcoal filled hearth associated with
burned caliche cobbles (middle right) and charred bone (upper left); bottom: circular
concentration of cracked bison bone.

Honea - Marks Beach

261

Projectile Points
Ten complete points and base fragments were recovered from the
deflated basin surface and vicinity of in situ Zone V A cultural features (Fig.
14). All are Washita points associated with the final prehistoric occupations
of the site. Washita points also were recovered from the surfaces of other
nearby sites.
Two Ellis and three base fragments and Marcos and Martindale bases (Archaic) were collected from the site surface (Fig. 14). Presumedly, they
originated in the deflated upper sections of Zone III B in the blowout basin.
A quartzite Marcos point (Archaic) was recovered from an undisturbed
lower Zone III B level in excavation unit 80. A chert base from a point of the
same type was obtained from an upper level of ~he same zone in excavation
unit 94AE. The water well and several in situ hearths discovered there or in
other units could be coeval.
A proximal dart point fragment (Alibates chert), excavated from uppermost Zone III A, is stemmed and reminiscent of a Frio-Uvalde form in
respect to the recurved base shape. However, it is not shouldered (Fig. 14).
The transverse cross section at the top of the stem is biconcave, suggesting it
may have been refashioned from a Clovis point.
Pottery
About 150 potsherds were recovered mainly from deflated Zone V A
cultural areas along the inner south and east margins of the blowout. The
majority are quite small due to trampling.
Most sherds are fragments of oxidized, fired, culinary and brown wares.
Detailed studies of temper have not been made. Preliminary sorting created
two basic groups: nonmicaceous (commonest) and micaceous (rarest).
Stone temper is common to both, either weathered or crushed igneous rock
or sand. Exterior surfaces in the first group, which tend to be thick, are either
coarsely smoothed or smeared indented corrugated. Exterior surfaces of the
second group, thinner sherds than the preceding group, are either finely
smoothed or smoothed and finely striated. This group was made from a
micaceous clay. Both may be interiorly polished. Closed and open vessel
forms are represented. Some of this material may be derived from a
Mogollon source, e.g., the lower Pecos drainage.
The collection of 20 small Upper Rio Grande paint decorated sherds are
in two groups. The carbon painted, reduced fired group are probably of the
Jemez or Wiyo Black-on-white types. The remainder are glaze painted.
Most are Glaze A types Agua Fria Glaze-on-red and Cieneguilla Glaze-onyellow. They are dateable to the mid 14th Century A.D. (Honea,
1968:163, Table 30). Several reduced fired sherds lacking surface decoration are stone tempered and may stem from the New Mexico Middle Rio
Grande drainage.
Radiocarbon Date
Half of an unburned Bison antiquus pelvis from excavation unit 52, Zone
II, was processed for a radiocarbon date. The specimen (TT5-52-108) was
submitted to Geochron Laboratories, Cambridge, Massachusetts. It had
been covered with a deposit of calcrete and a bed of nearly pure diatomite.
It was cleaned of diatomite in the laboratory and a final dry bone sample of

262

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 14 Marks Beach projectile points. Top row (Neo American): a) Washita; b) Harrell. Bottom row (Archaic): c) unnamed type, Zone III A; d) Marcos, lower Zone Ill
B; e) Marcos base, upper Zone III B; f) Marcos, surface; g) Ellis, surface; h) Martindale, surface.
261 gm obtained. In the course of analysis, the carbon dioxide fraction was
extracted from the contained apatite of the bone sample and this fraction
was dated. The estimated date was + I0,000 B.P. The sample assayed at
9920 + 380 years B.P. (GX-1458; 5,570 years half life).

REGIONAL CORRELATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
Stratigraphy
The geomorphic sequences in Marks Beach, Lubbock Lake (E. Johnson,

1976; Holliday and Allen, in press),

and Blackwater Draw

Locality

#1

(Haynes, 1975) exhibit generalized similarities in stratigraphy. At present,
only correlations of the most generalized kind are made between the three
sites. The Marks Beach sedimentary units that can be correlated with this
basic scheme are in Table 2.
Common regional geologic denominators seem to be the

following:

Lower Sedimentary Complex: basal, predominately fluviatile, massive gray
sands, overlain on an erosional contact surface by a series of lacustrine
sediments comFosed of laminated diatomaceous earth, diatomite, carbonaceous
and/or sand strata, indicating moist conditions.
Middle Sedimentary Complex: progressive series of carbonaceous, clayey, silty to
increasingly sandy strata, some of the latter oxidized, deposited unconformably on
the proceding complex, marking a change from a moist climatic regime to increasing
dessication of the landscape, lowering of groundwater level, and terminated locally by
one or several ponding phases.
Upper Sedimentary Complex: series of unconformable sands of locally variable facies
but mainly of aeolian origin and indicative of continuing arid conditions, extending to
the present.

Caliche Aquifers
Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1 (Haynes and Agogino, 1966) is
associated with ancient, intermittent, caprock seepage springs. Such springs

Honea - Marks Beach

263

Table 1
Stratigraphic Description and Concordance of Excavation Units 52, 35, 40 at
Marks Beach Site
Stratum
la
lb

3a
3b
4
5
6
7
8
9
I0
11

Zone

Color and Characteristics

VB
VA

Recent tannish blow sands.
Compacted, near recent, stratified, brownish
sands.
Gray black, sandy, carbonaceous silt with
abundant small snails.
Gray green silt; snails; root holes.
Light gray sand; snails.
Gray sand; root holes.
Yellowish white silt; root holes.
Brown sand; root holes.
Tannish sand; root holes.
Light gray sand; root holes.
Brownish tan sand; root holes.
Light gray sand, in part oxidized; root holes.
Firm, brownish tan sand, in part oxidized;
calcareous hard pan, scattering of caliche
pebbles at base; unit 94 AE well dug from this
stratum; root holes.
Soft, light gray sand; few caliche pebbles in
upper margin; scattered root holes.
Firm, brownish tan sand with firm discontinuous
laminae; brownish black diatomaceous earth and/
or carbonaceous silt, darkest at base.
Firm, diatomaceous earth with sand lens;
undulate, finely laminated.
Soft, loose, sandy diatomite with sparce root
holes in upper portion; lower portion harder,
limonite stained, with fine root casts; lower
part covers Bison antiquus remains lying on
surface of llxiv encased in a shell of calcrete
in excavation units 52 and 80.
Firm, diatomaceous earth; finely laminated;
Bison antiquus remains in units 52 and 80,
possible hoof prints in unit 94 AE; firm,
muddy, pond edge suggested.
Firm laminae of diatomaceous earth, sandy
diatomite and/or sand; small unidentified
mammal bone recovered from lliv, deepest
faunal material discovered; lliii through
llx to greater or lesser extent limonite
stained; lli sandy and transitional to deeper
gray sands; some laminae in the upper part of
profile with carbonaceous vegetal material.

IVA
lllBix
lllBviii
lllBvii
lllBvi
lllBv
lllBiv
lllBifi
lllBii
lllBi

12

lllAii

13

lllAi

14

llxvi

15

llxv

16

llxiv

17-30

lli-xiii

occur at Rattlesnake Draw, west of Buckeye (New Mexico), but have not
been studied in detail (Smith et al., 1966:305-306). Blackwater Draw
Locality #1 spring conduits are older than the initial occupation and are
associated with deposition of both the lower complex gray sand and
diatomaceous units. The conduits appear as nearly vertical, irregularly cylindrical, or tapering sand filled tunnels close to the caprock caliche aquifer.
Some of the tunnels are reported to extend under the caliche into underlaying red sands and gravels (Haynes and Agogino, 1966:813). Many of the

264

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2
Marks Beach Sedimentary Units Correlated With Regional Scheme
Regional Scheme
Lower Complex
Middle Complex

Upper Complex

Marks Beach Units
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone

!
II
III A
III B
IV A
IV B
V A
V B

conduits contained cultural detritus of both Paleoindian and Early Archaic
periods.
The springs dried up because of increased aridity and a regional drop of
the water table during deposition of Middle Complex sediments. This event
was correlated with onset of the Altithermal (Haynes, 1975:83). The excavated water wells from this site (Evans, 1951; Green, 1962) and those at
Rattlesnake Draw (Smith et al., 1966) may be contemporaneous with this
particular event.
Evidence for springs at Marks Beach is at best circumstantial. Although
spring conduits were not identified, a possible water well was. The well
seems to have been excavated in the same stratigraphic complex as those at
the Blackwater Draw (Haynes and Agogino, 1966) and Rattlesnake Draw
(Smith et al., 1966) localities. A temporal equivalency is implied, although
not demonsirated.
Dune Trends
Ephemeral playas on the Llano Estacado are usually associated with
distinctive dune trends produced by shifts in paleowind directions (Reeves,
1965). Marks Beach is significant since it exhibits two dunes of different
lithology and orientation. They are the active modern dune of tannish sands
in the east and southeast part of the site with an eastsoutheasterly orientation and an oxidized, orangish fossil dune in the northeast part with a northeasterly orientation. The former comprise the Upper Complex sediments
(Zone V A and B), while the latter is believed coeval with the buried Middle
Complex (Zone III B sediments).
Reeves (1965:504~508) noted three successive dune trends, the latter
two of which are pertinent to Marks Beach. Series III dunes, furtherest from
present playas, accumulated more than 15,000 years ago in mean paleowind directions of S 60° E. Evidence of these dunes at the site is lacking.
Series II dunes accumulated mainly on the north and east edges of playa
blowouts with paleowinds blowing predominantly southeast to east at a
mean direction of S 60° E. They are dated 15,000 to 5,000 years ago.
Series I dunes accumulated on the northern and eastern blowout margins at
a prevailing mean paleowind direction of N 20 o E. The inference is that they
were deposited in part over earlier Series II trends on the north and east
blowout margins. Development of this trend is believed to have begun
5,000 years ago. Such dunes are active today on the Llano Estacado
(Reeves, 1965).

Honea - Marks Beach

265

At Marks Beach, the exposed oxiodized fossil dune between the two
caliche outcrops is evidently a remnant of the Series II type based on probable age and orientation; it probably extended onto the east edge of the
site. Buried portions of it may still be preserved. The buried Zone III oxidized
sediments in the site proper are believed associated with this early period of
deflation.
The present active sand dune (Zone V) is equivalent to the Series I trend.
It is separated from Series II dune sands on the east margin of the site. Middle Complex Zone IV marsh sediments separate the two dunes. Deposition
of both dune trends was affected by the two caliche outcrops in the site.
They present a kind of barrier or windbreak and as such have influenced
wind flow patterns over the millenia.
Since deposition, the Series II fossil dune has been affected physically by
the shift in paleowind direction (S 60 o E to N 20 o E). Surface indications of
it are lacking east of the blowout, although present in the protected saddle
area between the caliche outcrops in the northeast quadrant. In the former
area, it either is buried intact under Series I sands or it was partially or fully
deflated as the Series I dune trend accumulated. The remnant of this older
dune in the saddle area is being subjected to severe wind scouring in the
course of which ostensibly older cultural and faunal materials are being exposed. Lithics are typically wind polished.
An hypothesis concerning the possible location of transitory camps of early site habitants is based on available data. Cultural detritus buried in
sediments of Zones II and III is rare. Similarities exist between buried Zone III
sediments in the basin and those exposed in preliminary excavation of the
south leeward margin of the fossil dune. Fossil dune sediments on the saddle between the caliche outcrops may contain stratified cultural deposits of
these early camps. They should be present above the caliche gravels and
possibly below. This area is in a dry position which would have been away
from muddy or marshy edges of the draw and/or later ponds and marshes.
The testing of this hypothesis involves more thorough excavations and
radiocarbon dates.
Local Related Sites
The as yet unexcavated Amherst site, stratigraphically similar to the lower
geologic units of Marks Beach, was discovered about 2 mi further upstream
on the same bank of Blackwater Draw (Fig. 15). An oblong area of whitish,
weathered diatomaceous earth measuring about 20 x 50 m is exposed. The
long axis of this unit is parallel to the course of the draw. The exposure may
represent an ancient pond margin. Weathered faunal material is embedded
in the surface. Lithic debris and other cultural detritus occur on but not in the
surface and could be secondarily associated. This diatomaceous unit is on
the same level as the present level of the draw and may correlate with the
Zone II sedimentary complex at Marks Beach.

Chronology
The available Marks Beach bison bone date from Zone II is 9920 + 380
years B.P. (GX-1458). Charred bone from a comparable stratigraphic unit
at Lubbock Lake produced a date of 9883 + 350 years B.P. (C-558)
(Green, 1962:115). Recent Lubbock Lake Project work in the same
stratigraphic unit (2B cienega/base) produced dates of 9960 + 80 years

266

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 15 General view of Amherst site, located about 1 km to the north of Marks
Beach. Whitish material in center is weathered diatomaceous earth deposit corresponding to Zone II at Marks Beach. Overburden formerly covering this deposit appears as a dune in the right background.

B.P. (SMU-275; diatomite humates) and 9985 + 100 years B.P.
(SMU-728; cienega humates) (Johnson and Holliday, 1980; Holliday and
Johnson, in press).
Cultural Sequences
Evidence from the Marks Beach excavation suggests sporadic habitation
from the Paleoindian, Archaic, to the Neo-American periods. Diagnostic
cultural materials are rare, with only those of the final occupants recovered
in any quantity.
Camps associated with peoples living at the site during accumulation of
the Lower and Middle Sedimentary complexes (Zones II and III) most likely
are buried in the fossil dune in the northeast quadrant of the site near the
caliche outcrops. Results from exploratory testing support this hypothesis.
Disarticulation and patterned placement of bones in the Zone II bison
bone bed were observed in a comparable level at Lubbock Lake (Johnson
and Holliday, 1980). Stacking phenomenon was noted at the Hell Gap
Casper site in Wyoming (Frison, 1974:62-69), dated to 9880 + 350 years
B.P. (RL-125) (Frison, 1974:108).
The Marks Beach bison bone bed of Zone II probably represents a Plainview occupation. The three Lubbock Lake radiocarbon dates are in association with Plainview points and date the Plainview occupation at the site.
Although the earlier date (9883 + 350 years B.P.) originally was considered a Folsom date (Green, 1962:115), current Lubbock Lake Project
work has shown it to be Plainview (Johnson and Holliday, 1980; Holliday et
al., in press). The latter humate dates support the general accuracy of the
bone date.

Honea - Marks Beach

267

Other sites with dated Plainview occupations are the Plainview type site
(9800 + 500 years B.P.; Haynes, 1967:271) and Bonfire Shelter (average
age 10,080 + 130 B.P.; Dibble, 1970:251). Materials dated in the former
were unburned bone and in the latter charcoal.
Archaic projectile points recovered from Middle Sedimentary Complex
subunits III A and III B are too few to permit much speculation. A point
similar to the anomalous Frio-Uvalde like one was recovered from a spring
conduit at Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1 and believed to date to the Early
Archaic (Haynes and Agogino, 1966:818, Fig. 7). Two other examples
were surface collected from the Rattlesnake Draw site (Smith et al.,
1966:P1. III F, G).
Two Marcos points at Marks Beach were excavated from Zone III B, a
zone associated with the possible water well; a third was collected from the
site surface. The published age range of this type places its earliest occurrence at about 4,000 years B.P. (Bell, 1958:42). If the Marcos points are
contemporaneous with the well and dating of the Rattlesnake and
Blackwater Draw wells to the Altithermal (Smith et al., 1966:306; Haynes,
1975:83) is correct, then the earliest appearance of Marcos points may be
somewhat earlier than indicated.
Ellis points are believed to date to about 3,000 B.P. and Martindale points
to 5,000 or 6,000 years ago (Bell, 1960:32, 70). The Marks Beach
specimens are from the surface and could come from either the disturbed
upper Zone III B or IV sediments. Washita points recovered from Zone V A
have an estimated age range of about A.D. 1100 to 1600 (Bell, 1958:98).
The Upper Rio Grande pottery associated with them in the site suggests a
time period of about A.D. 1350 (Honea, 1968).
FURTHER WORK
Definitive conclusions regarding Marks Beach cannot be made until the
recovered data have been studied. Similarities with other deeply stratified
sites of the region are manifest.
Renewed excavations at the site should concentrate in the following
areas. First, the fossil dune and its contents should be explored. Secondly,
both the geologic and cultural stratigraphies in the modern dune base need
to be defined in detail. Finally, excavation of the nearby Amherst site should
provide a wealth of comparative data regarding local late Pleistocene and
early Holocene geologic and cultural events since the post Pleistocene overburden was removed by deflation.
This proposed work, new data from Lubbock Lake, and definitive studies
on Blackwater Draw Locality #I (Wendorf and l~lester, 1975; Hester, 1972)
should help in gaining new insights into the early archeology of the Llano
Estacado.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Marks Beach site was discovered by Mark Randall of Littlefield in 1967, then an
undergraduate student at Texas Technological College. It was reported to this writer and we
both carried out the initial surveys there and in the general area.
Grateful thanks is here extended to the management of the ranch on which the site is located
for permission to excavate. A condition for this was that the exact location of the site is to remain confidential.

268

Texas Archeological Society

The recovery of the important data from the site would have been impossible without the
dedicated efforts of the 1968 and 1969 Texas Tech student team members: Arthur Black, Randall Callahan, Susan Driskill, Robert Hayley, Kathy King, Mark Randall, Danny Sessums, Judy
Trotter, and Doug Yarbrough. The 1970 team, from Northern Illinois University, included
Lonny and Herbert Hothan, Nancy Nelson, and Craig Scheffler, My son, Andreas, provided
invaluable help during the three excavation seasons.
A paper presenting preliminary results of the excavations at the Marks Beach site was
presented by the writer at the December 1968 annual meeting of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science in Dallas, Texas.
Special thanks are due to Eileen Johnson, editor of this journal, for the herculian efforts that
went into making this a readable report. C.C. Reeves offered invaluable advice in the field.
Errors of omission, and mistakes, are of course my own.

REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
1958
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Special Bulletin, 1:1-104.
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
1960
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Special Bulletin, 2:1-105.
Black, Craig C. (ed.)
History and Prehistory Of the Lubbock Lake Site. The Museum Journal,
1974
15:1-160.
Dibble, David S.
On the Significance of Additional Radiocarbon Dates from Bonfire
1970
Shelter, Texas. Plains Anthropologist, 15(50):251-254.
Evans, Glen
Prehistoric Wells in
1951
17(1):1-8.

Eastern New Mexico.

American Antiquity,

Frison, George
The Casper Site: A Hell Gap Bison Kill on the High Plains. Academic
1974
Press, New York.

Green, Earl
1962
The Lubbock Reservoir Site. The Museum Journal, 6:85-123.
Haynes, C, Vance Jr.
Carbon-14 Dates and Early Man in the New World. In: P.S. Martin and
1967
H.E. Wright Jrs. (eds.), Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a
Cause, pp. 267-286. Yale University Press, New Haven and London.
Pleistocene and Recent Stratigraphy. In: F. Wendorf and J.J. Hester,
1975
Late Pleistocene Environments of the Southern High Plains, pp. 57-96.
Fort Burgwin Research Center, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Haynes, C. Vance Jr. and George Agogino
Prehistoric Springs and Geochronology of the Clovis Site, New Mexico.
1966
American Antiquity, 31:812-821.
Hester, James
1972
Blackwater Locality No. 1: A Stratified, Early Man Site in Eastern New
Mexico. Fort Burgwin Research Center, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.
Holliday, Vance and B.L. Allen
Stratigraphy and Paleopedology. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.), Lubbock
in
press
Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern High Plains. University
of Texas Press, Austin.

Honea - Marks Beach

269

Holliday, Vance and Eileen Johnson
in
An Update on the Plainview Occupation at the Lubbock Lake Site.
press
Plains Anthropologist.
Holliday, Vance, Herbert Haas, and Robert Stuckenrath
in
Radiocarbon Dates from Lubbock Lake: 1950-1978. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.), Lubbock Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern
press
High Plains. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Honea, Kenneth
1968
Material Culture: Ceramics. In: Charles H. Lange (ed.), The Cochiti
Dam Archaeological Salvage Project, Part 1: Report on the 1963
Season. Museum of New Mexico Research Records, 6:111-169.
Johnson, Charles
1974
Geologic Investigations at the Lubbock Lake Site. In: C.C. Black (ed.),
History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site, The Museum Journal,
15:79-105.
Johnson, Eileen
1976
Investigations Into the Zooarchaeology of the Lubbock Lake Site. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Johnson, Eileen and Vance T. Holliday
A Plainview Kill/Butchering Locale on the Llano Estacado--The Lub1980
bock Lake Site. Plains Anthropologist, 25(88) :89-111.
Martin, P.S. and H.E. Wright Jr.
Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a Cause. Yale University Press,
1967
New Haven and London.
Newman, Allen L.
1962
Soil Survey: Lamb County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture Series, 1959(7) :1-69.
Reeves, C.C. Jr.
Chronology of West Texas Pluvial Lake Dunes. The Journal of
1965
Geology, 73(3):504-508.
Smith, Calvin, John Runyon, and George Agogino
A Progress Report on a Pre-Ceramic Site at Rattlesnake Draw, Eastern
1966
New Mexico. Plains Anthropologist, 11(34):302-313.
Wendorf, Fred and James Hester (eds.)
Late Pleistocene Environments of the Southern High Plains. Fort
1975
Burgwin Research Center, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Fox - Material Evidence

271

The Material Evidence of
Texas History

ABSTRACT
A general review of historical archeology in Texas provides an introduction to the subject for
the state. Discussion is focused on selected accomplishments of archeological investigations of
historic Indian sites, shipwrecks, French occupation, Spanish Colonial establishments, early
19th Century sites, German settlements, frontier military outposts, and archeological sites of
the second half of the 19th Century and the 20th Century. Some contemporary research problems and potential contributions of historical archeology in Texas are derived from this summary.

INTRODUCTION
Numerous books have been published detailing the events of Texas
history and every community has its own folklore, written or unwritten,
about its heritage. Archeologists study the material evidence and the cultural
environmental contexts of human behavior. They have an opportunity to
verify, correct, and supplement the documentary record of Texas history
and explain why events happened.
Systematic archeological investigation of non-lndian sites of the historic
period is a recent development in the disciplines of history and archeology in
Texas. Most work has been concerned with the state’s prehistory. Historical
archeology often is restricted as well as encouraged by legal, financial, and
political aspects. As yet, historical archeology in Texas does not have an
organized system of method and theory; although more recent, intensive
historic site investigations have adopted current scientific concepts and
methods (e.g., Gilmore, 1973; A. Fox and Livingston, 1979).
The following summary is a simplified version of the historical archeology
that has been done in Texas. It is written as an inti’oduction and by no
means is exhaustive.
TEXAS ABORIGINES
The search for material evidence of historic Indian societies has long been
an important interest of Texas archeologists. Linking early explorers’ and
missionaries’ accounts with the material remains of native peoples helps to
identify prehistoric groups and reconstruct their lifeways. It also makes it
possible to study the processes involved in the acculturation of aboriginal
peoples. Few archeological sites have been found which can be attributed
with certainty to historic Indians in Texas, particularly those with a cultural

272

Texas Archeological Society

heritage of occupation in one general environmental situation. It is difficult
to affiliate known historic Indian remains with prehistoric cultural materials.
Eastern Apaches, Tonkawas, Coahuiltecans, and Karankawas
The only archeological sites that have been investigated intensively which
are known to have been occupied by various nomadic hunting and gathering peoples of Central, South, and Coastal Texas are the Spanish Colonial
missions located in those aboriginal homelands (Hester, 1975; Gilmore,
1969; Schuetz, 1969; A. Fox et al., 1976). Identification of the material
culture produced by the mission Indians is difficult. Most of the missions
were built on sites which had been occupied by prehistoric groups. Mission
Indian materials sometimes are mixed with evidence of earlier occupations,
some dating back thousands of years (D. Fox, 1979a). The probability that
mission inhabitants collected or reused artifacts of earlier peoples further
complicates the identification of mission Indian material culture (D. Fox,
1979a:33-34).
Mission converts used European tools, weapons, ornaments, and other
implements. An analysis has not been done of how dependent they were on
European technology; or of how the mission system adapted to conditions
of the Texas frontier and was supplemented by native materials and Indian
technology.
Prior to entering the missions, the native peoples of the Edwards Plateau
and the Rio Grande Plain already had undergone generations of culture
change in adaptation to population decline, territorial displacement,
segregation and ideological pressure, loss of ethnic identity, and absorption
by invading populations (Campbell, 1975:2). As mission neophytes, Indians from different cultural backgrounds were integrated into a single,
hierarchically organized mission population (Scurlock et al., 1976:24-27)
and quickly acculturated into the laboring class necessary to support the hacienda system of New Spain (Chevalier, 1966; Fehrenbach, 1968:65).
Artifacts produced from native materials identified as mission Indian include simple pottery vessels and other ceramic artifacts, triangular arrowpoints, gun flints and other flaked lithic tools, and a few ornaments and tools
of bone and shell (Scheutz, 1969:62-77; D. Fox, 1979a). This material is
only vaguely similar to Late Prehistoric material culture. The limited, standardized nature of mission Indian artifacts appears to reflect a dependence
upon European technology, an adaptation to sedentary life, and organization of the hacienda, more than a continuation of Indian cultural traditions
(D. Fox, 1979a).
Wichitas
The Wichita speaking peoples who inhabited Northcentral Texas and adjacent parts of Oklahoma during the 18th and early 19th centuries are some
of the archeologically best known Indian cultures. Artifacts of native
manufacture found in association with European trade materials at a series
of localities in Northcentral Texas were designated the Norte~o Focus.
This archeological complex was thought to be attributable to historic Wichita
tribal groups (Duffield and Jelks, 1961:69-71; Bell et al., 1967).
Material remains of the Norte~o Focus include triangular arrowpoints,
scraping tools, knives and other flaked lithic implements, types of locally

Fox - Material Evidence

273

made and trade ware pottery, ceramic and ground stone smoking pipes, ornaments and tools of bone and shell, and other artifacts of local origin;
European trade beads, knives, axes, metal arrowpoints, gun parts, ornaments, kettle fragments, and horse trappings (Duffield and Jelks, 1961;
Harris et al., 1965; Jelks, 1967).
This material represents a hunting and gathering lifeway. The extensive
size of Norte~o Focus sites, remains of substantial dwellings, and nature
of other archeological features reflect a partial dependency upon agricultural
crops necessary to support large semipermanent villages (Suhm, 1960:67).
Trade and other forms of socioeconomic interaction with neighboring Indian
groups and Europeans also must have been an important part of historic
Wichita subsistence.
Some studies of the material culture inventory of the Norte~o Focus
and historical documentation of the Wichita were applied toward an interpretation and reconstruction of Wichita culture of the Historic Period
(Newcomb and Field, 1967). Some Norte~o Focus artifacts resemble
Late Prehistoric cultural remains referred to as the Henrietta Focus of Northcentral Texas (Duffield and Jelks, 1961:73). However, Wichita peoples
probably were not native to Texas (Suhm, 1960:66; Newcomb, 1961:248;
John, 1975:338). Norte~o Focus materials have not been compared to
their prehistoric counterparts in order to study the degree to which the
Wichita had become acculturated; or in what ways Wichita culture changed
from its prehistoric antecedents.
Comanches
The aboriginal nomads of Central, South, and Coastal Texas were the
first to disappear during the Historic Period. The culture of the more
organized, semisedentary Wichita immigrants endured a while longer. The
Comanches were among the last to surrender (Newcomb, 1961:158).
Possibly because of their mobility and their late arrival in Texas, archeological evidence of the Comanches is limited (Willey et al., 1978). A
few isolated burials have been found (Suhm, 1960:67; Word and Fox,
1975). Offerings commonly associated with Comanche burials include
horse trappings (occasionally, the remains of a horse), knives, hoes and
other tools, brass bracelets, glass beads, finger rings, conchos, hair pipes
and other ornaments, leather and fabric garments, mirrors, and aboriginal
artifacts (Word and Fox, 1975:43-52).
Several Comanche burial customs reported in ethnographic accounts
have been verified from archeological evidence (Word and Fox, 1975:48,
Table 5). Among these customs, the body was flexed and bound in position,
painted with vermillion, dressed in the finest clothes, and wrapped in a robe
or blanket. The body was buried in a crevice or secluded place along with
the deceased’s possessions, including his saddle, bridle, and favorite horse.
The grave was covered with rocks and a ceremonial fire was built.
With the warrior appropriately laid to rest, the spirit of the Comanches
lived on in the perfect afterworld. "There was plenty of game for the men to
hunt, the horses were fast, pounded corn was always available, and there
was no sorrow or suffering" (Newcomb, 1961:189).

274

Texas Archeological Society

SHIPWRECKS
Archeological investigation of shipwrecks along the coast is a recent addition to historical archeology in Texas. The successes of professional treasure
hunters during the 1960’s spurred the development of a whole new system
of antiquities legislation and archeological technology.
Meticulous study of 16th Century Spanish artifacfs from Texas tidelands
confiscated by the state resulted in the thorough description of Spanish
cargo (Olds, 1976) and development of new techniques for historic artifact
analysis and conservation (Hamilton, 1976). The location, identification,
and underwater excavation of wrecks of a Spanish Flotilla off South Padre
Island resulted in technological innovations, publication of technical archeological reports and historical documentation (e.g., McDonald and Arnold, 1979), public exhibitions, a motion picture, and a book (Arnold and
Weddle, 1979).
The science of underwater archeology in Texas is developing rapidly and
is being integrated with the study of maritime archeology in the United
States and Old World (Arnold, 1978). This has created an atmosphere conducive to reducing the high cost of managing underwater cultural resources
and balancing the popular appeal with the academic values of historical archeology. Underwater archeology, particularly that concerned with 19th
Century coastal and inland shipping, will contribute to the understanding of
the history of the people of Texas.

LA SALLE’S FORT SAINT LOUIS
While historians decipher documentary sources and attempt to plot
historic places, archeologists look for material evidence left by the people
who occupied the places. The identification of the site of La Salle’s Fort
Saint Louis on the Texas coast is an example of historical research and archeological investigation applied to historic site location (Gilmore, 1973).
Rene Robert Cavelier, Sieur de la Salle, established an ill fated colony on
the coast in 1685. On hearing of French claims to this territory, the Spanish
sent several expeditions to locate and destroy Fort Saint Louis (Weddle,
1973). In 1689, when Alonso de Leon finally found La Salle’s colony, it
had been destroyed by Indians (Bolton, 1959:398-399). Determined to
protect their territories from the French, the Spanish established the presidio
of Nuestra Se~ora del Loreto (La Bahia) in 1722 on the site of Fort Saint
Louis. The Mission Espiritu Santo de Zu~iga was established nearby
among the Karankawa Indians (Hackett, 1945).
Using a Spanish map of 1691, Bolton (1924) found a possible location of
the French colony (Keeran site) on Garcitas Creek near Lavaca Bay in Victoria County. Other historians contested Bolton’s claims (Gilmore, 1973:1).
Archeological excavations at the Keeran site (Gilmore, 1973) failed to
demonstrate that this was the location of the French colony. None of the artifacts recovered were identified positively as being representative of French
occupation (Gilmore, 1973:1).
Using a methodological approach developed to demonstrate precise Iocations of other historic sites, Gilmore (1973) formulated a conceptual model
of what the location of La Salle’s Fort should look like. This model was
based on researching historical documents to reconstruct the geography,

Fox - Material Evidence

275

physiography, and topography of the site’s location and studying archeological materials from sites of the appropriate time period to determine
what material remains of the French fort and the Spanish presidio should
be.
Gilmore (1973:20-2"1) found that certain characteristic types of Mexican
made ceramic vessels, particularly decorated majolica categories, were
recovered from the Keeran site. This material indicated that it was the site of
Presidio Loreto. The geographic, physiographic, and topographic situation
of the Keeran site also corresponded relatively well to historical accounts of
the locations of the Presidio and the French colony.
Search for artifacts characteristic of French occupation was complicated
by the fact that French trade goods such as guns and gun flints were traded
and used by others than the French (Gilmore, 1973:30). Furthermore, the
main French settlement area at the Keeran site probably was not excavated
during the investigation (Gilmore, 1973:36). Concentrating on ceramics as
a more sensitive indicator of cultural traditions, Gilmore (1973:31) found
one type of French pottery in the collection which indicated that the Keeran
site probably is the site of La Salle’s Fort Saint Louis.

SPANISH

COLONIAL MATERIAL CULTURE

Federal, state, local, and private funding has encouraged considerable
amounts of historical research and archeological investigations of Spanish
Colonial sites, particularly those in or near populated areas. Archeologists
conducted a variety of intensive and short term investigations at the better
known, best preserved Spanish Colonial sites. Their research has been extended to include the location and description of the more obscure, almost
forgotten localities, such as the missions, presidios, and ranchos of East,
South, and Coastal Texas (e.g., Hester, 1975; Adams, 1976).
The Spanish Colonial sites of the San Antonio area have received the
greatest amount of attention. Missions San Antonio de Valero (the Alamo),
Concepci’on, San Jose, San Juan Capistrano and Espada, San Femando
Cathedral, the Governor’s Palace, and sections of the acequia (irrigation)
system of Spanish Colonial San Antonio have been investigated (A. Fox et
al., 1976; D. Fox, 1979a; D. Fox et al., 1977; Scheutz, 1969).
Investigations were limited primarily to salvage or cultural resource
management operations instead of well funded, problem oriented archeological programs (Scurlock et al., 1976:64). Basic information about
the remains of the Spanish Colonial peoples was recovered. However, it
has yet to be synthesized thoroughly and applied toward the explanation of
the expansion and decline of Spanish Colonial feudalism.
Eighteenth Century material remains of Spanish Colonial Texas include
goods imported from Europe, Mexico, and China and artifacts and architecture produced locally (Gilmore, 1969:45-46, 48-49, 55-56; Schuetz, 1969;
D. Fox, 1979a). Household goods include Mexican made majolica (hand
painted, tin enamelled earthenware), lead glazed wares and red burnished
earthenware, oriental procelain and mission Indian pottery vessels, knives
and other lithic tools, Mexican grinding implements, Spanish olive jars,
needles, pins and thimbles, glassware and wine bottles, metal knives, and
kettle and boiler fragments.

276

Texas Archeological Society

Building hardware is limited primarily to hand wrought nails and hinges,
perhaps because of the difficulty of transporting large quantities of metal
overland from Mexico. Agricultural implements include hoes, axes, and
picks. Horse trappings include bridle parts, saddle parts, and buckles.
Spanish and French gun parts, saber fragments, lead, European and locally
made gun flints, triangular flaked lithic arrowpoints, and occasional projectile points of glass and copper represent weapons and hunting implements.
Religious paraphernalia such as medals, crucifixes, and rosary beads occur
at missions and other sites (Gilmore, 1969; Schuetz, 1969).
Spanish Colonial architecture was fashioned in timber, adobe, and stone,
or a combination of those materials. Techniques of temporary construction
were adapted from Mexican and local traditions. More substantial, permanent edifices were patterned in the styles of Europe and Spanish Colonial
Mexico (Gilmore, 1969; Schuetz, 1969).
Vast areas separated the frontier outposts of the Spanish Colonial Empire
in Texas from the logistical support of the core cities of New Spain. This
remoteness created difficulties in dealing with French intrusion in eastern
Texas and with invasions of Indian populations from the north; it hampered
relations between the Spaniards and sometimes threatened their existence
(Tunnell and Ambler, 1967:10-16).
Spanish Colonial material culture reflects more than 18th Century occupation and Hispanization of Texas aboriginies. It is evidence of frontier
adaptation and the development of a mixture of Spanish military, settler,
and acculturated Indian elements which was destined to evolve into Mexican society as Anglo-American colonists encountered it in the early 19th
Century (Scurlock et al., 1976:41-42).

MEXICAN, ANGLO-AMERICAN,

AND

AFRO-AMERICAN TEXANS
Minimal attention has been paid to the material remains of the period
from 1836 to the Civil War in Texas. Less is known about the archeology of
Mexican Texas of the early 19th Century. Only the best known sites of early
Anglo-American Texas have been investigated. Only a few Afro-American
sites have been identified.
Recent archeological work at the Alamo has uncovered evidence of the
battle, such as remains of fortifications and weapon related artifacts (A. Fox
et al., 1976). Archeological investigations at Washington-on-the-Brazos
State Park (Davis and Corbin, 1967) found little left of the early Texas town
of Washington. Preliminary investigations recovered minimal information
about the disturbed condition and contents of Mexican and Texan Fort
Lipantitlan (1831-1842) in Nueces County (Ing, 1976).
Many of the Spanish Colonial sites in the San Antonio area were occupied before and after the Texas Revolution. However, archeological investigations at these sites have focused on Spanish Colonial evidence (A.
Fox et al., 1976; D. Fox et al., 1977; Schuetz, 1969). The material culture
of the early 19th Century occupations is difficult to identify amidst the complexity of remains of earlier and later occupations.
Intensive archeological surveys of reservoir areas and other projects have
located and identified a variety of early 19th Century Anglo-American

Fox - Material Evidence

277

homesteads, plantations, communities, and cemeteries. Many sites of
Austin’s and DeWitt’s colonists have been identified (Mallouf et al., 1973;
D. Fox et al., 1974); however, only a few of these have received additional
study. At Palmetto Bend Reservoir, archeological investigation found that
little remained of Texana, an early inland shipping port in Jackson County
(Jackson, 1977).
Even less attention has been paid to the identification and investigation of
the archeology of Mexican cultural elements of early Texas. Only
preliminary studies have been done of Mexican settlements in the areas
around Victoria, Goliad, and San Antonio (Mallouf et al., 1973; Scurlock et
al., 1976; A. Fox, 1977; D. Fox et al., 1978; Katz, 1978). Late 18th and
19th Century architecture of the Falcon Reservoir area on the Rio Grande
was recorded (George, 1975). However, the archeology of the early 19th
Century peoples along the Rio Grande virtually is unknown.
Because historical documentation and folklore pertaining to much of early
19th Century Texas is biased, inaccurate, or lacking, the archeology of this
period can be of great value to the understanding of Texas history. The
historical archeology of early Mexican and Anglo-American Texas is in the
early stages of development. Its primary objectives are concerned with the
association of dates and functions with the various types of material remains
of th~period (Schuetz, 1969; Mallouf et al., 1973:156-193; A. Fox et al.,
1976:53-78; D. Fox et al., 1978:26).
Samples of ceramics from occupations of the first half of the 19th Century
include a high percentage of decorated British white paste earthenware
(transfer printed, featheredge, blue flown, hand painted floral design, and
mocha wares). Glass bottle fragments are from free blown vessels and containers with molded bodies, pontil scarred concave bases, and hand finished
necks and rims. Metal objects include square nails, hand wrought nails and
other hardware, harness trappings, and cast iron vessel fragments. (Mallouf
et al., 1973:156-192; D. Fox et al., 1974:216-247; A. Fox et al.,
1976:53-78; Scurlock and Fox, 1977:55-135).
Dates and functions of much of the material culture of 19th Century occupation has been determined, particularly for the period after about 1830
(A. Fox et al., 1976; Scurlock and Fox, 1977; D. Fox et al., 1978).
However, the cultural or ethnic affiliation of 19th Century historic sites in
some areas is a major problem. Mexicans, Anglo-Americans, and AfroAmerican slaves in frontier Texas were dependent upon the same markets
and used many of the same imported goods. Where people of different
backgrounds settled near each other, they probably shared many
technological elements.
Similar tools, weapons, and techniques of stone, frame, and jacal construction probably were shared by different ethnic groups of early Texas.
The place of manufacture of a particular artifact does not necessarily reflect
the nationality of its user. The occurance of a sherd of Mexican made pottery in a sample of ceramics, for example, is not necessarily representative
of Mexican occupation. A sample consisting entirely of British ceramics
could be indicative of a Mexican or Afro-American slave occupation.
Ongoing archeological research at 19th Century sites needs to be aimed
at developing ways to identify ethnic or cultural affiliation and

278

Texas Archeological Society

socioeconomic status represented by the patterning of occupational
evidence. Only then can the integration of the people who settled pre-Civil
War Texas be reconstructed.

GERMAN IMMIGRANTS
Of the diversity and large numbers of European immigrants in AngloAmerican Texas, the German settlers of the 19th Century have received the
most attention from historians and archeologists (Jordan, 1975; Flach,
1974; A. Fox and Livingston, 1979; Carter and Ragsdale, 1976). The
stability of rural German settlement, based upon the stability of the German
family as the basic socioeconomic unit (Jordan, 1975:185~ Flach, 1974:6,
51), is reflected by the sturdy, enduring presence of German farm com~
plexes in the Hill Country and on the Coastal Plain of Texas. The age, integrity, and architectural distinctiveness of these 19th Century sites has attracted public interest and encouraged some of the most exhaustive archeological investigations of historic sites done in Texas.
Archeological research at the Biegel Settlement in Fayette County (Carter
and Ragsdale, 1976) and Steiner-Schob Complex in Victoria County (A.
Fox and Livingston, 1979) recovered evidence that supports historians’
generalizations about how German immigrants became Texans. An example is the cultural rebound hypothesis (Jordan, 1966:199-200) which suggests that when the Germans first arrived they adopted the frontier architecture of Anglo-American settlers. As soon as they were established, they
returned to traditional, Old World styles of construction. After 1880, later
generations began building frame houses devoid of imported methods,
reflecting their eventual assimilation.
Because German immigrants were dependent upon the same markets of
the United States and Western Europe as other Texas frontier settlers, most
of the artifacts at German sites are like those at other 19th Century
homesteads (A. Fox and Livingston, 1979; Carter and Ragsdale, 1976).
Occasional objects from Germany, such as coins, do appear. The lifestyle of
German settlers, their reuse and recycling of construction materials and
other goods (heirlooms), is reflected in the patterning in which their occupational evidence occurs. The stability of German family residence, dispersed
settlement pattern, intensity and diversity of agrarian enterprises, and
tendency toward frugality and conservatism are archeologically observable
(A. Fox and Livingston, 1979; Carter and Ragsdale, 1976).
German immigrants maintained their cultural identity while becoming
Texans. "The result was a blend of adopted and imported traits, a partial
assimilation, which caused the Texas Germans to differ not only from
southern Anglo-American farmers, but also from their countrymen back in
Europe" (Jordan, 1966:192).

FRONTIER MILITARY OUTPOSTS
In the mid-19th Century and following the Civil War, the United States
government established a chain of forts along the Texas frontier from the
Red River to the Rio Grande for the protection of settlers against Indian
depredations. Other forts were located in western Texas along the San
Antonio-Santa Fe Road. These outposts were unfortified, planned military

Fox - Material Evidence

279

communities rather than forts. It is questionable as to what degree they were
successful at controlling the activities of hostile Indians (Westbury,
1976:22).
Most of the earlier frontier military posts were abandoned during the Civil
War. Afterward, these and new forts were occupied until Indian troubles
ceased. The more isolated posts fell into ruin. Others were maintained as
military posts into the 20th Century, particularly those in strategic places

such as towns.
Historians and archeologists have researched the Texas frontier forts,

many of which are now State Historic Parks (Black, 1974; Ing, 1976; A.
Fox, 1976; Dickson, 1976). Government reports, plans, and other records
document the organization, personnel, and operation of the forts and provide some information on life style. Archeological investigation has become
an important means of verifying this documentation and obtaining specific
information about fort layouts and architecture (A. Fox, 1976; Dickson,
1976; Black, 1974). Most archeological work has been oriented toward
recovering those details necessary for historic site restoration and management. Little has been done to study how people lived at frontier military
posts.
The forts are valuable as cultural resources for the comparative information they contain. Architectural and artifactual data which can be associated
with specific function and chronology at frontier military outposts can be
used in the identification and interpretation of contemporaneous non
military frontier homesteads and settlements. Methods of stone, frame, canvas, picket, and adobe construction employed at the forts were adapted to
local conditions and sometimes involved civilian labor and expertise. Food,
household, personal goods, and other necessities were procured from many
of the same depots and markets that supplied other frontier communities.
The assemblage of material culture of Texas forts includes the typical
ceramic, glass, and metal of the period from about 1850 to the 1880’s (D.
Fox, 1979b; Black, 1974). Brightly decorated British white paste earthenware, characteristic of pre-Civil War occupation, include featheredge, hand
painted floral design, transfer printed, and blue flown wares. Other
decorated types such as mocha and sponged wares probably were used
before and for a short time after the Civil War.
After about 1860, the market became flooded with undecorated
ironstone china, the most.common ceramic wares at the forts. Sherds of
porcelain and stoneware crockery vessels also occur. Occasional tin
enamelled and lead glazed pottery sherds are found at forts near the Mexican border (Black, 1974; A. Fox, 1976; D. Fox, 1979b).
Bottle glass at the forts is indicative of the period just before and after the
invention of the snap case which superceded the use of the pontil in the
manufacture of glass vessels. Except for an occasional free blown vessel,
most bottles from the forts have molded bases and bodies and hand finished
necks and rims. Numerous cylindrical and lettered panel bottles represent
the popularity of patent medicines which occurred during and after the Civil
War (Black, 1974; A. Fox, 1976~ D. Fox, 1979b).
Square nails, agate ware door knobs, hinges and locks, and window pane
glass are common at frontier forts. Personal items include clay tobacco pipes

280

Texas Archeological Society

of various forms, coins, clothing fasteners, pen knives, pins, and thimbles.
Harness trappings and stove parts also are common. The military nature of
the outposts is reflected in the layout of structures and their standardized
nature of construction, uniform buttons and insignia, bridle parts, and
weapon related items (lead balls, percussion caps, cartridges) (Black, 1974;
A. Fox, 1976; D. Fox, 1979b).
Each kind of artifact is indicative of details about fort construction, the
function of different post structures, the way the inhabitants dressed, andwhat they ate. The relative frequencies at which different characteristic kinds
of material culture occur reflect the life style at the frontier military posts.
Perhaps the most easily recognizable past time of the inhabitants is indicated
by the large quantity and variety of alcoholic beverage bottles found at every
fort site.
At Fort Mclntosh in 1856, Colonel J.K.F. Mansfield observed (Crimmins,
1939:237):
There is a sutler at this post, and as at other posts is permitted to sell ardent spirits. The
regulations forbid the sutler to sell ardent spirits, but the disregard of it, is excused on the
ground that others would hover around in the vicinity of the post and sell liquor to the
men, and that it was better for them to obtain it of the sutler. The regulation should
either be rescinded or enforced. Beer, cheap wine or cider would be a very good
substitute for strong clrink and no doubt satisfy all the wants of the men who have been
brought up to drink habitually.
There probably was variation in the quality of accomodations at a frontier
fort based upon rank (Black, 1974; Westbury, 1976:23). However, post
personnel as a community encountered hostile Indians and endured bad
weather and other discomforts of life in desolate places. The documentary
record and material evidence seem to indicate that enlisted men at a frontier
fort lived a routine of daily duties, boredom, and liquor in an isolated place.
AMERICAN TEXAS
During the mid-19th Century, the Texas cotton industry became
established, South Texas cattle enterprises developed, and the frontier
pushed westward. Following the Civil War, Texas gradually became a part
of a socioeconomic system that removed state sovereignty over politics,
money, and social organization. The railroads came in, as did waves of immigrants who settled the vacant and unused lands. The cotton and cattle
kingdoms of Texas were made tributary to American industrialized society
(Fehrenbach, 1968:603).
The Americanization of Texas is observable in the great variety of historic
sites dating from the last half of the 19th Century. Changes in the settlement
pattern of the lower Frio River Valley reflect changes in economies based on
cattle, sheep, and oil and gas production (Lynn et al., 1977). In the Trinity
River Basin, changes in rural Anglo-American economies are being studied.
The pattern advances from cash crops, cotton plantations and a reliance on
river navigation, to tenant farming, lumbering, and establishment of railroad
transportation~ and then to an agribusiness period of urban growth,
automotive transportation, and beef and hay production (Richner and
Bagot, 1978).
Around 1873, architectural alteration of the church of the Villa de San
Fernando created the San Fernando Cathedral of downtown San Antonio.

Fox - Material Evidence

281

The patterning of material culture reflects the rapid growth of the surrounding urban area (D. Fox et al., 1977). Other sites in metropolitan areas
have been investigated (Roberson, 1974; Ivey, 1978). Archeological
evidence at the Dolores Aldrete House in San Antonio reflects changes in
the function of the site from a 19th Century household occupation to a 20th
Century commercial property (D. Fox et al., 1978).
Archeological research has been done at sites of various developing industries of 19th Century Texas. Mills in Travis County (Durrenberger, 1965;
McEachern and Ralph, 1980), pottery kilns and lime kilns in various areas
(Malone et al., 1979), commercial salt manufacturing operations of the
Neches Saline (Skinner, 1971), Chinese railroad camps in West Texas
(Briggs, 1974), and other industrial sites have been investigated.
An increasing diversity and standardization of material goods mass produced by a greater variety of manufacturers is represented at post-Civil War
archeological sites. Technological innovations are apparent in food and
beverage containers, tools, weaponry, and other goods. The material
evidence of life in Texas after the Civil War reflects varying degrees of industrialization and Americanization. Further historic archeological research
at late 19th Century and 20th Century sites will contribute to the understanding of the ways in which the peoples of Texas have adapted to ever increasing pressures toward integration into the greater American
socioeconomic system.

FUTURE OF HISTORICAL ARCHEOLOGY IN TEXAS
Historical archeology has become an established part of cultural resource
management in Texas, attracting archeologists, historians, planners,
developers, associations, and private citizens. The increasing amount of
historical archeological research rapidly is accumulating a substantial body of
comparative data and gradually contributing to the study of culture history.
Most historical archeological investigations have been short term cultural
resource management projects. They have recovered little more than
assorted bits of information about historic material culture, architecture, subsistence technology, and settlement pattern.
The promotion of a research design for historical archeology would
stimulate healthy debate and imaginative research. Some archeologists suggest that the implementation of a regional research strategy would produce
more meaningful results (Schiffer and House, 1977:250; Patterson,
1980:4-5). However, it is possible that general acceptance of a rigorously
defined framework could stifle innovation, encourage stagnation of the
discipline, and expose historical archeology to management by government
agencies and professional organizations.
At this stage in the development of historical archeology in Texas, it
seems more appropriate to suggest some pertinent problems for further
research. The following suggestions are derived from the preceding review:
Archeological investigation of the historic Indians of Texas should be coordinated with
ethnohistorical research (Campbell, 1972, 1975, 1977). An attempt should be made to compare historic Indian remains with prehistoric cultural materials so that Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric aboriginal groups can be identified and their acculturation studied.
An analysis should be done of how dependent mission Indians were on European
technology and how colonial technology was supplemented by native materials and
technology.

282

Texas Archeological Society

The remote sensing technology used for underwater archeology should be developed further
for use in terrestrial archeology. The results of underwater archeology can be used to stimulate
public interest in Texas archeology.
The nature and meaning of the material culture of French occupation should be studied.
Spanish Colonial archeology needs to be synthesized and applied toward the explanation of
18th Century feudalism and evolution of Mexican society in Texas.
The material culture of early 19th Century Texas should be identified and interpreted. There
is need to develop methods of identifying ethnicity and socioeconomic status archeologically so
that the processes of integration in different parts of 19th and 20th Century Texas can be explained.
The assimilation of Germans and other immigrants deserves further study.
The archeological manifestation of ranking can be studied at frontier military outposts and
compared to evidence of social ranking in other archeological contexts.
The industrialization and Americanization of 19th Century Texas deserves thorough
historical and archeological investigation.
The development of Texas industry and commerce can be researched at a variety of 19th
and early 20th Century sites.
The potential value of historical archeology just now is being realized. It
can contribute to the understanding and expand the meaning of history. It
can be used as a testing ground for new approaches to prehistoric archeology and provide insights into the significance of prehistoric cultural remains. It can be applied in conjunction with historical research toward the
development of public awareness in the cultural heritage of Texas.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
At first, it seemed that drafting a general review of historical archeology in Texas would be
relatively simple. However, as the project developed and more and more personalities became
involved, the author learned how difficult it is to write even a basic summary that will satisfy
everyone in the discipline. The following people helped with their constructive comments and
encouragement to make the project an interesting and introspective exercise: W. Hayden
Whitsett, Archeologist, Texas Department of Water Resources. Anne A. Fox, Dr. Thomas R.
Hester, Steve Black, and Fred Valdez, archeologists, Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio. Alton K. Briggs, Director, Cultural Resources Management, Texas Historical Commission. Dr. Eileen Johnson, Editor, and the anonymous
reviewers of the peer review process for this volume of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society. Non-archeologists (engineers and hydrologists), Construction Grants and Water
Quality Planning Division, Texas Department of Water Resources.

REFERENCES CITED
Adams, R.E.W.
1976
The Archaeology and Ethnohistory of the Gateway Area, Middle Rio
Grande of Texas, Report of the 1976 Investigations. Mimeographed
report submitted to the National Endowment for the Humanities by The
University of Texas, San Antonio.
Arnold, J. Barto III (ed)
1978
Beneath the Waters of Time: The Proceedings of the Ninth Conference
on Underwater Archaeology. Texas Antiquities Committee Publication,
6:1-244.
Arnold, J. Barto III and Robert S. Weddle
The Nautical Archeology of Padre Island: The Spanish Shipwrecks of
1979
1554. Academic Press, New York.

Bell, R.E., E.B. Jelks, and W.W. Newcomb Jr.
A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archaeology and Ethnohistory. National
1967
Science Foundation Report, Washington, D.C.

Fox - Material Evidence

Black, Art
1974

283

Fort Lancaster State Historic Site, Crockett County, Texas, Archeological Excavations. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Historic
Sites and Restoration Branch, Archeological Report, 18:1-188.

Bolton, Herbert E.
1924
The Location of La Salle’s Colony on the Gulf of Mexico. Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, 27(3):171-189.
1959
Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. 1916 Reprint.
Barnes and Noble, New York.
Briggs, Alton K.
1974
The Archeology of 1882 Labor Camps on the Southern Pacific
Railroad, Val Verde County, Texas. Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
Campbell, T.N.
1972
Systematized Ethnohistory and Prehistoric Culture Sequences in Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 43:1-11.
1975
The Payaya Indians of Southern Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological
Association Special Publication, I: 1-30.
Ethnic Identities of Extinct Coahuiltecan Populations: Case of the Juan1977
ca Indians. Texas Memorial Museum, The Pearce-Sellards Series,
26:1-76.
Carter, Emily Suzanne and Crystal Sasse Ragsdale
1976
Biegel Settlement: Historic Sites Research, Fayette Power Project,
Fayette County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin, Research Report, 59:1-132.
Chevalier, Francois
1966
Land and Society in Colonial Mexico: The Great Hacienda. University
of California Press, Berkeley.
Crimmins, M.L. (ed)
Colonel J.K.F. Mansfield’s Report of the Inspection of the Department
7939
of Texas in 1856. Southwestern Historical Quarterly, 42:215-257.
Davis, E. Mott and James E. Corbin
1967
Archeological Investigations at Washington-on-the-Brazos State Park in
1966. State Building Commission Archeological Program Report,
5:1-58.
Dickson, D. Bruce
Archaeological Research at Fort Richardson State Park, Summer 1975.
1976
Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University Report, 28:1-101.
Duffield, Lathel F. and Edward B. Jelks
1961
The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology,
Archaeology Series, 4:1-83.
Durrenberger, E. Paul
Anderson’s Mill (41TV130): A Historic Site in Travis County, Texas,
1965
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 36:1-69.
Fehrenbach, T.R.
1968
Lone Star: A History of Texas and the Texans. MacMillan, Toronto.
Flach, V.
1974

A Yankee in German America: Texas Hill Country. Naylor, San Antonio.

284

Texas Archeological Society

Fox, Anne A.
1976
Archaeological Investigations at Fort Griffin State Historic Park,
Shackelford County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report,
23:1-48.
The Archaeology and History of the Spanish Governor’s Palace Park.
1977
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report, 31:1-43.
Fox, Anne A., Feris A. Bass Jr., and Thomas R. Hester
1976
The Archaeology and History of Alamo Plaza. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report, 16:1-105.
Fox, Anne A. and Katherine Livingston
1979
Historical, Architectural and Archaeological Investigations at the
Steiner-Schob Complex, Victoria County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report, 52:1-99.
Fox, Daniel E.
1979a The Lithic Artifacts of Indians at the Spanish Colonial Missions, San Antonio, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, Special Report, 8:1-47.
1979b Archaeological Testing at Fort Mclntosh, Laredo Junior College Campus, Laredo, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report, 68:1-34.
Fox, Daniel E., Robert J. Mallouf, Nancy O’Malley, and William M. Sorrow
Archeological Resources of the Proposed Cuero I Reservoir, DeWitt and
1974
Gonzales Counties, Texas. Texas Historical Commission and Texas
Water Development Board, Archeological Survey Report, 12:1-311.
Fox, Daniel E., Dan Scurlock, and John W. Clark Jr.
1977
Archeological Excavations at San Fernando Cathedral, San Antonio,
Texas: A Preliminary Report. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Special Report, 22:1-42.
Fox, Daniel E., Fred Valdez Jr., and Lynn Osborne Bobbitt
1978
An Archaeological Assessment of the Dolores Aldrete House Property,
San Antonio, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report, 58:1-32.
George, Eugene
1975
Historic Architecture of Texas: The Falcon Reservoir. Texas Historical
Commission, Texas Historical Foundation, Austin.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1969
The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical Site Identification. State
Building Commission Archeological Program Report, 16:1-151.
1973
The Keeran Site: The Probable Site of La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas.
Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Report,
24:1-100.
Hackett, Charles W.
1945
The Marquis of San Miguel de Aguayo and His Recovery of Texas from
the French, 1719-1723. Southwestern Historical Quarterly,
49(2):193-214.

Fox - Material Evidence

285

Hamilton, Donald
Conservation of Metal Objects from Underwater Sites: A Study in
1976
Methods. Texas Antiquities Committee Publication, 1:1-108.
Harris, R.K., Inus Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine, and Jerrylee Blaine
1965
A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack
Site, Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
36:287-363.
Hester, Thomas R.
1975
Material Culture at San Bernardo: Preliminary Comments. In: R.E.W.
Adams, The Archaeology and Ethnohistory of the Gateway Area, Middle Rio Grande of Texas, pp. 23-36. Mimeographed report submitted to
the National Endowment for the Humanities by The University of Texas,
San Antonio.
Ing, J. David
1976
Fort Lipantitlan State Historic Site, Nueces County, Texas: Archeological Testing - 1974. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Historic Sites and Restoration Branch, Archeological Report, 16:1-21.
Ivey, J.E.
1978

Archaeological Investigations at the Gresser House, 41BX369, San Antonio, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report, 60:1-32.

Jackson, Marsha F.
1977
Texana: Excavations at a Nineteenth Century Inland Coastal Town,
Jackson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin, Research Report, 57:1-166.
Jelks, Edward B. (ed)
1967
The Gilbert Site: A Norte~o Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Areheological Society, 37:1-248.
John, E.A.H.
1975
Storms Brewed in Other Men’s Worlds: The Confrontation of lndians,
Spanish, and French in the Southwest, 1540-1795. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.
Jordan, T.G.
German Seed in Texas Soil: Immigrant Farmers in Nineteenth Century
1975
Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Katz, Paul R.
1978
Archaeological and Historical Investigations in the Arciniega Street
Area, Downtown San Antonio, Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research, The Univesity of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological
Survey Report, 61:1-77.
Lynn, Warren M., Daniel E. Fox, and Nancy O’Malley
1977
Cultural Resource Survey of Choke Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak and
McMullen Counties, Texas. Texas Historical Commission and Texas
Water Development Board, Archeological Survey Report, 20:1-273.
Mallouf, Robert J., Daniel E. Fox, and Alton K. Briggs
1973
An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of Palmetto Bend Reservoir,
Jackson County, Texas, Texas Historical Commission and Texas Water
Development Board, Archeological Survey Report, 11:1-218.

286

Texas Archeological Society

Malone, James M., Georgeanna H. Greer, and Helen Simmons
Kirbee Kiln: A Mid-19th Century Texas Stoneware Pottery. Office of the
1979
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Report, 31:1-60.
McDonald, David and J. Barto Arnold III
Documentary Sources for the Wreck of the New Spain Fleet of 1554.
1979
Texas Antiquities Committee Publication, 8:1-330.
McEachern, Michael and Ronald W. Ralph
1980
Archeological Investigations at the Thomas F. McKinney Homestead,
Travis County, Texas: An Experiment in Historical Archeology Part I
Bulletin of the Texas Archeologtcal Society, 51:5-208.
Newcomb, W.W. Jr.
1960
Indian Tribes of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
29:1-34.
1961
The Indians of Texas. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Newcomb, W.W. Jr. and W.T. Field
1967
An Ethnohistoric Investigation of the Wichita Indians in the Southern
Plains. In: R.E. Bell, E.B. Jelks, and W.W. Newcomb Jr., A Pilot Study
of Wichita Indian Archaeology and Ethnohistory, pp. 240-331. National Science Foundation Report, Washington, D.C.
Olds, Doris
Texas Legacy from the Gulf: A Report of Sixteenth Century Shipwreck
1976
Materials Recovered from the Texas Tidelands. Texas Memorial
Museum, Miscellaneous Papers, 5:1-204~ Texas Antiquities Committee
Publication, 2:1-204.
Patterson, L.W.
Regional Synthesis in Texas. Texas Archeology: Newsletter of the Texas
1980
Archeological Society, 24(4):4-5.
Richner, Jeffrey J. and Joe T. Bagot
1978
A Reconnaissance Survey of the Trinity River Basin, 1976-1977.
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Archeology Research Program, Research Report, 113:1-287.
Roberson, Wayne R.
1974
The Carrington-Covert House: Archeological Investigation of a 19thCentury Residence in Austin, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Special Report, 25:1-142.
Scheutz, Mardith K.
1969
The History and Archeology of Mission San Juan Capistrano, San Antonio, Texas. Vol. II, Description of the Artifacts and Ethno-History of
the Coahiltecan Indians. State Building Commission Archeological Program Report, 11:1-133.
Schiffer, Michael B. and John H. House
1977
An Approach to Assessing Scientific Significance. In: M.B. Schiffer and
G.J. Gumerman, Conservation Archaeology: A Guide for Cultural
Resource Management Studies, pp. 249-257. Academic Press, New
York.
Scurlock, Dan, Adan Benavides Jr., Dana Isham, and John W. Clark Jr.
1976
An Archeological and Historical Survey of the Proposed Mission
Parkway, San Antonio, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Archeological Survey Report, 17:1-351.

Fox -- Material Evidence

287

Skinner, S. Alan
Historical Archeology of the Neches Saline, Smith County, Texas.
1971
Texas Historical Survey Committee, Archeological Report, 21:1-45.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960
A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 29:63-107.
Tunnell, Curtis D. and J. Richard Ambler
Archeological Excavations at .Presidio San Agustin de Ahumada. State
1967
Building Commission Archeological Program Report, 6:1-116.
Weddle, Robert S.
1973
Wilderness Manhunt. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Westbury, William A.
Archeological Investigations at Fort Richardson State Park, 1976. Texas
1976
A&M University, Amhropology Laboratory Report, 31:1-68.
Willey, Patrick S., Billy R. Harrison, and Jack T. Hughes
1978
The Sand Pit Site. In: Jack T. Hughes and Patrick S. Willey, Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Archeological Survey Report,
24:233-253.
Word, James H. and Anne A. Fox
The Cogdell Burial in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas At1975
cheological Society, 46:1-63.

289

NOTES

Attributes of Experimental Folsom
Points and Channel Flakes

ABSTRACT
Physical attributes of large samples of experimental Folsom points and channel flakes are
presented and discussed in regard to related manufacturing technology. Comparison with archeological specimens is limited by data availability. The use of lever devices for pressure flaking to produce channel flakes is described.

INTRODUCTION
The Folsom fluted projectile point was one of the first point types identiffed as Paleoindian (Wormington, 1957:23-41). It is of wide interest both
because of its antiquity and fine workmanship. Folsom points are described
in several works (Bell, 1958:26; Judge, 1973:165; Suhm and Jelks,
1962:193; Wilmsen, 1974:Table 5.9; Wilmsen and Roberts, 1978:Table
43). Articles on Folsom point replication also are available (Crabtree, 1966;
Flenniken, 1978; Sollberger, 1977).
Not much quantitative data are available on the attributes from large
samples of Folsom points in order to establish what is typical and what variations can be expected. For example, regional variations may exist in average
dimensions. Variations might be caused by raw material types, work of individual craftsmen, or by localized cultural preferences.
Data are presented on physical attributes of large samples of experimental
Folsom points and channel flakes made by the senior author. These data
could be useful for the following reasons: 1) provides quantitative data to
supplement limited data available from archeological sites; 2) gives the basis
for comparison of an experienced replicator’s product with archeological
materials; 3) a large statistical sample is presented not previously available in
the literature; 4) may be useful to others in future replication work; and 5)
experimental data may be useful in determining aboriginal manufacturing
methods.

290

Texas Archeological Society

Channel flakes are specialized flakes produced to form the long
longitudinal flake scars that are the flutes on Folsom points. Except for
Lindenmeier (Wilmsen and Roberts, 1978) and Hanson (Frison and
Bradley, 1980), little site information is available on the physical attributes of
channel flakes removed from Folson point preforms. Several reports
(Hester, 1972:134; Judge, 1973: Fig. 14; Tunnell, 1977:152) illustrate only fragments of folsom channel flakes although sample sizes are fairly large.
At Lindenmeier (Wilmsen and Roberts, 1978:101), there are 948 channel
flake specimens and only one is unbroken.
The senior author experiences breakage of most channel flakes during
replication of Folsom points. This breakage occurs because these thin flakes
bend away from the preform while still under load during the fracture time
interval. Breakage of these fragile flakes also could occur rather easily from
fortuitous causes. A large collection of experimental Folsom channel flakes
resulted from this replication work. Most complete specimens of these channel flakes were reconstructed by gluing fragments together. A summary of
the attributes of this collection is presented; Lindenmeier (Wilsen and
Roberts, 1978) and Hanson (Frison and Bradley, 1980) data are summarized for comparison.
MEASUREMENT METHODS
Attributes of Folsom points and channel flakes (Fig. 1) were made using
the same methods as for the measurement of prismatic blades (Sollberger
and Patterson, 1976:518). A dial caliper with an accuracy of 0.1 mm was
used to obtain linear dimensions. A 10 power magnifier was used to examine qualitative attributes.
An optical comparator was used to measure striking platform and proximal end angles of channel flakes. This instrument is a 7 power magnifier
with a protractor reticle. The striking platform angle is the angle of the striking platform surface to the main preform face. The bevel at the striking platform edge formed during platform preparation was ignored. This short bevel
does not represent the overall geometry involved in flake removal
mechanics. The proximal end angle is the total angle included between
lateral edges as these edges flare out from the striking platform. This attribute is a distinctive feature of channel flakes. This angle is generally clearly
defined, with little curvature of the lateral edges at this location. After full
width is reached, lateral edges become parallel or taper gradually toward the
distal end.

KNAPPING TECHNIQUES
Force application techniques to produce long, relatively narrow Folson
channel flakes are varied. Crabtree (1966) replicated Folsom points by both
pressure and indirect percussion and more recently by direct percussion
(Crabtree, 1979:10). Flenniken (1978) used indirect percussion and
Sollberger (1977) used level pressure from two types of mechanical devices.
These experimental knappers agree that the preform must be securely held
during channel flake removal. Striking platforms for channel flakes must be
well isolated by pressure flaking and well smoothed by grinding. The

Sollberger and Patterson - Experimental Points and Hakes

291

preform must be uniformly thinned for successful channel flakes to be produced. Dorsal ridges are not present to act as force guides as on prepared
cores used to make long, narrow prismatic blades.
For the Folsom replicates described, two level pressure methods were used. In both methods, the striking platform angle employed averages about
80°. Approximately 90% of the replicates were fluted with a device specially made for this purpose. The preform is held in a vertical position by a
wood clamp that presses against both lateral edges, with the distal end of the
preform resting on a wood anvil. The hooked end of a level arm is placed on
the striking platform that has been prepared for channel flake removal, and
uniform pressure is applied to remove the flake (Fig. 2).
The other level pressure method used involves use of a two pronged fork
(Fig. 3). The fork notch serves as a fulcrum point for a separate pointed
pressure flaking tool that is used as a level to apply force. Use of a fork for
pressure flaking was previously described (Sollberger and Patterson,
1976:524; Sollberger, 1978).
Regardless of which force application technique is used, the process of
fluting Folsom points requires exacting knapping procedures. Folsom fluted
points are more difficult to manufacture than Clovis fluted points since
Folsom points are much thinner and subject to breakage. Folsom flutes
generally are relatively much longer in proportion to point length than
Clovis flutes.
The exact techniques used by aboriginal knappers to flute Folsom points
is still subject to speculation. However, a tool made from the first brow tine
of an elk antler from the Agate Basin site (Frison, 1980) suggests that a lever

~"

PROXIMAL

~

END

ANGLE

~ STRIKING
PLATFORM ANGLE

FORCE BULB

’,’==--’"--THICKNESS

DISTAL END

Fig. 1 Channel flake measurements.

292

Texas Archeological Society

PREFORM

/

CLAMP BINDINGS

CLAMP

ANVILBOARD

TABLE TOP

FOiCE

D
WITH ANTLER TIP

Fig. 2 Lever pressure devices.

FORK
PREFORM

!

Fig. 3 Fork pressure devices.

Sollberger and Patterson - Experimental Points and Flakes

293

device was used at least sometimes. A distinctive notch in the tip may indicate that this was the pressure contact point with the Folsom preform for
the fluting operation. Frison (1980) proposed that the base of this antler tine
would have been fastened to some type of level pole.

FOLSOM POINT ATTRIBUTES
Data presented on attributes of Folsom point replicates (Fig. 4) are based
on 36 points (Table 1). Data on individual points are given in Tables 2 and
3. Table 2 shows replicates where flutes on both faces extend the entire
length of the point. Table 3 shows replicates where a flute on only one face
extends the entire length of the point, with the flute on the other face terminating short of the distal end.
The minimum thickness of a completed Folsom point is related to the
preform thickness after removal of the first flute. This relationship is because
the second flute flake cannot be generally thicker than the thickness between
the two channel flake scars without causing breakage. Replicates for this
study have thicknesses of 2.6 to 4.7 mm (Table 1). This range can be compared with Lindenmeier Folsom point thicknesses of 3.3 to 4.3 mm
(Wilmsen and Roberts, 1978:Table 43) and some New Mexico Folsom
point thicknesses of 3.4 to 4.3 mm (Judge, 1973:165, 213). Three Folsom
points from Hanson (Frison and Bradley, 1980:Table 4) have thicknesses of
4.10, 3.85, and 3.80 mm.
Because of the small published archeological data base, modern
replicators do not know if they are really replicating typical Folsom points. A
few skillful flintknappers can do well, however, in replicating the few Folsom
specimens generally available for study. One of the main values in Folsom
point replication has been to demonstrate the amount of skill needed to produce this point type. Making flutes on Folsom points is a highly specialized
process.
A better summary of archeological data on dimensions of large numbers
of Folsom points is needed in order to judge what is typical and what may
represent regional variations. There can be considerable variation in Folsom
point dimensions. Suhm and Jelks (1962:193) give a range of 3 to 8 cm for
lengths of Texas Folsom points. Hester (1972:124) gives a length range of
2.5 to 5.0 cm for Folsom points from Blackwater Draw Locality No. I in
New Mexico. Roberts (1943:Fig. I) illustrates a Folsom point with a length
of 11.9 cm and two others of 4.5 cm length. Wilmsen and Roberts
(1978:Table 43) show lengths of 2.9 to 3.6 cm for 31 specimens, but a
number of these may have been shortened by resharpening.
In describing Folsom point replicates, Flenniken (1978:474) selected five
specimens from 100 made as a random sample for tabulation of quantitative
attributes. This set, however, is not a statistically significant sample. Large
samples should be used, when available, to minimize errors that can result
from small samples (Arkin and Colton, 1970:160).
Since the Folsom point replicates summarized in Tables 2 and 3 were
made over a long time period, data are not available on corresponding
preform dimensions. The majority of these replicates are made of chert from
Georgetown, Lake Belton, and other miscellaneous Edwards Plateau
sources.

294

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 4 Folsom point replicates.

CHANNEL FLAKE ATTRIBUTES
The attributes of 66 complete experimental Folsom channel flakes (Fig. 5)
are summarized in Table 4. Data are not available to match individual channel flakes with finished point specimens. Many of the attributes are predictable from the technology involved. For example, the dorsal faces of flakes
are covered with fine, roughly parallel flake scars formed during uniform
thinning of the preform. Channel flakes have striking platform isolation flake
scars starting at the platform edge on the dorsal face. Striking platforms
show evidence of grinding. These channel flakes are characteristically long
and narrow with parallel or gradually tapering lateral edges. Striking platforms are small, relative to flake width. In the replicate collection, the ratio of
average flake width to average striking platform width is 4:1.
Striking platforms tend to be nearly perpendicular to the dorsal faces, with
an average striking platform angle of 79°. The angle of force application
used generally was approximately 15° from the dorsal face, applied toward
the dorsal face. Over 2/3 of these flakes are lipped at the proximal end on
the ventral face. Specimens have diffuse bulbs of force. Concentrated bulbs
of force were not observed, as are common when using direct percussion.
Almost all specimens had radiating (undulating) force lines on the ventral
faces. Fine grained chert fractures cannot be produced without force lines at
channel flake thicknesses.

Sollberger and Patterson - Experimental Points and Flakes

295

Table 1
Summary of Attributes of Folsorn Replicates
Attribute
length, mm
width, mm
thickness, mm (A)
L/T ratio
W/T ratio

Average

Std. Dev.

Range

52.7
22.4
3.6
15.1
6.4

6.2
1.9
0.5
2.1
0.7

38.0-73.5
19.0-26.4
2.6- 4.7
11.9-21.0
4.7- 7.7

(A) thickness at fluted section

Table 2
Attributes of Type 2 Folsorn Replicates (A)
Sample Number

Length (ram)

Width (mm)

Thickness (mm)

L/T

W/T

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
I0
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

38.0
49.0
42.0
63.0
48.0
55.0
45.0
57.0
47.6
48.8
50.0
48.0
52.0
48.7
55.0
56.0
43.0
51.0
52.5
52.0

20.0
19.5
21.5
19.0
23.0
19.0
20.2
21.7
21.1
20.5
23.0
23.0
23.4
19.5
19.8
25.0
23.2
22.0
24.2
22.4

2.6
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
2.8
3.4
3.5
3.1
3.1
3.5
3.4
3.1
3.0
3.4
314
3.6
4.0
4.1
3.9

14.6
16.3
14.0
21.0
16.0
19.6
13.2
16.3
15.4
15.7
14.3
14.1
16.8
16.2
16.2
16.5
11.9
12.8
12.8
13.3

7.7
6.5
7.2
6.3
7.7
6.8
5.9
6.2
6.8
6.6
6.6
6.8
7.5
6.5
5.8
7.4
6.4
5.5
5.9
5.7

Average
Std. Dev.
Range

50.1
5.7
38.0-63.0

21.6
1.8
19.0-25.0

3.3
0.4
2.6-4.1

15.4
2.2
11.9-21.0

6.6
0.7
5.5-7.7

There are almost equal numbers of channel flakes with parallel lateral
edges and with lateral edges tapering toward the distal ends. Over 2/3 of
these flakes were broken during original detachment from the preforms. The
residual striking platforms generally are roughly rectangular, and the striking
platform width averages about twice the thickness. Lateral edges flare out
sharply from the striking platform. This condition is caused by the nature of
the platform isolation geometry. This flare is the Hertzian Cone force-flare,
but modified by platform isolation and preform facial convexity. There are
about equal numbers of flakes with feathered or abrupt (snapped or hinged)
terminations on the distal ends. These channel flakes do not have much
curvature because of the nature of flake removal (from flat faces of
preforms).

296

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 5 Channel flake replicates: (top) dorsal surfaces; bottom) ventral surfaces.

Widths and thicknesses of Folsom channel flakes are compared-in Table 5
for replicates (Table 4), Hanson (Frison and Bradley, 1980: Fig. 67), and
Lindenmeier (Wilmsen and Roberts, 1978:Table 38). The average dimensions in these collections seem to be fairly close. This situation may indicate
some consistency in the overall technology involved.

SUMMARY
Information is presented on various attributes of experimental Folsom
points and channel flakes from relatively large samples. Some of the most
significant attributes of channel flakes could be predicted from the
technology involved in the fluting process. Since most Folsom channel

Sollberger and Patterson - Experimental Points and Flakes

297

Table 3
Attributes of Type 2 Folsom Replicates (A)

Sample
Number

Length (mm)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

47.0
50.0
48.8
51.0
53.0
56.1
54,8
48.6
54,1
55.3
73.5
51.5
56.7
60,8
63.5
58.0

Average
Std. Dev.
Range

55,2
6.6
47.0-73.5

Width (mm)

Thickness
at Fluted
Section (mm)

Thickness
Beyond Fluted
Section (mm)

L/T"

W/T

21.5
21.0
20.1
26.4
22.5
21.9
21.0
22.8
22.1
24.0
22.8
24.6
25.0
25.6
25.5
22.2

3.8
3.4
3.1
3.5
3.7
3.0
3.5
3.8
3.5
3.9
3.9
4.3
3.9
4.3
4.5
4.7

3.3
4.6
3.5
3.4
3.8
3.8
2.8
2.9
3.3
4.0
4.4
4,0
3.7
4.4
4.4
3.7

12.4
14.7
15.7
14.6
14.3
18.7
15.7
12.8
15.5
14.2
18.8
12.0
14.5
14.1
14.1
12.3

5.7
6.2
6.5
7.5
6.1
7.3
6.0
6.0
6.3
6.2
5.8
5.7
6.4
6.0
5.7
4.7

23.1
1.9
20.1-26.4

3.8
0.5
3.0-4.7

3.8
0.5
2.8-4.6

14.7
2.0
12.0-18.8

6. I
0.6
4.7-7

A-Flute On Only One Face Extends Entire Length Of Point
* Ratios Use Thickness At Fluted Section

flakes found on archeological sites will probably be broken, it is recommended that emphasis be placed on proximal end fragments. Many of the
significant attributes of channel flakes are on this type of fragment.
Information presented represents the results of a single flintknapper, using
two pressure techniques for channel flake removal. Other flintknappers who
replicate Folsom points should publish similar data on large samples for
comparison. Of most importance is the need to publish more data on
Folsom points and channel flakes from archeological sites in order to
establish a better picture of the quantitative nature and variability of these artifacts.

298

Texas Archeological Society

Table 4
Attributes of Experimental Folson Channel Flakes (sample size = 66)
Attributes
Width (mm)
Length (mm)
Thickness (ram)
Length/Width Ratio
Width/Thickness Ratio
Ground Str. Plat.
Sir. Plat. Width (mm)
Str. Plat. Thk. (mm)
Plat. Width/Plat. Thk.
Str. Plat. Angle (degrees)
Prox. End Angle (degrees)
Force Bulb Type
lipped
diffuse
Force Bulb Thk. (ram)
Radiating Force Lines
Plat. Prep. Flake Scars
Lateral Edges
Uniform Parallel
Irregular Parallel
Uniform Tapered
Irregular Tapered
Distal End Termination
abrupt
feathered
Number of Breaks
none
one
two
three or more

Percent

Average

Range

Std. Dev.

-----100.0
------

15.6
48.9
2.3
3.2
7.0

11.5-21.3
29.3-69.0
1.5- 4.4
2.1~ 4.1
4.4-11.9

2.34
8.41
0.50
0.49
1.32

3.8
1.7
2.3
79.2
76.1

2.1- 5.7
1.1- 2.5
1.4- 3.5
65-90
50-120

0.62
0.32
0.46
7.53
14.51

2.4

1.7- 4.3

0.59

68.2
31.8
-97.0
100.0
27.3
19.7
33.3
19.7
56
44
30.3
37.9
24.2
7.6

Table 5
Comparison of Folsom Channel Flake Dimensions
Dimensions (ram)
Width
average
range
Thickness
average
range

Replicates (A)

Hanson (B)

Lindenmeier (C)

15.6
11.5-21.3

15
11-23

15.3
--

2.3
1.5-4.4

1.98
1.5~3.3

1.84
--

A-Table 4
B-Frison and Bradley (1980:Fig. 67)
C-Wilmsen and Roberts (1978:Table 38)

REFERENCES CITED
Arkin, Herbert and Raymond R. Colton
1970
Statistical Methods. Barnes and Noble Books, New York.

Sollberger and Patterson - Experimental Points and Hakes

299

Bell, Robert E.
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
1958
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin, 1:1-104.
Crabtree, Don E.
1966
A Stoneworker’s Approach to Analyzing and
Lindenmeier Folsom. Tebiwa, 9(1):3-39.
1979
Craftsman. Flintknappers’ Exchange, 2(2):8-13.

Replicating

the

Flenniken, J. Jeffrey
Reevaluation of the Lindenmeier Folsom: A Replication Experiment in
1978
Lithic Technology. American Antiquity, 43(3):473-480.
Frison, George C.
1980
Fluting of Folsom Projectile Points: New Archaeological Evidence.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Philadelphia.
Frison, George C. and Bruce A. Bradley
1980
Folsom Tools and Technology at the Hanson Site, Wyoming. University
of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Hester, James J.
1972
Blackwater Locality No. I: A Stratified Early Man Site in Eastern New
Mexico. Fort Burgwin Research Center, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.
Judge, W. James
Paleoindian Occupation of the Central Rio Grande Valley in New M’ex1973
ico. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Roberts, Frank H.H. Jr.
1943
Evidence for a Paleo-lndian in the New World. Acta Americana,
1(2):171~201.
Sollberger, J.B.
1977
On Fluting Folsom: Notes on Recent Experiments. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, 48:47-52.
1978
Lever Flaking as a Credible Alternative to Hand-Held Pressure Flaking.
Flintknappers ’ Exchange, 1(1) :6-7.
Sollberger, J.B. and L.W. Patterson
1976
Prismatic Blade Replication. American Antiquity, 41(4):517-531.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
1962
theological Society Special Publication, 1:1-299.

Texas At-

Tunnell, Curtis
1977
Fluted Projectile Point Production as Revealed by Lithic Specimens
from the Adair-Steadman Site in Northwest Texas. In: Eileen Johnson
(ed.), Paleoindian Lifeways, The Museum Journal, 17:140-168.
Wilmsen, Edwin N.
Lindenmeier: A Pleistocene Hunting Society. Harper and Row, New
1974
York.
Wilmsen, Edwin N. and Frank H.H. Roberts Jr.
1978
Lindenmeier, 1934-1974: Concluding Report on Investigations.
Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology, 24:1-187.
Wormington, N.M.
1957
Ancient Man in North America (4th edition). Denver Museum of Natural
History Popular Series, 4:1-322.

Jimmy L. Mitchell,
Thomas R. Hester,
Frank Asaro, and
Fred Stross

ABSTRACT
This brief note reports the x-ray fluorescence analysis of obsidian artifacts recovered from the
McGarraugh Ranch (41RB2) and Tarbox Creek (41HC2) sites in the Texas Panhandle. the
obsidian specimens are distinguished by a high Niobium content. In this respect, they are very
similar to obsidian recovered from archeological sites in the Radium Springs area of Southcentral New Mexico and a few sites in Western and Southcentral Texas. Such high Niobium obsidian appears to match obsidian from the Valles caldera, a basin in the Valles mountains west of
Santa Fe, New Mexico. Dating the use of High Nb obsidian is problematic. Associated artifacts
at the McGarraugh Ranch suggest a Panhandle Aspect occupation which is generally dated at
A.D. 1200 to 1450. Tarbox Creek artifacts include both Panhandle Aspect and an earlier component. The Radium Springs and other sites with High Nb obsidian are dated A.D. 900 to
about 1400. High Nb obsidian may have potential as a horizon marker for this period in Texas
and New Mexico archeology.

INTRODUCTION
Trace element analysis of obsidian artifacts is a technique which has been
used extensively over the past two decades to infer prehistoric trade relationships among regions of the United States and Mexico, in the Near East,
and in other parts of the world (Hester et al., 1975). Trace element quantitles are determined through x-ray fluorescence (XRF) and these data compared with information from known obsidian flows (Michels, 1973:215).
Since the pattern of relative quantities is unique to each geologic source, inferences can reasonably be made that the obsidian originated in a specific
geographic source.
Previous obsidian trace element analysis research suggests that much of
the obsidian found in Texas archeological sites comes from areas of New
Mexico (Hester and Mitchell, 1974) or from obsidian sources in Mexico
(Hester, House, et al., 1975). Sources in Mesoamerica are defined fairly

302

Texas Archeological Society

well but obsidian flows in parts of the United States, particularly New Mexico, are not yet completely documented (Stross et al., 1978).

OBSIDIAN SPECIMENS
Three obsidian artifacts were surface collected in the Texas Panhandle;
one from the Tarbox Creek site (41HC2) in Hutchinson County, and the
others from the McGarraugh Ranch site (41RB2) in Roberts County (Fig.

I).
Tarbox Creek (41HC2)
A number of early expeditions (Holden, 1929; Moorehead, 1931)
documented a massive, multiroom structure at Tarbox Creek. Much of the
area was subsequently destroyed by oil production activities. In recent
years, surface collecting on the hill top area surrounding the ruin produced
Washita and Harrell arrowpoints, a small corner notched point (possibly a
Glendo), a large oval knife, a grinding basin, and several large, expanding
base dart points. The dart points are basally smoothed and similar to points
found at several Panhandle sites; these have been called Tarbox Creek
points (Mitchell, 1976). An obsidian flake was recovered at the edge of the
site (Fig. 2a); this specimen was made available for trace element analysis
and designated Tex 10.
McGarraugh Ranch Site (41RB2)
The McGarraugh Ranch site is a previously unreported site in northwestern Roberts County; its exact location is on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. It is a village site with at, least six Panhandle Aspect houses still visible on the surface. Several houses are severely
disturbed and a portion of the site was destroyed by a county road. The site
extends from creekside to a saddleback which connects a small isolated
mesa to the western edge of the canyon.
An isolated house site, relatively undisturbed, is on top of a shelf three
quarters up the western edge of the saddleback. The single line of upright
stones marking the house outline (23 x 25 ft) is broken on the east side by an
8 ft entryway consisting of a double line of stones about 18 in apart. This entryway faces a notch in the eastern wall of the valley across the creek from
the site.
Materials collected from the surface of this site include Fresno and
Washita arrowpoints, diamond shaped beveled knives, a greenstone celt, a
sandstone grooved arrowshaft smoother, scrapers, and fragments of mussel
shell. Pottery fragments collected include Borger Cordmarked, a smoothed plainware (Borger Plain?), a reddish, smoothed ware which is atypical of
the Panhandle Aspect, and Pueblo trade pottery which is decorated with
either parallel black lines or a single line with dots. This decorated ware appears to be Chupadero Black-on-White, a type reported at several sites in
the Texas Panhandle (Crabb, 1968).
Two obsidian fragments also were recovered from the site; one small irregular piece was analyzed in the current project, labeled Tex 7 (Fig. 2b). A
second specimen was analyzed previously in a pilot project by Robert Jack;
it was identified in Jack’s unpublished records as a "Canadian River"
specimen (Fig. 2c).

Mitchell et al. - Trace Element Analysis

303

TRACE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
The obsidian specimens were analyzed at the Lawrence Berkeley
Laboratory and University of California at Berkeley. Results of the XRF
analysis are shown in Table I, which displays the abundances in parts-permillion except for Iron (Fe) which is shown as a percentage. Data shown for
the Canadian River specimen result from converting Jack’s measurements

Fig. I Geographic relationship of sites discussed in text: 1) Valles Caldera; 2) Radium
Springs area; 3) Northern Jornada Mogollon area; 4) Hutchinson County; 5)
Roberts County; 6) Andrews County; 7) Dimmit County; 8) Travis County; 9)
Williamson County; and 10) Bexar County. Map prepared by Kathy Bareiss.

Texas Archeological Society

304

I

I

a

c

b
0

I

3

,

,

I

cm.
Fig. 2 Obsidian specimens from Hutchinson and Roberts counties, Texas Panhandle:
a) Tex 10, Tarbox Creek site (41HC2); b) ?rex 7, McGarraugh Ranch site (41RB2);
c) Canadian Riber specimen (41RB2). Drawings by Kathy Bareiss.

(counts-per-second) to abundances using a special algorithm developed
from a set of known obsidian values.
Data on the Texas Panhandle obsidian specimens revealed an unusually
high Niobium (Nb) content. The specimens are similar in this respect to a
number of obsidian artifacts recovered from the Radium Springs area of
Southcentral New Mexico (Black and Hester, 19"77) which were also analyzed at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. The high Niobium content of this
group of artifacts also is similar to a group of obsidian specimens studied
previously by Jack. Jack was the first to identify a cluster of obsidian
specimens which he called the High Nb group; his clustering included
specimens from sites in Andrews County (41AD2, 41AD8), Travis County
(41TV39), Williamson County (41WM56), and the Canadian River
specimen. At the time of Jack’s analysis (1971-1973), a known source for
the High Nb obsidian was lacking and a formal report of the discovery of the
High Nb group was not made.
Using the more detailed XRF measurements now available, a check was
made against currently documented obsidian sources on file in the
geochemical library of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. This check
resulted in a tentative identification of a source as the Valles caldera in New
Mexico (Fig. 1). This caldera is located in the Valles mountains west of Santa Fe (Williams, 1941:251). The Valles caldera measures 20 x 25 km
across; its walls enclose a circular moat partially filled by a ring of rhyolite
domes. The caldera was formed approximately one million years ago by a
major erruption of materials and subsequent collapse of the area (Williams
and McBirney, 1978:211-212). The resulting basin contains a sizeable
number of obsidian deposits which apparently were utilized by prehistoric
man.

Mitchell et al. - Trace Element Analysis

305

Table 1
Element Abundances as Determined by XRF for Obsidian Artifacts from Texas
Panhandle Sites
Sample Designation

Rb

Sr

Zr

Y

Nb

Fe(%)

Zn

Mn

Tex 10
Tex 7
Mean Value for seven
Texas & New Mexico
Specimens
(NMex 2-7 and
Tex 7 and I0)
Canadian River
Specimen

218
209

12 +
7+

188
193

80
83

84
83

.71
.71

63
105

598
448

222

11 +

186

80.3

81.3

.71

90

558

222

13

205

82

Rb = Rubidium
Sr = Strontium
Zr = Zirconium
Y = Yttrium

100
Nb
Fe
Zn
Mn

= Niobium
= Iron
= Zinc
= Manganese

The exact provenience of the geochemical sample from the Valles caldera
is not known. It is not yet possible to suggest in-~vhich part of the basin the
various specimens may have originated. Additional research is underway so
that it may eventually be possible to relate samples of High Nb obsidian to
specific sources within the caldera.

DISCUSSION
Three obsidian specimens recovered from two archeological sites in the
Texas Panhandle are traced to a probable source in the Valles caldera west
of Santa Fe, New Mexico. They match a group of distinctive obsidian
specimens (High Nb group) which appear to have a fairly widespread
distribution (Fig. 1).
Such a dispersion pattern of High Nb obsidian is suggestive of a fairly extensive network of trade in obsidian. However, trace element analysis
results are not sufficient to establish either the time frame or cultural relationships inferred by such trade. It is necessary to examine more traditional archeological data to develop an understanding of such relationships.
House sites and other artifacts at the McGarraugh Ranch site suggest a
Panhandle Aspect occupation (A.D. 1200-1450). Presence of Chupadero
Black-on-White pottery would indicated a trade relationship with New Mexico (Holden, 1929; Moorehead, 1931; Watts, 1963; Hughes, 1968;
Honea, 1973; Lintz, 1976). However, Tarbox Creek yielded both Panhandle Aspect materials and dartpoints which probably predate the Panhandle
Aspect period (Mitchell, 1975; 1976). Hughes (1962; Hughes and Willey,
1978) noted the possibility of earlier trade based on Jornada brownware.
In the Radium Springs area of Southcentral New Mexico, one obsidian
projectile is serrated and resembles the Temporal point type (Black and
Hester, 1977:55). This type is diagnostic of the Jornada branch of the
Mogollon. Ceramics from sites in the area include 21 various wares varying
from plainware to Black-on-White and polychrome pottery. These date between A.D. 900 and 1400 (Roemer and Katz, 1977). The strongest exter-

306

Texas Archeological Society

nal relationship of these sites appears to be with the northern part of the Jornada district. This relationship is based on the relative quantity of specific
types of ceramics versus pottery from other areas to the west and south
(Roemer and Katz, 1977).
In the Andrews County (Texas) localities, Collins (1968) postulated an
actual migration of eastern Jornada people onto the Llano Estacado of West
Texas. At the Adobe Mound site (41AD3), Fresno, Toyah like, stemmed,
and side notched points were recovered. A house site was reported with
stone walls similar to sites in the Texas Panhandle.
While a large Jornada trade sphere would reasonably account for the
presence of High Nb obsidian and trade pottery at these sites, it is difficult to
postulate direct trade to explain such obsidian in Central and Southern
Texas counties (Fig. 1). However, several sites in these counties also have
produced southwestern pottery. Hester and Hill (1969) report El Paso
Brownware from a site in Dimmit County along San Ambrosia Creek; the
Armstrong site in northeastern Dimmit County produced a specimen of
High Nb Obsidian (Hester, House, et al., 1975).
Tularosa and Reserve Black-on-White and Los Lumas Smudged pottery
were recovered from the Olmos Dam and San Pedro Park areas of Bexar
County and other sites in South Texas (Orchard and Campbell, 1960;
Fawcett, 1972). Pilares Banded pottery was recovered from the Granberg
site (Schuetz, 1966) which may date as early as A.D. 900. These pottery
types are either Pueblo II or Pueblo III wares which Honea (1973) dates
from A.D. 900 to A.D. 1300. Roemer and Katz (1977) date these periods
to A.D. 900 to A.D. 1400.
Ceramics and other materials consistently are estimated to be between
A.D. 900 and about A.D. 1400 in all areas where High Nb obsidian has
been identified. This situation is particularly significant for the study of trade
in Southcentral and Southern Texas where there is little evidence of a local
ceramic tradition prior to about A.D. I000 or 1100 (Hester and Hill, 1971;
Mitchell, 1978).
CONCLUSIONS
Obsidian specimens recovered from archeological sites in Hutchinson and
Roberts counties in the Texas Panhandle were analyzed and proved to be a
distinctive form of obsidian distinguished by a high Niobium content. The
obsidian was linked tentatively with a source in the Valles caldera west of
Santa Fe, New Mexico. Obsidian from this source was recovered from sites
in Southcentral New Mexico, and West, Central, and South Texas. In these
locations, the distinctive High Nb obsidian can be dated approximately to
A.D. 900 ~ 1400 by ceramics or other artifacts. High Nb obsidian may have
potential as a horizon marker for this period in the study of archeology in
Texas and New Mexico.

ACKNOWLEDG EMENTS
We are particularly grateful to Dr. Robert N. Jack who accomplished much of the early work
with Texas obsidian specimens and who initially recognized the High Nb group; his work was
invaluable as a foundation for the present study. We also are indebted to several individuals in
the northeastern Panhandle area who loaned obsidian specimens, shared site information, and
cooperated with pottery identification and other work; they include Charles Bulls of Farns-

Mitchell et al. -- Trace Element Analysis

307

worth, Texas and Rick Williams and Bob Fleming of Perryton, Texas. Our thanks also to Chris
Lintz, University of Oklahoma, for his very helpful comments on an earlier draft of this report.
Finally, we are indebted to the Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San
Antonio, for support of the XRF analyses included in this report.

REFERENCES CITED
Black, Stephen L. and T.R. Hester
1977
Lithics. In: T.R. Hester (ed.), An Archaeological Survey of the Radium
Springs Area, Southern New Mexico. University of Texas at San Antonio, Center for Archaeological Research, Survey Report, 26:48-78.
Collins, Michael B.
1968
The Andrews Lake Locality: New Archeological Data From the
Southern Llano Estacado, Texas. Unpublished M.A. thesis, University
of Texas, Austin.
Crabb, Martha Lewis
1968
Some Puebloan Trade Pottery From Panhandle Aspect Sites. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society, 38:83-89.
Fawcett, William B. Jr.
1972
The Prehistory of Bexar County: A Study of Previous Work in South
Central Texas. Lower Plains Archaeological Society Bulletin, 2:23-43.
Hester, Thomas R, Robert F. Heizer, and John A. Graham
Fields Methods in Archaeology (6th Edition). Mayfield Publishing Co.,
1975
Palo Alto, California.
Hester, Thomas R. and T.C. Hill Jr.
1969
Mogollon Ceramics from Southern Texas. The Artifact, 7:11-15.
An Initial Study of a Prehistoric Ceramic Tradition in Southern Texas.
1971
Plains Anthropologist, 16(53):195-202.
Hester, Thomas R., J.W. House, R.N. Jack, and F.H. Stross
X-Ray Fluorescence of Obsidian Artifacts from the Rio Grande Plain,
1975
Southern Texas. Texas Journal of Science, 26(1-2):286-289.
Hester, T.R. and J.L. Mitchell
Source Analysis of Obsidian Artifacts from McMullen County, Texas.
1974
Lower Plains Archaeological Society Bulletin, 4:25-32.
Holden, W.C.
1929
Some Recent Explorations and Excavations in Northwest Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Palentological Society,
1:23-25.
Honea, Kenneth
The Technology of Eastern Puebloan Pottery of the Llano Estacado.
1973
Plains Anthropologist, 18(59):73-88.
Hughes, Jack T.
1962
Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, 32:65-84.
Prehistory of the Caddoan-Speaking Tribes. Unpublished Ph.D. Disser1968
tation, Columbia University, New York.
Hughes, Jack T. and Patrick S. Willey
Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Of1978
fice of the State Archeologist, Archeological Survey Report, 24:1-294.

308

Texas Archeological Society

Lintz, Chris
The Panhandle Aspect and its Early Relationship with the Upper
1976
Republican Phase. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Plains
Conference, Minneapolis.
Michels, Joseph W.
1973
Dating Methods in Archaeology. Seminar Press, New York.
Mitchell, Jimmy L.
1975
Notes on Some Archeological Materials from the Palo Duro Creek Area
of Hansford County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 46:217-230.
1976
Basal Smoothing of Texas Panhandle Points. Artifacts, 6(3):14-17.
The Turtle Creek Phase: An Initial Late Prehistoric Component in
1978
Southern Texas. La Tierra, 5(4):32-43.
Moorehead, Warren K.
Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley. Phillips Academy, Andover,
1931
Massachusetts.
Orchard, C.D. and T.N. Campbell
Southwestern Pottery from Sites in the Vicinity of San Antonio, Texas.
1960
Texas Archeology, 4(2):7-8.
Roemer, Erwin Jr. and Paul R. Katz
1977
Ceramics. In: T.R. Hester (ed.), An Archaeological Survey of the
Radium Springs Area, Southern New Mexico. University of Texas at
San Antonio, Center for Archaeological Research, Survey Report,
26:79-111.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1966
The Granberg Site: An Archaic Indian Habitation in Bexar County,
Texas. Witte Museum Studies, 1:1-91.
Stross, F.H., T.R. Hester, R.F. Heizer, and R.N. Jack
1978
Archaeological and Chemical Studies of Mesoamerican Obsidian. In:
R.E. Taylor (ed.), Recent Advances in Obsidian Glass Studies, pp.
240-250. Noyes Press, Park Ridge, New Jersey.
Watts, W.C.
Distribution of Pottery in Surface Sites on the South Plains of Texas.
1963
Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, I: 1-25.
Williams, Howel
Calderas and Their Origins. Bulletin of the Department of Geological
1941
Sciences, University of California, 25(6):239-346.
Williams, Howell and Alexander R. McBirney
1978
Volcanology. Freeman, Cooper, and Company, San Francisco.

The Significance of Dart Point
Ste Breakage

Lo Wo Patterson

ABSTRACT
A pattern of possible dart shaft and foreshaft reuse is developed from the frequency of dart
point stem fragments with transverse fractures found at archeological sites in Central and
Southeast Texas. Dart point blade fracture patterns also are considered, as related to damage
during the hunt and subsequent reworking. Good comparisons are shown between surface collected and excavated assemblages in Harris County.

INTRODUCTION
Stem pieces are the most common type of dart point fragments found on
archeological sites studied in the Lake Limestone area on the eastern edge
of Central Texas (upper Navasota River area east of Waco) (Prewitt,
1974:62, 1975:17). Prewitt (1974, 1975) suggested that basal fragments of
dart points found at campsites may be the result of retrieval and reuse of dart
shafts and foreshafts. Points were broken during the hunt. New points
would be refitted upon the user’s return to camp, and basal fragments
discarded at the campsite.
To test Prewitt’s (1974, 1975) hypothesis, data from two other areas of
Texas were examined. One location was Harris County, in the greater
Houston area. This area is on the upper Texas coast in Southeast Texas, approximately 150 mi southeast of Prewitt’s (1974, 1975) study area. The
other location was Bandera County in Southcentral Texas, approximately
50 mi northwest of San Antonio. Bandera County is about 240 mi west of
Harris County and approximately 210 mi southwest of Prewitt’s (1974,
1975) location.
The three locations (Fig. 1) are far enough apart that any consistent conclusions reached could be considered to be regional patterns for the eastern
and central areas of Texas involved. Current inventories of dart points and
fragments from archeological sites in Harris and Bandera counties were
used to developed data. Quantitative confirmation of general impressions
on dart breakage patterns for sites (Patterson, 1974, 1975a, 1975b, 1975c,
1976a, 1976b, 1977, 1978a, 1978b, 1979a) was generated.
In order to develop a more complete picture of what may have happened
at archeological sites, it was necessary to consider other types of dart point
breakage. Therefore, dart point blade breakage patterns also are discussed.
There is a good match of dart point breakage patterns for surface collections
and an excavated site in Harris County. This match gives support to the

310

Texas Archeological Society

/

~LANO

~VALOE

~EDINA

~A~SAS~

Fig. 1 Texas study locations: A) upper Navasota River; B) Harris County; C)
Bandera County,

value of data from surface collection for some types of archeological interpretation.
DART POINT BREAKAGE PATTERNS
Dart points generally are believed to have been used in a weapon system
consisting of a spear thrower (atlatl), a spear shaft, and a hafted lithic projectile point (Chard, 1975:Fig. 12-5). Projectile points could be hafted directly
to a single shaft; or a compound shaft could be used, with the point hafted
to a removable foreshaft. Although made from perishable wood materials,
some archeological remains of spear throwers (Aikens, 1979:Fig. 114;
Hester et al., 1974; Willey, 1966:Fig. 4-18) and foreshafts with hafted
points (Schuetz, 1960:Fig. 2b; Willey, 1966, Fig. 4-18) have been
recovered. Lithic projectile points weighing over 3 gr are classified as dart
points, in contrast to lighter, smaller arrowpoints (Patterson, 1976c:Fig. 4).
Dart points found on archeological sites could have been broken for a
number of reasons, including surface disturbances by modern man. If the
assumption can be made that most dart point breakage occurred during
original site occupation, breakage patterns might furnish some information
on specific site activities (Roper, 1979:113). Data developed for this study
do not indicate that fortuitous dart point breakage, either prehistoric or
historic, was an important factor in overall dart point breakage patterns. If
fortuitous breakage were statistically significant, large numbers of matching

Patterson - Point Stem Breakage

311

dart point pieces should be recovered from intensive surface collecting and
excavations. This recovery rate was not observed in the data used.
Few quantitative studies of dart point breakage patterns are available.
Roper’s (1979) recent study of this type is largely inconclusive. Roper
(1979:Table 2) presented some data on longitudinal breakage of stems; but
did not give data on transverse stem fractures, which is the more common
breakage pattern in data reviewed.
There are two breakage locations for stemmed dart points, stem breakage
and blade fractures. Most stem breakage on archeological sites reviewed involved transverse fractures near the point where the stem joins the dart
point blade. This stem breakage pattern is the one under consideration.
Blade breakage seems to occur in a variety of directions, ranging from
transverse to longitudinal. It is discussed along with the possible causes of
blade breakage.
DART POINT BREAKAGE CAUSES
Activities during the hunt is one of the principle causes of dart point
breakage that can be postulated. During hunting activities, points may have
been broken during impact; or points tightly wedged in an animal may have
been snapped by leverage to retrieve the shaft or foreshaft. If projectile
points were broken during hunting, fragments remaining in a hafted position
would be stem fragments or more complete points with broken blades. If
spear shafts and/or foreshafts with broken points were being carried back to
camp for refitting projectile points, there should be disproportionate higher
percentages of these two types of dart point fragments at campsites. Data
presented (Tables 1-3) show that this disproportionate pattern of point
fragments occurs at the widely separated campsites studied.
If hafted projectile points also were used as knives for butchering activities, physical stresses might cause stem breakage during this type of activity. Due to shape, it is less likely that cutting function would cause many
blade fractures except on delicate tips. If this type of use caused stem
breakage at campsites, it would be expected to find approximately equal
amounts of dart point stem fragments and points with broken stems. This
situation is not the case for data reviewed. Many dart points would not make
very good cutting tools due to rough and steeply beveled edges. At campsites, large chert flakes with sharp edges would have been generally superior
to the reuse of dart points as knives (Patterson, 1975d). A bifacial edge must
have a very acute angle (25° or less) to approach the cutting efficiency of a
sharp flake (Patterson, 1976d).
During the hunt, it may have been convenient for Indians to use dart
points as expedient cutting tools. If stem breakage occurred from this activity, it would be difficult to separate this cause from other stem breakage during the hunt. Therefore, this study is only concerned with whether or not
stem breakage occurred at remote hunting locations away from campsites.
Regardless of specific point breakage cause, shafts and foreshafts could
have been carried back to campsites for refitting of new points.
Manufacturing failure is another possible cause of dart point breakage.
This cause is not considered important since the author’s experience in experimental flintknapping and observation of other flintknappers is that most

312

Texas Archeological Society

"~

~00~

~

O0

0
L)
L)

A

&
~000~

E

~

0~
0~0~

Patterson - Point Stem Breakage

313

c~

,4

r,

m
t"

Lo o co ox o o

Nm

m

&
’5~

o~
o3

o’)
O0

0 :~.- ~~-

~"

oo1~
oo ~.-

C~

0,1

00
0

A
LI..,

~"

OX~LO~CO~C~

O~

o

~m

ca

r~

c~

~ooooo
666~5o ~

~,.~ 00

ca

~--~

0

314

Texas Archeological Society

manufacturing failures occur during bifacial preform thinning. Failures show
up as generalized biface fragments lacking finely pressure retouched edges.
Preform failures can be separated from finished dart point fragments. Stem
breakage during dart point manufacture is rare since stems are formed by
pressure flaking, which produces little breakage.
Some broken dart points could have been reworked into smaller serviceable points at campsites. This reworking would be done mainly by
reshaping of broken blades. This activity would complicate the analysis of
dart point fragments as numerous blade fragments could be produced during reworking of a broken dart point. There were few examples of reworked
dart points in the data reviewed, although some reworking may have occurred which was not obvious.

ARCHEOLOGICAL

DATA

Archeological collections from several sites in Texas were examined for
dart point breakage patterns. Table 1 is a tabulation of data from eight surface collected sites in Harris County. Dart point specimens are typica! types
of the Archaic and Early Woodland periods of the upper Texas coast (Suhm
and Jelks, 1962; Patterson, 1979b). These dart points (Fig. 2) include expanding, straight, and contracting stem point types (e.g., Gary, Kent,~
Bulverde, Yarbrough, and Ellis).
All sites have more stem fragments than points with stem fractures (Table
1). The total collection has over 10 times as many stem fragments as points
with stem fractures. This disproportionate pattern is not present in comparing blade fragments and points with blade fractures. The number of blade
fragments and points with broken blades is approximately equal. However,
there is not a particular geometrical match between blade fragments and
points with broken blades. Some points with broken blades may be from
breakage during the hunt and some miscellaneous blade fragments could be
from reworking of broken points.
Data were tabulated for a well excavated site in Harris County (41HR315;
Patterson, 1978a) as a comparison with surface collections (Table 1). Data
are summarized (Table 2) from all excavated levels of 41HR315, spanning a
total time period from the Late Paleoindian/Early Archaic (starting approximately 7,000 BP) to the Late Prehistoric (ending approximately AD 1500).
A culturally mixed area is included that appears to have been the result of a
prehistoric erosion episode.
The dart point breakage pattern (Table 2) is similar to the surface collections (Table 1) from the same county. There are over five times as many
stem fragments as points with stem fractures and an approximately equal
number of blade fragments and points with blade breakage. The collection
from 41HR315 represents a 10% sample of the total site area. The overall
dart point breakage for surface and excavated collections (Tables 1, 2) also
is fairly similar. For the surface collections, there are 3.6 times as many dart
point pieces as whole dart points. For the excavated site, there are 2.5 times
as many dart point pieces as whole dart points.
Dart point breakage for two surface collected sites in Bandera County are
summarized (Table 3). There is a large difference in numbers of stem
fragments and points with stem fractures, with 12.5 times more stem

Patterson - Point Stem Breakage

315

J

B

D

Fig. 2 Typical dart point types: A) Gary; B) Kent; C) Bulverde; D) Yarbrough; E)
Ellis.

fragments. There are 2.6 times as manyblade fragments as points with
blade fractures.
J.B. Sollberger (personal communication) tried to match up surface collected dart point fragments from Kerr County. A large number of stem
fragments without corresponding numbers of other complimentary types of
fragments were identified.
CONCLUSIONS
Archeological data presented support Prewitt’s (1974, 1975) hypothesis
that dart points were broken more often on hunting trips than at campsites,
especially as related to stem fractures. Indians returned to campsites with
basal fragments of dart points still attached to spear shafts. The geographical
spacing of archeological sites examined supports a regional rather than local
pattern of dart point breakage.
The data used were from overall lithic collections of significant sizes and
should represent random samples. Blade breakage patterns of dart points
examined are different from stem breakage patterns. Blade breakage pattern might relate to reworking of broken points and some fortuitous
breakage. Some points with broken blades may be the result of point
breakage during the hunt. It may be that spear points were regarded as expendable items, while good quality spear shafts and foreshafts were held as
valued items for more permanent use.
Comparison of dart point breakage patterns for surface collected and excavated materials does not show any particular bias. The value of study of
surface collections is underrated. All types of archeological remains are imperfect samples of materials from past use; and all types of archeological
data should be considered to obtain the largest data base.

REFERENCES CITED
Aiken, C. Melvin
1970
Hogup Cave. University of Utah Anthropological Papers, 93:1-286.

316

Texas Archeological Society

Chard, Chester S.
Man in Prehistory, Second Edition. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
1975
York.
Hester, T.R., M.P. Mildner, and L. Spencer
1974
Great Basin Atlatl Studies. Ballena Press, Ramona.
Patterson, L.W.
A Multiple Rock Midden Site. La Tierra, 1(3):10-13.
1974
1975a Harris County, Texas Site 41HR182. Houston Archeological Society
Newsletter, 50:6-8.
1975b 41HR210, A Multicomponent Site in Harris County, Texas. La Tierra,
1975c
1975d
1976a
1976b
1976c
1976d
1977
1978a
1978b
1979a
1979b

2(4) :17-22.
A Two Component Site, 41HR185. Houston Archeological Society
Newsletter, 48:13-14.
Lithic Wear Patterns in Deer Butchering. Texas Archeology,
19(2):10-11.
A Harris County, Texas Prehistoric Site, 41HR209. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter, 51:5-7.
A Predominantly Woodland Site 41HR244, Harris Co., Texas.
Houston Arcbeological Society Newsletter, 53:2-7.
Technological Changes in Harris County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, 47:171-188.
Deer Skinning with a Bifacial Tool. Texas Archeology, 20(2):8-10.
An Archaic-Woodland Site, 41HR223, Harris Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter, 56:4-7.
Preliminary Report on Site 41HR315, Harris Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter, 59:2-4.
An Archaic Rock Midden Site (41BNll), Bandera County, Texas. La
Tierra, 5(1):21-26.
Harris County Site 41HR244 Revisited. Houston Archeological Society
Newsletter, 63:2-6.
A Review of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas Coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, 50:103-123.

Prewitt, Elton R.
1974
Upper Navasota Reservoir: An Archeological Assessment. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report, 47:1-89.
Upper Navasota Reservoir: Archeological Test Excavations at the
1975
Barkley and Louie Sadler Sites. Texas Archeological Survey Research
Report, 53:1-42.
Roper, Donna C.
Breakage Patterns of Central Illinois Woodland Projectile Points. Plains
1979
Anthropologist, 24(84):113-121.

Schuetz, Mardith K.
An Analysis of Val Verde Cave Material: Part II. Bulletin of the Texas
1960
Archeological Society, 31:167-205.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
Handbook of Texas Archeology:
Type Descriptions. Texas Ar1962
cheological Society Special Publication, I: 1-299.
Willey, Gordon R.
An Introduction to American Archaeology, Vol. 1. Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
1966
Englewood Cliffs.

Transport Of Cultural And
NonoCuiturai Materials By
Texas Woodrats:
Examples And Archeological
Implications

Thomas R. Hester and T.C. Hill dr.

ABSTRACT
A study was conducted of modern woodrat (Neotoma micropus) houses located on or near
prehistoric open campsites in southern Texas. Structural components of the houses are
documented. Large, shallow basins are found beneath the houses, containing grass lined nests
and tunnels. The rodents often transport a variety of cultural and non-cultural materials into
these domiciles. Nature and type of the collected items are recorded. Possible archeological implications are discussed, particularly those which might lead to misinterpretation of artificially
created artifact and debris patterns.

INTRODUCTION
Archeologists have noted various mechanisms through which animals can
be responsible for the transport or movement of artifacts and other cultural
materials. Heizer (1968) documented a number of examples. Woodrats
(Neotoma sp.) are particularly well known for their ability to carry and move
artifacts and other large objects, with such items usually being taken to their
nests. This situation is a common phenomenon in Great Basin caves and
rockshelters, where a wooden artifact (such as a dart shaft or digging stick)
might be incorporated in the construction of a woodrat house (Heizer and
Krieger, 1956:10).
Heizer and Brooks (1965) presented data on the contents of packrat nests
found in California and the Great Basin to support their argument that the
features excavated at the Lewisville locality in northern Texas might be
burned woodrat houses and not Paleoindian hearths. There have been
detailed analyses of Pleistocene packrat nests and middens in various parts
of the American Southwest and adjacent desert areas (Finley, 1958; Raun,
1966; Wells and Jorgensen, 1964; Wells, 1966, 1976; Van Devender,
1974, 1976; Phillips and Van Devender, 1974; Riskind and Van Devender,
1979). The primary goal of these studies was paleoenvironmental research.
These studies often illustrated the potential for the transport of artifacts
(Finley, 1958) and other materials by woodrats (Riskind and Van
Devender, 1979:6). These materials sometimes are used as components in

318

Texas Archeological Society

house construction or they end up in the nest and tunnels beneath the
house. These data lead to a simple conclusion: the rodents can distort the
archeological record. Most field archeologists are familiar with the
stratigraphic problems that burrowing rodents can cause. However,
fieldworkers perhaps are less cognizant of the horizontal disturbances that
could result from woodrat activities.
Woodrats can disturb artifact patterning on living floors; or they can create
artificial features, i.e., clusters of artifacts or materials that might be interpreted as activity loci. Hester (1975) described an example of this kind of
phenomenon caused by roadrunners in southern Texas. Transporting activities might have a significant effect on interpretations of prehistoric
features and artifact patterning. Since the hunter-gatherer camp sites of the
region were repeatedly abandoned, there would have been ample opportunity for the rodents to collect and move cultural residues left behind by
seminomadic inhabitants.
Results obtained by the dissection of two large modern woodrat houses
found on the surface near prehistoric open camp sites in southern Texas are
described. Woodrats (Neotoma rnicropus, Southern Plains Woodrat) are
extremely common in the area (Raun, 1966) and their houses are
numerous. These houses sometimes occur on or near local prehistoric sites.
Faunal assemblages found in excavated sites in the area provide evidence of
the abundance of these rodents in prehistoric times (Hester and Hill, 1975).
They were present not only in the area but also were a favored staple in the
aboriginal diet.

WOODRAT HOUSES AND THEIR CONTENTS
Two woodrat houses along Tortugas Creek in Zavala County, southern
Texas, were dissected in 1971. These houses were located on, or adjacent
to, Late Prehistoric sites, including 41ZV14 and 41ZV155 (Hester and Hill,
1973, 1975; Hill and Hester, 1973). House components were documented
and nest contents within houses collected. Only general comments are
made about the houses and their construction; additional details for South
Texas woodrat houses are in Raun (1966) and Johnson (1966).
House #1 was located 150 yds east of Tortugas Creek in an open
floodplain microenvironment dominated by prickly pear (Opuntia lindheimeri) (Holdsworth, 1973). Site 41ZV14 is nearby (Hester and Hill,
1973). The house (outer shelter) appeared as a large accumulation of sticks
and brush. It was 6 ft long (east-west), 5 ft wide (north-south), and 22 in
high. It was built against an Opuntia sp. stump which served as a buttress to
the structure. Five entrances to the house were observed.
Major components recorded were: prickly pear (Opuntia sp.) leaves,
segments of the pitaya cactus (Echinocereus enneacanthus), many small
mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa) branches, mesquite bark, Iotebush branches
(Condalia sp.), huisache (Acacia farnesiana), Christmas cactus (Opuntia
leptocaulis), granjeno or hackberry (Celtis pallida), and guayacan (Porliera
angustifolia). Items used to fill areas on the house included cow dung and
dirt clods. Data were recorded for six sticks in order to illustrate the size of
some of the woody components of the house (Table 1). In total, nine bu of
materials were tallied as components of the house.

Hester and Hill -- Transport by Texas Woodrats

319

A large adult and two juvenile woodrats made their escape as demolition
of the house proceeded. Removal of the structure exposed a saucer shaped
depression in the earth, approximately two thirds the size of the house and 3
in deep in the central part. Burrows, consisting of tunnels and trenches
(some lined with grass), constituted the nesting areas.
House #2 (Fig. I) was also in the area of site 41ZV14, 300 yds east of
Tortugas Creek in a similar prickly pear zone. The house was 5.5 ft long
(north-south), 4.75 ft wide (east-west), 14 in high, and had eight entrance
holes. Like House #I, it was built against a bush or tree stump. The same
type of building components were observed; they filled 6.5 bu when removed. The longest stick used in construction was 43 in long. A sample of
sticks used in the building of the house was recorded (Table 2).
A large, shallow depression was noted beneath the house; within this
depression, two rooms (one a grass lined nest) were connected by four
trenches. Unlike House #1, this woodrat domicile was abandoned.
While only Houses #1 and #2 were totally dissected, casual observations
were made on several other woodrat houses that were either totally or partially dissected. Their components differed little from those described in
detail. However, the brief inspections allow additional generalizations.
Houses were built from whatever was immediately available in the vicinity.
Lanner and Van Devender (1974:207) observed that the home range of
woodrats is approximately 100 m (328 ft) in radius. However, Raun
(1966:23) observed that South Texas woodrats have a greater home range
of between 1,700-2,500 sq ft. These animals often move objects of considerable weight and size; sticks form the basic structure that is capped with
Opuntia sp. leaves, animal dung (cow, horse), and dirt clods.
This work was designed to obtain data on the kinds of items taken into the
nests by woodrats. Tabulation of the kinds of components used in building
the houses documents the capacity of these rodents to move large objects. It
also ascertains the variety of items collected from the area around the
houses and brought into the chambers and nests. Specific data are available
for Houses #1 and #2 (Table 3). Using the observations from the casual inspection of several other woodrat houses, Table 4 illust~ates some of the
diversity of items collected.
ARCHEOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS
Distortion of the archeological record and misinterpretation of evidence
could result from woodrat activities. For instance, were House #I or #2 to
have been built in prehistoric times on the fringes of an aboriginal camp site
and then burned (either through natural causes or by aborigines), a 20th
Century archeological excavation might lead to their documentation as
cultural phenomena. The archeologist would find a shallow, basin shaped
depression, perhaps up to 4 ft in diameter and a few inches deep, containing some burned rocks, burned clay or dirt lumps, land snails, pebbles,
perhaps a chert flake (or even a tool), and a varied assortment of animal remains.
Paleobotanical, palynological, or phytolith analyses of the feature’s contents could reveal the presence of Opuntia sp. and pitaya cactus, hackberry
seeds, and other plant remains that would have been contained in animal
dung. An archeologist, working on or near the edge of a known prehistoric

320

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 1 View of Woodrat House #2.

0

L~

3
S

cm
Fig. 2 Chert uniface from nest within Woodrat House #2. Dorsal view and cross section shown.
site might infer a hearth function for such an occurrence.
The shape, size, and contents of such a house are not unlike aboriginal
hearths documented at South Texas hunter-gatherer sites (Hester and Hi!l,
1975; Montgomery, 1978). There is not a great abundance of woodrat
bones in the nests (remains resulting from natural deaths in the domicile).
The few charred woodrat bones found in the burned depression might indeed argue against it being a woodrat nest, i.e., they represent remains of
rodents cooked during an aboriginal meal.

Hester and Hill - Transport by Texas Woodrats

321

Table 1
Measurements of Six Sticks from Woodrat House #I
Stick

Wt (oz)

Length (in)

Avg Diam (in)

1-1
1-2
I-3
1-4
1-5
1-6

7.5
8.0
4.0
6.0
9.5
11.5

16
17
10
18
25
42

1.50
1.25
1.25
1.25
1.00
1.25

Table 2
Measurements of Six Sticks from Woodrat House #2
Stick

Wt (oz)

Length (in)

Avg Diam (in)

2-I
2-2
2-3
2-4
2-5
2-6

5.5
8.0
17.5
5.0
4.5
4.0

16
24
30
20
12
13

1.25
1.25
1.50
1.25
1.00
1.00

Table 3
Materials found within Woodrat Houses #I and #2
HOUSE #1
1 18 in length of double strand barbed wire
several horse and other mammal feces, up to 2.5 in in diameter
five Rabdotus sp. land snails, up to 1.75 in in length
four small pieces of charcoal
mandible fragment of a woodrat
HOUSE #2
two dried segments of pitaya cactus
several horse feces
one oboriginal baked clay lump (of the type documented for the area by Hester and Hill
1973, 1975)
several fragments of cow dung
one 410 gauge shotgun shell
II Rabdotus sp. land snails (averaging 1.25 in in length)
bits of other animal feces (including deer)
three small rounded pebbles (.75 to 1.0 in in length)
four burned rocks of aboriginal date
one aboriginally modified chert flake, probably a unifacial scraper (34 mm long, 18 mm
wide, and 8 mm thick; Fig. 2)

Woodrat houses in South Texas prickly pear flats usually are clustered
(Holdsworth, 1973). A prairie or brush fire sweeping through the community could create a whole series of burned depressions (with the kinds of contents noted). This distribution could reinforce the archeologist’s inference
that these excavated features were not natural but camp fires of family units
in a hunter-gatherer band (cf. site plans of Bushmen open occupation sites;
Yellen, 1977).

322

Texas Archeological Society

Table 4
Examples of Materials Collected from Several Other Woodrat Houses
woodrat crania
cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus sp.) cranium
white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) scapula
opposum (Didelphis marsupialis) cranium
turtle (Chrysemys sp.) carapace fragments
fragments of a white-tailed deer long bone
animal feces of types described from other houses (including coyote)
a piece of lumber (5.0 x 1.25 x 1.25 in)
20-gauge shotgun shells

Criteria for distinguishing between a burned woodrat nest and some types
of aboriginal cooking areas cannot be provided. In South Texas, the size,
contents, and density of materials is likely to be similar. Perhaps controlled
experimental burning of woodrat houses, followed after some time by
careful excavation, would serve to better define the situation in archeological terms.
Although field studies and speculative comments have dealt with modern
woodrat houses, these data may be compared to a controversial site like
Lewisville (Heizer and Brooks, 1965). The largest fire feature at Lewisville
(Hearth 1; Crook and Harris, 1957) is larger in plan than the modern
woodrat nests examined. However, some of the 21 fire features are approximately the same size as the substructural woodrat depressions noted.
Hearth 14 was 4.75 x 3.3 ft, hearth 15 was 5.8 x 3.5 ft, and hearth 16 was
4.5 x 2.6 ft; all were shallow, 3 to 8 in deep (Crook and Harris, 1957:34).
Their contents, and those of the other fire features, make interesting comparisons to the modern data presented. There are a variety of animals (turtle, deer, skunk, rabbit, mole) within the features, including woodrat remains in practically every one; there are also pieces of sandstone, snails,
and charcoal (cf. House #1) (Crook and Harris, 1957).
Archeologists working in areas where woodrat houses occur on or near
open occupation sites, as in Texas and other parts of the western United
States, should be aware of the potential for misinterpretation of subsurface
burned features. Additionally, prehistoric woodrat houses that deteriorated
and decayed through natural processes could conceivably have created artificial clusters of animal bone, burned rocks, and even lithics which might be
seen by the excavator as an activity area. The selective sampling habits of
these rodents could have caused some disarray in fragile aboriginal activity
patterns on abandoned camp sites by the moving of lithics, bones, and other
items from the camp sites to their nests.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank John B. Holdsworth of Crystal City, Texas, for his assistance
with this project. Notes and color slides resulting from the field study are on file at the Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Hester and Hill -- Transport by Texas Woodrats

323

REFERENCES CITED
Crook, W.W. Jr. and R.K. Harris
1957
Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas and
Associated Faunal Material. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
28:7-89.
Finley, Robert B. Jr.
The Woodrats of Colorado: Distribution and Ecology. University of
1958
Kansas Publications Museum of Natural History, 10:213-552.
Heizer, Robert F.
Migratory Animals as Disposal Agents of Cultural Materials. Science,
1968
161:914-915.
Heizer, Robert F. and Richard A. Brooks
Lewisville-Ancient Campsite or Wood Rat Houses? Southwestern Jour1965
nal of Anthropology, 21 (2):155-165.
Heizer, Robert F. and Alex D. Krieger
1956
The Archaeology of Humboldt Cave, Churchill County, Nevada.
University of California Publications in American Archaeology and
Ethnology, 47(1):I-190.
Hester, Thomas R.
The Natural Introduction of Mollusca in Archaeological Sites: An Exam1976
ple from Southern Texas. Journal of Field Archaeology, 2:273-275.
Hester, Thomas R. and T.C. Hill Jr.
1973
Prehistoric Occupation at the Holdsworth and Stewart Sites on the Rio
Grande Plain of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
43:33-65.
Some Aspects of Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric Archaeology in
1975
Southern Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, Special Report, 1:1-35.
Hill, T.C. Jr. and Thomas R. Hester
A Preliminary Report on the Tortuga Flat Site: A Protohistoric Campsite
1973
in Southern Texas. Texas Archeology, 17(2):10-14.
Holdsworth, John B.
1973
A Study of the Modern Flora and Fauna in the Vicinity of the
Holdsworth Site (41 ZV 14). In: Thomas R. Hester and T.C. Hill Jr.,
Prehistoric Occupation at the Holdsworth and Stewart Sites on the Rio
Grande Plain of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
43:65-73.
Johnson, Clifford W.
1966
Woodrat Dens in Zavala County, Southern Texas. In: G.G. Raun, A
Population of Woodrats (Neotoma micropus) in Southern Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Memorial Museum, 11:55-58.
Lanner, Ronald M. and Thomas R. Van Devender
Morphology of Pinyon Pine Needles from Fossil Packrat Middens in
1974
Arizona. Forest Science, 20(3):207-21 I.
Montgomery, John L.
1978
The Mariposa Site: A Late Prehistoric Site on the Rio Grande Plain of
Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio, Special Report 6(2):1-155.

324

Texas Archeological Society

Phillips, Arthur M. III and Thomas R. Van Devender
Pleistocene Packrat Middens from the Lower Grand Canyon of Arizona.
1974
Arizona Academy of Science, 9(3):117~119.
Raun, Gerald G.
1966
A Population of Woodrats (Neotoma micropus) in Southern Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Memorial Museum, 11:1-50.
Riskind, David H. and Thomas R. Van Devender
Pack Rats, Unwitting Helpers of Archaeologists. Texas Parks and
1979
Wildlife Magazine, 37(3):6-9.
Van Devender, Thomas R.
1974
Late Pleistocene Plants and Animals of the Sonoran Desert: A Survey of
Ancient Packrat Middens in Southwestern Arizona. Dissertation
Abstracts International, 34(1 I) :5590-5591.
Wells, Philip V.
1976
Macrofossil Analysis of Wood Rat (Neotoma) Middens as a Key to the
Quaternary Vegetational History of Arid America. Quaternary
Research, 6:223-248.
Pleistocene Woodrat Middens and Climatic Change in Mojave Desert: A
1964
Record of Juniper Woodlands. Science, 143:1171-1174.
Yellen, John E.
1977
Archaeological Approaches to the Present. Academic Press, New York.

A Travel Guide to Archaeological Mexico. By Robert D. Wood.
Hastings House Publishers, Inc., New York. 1979. 156 pp. $6.95
(paper), $9.95 (cloth).
This little guide is divided into five parts. The first is a section on various travel
routes which are geographically arranged, e.g., Route 11 - In and around Guadalajara. The text gives fairly detailed information on how to get to the sites. However, it
is not a road log a la SANBORN who prepares you for every bump in the road. Maps
(not to scale) of routes showing more than 100 of the known archeological sites as
well as maps of larger sites are included.
The second section gives concise background information on sites which are listed
alphabetically. Included is a pronunciafion of the name, translation or derivation of
the name, location, route, dates of occupation, cultural affiliation, most interesting
things to see, and when and by whom the site was excavated.
The third section contains a brief description of the archeological regions; while the
fourth part presents a short introduction to the early cultures of Mexico. In general,
the information seems to be accurate.
The fifth section gives travel tips and describes a few special customs. This section
should be read before your first trip south of the Rio Grande; or Rio Bravo as it is
called in Mexico.
There are other guides to archeological sites in Mexico, but they are usually on one
particular cultural group or a single geographical area. Because this guide packs a
wealth of information in very little space and covers all of Mexico, it will be one of the
items in my shoulder bag next trip.
Eunice M. Barkes
3612 Shell Ave.
Midland, Texas 79703

Ethnographic Notes on Indian Groups Associated with Three Nations in
Guerrero, Coahuila. By Thomas N. Campbell. Center for Archaeological Research, Archaeology and History of the San Juan
Bautista Mission Area of Coahuila and Texas Report, No. 3, The
University of Texas at San Antonio. 1979. 76 pp. $4.00
This work is a detailed report of a chapter submitted by Dr. Campbell in the final
report of Guerrero or Gateway Project undertaken by the University of Texas at San
Antonio. The chapter of the final report is entitled "Resident Indian Populations at
the Guerrero Missions." In Ethnohistoric Notes, more detail is included than was
possible in the final chapter.
Dr. Campbell (Professor Emeritus, Department of Anthropology, University of
Texas at Austin) has accomplished a great deal of study on ethnohistory in southern
Texas. He is a thorough and cautious researcher and the information contained in
this report is witness to those qualities.
Missions San Francisco Solano, San Juan Bautista, and San Bernardo were
established on the Rio Grande near present Guerrero during 1700 to 1703. A summary of what is known about each of the 88 named Indian groups at the missions is
presented in alphabetical order by group. The summaries make it painfully apparent,
however, how little is known about most of the groups. As Dr. Campbell states,
"much of what is known consists of miscellaneous bits of information, often trivial in
nature, haphazardly recorded by Europeans who varied in native intelligence and
educational background." He further states that it is not wise to take each bit of

326

Texas Archeological Society

recorded information at face value and that it must be challenged in various ways
before being accepted.
It is evident in the summaries about what is known of these Indian groups that
Campbell has challenged the information. Campbell does not make an attempt to
present the complete list of known named variants for all groups, since some Indian
group names had as many as 40 variants. Sample lists are included to show range of
name variations and call attention to various kinds of errors. For instance, in the
Handbook of American Indians (Hodge, 1907, 1910), 14 names should no longer
be regarded as separate groups because it can be demonstrated that these are
variants of other group names: Guisoles, Haeser, Hihame, Morbana, Ohaquames,
Pachaloco, Pacuachiam, Pasteal, Psaupsau, Putsay, Quesal, Sinicu, Taimamares,
and Tusonid.
Campbell points out how risky it is to use secondary sources in ethnohistoric
research. On page 9, he notes that Swanton (1940, 1952) and Ruecking (1954,
1955) followed the lead of Hodge and consequently made mistakes about the ethnic
units. Key pages in the widely scattered documents, both published and unpublished, are noted so that the "serious inquirer . ¯ . may evaluate the evidence independently."
Secondary sources also are cited when they add to the interpretation of the
primary source or where errors have been made. An attempt is made to place each
group within a geographic range before they entered the missions. Therefore, special
attention was given to reports of where each group might have been living prior to
mission entry.
Three kinds of population figures are included: 1) occasional headcounts made by
Spaniards and native encampments; 2) population estimates made by missionaries
that refer either to Indian groups in missions or groups still living under native conditions; and 3) population figures compiled from mission records and censuses. Some
population figures are corrected. Where possible, the language spoken is mentioned
when there is enough evidence to warrant some kind of statement. Being careful and
scholarly, Campbell includes cultural information only where it can be related to a
specific group.
A table at the end of the report lists the numbers present of each group at each of
the missions: at San Francisco Solano on the registers from 1700 to 1718; San Juan
Bautista censuses 1734, 1772; San Bernardo, censuses 1734, 1772.
Since Solano was moved to San Antonio in 1718, becoming San Antonio de
Valero, some of the Indians went to San Antonio. Campbell notes where the same
groups are listed on the San Antonio census. He also corrects some errors of
assumption in that some of the groups on the Solano registers were mistakenly
thought to have been at Valero because both registers were filed at Valero.
The summaries will clarify many confusions about these Indian groups. It is not
completely clear how Campbell arrives at the synonymous names. He takes to task
those who suggest synonymity on similarity alone; he implies cross checking of
names in different registers or censuses. No doubt, nevertheless, each has been
carefully researched.
The summaries also will prove useful for the geographic range. Many of the groups
ranged into Texas and some made up the aggregation known as Rancheria Grande
located somewhere between the Colorado and Brazos rivers. All of this information
should be useful to archeologists working in these areas. There is a paucity of sites of
this time period and we may be misinterpreting our archeological data.
Kathleen K. Gilmore
North Texas State University
Denton, Texas 76203

Book Reviews

327

Documentary Sources for the Wreck of the New Spain Fleet of 1554.
By David McDonald and J. Barto Arnold III. Texas Antiquities Committee Publication, No. 8. 1979. xvii + 330 pp. $26.00.
This fairly large, paperbound, double columned book is the eighth in a series of
reports on investigations of the material remains of three Spanish ships that were
blown ashore on Padre Island in April, 1554. The homebound New Spain fleet of
that year consisted of only four vessels.
This publication presents English translations (by McDonald) of Spanish
documents or extracts from documents (mainly derived from the archives and
libraries of Simancas, Seville, and Madrid) which contain specific or general information on the three wrecked ships, their equipment and supplies, their crews and
passengers, and their cargoes.
Two documents report the results of salvage operations conducted at the shipwreck locality a few months after the vessels were lost. These results include inventories of objects recovered and officially recorded weights of all gold and silver pieces.
Other documents provide background information on Spanish shipping activities
during the 16th Century. The various document and extract translations are
presented in three sections but are numbered consecutively from I through 60.
Most of the 60 presentations are said to be taken from "about 35,000 pages" of
microfilmed, xeroxed, and photographed documents obtained in Spain by a
research team. The items selected for translation are of unequal value, and a few are
so brief and minimally informative that one wonders why they are included.
McDonald and Arnold’s comment on the selections appears in a general introduction to the volume, in introductions to individual documents or sets of related
documents, and in footnotes. The general introduction is very well done, but the introductions to specific documents vary in quality. Some of these are detailed, informative, and quite interesting because the editors point out how the documents
negate certain conclusions drawn by modern historians.
Other introductions, however, seem perfunctory, and they sometimes contain
statements that are difficult to understand. For example, in connection with a lengthy
list of medicines purchased for use on armed escort vessels it is stated that the "influence of New World herb lore adopted.from Aztecs is apparent." Close inspection
of the list does not reveal a single "medicine" that is immediately identifiable as Aztec
in origin. One entry ("Indian electuary") may refer to India and not to North
America. Extensive pharmaceutical research is required here.
The translated excerpt from D~avila’s Historia (a secondary source published in
1596) is the only known detailed account of what happened to the shipwreck survivors, nearly all of whom died from starvation, thirst, and exposure or were killed by
Indians as they walked southward. According to D~vila, the same group of Indians
pursued the rapidly dwindling party of Spaniards down the Gulf coast from lower
Padre Island all the way to southern Tamaulipas, a distance of well over 200 miles.
McDonald and Arnold might have pointed out how dubious this pursuit appears in
light of what is known about the rather large number of Indian ethnic units distributed
along the Gulf coast and also the restricted nature of their territorial ranges. This
knowledge refers particularly to Indian groups encountered by Cabeza de Vaca some
20 years before the ships were wrecked and also to Indian groups recorded later by
chroniclers of Spanish colonization in Tamaulipas.
Fifty pages of this book are used to present reproductions of 25 single pages from
Spanish manuscripts, each accompanied by a facing transcription and an English
translation. These pages give impressions of 16th Century Spanish handwriting and
will be of interest mainly to those who know Spanish but who have never seen similar
manuscripts. Those who do not know Spanish may ask why so many were included.
Distribution of these illustrations throughout the book may be somewhat distracting
to those who search the text for various kinds of information. Perhaps they should

328

Texas Archeological Society

have been grouped and presented as a unit at the end of the volume. The most interesting illustrations are eight drawings taken from a treatise by Ledesma (1623) on
methods of salvaging ~unken ships. One of these is effectively used on the front and
back covers of McDonald and Arnold’s book.
This publication is not aimed at professional scholars, who would prefer a good
facsimile reproduction of each Spanish manuscript in its entirety, along with a printed
transcript. Instead, it is aimed at those who need certain kinds of information for
special purposes and do not have the time or motivation to learn Spanish, acquire
the appropriate scholarly skills, and visit archives. The volume contains much
previously unpublished information that will be of interest to laymen and to specialists
outside the field of underwater archeology. Its usefulness would have been enhanced
by inclusion of a detailed topical index.
This intricate and complex volume is, in general, well edited, and readers will not
be able to detect many errors. There is occasional confusion in bibliographic citations.
Several sources used are omitted from the list of references cited. A sharp-eyed
reader may catch the use of "arinciple"
for "principal"
and rendition
of one Spanish
-t
.
historian’s name as "Gomera instead of Gomara. Prospectwe buyers should
perhaps be warned that some copies of this attractive book may be insecurely bound.
After moderate use, several pages of this reviewer’s copy worked loose from the
spine.
T.N. Campbell
Department of Anthropology
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas 78712

AUTHORS
Michael McEachern is a free lance archeologist and speleologist currently with the
University of Alabama in Birmingham. He received his B.A. and M.A. degrees
from California State University, Sacramento. He has worked in California,
Nevada, Texas, Alabama, New Mexico and Alberta, Canada. His research interests include the conservation of archeological sites and cave environments
and application of computer technology to research goals. Address: Department of Anthropology, University Station, Birmingham, Alabama, 35294.
Ronald W. Ralph is an archeologist with the State of Texas. He received his degree
from the University of Texas at Austin. He has conducted field work in Mexico,
California, Arizona, and Texas for the last 17 years. His research interests include settlement patterns, rock art conservation, and cave studies. He currently is responsible for cultural resource management within the state park system.
Address: Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Master Planning Branch,
4200 Smith School Road, Austin, Texas 78744.
Mark J. Lynott is a Supervisory Archeologist at the National Park Service, Midwest
Archeological Center in Lincoln Nebraska. He received his B.S. from Western
Michigan University and Ph.D. from Southern Methodist University. He has
directed fieldwork in Texas and various areas of the Midwest and Great Lakes
area. Professional interests include cultural resource management and
prehistoric adaptive patterns. Address: Midwest Archeological Center, Federal
Building, Room 484, 100 Centennial Mall North, Lincoln, Nebraska 68508.
Kenneth Honea is Associate Professor of Anthropology at Northern lllinois University. Undergraduate studies were at the University of Houston and University
of Paris (Sorbonne). His doctoral degree is from the University of Vienna. He
was research archeologist at the University of Texas (Austin) and the Museum
of New Mexico (Santa Fe). He taught at Texas Tech University prior to leaving
for Illinois. He has carried out field work in most of Texas and New Mexico,
with interests centering on the Paleoindian and Archaic periods. His speciality
is prehistoric lithic technology. He originated and directed a continuing
Paleolithic and Mesolithic studies program in the Greek Islands (Kythnos).
More recently (1975-1978), he was Interacademy Exchange Scientist of the
National Academy of Sciences to the Academies of Science of Bulgaria and
Romania. Radiocarbon samples he brought back from the Middle Palaeolithic
Mousterian site of Ripiceni Izvor (Romania) now firmly date the earliest constructed housing of Homo sapiens to 45,000 BP. The summer of 1980, he
and the annual Northern Illinois Field School discovered a new Clovis age
mammoth processing station and camp near Earth on the Llano Estacado. It
ties in stratigraphically to both Marks Beack and Lubbock Lake. Address:
Department of Anthropology, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois
60115.

330

Texas Archeological Society

Daniel E. Fox received his B.A. degree from The University of Texas at Austin and
his M.A. degree from Texas Tech University. He has been a member of the
Texas Archeological Society for more than 15 years and has been employed in
applied archeology by seven institutions. Research interests include anthropology, archeological method and theory, field methods in prehistoric and
historic archeology, and popularization of archeology. Address: 1202 Hollow
Creek, Apt. 203, Austin, Texas 78704.
J.B. Sollberger is an amateur archeologist with a major interest in experimentation
and interpretation in lithic technology. His publications include "A
Technological Study of Beveled Knives" (Plains Anthropologist, 1977) and
"The Basic Tool Kit Required to Make and Notch Arrow Shafts for Stone
Points" (Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 1969). Address: 8515
Forest Hills Blvd., Dallas, Texas 75218.
Leland W. Patterson is a past Chairman of the Houston Archeological Society. He is
an active amateur archeologist with major interests in the upper coast and
southcentral regions of Texas. He has published over 90 articles and reports
on a variety of subjects, including site surveys, lithic technology, technological
change, and contract archeology. His publications have been in state,
regional, and national journals, as well as at the local level. His professional
duties for environmental affairs for Tenneco Inc. include consulting on matters
of contract archeology. Address: 418 Wycliffe, Houston, Texas 77079.
Jimmy L. Mitchell is a behavioral scientist with the Air Force occupational survey
program at Randolph Air Force Base, Texas. He holds a Ph.D. in industrial
psychology from Purdue University and is an Adjunct Assistant Professor with
the Department of Management of the School of Business, University of Texas
at Austin. He is Editor of La Tierra, quarterly journal of the Southern Texas
Archaeological Association (1978 to present) and has authored or coauthored
a variety of articles in the Ohio Archaeologist, Artifacts, South Texas Journal,
Lower Plains Archeological Society Bulletin, Bulletin of the Texas Atcheological Society, and La Tierra. Address: 6 Southeast Road, Randolph Air
Force Base, Texas 78148.
Fred Stross is a Professor of Anthropology at the University of California, Berkeley,

and a member of the Archaeological Research Facility. He has coauthored a
variety of archeological publications including several dealing with obsidian
trace element analysis in the Texas Journal of Science and a chapter in the recent book Recent Advances in Obsidian Glass Studies (1978). With Frank
Asaro of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, he has been working to refine the
techniques used by archeologists to determine the geographic source of
prehistoric artifacts. Address: Department of Anthropology, University of
California, Berkeley, California 94720.
Frank Asaro is on staff of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory of the University of California at Berkeley. He has been involved with the development of more
sophisticated methods of trace element analysis through x-ray fluorescence
and neutron activation analysis. His work promises to provide archeologists
with better analytical methods for developing inferences on prehistoric trade
relationships. Address: Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720.

Authors

331

Thomas R. Hester is Professor of Anthropology and Director, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio. He holds a
Ph.D. in Anthropology from the University of California, Berkeley, where he
studied under the late Robert F. Heizer. He formerly edited (with Harry
Shafer) the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society (1974-1979); and has
published a variety of books and articles on archeology, including (with Heizer
and Graham) Held Methods in Archaeology (1975). He had.done field work
in Egypt, Mesoamerica, Nevada, Montana, New Mexico, and Texas, including
a recent Earth Watch project at Baker Cave in Val Verde County (Nov/Dec
1979 issue of American Archaeology). In 1979 and 1980, he directed field
work at Colha, Belize, a major early Mayan site. Address: Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio,
Texas 78285.
T.C. Hill Jr. has been a member of the Texas Archeological Society for 11 years, a
Regional Vice President twice (regions 6 and 8), and worked on various projects for 15 years in Dimmit, Zavala, and Uvalde counties. Most publications
deal with late Prehistoric pottery sites. He is a first day member of the Southern
Texas Archaeological Association and past editor of La Tierra. Address: P.O.
Box 518, Crystal City, Texas 78839.

Infonnation for Contributors
The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society publishes original papers in the
field of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and adjoining areas in the
United States and Mexico; papers on other areas are also considered. Articles concerning archeological technique, method, or theory are encouraged.
Manuscripts must be typed, double spaced throughout, on 81/2 x 11 white paper.
Footnotes should be avoided. References to published literature, by author, date,
and page or figure number, should be placed within parentheses in the body of the
text, with full bibliographic citations at the end. See this issue of the Bulletin for examples. Authors also should consult "Style Sheet for Authors" in Texas Archeology,
23(1):11-13 (January, 1979) or write the Editor for a copy.
The proportions of full page illustrations (picture or drawing plus captions) should
be suitable for reduction to effective Bulletin page size of 41/4 x 7 inches. Plates may
be printed either horizontally or vertically; allowance for the caption to be printed in
the same direction must be made. Captions for illustrations should be listed in
numerical order and placed behind the list of references cited.
A complete manuscript is one with: a title, abstract, main body with subdivisions,
acknowledgements, references cited, appendices (if necessary), figure captions,
completed photographic and drafted plates, and biographical note. Submit three
copies of the typed manuscript. Manuscripts are subject to peer review; final decision
rests with the Editor.
Papers published in the Bulletin are abstracted and indexed in Abstracts in Anthropology.
Manuscripts should be addressed to: Dr. Eileen Johnson, The Museum, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock, Texas 79409.

