Bulletin of the

TEXas

ARc HEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY V°lume 59/1988

Jimmy L. Mitchell, Editor
Beth Ogden Davis, Associate Editor

Published by tile Society at Austin
1989 (for 1988)

Cover Photographs
Reconstructions made by Betty Pat Gatliff, SKULLpture Lab, Norman,
Oklahoma. For information on these reconstructions, see Glassman, Gatliff, and
McGregor, Plains Anthropologist 34(125):223-231, August 1989. Photographs
courtesy of Roberta McGregor, Associate Curator of Anthropology, the Witte
Museum, San Antonio, Texas.
Front Cover: Archaic period mother and child from skeletal material recovered from the Shumla Caves, Lower Pecos Region.
Back Cover: Archaic period male from skeletal material recovered from the
Shumla Caves, Lower Pecos Region.

CONTENTS
Dedication (to J. B. Sollberger) ........................................................................... v
On Replicating Fluted Projectile Points.
J. B. Sollberger .............................................................................................. 1
J. B. Sollberger, Archeologist and Flintknapper.
Leland W. Patterson .................................................................................... 19
THE LOWER PECOS AND THE EASTERN TRANS-PECOS
The Prehistoric Legacy of the Lower Pecos Region of Texas.
Ilarry J. Shafer ............................................................................................ 23
Chronological Framework for Lower Pecos Prehistory.
Thomas R. Hester ........................................................................................ 53
The Live Oak Hole Complex: Plains Indian Art and Occupation in the Lower
Pecos River Region.
Solveig A. Turpin and Leland C. Bement ................................................... 65
The Parida Cave Conservation Project 1987.
Joseph H. Labadie ..................................................................................... 83
Diet Change in the Lower Pecos: A Comparison with Baker Cave Coprolites.
Kristin D. Sobolik ...................................................................................... 111
A Preliminary Report on Archeological Resources in Southern Culberson
County in the Vicinity of Van Horn, Texas.
John A. IIedrick ......................................................................................... 129
OTHER REPORTS
Long-Bone Implements from Some Prehistoric Sites in Texas: Functional
Interpretations Based on Ethnographic Analogy.
Grant D. IIall ............................................................................................ 157
Exploring the Possibilities of Acorn Utilization in the Burned Rock Middens of
Texas.
Ellen Sue Turner ....................................................................................... 177
Notes on Obsidian from the Fort Hood Area of Central Texas.
Richard E. Hughes .................................................................................... 193
Prehistoric Subsistence Strategies in Northeastern Central Texas.
David O. Brown ....................................................................................... 201
A Comparison of the Ceramic Assemblages of Five Nineteenth Century Texas
Sites.
Joan Few ................................................................................................... 245
A Key to Eleven Common Genera of Carbonized Wood, Using Scanning Electron
Microscope Photographs.
Michael W. Pendleton ............................................................................... 257
REVIEW
Columbian Consequences, Volume 1: Archeological and IIistorical Perspectives
on the Spanish Borderlands West. David Hurst Thomas.
Jimmy L. Mitchell ...................................................................................... 273
AUTHORS ...................................................................................................... 277

Dedication
This volume is dedicated to J. B. Sollberger of Dallas, Texas, a 28-year
member of the Society who has achieved a both national and international
reputation as a flintknapper par excellence, has acquired exceptional skill in the
experimental replication of Paleo-Indian lithics, and has delved beyond replication to the serious study of the technology of how prehistoric American Indians
controlled the manufacture of lithic tools. He has been author and coauthor of
several significant archeological reports in local, regional, state, and national
publications. He is fearless in his expression of his faith in the results of his
systematic examination of the materials, tools, and results of prehistoric lithic
processes, and is not hesitant to confront controversy. Appropriately, this volume begins with a report by "Solly" on his analysis of the techniques for
producing fluted Folsom projectile points.

On Replicating Fluted Projectile Points
J. B. Sollberger

ABSTRACT
This paper is an invitation to others in experimental archeology to publish
explicit details and data on the subject of how and why fluted points were
made. The author believes that fluting methods evolved over time from simple
to complex as Paleo-Indians filled a need for longer and longer flute scar
channels. It is demonstrated that lever-controlled pressure replicates the complex, evolved form of Folsom fluting with precision and efficiency. Advocates
of punch percussion fluting should support their beliefs on how full-length
flutes were made with specific comparative data and examples of high-quality
replications (i.e.; put up or shut up).
INTRODUCTION

For the new world, Crabtree (cf., 1966, 1968) set the American archeological community on fire by demonstrating outstanding ability to replicate stone
age tools, projectile points, and blades. He described a lithic tool kit, flaking
methods, and techniques. These and other contributions made Crabtree the
father of modern lithic technological studies, and deservedly so. His disciples
now number in the thousands; one can now even obtain college credit by
attending a flintknapping course. But such courses are, by their very nature,
elementary. One graduates with neither great skill nor any profound insights in
lithic analysis. Such skills are developed only later, after long and diligent
experience in actual flintknapping.
For accurate replication of a prehistoric artifact, much more than a basic
shape is required. Errett Callahan reported that his first several hundred attempts
to replicate eastern Clovis points were actually not "replications because they
were too thick (1979:170)." In his early work, Crabtree (1966) maintained that
he could replicate Folsom by two different methods of fluting; however, one has
simply to check his published data to find that only one of his points is thin
enough to qualify as an average Folsom. Average thickness of Folsom points is
between 3.7 and 3.8 mm (Sollberger 1985); this implies that 50 percent of the
total documented Folsoms are thinner than that standard.
Folsom Flute Scar Length
In the early (pre-Crabtree) days, the Folsom type was characterized as
having two flutes that snap-terminate at about two-thirds of the point’s length (I
have been asked many times how one makes the flutes snap off at that percise
length). All older point-type books illustrate and describe a single blunt-pointed
form, widest above mid-length, as the typical Folsom point.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (1988)

2

Texas Archeological Society

This stereotype ignored the fact that many Folsoms are widest across the
basal corners (Suhm et al. 1954:Plate 92 and others). But, by precedent, the first
to publish often sets an unalterable consensus. It is difficult subsequently to
modify such stereotyping.
However, Crabtree (1966) later described the Lindenmeier Folsom as having both flutes intersect the distal end (the tip), thus forming a knife-sharp point
or penetrator. Today, much of the archeological community believes that Folsom
man always intended full length fluting. Judge, for example, believes that
Folsom preforms were snapped off at the end of the shortest flute scar and then
completed (Judge 1977). Such action would certainly require a thick distal end,
and the shaping retouch would leave obvious scars within the channel faces.
In contrast, Wilmsen and Roberts (1978) provide a photograph of acuteangled distal ends of finished points that were broken off (in use?) above the
fluted part. Therefore, I feel justified in asking, how long are flute scars supposed to be? To answer this we must first determine the purposes fluting served.
Why Flute?
The discovery of the association of fluted points with Ice Age animals at
Folsom, New Mexico, was denied before eventually being accepted. The channel scars from fluting were first called grooves; it was widely supposed that
these were "blood grooves" that were ground out to enhance bleeding to make
the animal die more quickly. No one seemed to realize that to function as a
"blood groove" the grooves must necessarily be in the spear shaft itself, external
to the binding, and not on the stone point. Analysis of the mechanics of this
weapons system made this obvious. By accurately replicating the artifacts and
using them experimentally, we can begin to understand their very functional
design characteristics.
After some years of replicating fluted points, I have come to believe that
fluting was done for one major reason: fluting reduces the diameter of the spear
shaft needed at the opening of the mounting slot for point attachment. This
extends the amount of cutting edge that slices into the animal, widening the
entry wound, before the full thickness of the spear shaft is encountered, increasing the depth that can be penetrated with a hand-thrust spear. On the supersized,
thick-hided megafauna, repeated deep penetrations were very necessary in order
to kill the animal. Men have limited strength, and their tools are designed to help
overcome their limitations.
Fluting technology did not develop overnight. It takes a long time to learn
the properties of the materials being used and develop the techniques for proper
control of the patterns of flaking. We would expect such technology to improve
over time, as long as the need for such technology remained.
Fluting Versus Basal Thinning
When archeologists discuss point technology, a common question is, "is it
fluted or is it basal thinning?" I don’t think we have a published rule, so I will
provide one.

Sollberger ~ Fluted Projectile Points

3

When basal flaking thins the proximal end longer than the
length of the hafting notch (typically with one or two, or, rarely,
with three or more flakes), the point is fluted. When the hafting slot
is longer than the basal thinning flake or flakes, the point is not
fluted.
Pre-Folsom Fluting
We do not know how long it took the Clovis people to recognize a need for
fluting and to learn how to make a flutable biface..
Could it be that as Paleo-Indians’ technology progressed, they improved
their methods eventually to obtain full length fluting? The channel scars on
Clovis points--at least those on a majority of them--range between little longer
than basal pressure-thinning flakes and half the length of the points. The evidence from mammoth-kill sites west of the Mississippi River tends to support
this generalization.
East of the Mississippi, however, there are more varieties of Clovis and
Clovis-like points. Eastern points with full-length flutes are not uncommon (but
note that no Folsoms have been found in the eastern states).
Some authors have proposed that Clovis fluting originated in the East but I
do not believe there is sufficient dating or other evidence to support the theory
that fluting is earliest east of the Mississippi. However, fluting in the East
probably persisted to a later date and became more diverse in the East. The
shorter flutes of the western United States are probably the earlier technology.
Bonnichsen and others illustrate and describe a Moosehorn Clovis variety
from Maine (Bonnichsen et al. 1983:36-48). The lengths of their specimens
range between 75 and 136 mm (their Table 1), and their illustrations clearly
suggest that full-length fluting was intentional.
Storck (1984:6, Figure 2) describes and illustrates a Parkhill Clovis complex in Ontario that produced Barnes type Clovis points; flute scars measuring
as much as 85 mm long are reported. Cambron and Hulse (1964) describe the
Cumberland Clovis points of the eastern United States as about three inches
long, many of them fluted right to their tips.
In the light of such evidence, my judgement on eastern Fluting (the Cumberland, Moosehorn, and eastern Clovis varieties) is that full-length flutes were
highly desired and are the most well developed form. These point types are,
therefore, probably more recent than western Clovis fluting by at least a few
hundred years. They could have been produced only after technological advances that made full-length fluting consistently achievable.
The technological advantage of full-length fluting is simply this: fluting
right to the tip thins the projectile tip to a razorlike edge. Such tip-thinning
reduces the resistance to entry by reducing the bifacial friction encountered
while cutting the slot of entry wide enough for the attached spearshaft to enter.
This results in greater hunting efficiency and, therefore, is a constructive adaptive change.

4

Texas Archeological Society
Paleo-Indian Versus Archaic and Late Prehistoric Technology

At the end of the ice age, as the large, slow megafauna gave way to smaller,
quicker game animals, fluted lanceolate points evolved first into points with
stem constrictions, then shouldered points, then quite wide corner-notched and
basal-notched projectile points. These were probably adaptive changes, not just
stylistic ones. Megafauna such as mastodons required more than six inches of
penetration to reach vital organs; they were hunted less and less as their numbers
diminished until they became extinct. Smaller game such as deer and antelope
move too fast for repeated thrusting. The two-man thrust spear gave way to the
atlatl and thrown darts. Darts lengthened the hit range but, being longer, had to
be of lighter weight. Hunters learned to get penetration to vital organ depth by
cutting a wider slot at the point of entry. The wider wound, that is, the wider
slot-cut at entry, opened easily for the shaft entry following.
A simple analogy would be to take a steel needle and a thick hide or canvas.
Push the needle through half or more of its thickness, then try to pull it through
from the other side. The friction of the round, tight hole makes it very difficult to
pull the needle through. Now, take a sharp edge and cut a slot at the point of
entry; the needle goes through with very little force, since the slot lets it almost
fall through. Such a slot, cut by a wide-shouldered or corner-notched Archaic
projectile point hitting with some force, allows deep penetration of the projectile
point and its attached foreshaft, resulting in more efficient hunting of fastmoving wild game.
Eventually, the bow and arrow came along as another major technological
innovation. The high-velocity arrow, with its flatter trajectory, is much more
accurate than a thrown spear, and, with higher velocity and smaller shafts,
hunters could get substantial penetration. Again, the weight of the point was
substantially reduced in a tradeoff for greater hunting efficiency; a hunter could
carry many more arrows than he could the heavier atlatl darts with their foreand mainshafts. He could shoot from ambush before the game or enemy saw him.
PRESSURE VERSUS PERCUSSION FLUTING

The challenge for modern flintknappers to replicate examples of aboriginal
fluted points has motivated a great deal of experimentation and generated a great
deal of literature. Efforts have been centered on finding the method by which
aboriginals fluted their points. Many of the published reports claim success, but
illustrate only mediocre results. Most agree that some form of percussion is
required for true replication. The words true replication have become a subterfuge to forestall constructive criticism.
The process of replication has two inherent, inseparable parts:
1. The tools and manufacturing processes should be like those of the
aboriginals.
2. The product must equal in every respect the quality of the original.
Part 1 has been adhered to by hardly anyone working in the field of lithic
technology, so part 2 is all that is left. The proof of a pudding is in the eating, so,

Sollberger m Fluted Projectile Points

5

if part 2 is obviously a failure, the replicated tool should be rejected, and there is
no need to invoke part one.
In lieu of the more popular percussion fluting, I have used fork-and-lever
pressure fluting since about 1966. Every reaction I have had from professional
and avocational archeologists (other than Bruce Bradley and Errett Callahan)
has been, "I prefer percussion" or "Indians would not have used such a device."
Many percussion fluting advocates have chipped flint as long as I have.
Where are their Folsom, Cumberland, and Barnes Clovis points of acceptable
thinness and length, with each flute extending right to or nearly to the tip? The
longitudinal section between the channel scars at the very tip should be straight,
thin, and centered. The thinness of the tip proves that overshot or end-snipping
corrections were not needed to complete the point. The better examples of
Cumberland, Folsom, and some specialized Clovis have converging channel
scars (Crabtree 1966). With pressure fluting, I have made dozens of all these
types, in all of which the channel scars do converge exactly as Crabtree suggests.
Why is pressure fluting held in disdain? It is generally accepted by most
lithic technologists that in the beginning there was only percussion flaking. Flint
is a tough stone, and most strong men can consistently produce only flakes of
less than 2.5 cm by pressure flaking. The first people to publish work on lithic
technology shared this belief; they are cited and quoted, so a general consensus
has been created that, unfortunately, is treated as proof.
One of several possible examples is the work of H. Holmes Ellis (1965),
who attempted experimental lever flaking and came to the conclusion that "this
procedure is unsuitable and awkward to use (Ellis 1965:22)." In a later section
"Lever and Fulcrum," Ellis finds that the method "has many limitations" and
"only small flakes can be removed (Ellis 1965:39-41)." I find, however, that
Ellis is wrong on lever flaking and misleading on other techniques (such as those
illustrated in his figures V, VI, XI, XII, XVIII, and XX). No knapper can trap the
dorsal face of his flakes against a solid stone anvil and be successful.
There is a moral to the Ellis work and similar reports. It is, don’t necessarily
believe what you read or hear. Believe what you can see and do for yourself. Do
not join the concensus blindly; open your eyes and demand proof.
In the 1960s, I devised the fork-and-lever flaking method for bifacing and
fluting (Sollberger 1978). The late Joel Shiner observed my work and remarked
that "your use of the copper lever invalidates your work," so I then switched to
antler levers and found not only that my fluted points were acceptably thin (by
aboriginal standards) but also that my success-failure ratio was greatly improved
(Sollberger 1985). This outcome was the opposite of what Shiner predicted.
It can be neither proven nor disproven that lever fluting was used in the past.
The unwavering support of a consensus that lacks good empirical evidence is,
however, simply insisting that subjective voting can produce correct results.
We modems are surely at least equal to people of 10,000 years ago in
cognitive abilities and flintknapping skills. It follows then that the quality of our
replications should be equal to or exceed the quality of their best work. Judging

6

Texas Archeological Society

from most efforts, however, I can find only poor and mediocre replications when
the force to obtain long flutes was compression fluting by a punch.
However, by using lever pressure fluting I can match some of the better
works of Paleo-Indian era flintknappers (Figure 1). Flute flakes in excess of
130mm long and 9.0 mm wide offer no problem to pressure fluting when a lever
is employed to control the flaking.

Figure 1. Three pressure flutes from the author’s replications; long, wide, full preformlength channel flakes. The wide one is 114.55 mm long. Note that the long flutes always
detach in three or more pieces.

Sollberger ~ Fluted Projectile Points

7

Length Versus Thickness
Experimental archeologists searching for replicative methods and techniques often claim (or imply) success while ignoring comparative data (i.e.,
aboriginal points) on thickness and length. For an example, see Boldurian,
Fitzgibbons, and Shelly (1985:293-303 their Tables 1 and 2). To consider that
their one finished point (their Figure 5) replicates a freshly completed Folsomman projectile product requires a great stretch of the imagination. The Boldurian
report wrongly stresses the inherent ineptness of clamp-and-lever pressure fluting. Their Table 1 provides a mean length of 55.5 mm, maximum thickness of
11.0 mm, and weight of 18.9 g, giving a length-to-thickness ratio of 5.045.
For comparison, I recently weighed the first five points from a tray of my
clamp-held, lever-fluted replications to find that the five totaled no more than
19.0 g, and averaged about 3.8 g. The ten flute scars at mid-length averaged
13.57 mm wide. Each of the ten flutes terminated at the tip. The average
maximum width was 20.35 mm, mean length was 45.32 mm, and average
maximum thickness was 3.0 mm, giving a length-to-thickness ratio of 15.10:6.
The Folsom length-to-thickness ratio for aboriginal specimens is about 11.29:1
(Sollberger 1985:47), demonstrating that, at this time, pressure fluting appears
to be producing results closer than percussion to the attributes of aboriginal
specimens.
Sharp, Centered Distal End Tips
The full-length fluting of eastern Paleo-Indian projectile types (such as
Cumberland), suggests a highly developed fluting technology. In fact, such fulllength fluting may be by itself a sufficient indicator of more recent dates for
such specimens (radiocarbon dating may not be needed, except as an independent
verification of this hypothesis). It is my view that such point types have been
produced only since the advent of technological developments that included
vertical preform clamping with lever-assisted pressure flaking (on this point, see
E. L. Davis [1978] on the evolution of fluting at China Lake, California).
A basic intuitive understanding of fracture mechanics (which we today
know as Hooks Law) is all that is required. With that, any competent knapper
can produce both flutes with constant, even thinning, without outrepasse, to a
sharp, centered, distal end tip. Heat treatment is not required (Figure 2).
The maximum thickness of any projectile point is the width of the slot it will
pass through. For percussion fluting advocates, if a point will not drop through a
4.0 mm slot, the replication does not qualify as a Folsom.
Clovis points of the northeastern United States and Ontario, Canada have
deeply concave basal configurations compared to the shallow-base western
Clovis (Figure 3). The very short distal end flake scars outside the channel faces
show that the fluting made these ends very thin. None of the preform faces were
chipped to have strong flute-guiding ridges.

8

Texas Archeological Society

Obverse

Reverse
Figure 2, Obverse (above) and reverse (below) photographs of replicated Cumberland
Clovis points, on which the flutes on both sides intersect the light grinding to the sharpedged distal ends of the preforms. All of these specimens were made by lever pressure
fluting. The longest one is 97 nml long, the widest, 24.0 mm wide, and the maximum
thickness is 5.9 ram. The third from the left is 87 nun long, 25.7 mm wide, and has a
maximum thickness of 5.0 mm.

Sollberger ~ Fluted Projectile Points

Obverse

9

Reverse

Figure 3. Photographs of replicated Clovis points showing the difference between eastern
Clovis (deep basal concavity at left in each photograph) and western Clovis (shallow
basal concavity, at right in each photograph). The western style illustrated the shortening
of basal comers in setting up the second fluting platform.

Well-developed guiding ridges, as are found on Eden points, are not safe to
use except for long, narrow points, such as Cumberland. Note that on the longer
point (Figure 3, reverse face, left edge), the preform volume is abruptly increased at a snapped-off bifacing flake. This suggests that the small volume
increase added sufficient resistence to the leading edge of compression to slow it
down while the then-freed length of fracture was still being opened to widen the
flute flake crack above. The widening of the crack formed a secondary compression (Sollberger 1986:101-105) within the flute flake at and along the fracture
front. The combined load of the flaking tool and secondary compression required that a new and deeper tension formation direction (to support further
fracture propagation) must come from the flute flake side of the fracture front.
The result was certainly the undulation trough you see extending across the
channe! flake scar. The depth of that trough was limited by the fact that when the
compression front passed through the volume increase noted (the snap-break) it
accelerated, in that the volume reduction concomitantly speeded up the closely
following fracture front, which was as the trough deepened. Had the volume
beyond not reduced, an outrepasse (or reverse hinge fracture) would have
divided the preform into two pieces. The shallow and deep basal concavities
(Figure 3) will be discussed later.

10

Texas Archeological Society

We must try to recover the traditions of stone age flintknappers through
carefull documented experimentation. The full-size shop drawings I make (Figure 4) can be extremely valuable in that search, for they reveal many facts about
the reaction of lithic materials to the flaking forces the flintknapper uses,
eventually telling us what the correct longitudinal and cross sectional contours
must be relative to flute length, width, and fluting platform strength.
Sept 26, 87.

Barnes type Clovis. Contour configuration,

Pedernales flint: 5800 F. Held- 2 hours.
Preform: 135.0 x 32.0 x 10.70 mm max thk.
First flute: 130.0 x 19.25mm wide. 5.mm short of tip.
Second flute: 126. mm lg, exactly to tip.
Completed lght: 130.0 x 31.5 x 7.5 mm’between flute ridges~
Final retouch: basel concavty and distal tip.
lght/thk ratio 17.34: wd/thk 4.20
Remarks: First channel face is featureless. Second has force
line marking onset of secondary compression at bulbar end.
Accept template as-is.

Figure 4. A shop drawing entitled "Fluting results from preestablished preform contours," made by the author for an individual replication specimen

BASIS FOR FLUTING TECHNIQUES
Fluting projectile points is the art of blade-making on specialized cores.
Fluting platforms are necessarily more delicate than platforms for blades. It

Sollberger m Fluted Projectile Points

11

takes about the same interval of time for the fracture of either to travel because
the contouring flakes that size the flute for width and thickness originate from
lineal edges. The Levallois percussion technique was refined by New World
Paleo-Indian craftsmen who fluted points by the addition of pressure flaking to
reduce the prominence of the percussion flake scar ridges. This was done to
straighten the flute’s lineal edges, which, in turn, straightened the swells and
lows of the fracture down the length of the ventral face.
Percussion-blade success rises with the addition of weight to the core,
because weight adds thickness and reduces the core rotation and deflection
caused by the impact. Increased thickness of the core relative to blade thickness
reduces distortion of the core mass by the percussive instrument in proportion to
the cross sectional area of the blade being struck.
The core for fluting is a biface that is much thinner and lighter than a blade
core. Percussion fluting distorts and literally bends the biface core because the
amount of flaking force cannot be reduced, so light-weight blade cores and
bifaces must be held in a vice or clamp to prevent rotation and deflection in
order to have a success ratio sufficient to sustain an industry. Deflection of the
core reduces or eliminates the flaking force. Rotation, from its very onset,
constantly changes the correct angle of applied flaking force to excessive and
more so, resulting in more and greater failures. The human hand cannot hold a
preform against deflection and rotation nearly as well as can a simple leatherpadded clamp applied to the preform’s lineal edges.
The need for fluting was predicated on the premise that the deeper the
penetration, the faster an animal was immobilized. Deeper penetration was first
accomplished by basal thinning, which reduced the hafting diameter restriction.
With some apparent success came further modifications; basal thinning gave
way to short flutes and, eventually, to full-length flutes. Each modification
resulted in increased penetration and stronger hafting, while reducing the thrust
energy requirements. Each gain, however, also increased manufacturing constraints. The longer flutes increased the losses to manufacturing failure. The
introduction of pressure fluting eventually must have replaced percussion, since
lever pressure allowed the use of minimal force with its superior advantages.
We have an analogy with modern weaponry. Shotguns and rifles at first had
very large calibers. Big-bore weapons gave way to smaller calibers, flatter
trajectories, and increased velocities as technology developed As stone age man
learned and developed his technology, so modern man has also progressed.
From the onset of fluting until the development of classic Archaic dart point
types, the halhnark of the Paleo-Indian projectile point flaking patterns is extensive pressure-flaking laid over percussion. Paleo-Indian points have a smooth,
molded feel to them. On less well made pieces, the channel scar lineal edges
weave in and out, and the channel scar faces wave up and down according to
preform thickness changes in length, width, or surface. A minor volume change
in the flute flake as it lengthens causes ripples, a larger change causes undulations, and an excessive change results in a manufacturing failure. If the flaking

12

Texas Archeological Society

force is reduced in time over the fracture length, the fracture deceleration
produces ripples at distal ends. Lever pressure fluting provides a constant force
throughout, whereas percussion provides a faster fracture in addition to the
greater distortions produced by the force required for fracture length. That is
why, for example, pressure blades can be much more uniformly flaked than can
percussion blades (Crabtree 1978; So!Iberger 1983).
MANUFACTURING TECHNIQUES
Fluting is a specialized type of blade making. A more precise fluting
platform is needed because the more fragile biface core is used.
Fluting Procedures
It is necessary to isolate a nipple to serve as the fluting platform. First, one
must bevel-shorten the base so the desired flute will not become thicker below
the nipple; if it thickens, it will result in an overshot. A low spot less than
straight below the nipple will snap-break the flute short.
To form the nipple, start small flakes at the beveled edge of each basal
comer, with the force directed toward the lineal edges (not towards the distal
end). As the midwidth is approached, make the flakes longer, so a parallel-sided
column is achieved. Next, turn the preform over and thin the backside to a sharp
edge, which must be carefully ground to the proper thickness--this thickness
determines the thickness of the resulting flute flake.
You now have your first fluting platform, but it needs to be very critically
examined. The backside should be flat, and this flat side should be parallel to the
preform width center plane. The fracture should instigate well above the center
plane of thickness. Even for a very long flute, the arc of instigation should be no
wider than 3 mm and its thickness no greater than about 2.5 mm; for small points
like Folsom, these measurements should be even smaller. Lastly, the longitudinal face below the nipple face must be only lightly convex for about two-thirds
of the desired flute length. If such conditions are not present, the preform will
have to be remodelled. If it passes inspection, then the flute can be made.
The second platform is much the same. Reverse the bevel by flaking into the
first channel face. Then reverse that bevel to leave a centered, exposed column,
the backside of which is the channel scar face of the first flute. It is important to
form an offset to separate the fluting column from the prior flute face in order to
locate the second flute instigation. This thinning of the column is done by
pressing off a flake from each lateral margin of the fluting column. The direction
of force for each thinning flake should be toward the opposite lateral margin of
the preform. Grind the second nipple and subject the preform to the same critical
examination as you did for the first flute. If it does not conform, remodel by
shortening the preform; the result will be a very deep basal concavity after
making the flute.

Sollberger m Fluted Projectile Points

13

Following the second flute, only minor retouch at the tip and within the
basal cavity is required. It is pure nonsense to suggest that preform distal tips
have to be left thick and wide and that they were heavily ground to support the
fluting force. In fact, in my opinion, the Cumberland type in particular and other
types where the objective is full-length fluting to thin the tip cannot be so fluted
from preforms left wide or thick at the distal end. Convincing proof is lacking
for this hypothesis, but if you believe otherwise, please publish your proof.
Some Observations
Bifacing is a reduction system. A "bad" flake cannot be replaced. A quickly
made point usually is nothing to be proud of. A five-hour fluted point usually is
more than satisfactory. A fraction of a millimeter becomes important, and is an
important tolerance in fluting. Later "Plano"-Indian point makers gave up fluting for thicker, heavier lanceolate and stemmed forms more suitable for atlatl
dart points. No stone age or modem man always uses perfect stone, always has
the right tool kit, or always experiences reduction success. Therefore, we often
take what we can get.
In order to reconstruct Paleo-Indian lifeways involving the making of stone
tools, logical analysis alone is not enough. We must have and use a common
knowledge of the reaction of lithic materials to flaking forces. Only then can
archeologists agree and raise lithic analysis to its greatest possible potential (see
Sollberger 1986:101-105).
With such knowledge and experience, you can look at fracture ventral faces
and interpret fracture feature formations such as radius of the ring arc, the extent
of lipping, the angle and depth of bulbar flare, the onset of acting secondary
compression, causes for undulations and ripples, tear lines, fracture most advanced centrally or lateraly or shifting between the margins, the cause for
thickening or thinning wave planes, snap breaks, diving flakes, and the various
kinds of hinge fractures as opposed to lengthwise or crosswise overshots.
If fracture feature formations cannot be explained under a noncontradictory
fracture theory, the hypothesis is wrong, and the analysis is probably also wrong.
In fluting industries, preforms were made to conform to the standard of
tradition and were given critical analysis. If the preform was too thin to flute, the
knapper did not try. If only one face was flutable, he took one flute. When the
eye of the knapper predicted failure with a single flute, he made two or more
thin, narrow flutes from the same face lateral to each other. The term for that is
multiple fluting.
Boldurian and his co-workers extended that terminology to include the
taking of a second flute from directly below the first attempt (which certainly
must have aborted in order to make a need for the second). The term multiple
fluting should not be used unless the flutes are side by side and overlapping;
where the knapper took this approach to completing the piece.

14

Texas Archeological Society
Examples

Following are some illustrations of the kinds of results that can be achieved
with preform clamping and controlled lever pressure fluting. In the first (Figure
5, obverse and reverse), only one of the four faces has the flute right to the tip;
this is a function of combined platform strength and longitudinal convexity of
the preform.

Reverse

Obverse

Figure 5. Obverse (left) and reverse (right) views of replication, showing how early flute
snap breaks from buckling shorten the flutes. Uneven faces cause lateral turns.

Another point (Figure 6, left) is a good example of a channel scar forming
free of ripples, undulations, and other problems. Such a specimen is the result of
good preforming of facial surfaces, plus the benefits of preform clamping and
controlled lever pressure flaking.
CONCLUSIONS

I have researched fluted point cultures from Clovis times onward; groups
who produced full-length channe! scars on their points that are directly comparable to the channel scars on the replications illustrated in this report. All of
these experimental examples are the result of lever pressure fluting with the
preforms held vertically in split-limb grooved clamps. Several ethnographic
reports suggest such a technique, but modern practitioners and most of the
archeological community have rejected it. Most modern replication experiments

Sollberger m Fluted Projectile Points

15

Figure 6. Two replications. The specimen on the left shows how near-perfect contours
plus pressure force result in an undulation-free, ripple-free flute, with channel scars right
to the tip of the point.

have been done with indirect percussion. I fail to find in the archeological
literature any proof that such percussion fluting is equal to or better than the
"better" work of Paleo-Indians.
If the prevailing hypothesis for indirect percussion fluting is correct, it
should be demonstrated with empirical evidence that equals the "better" specimens left by stone age flintknappers. Where is the evidence? Only when such
evidence is published will we be in a position to say that the Indians would or
would not have used pressure by lever-assist to gain the necessary force for
controlled fluting. My own experimental work has convinced me in this case,
but I am open to examining the work of others. One last caveat however--a
rebuttal to be valid must be accompanied by evidence. Flutes must have the
overall thinness of aboriginal specimens--right to the tip.

16

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Boldurain, A. T., P.T. Fitzgibbons, and P. H. Shelly
1985
Fluting Devices in the Folsom Tradition: Patterning in Debitage Formation
and Projectile Point Basal Configuration. Plains Anthropologist 30:293303.
1986

A Reply to Sollberger and Patterson on experimental Folsom Biface
Manufacture. Plains Anthropologist 31:245-248.

Boldurain, A. T., G. A. Agogino, P. H. Shelley, and Mark Slaughter
Folsom Biface Manufacture, Retooling, and Site Function at the Mitchell
1987
Locality of B lackwater Draw. Plains Anthropologist 32:299-310.
Bormichsen, Robson, Bruce Bourque, and D. E. Young
The Moosehorn Fluted Point Discovery, Northern Maine. Archeology of
1983
Eastern North America 11:37-48.
Callahan, Erret
1979
The Basics of Bifacing Knapping in the Eastern Fluted Point Tradition.
Archeology of Eastern North America 7(1).
Cambron, J. W., and D. C. Hulse
1964
Handbook of Alabama Archeology Part I, edited by David L. Dejamette,
The Archeological Research Association of Alabama.
Crabtree, D. E.
1966
A Stoneworkers Approach to Analyzing and Replicating the Lindenmeier
Folsom. Tebiwa 9(1):3 -39.
1968

Mesoamerican Polyhedral Cores and Prismatic Blades. American Antiquity
33(4):446-478.

Davis, E. L.
Associations of People and Rancholabrean Fauna of China Lake, California.
1978
Early Man in America from a Circum-Pacific Perspective. Edited by Alan
Lyle Bryan. Occasional Papers No 1 of the Department of Anthropology,
University of Alberta, Edmonton.
Ellis, H. H.
Flint-Working Techniques of the American Indians. Ohio Historical Soci1965
ety~ Columbus.
Judge, J. W.
1973
Paleoindian Occupation of the Central Rio Grande Valley in New Mexico.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Sutun, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
1954
Archeological Society 25.

Sollberger ~ Fluted Projectile Points

17

Sollberger, J. B.
1978
Lever Flaking As a Credible Alternative to Hand-Held Pressure Flaking.
Flintknappers Exchange 1(1) 6-7 and 1(2) 25.
1985

A Technique for Fluting Folsom. Lithic Technology 14(1)41-50.

1986

Lithic Fracture Analysis: A Better Way. Lithic Technology 15(3) 101-105.

Sollberger, J. B., and L. W. Patterson
1983
A Pressure Method for Microblade Manufacture. Lithic Technology 12(2)2531.
1986

Comments on Folsom Fluting Experiments by Boldurian et al. Plains Anthropologist 31 (! 13):241-244.

Storck, P. L.
1984
Research into the Paleo-Indian Occupations of Ontario: A Review. Ontario
Archaeology 41:6.
Wilmsen, E. N., and F. H. H. Roberts, Jr.
1978
Lindenmeier 1934-1974. Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology No.
24.

19

J. B. Sollberger, Archeologist and Flintknapper
Leland W. Patterson
The work of J. B. Sollberger, known to his many friends and associates
simple as "Solly," has been familiar for many years to people engaged in
archeology in Texas. His career as an avocational archeologist spans several
decades. Solly is known for work in Texas prehistoric archeology and for
research in experimental flintknapping. His work has been published in several
journals, including American Antiquity, Plains Anthropologist, Lithic Technology, La Tierra (Journal of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association), The
Record (publication of the Dallas Archeological Society), and the Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society.
Sony was born in 1914 in Dallas, Texas, where he graduated from high
school in 1932. He became a plumber in Big Spring, Texas and, in 1935, married
Anna Stohacker, of Kerrville, Texas. In the 1930s he explored several sites in
South Central Texas, and his earlier archeological publications focus on this
region. During World War II, from 1942 to 1945, he served in the Army Air
Corps. Subsequently, he has been a long-time resident of Dallas, as his backyard lithic workshop attests. He retired in 1977 after having been involved in the
construction of steam-generated electric power plants, primarily in the Dallas
region. Solly has been a long-time member of the Texas Archeological Society,
the Dallas Archeological Society, and is a founding member of the Southern
Texas Archaeological Association.
One thing that most distinguishes Sollberger is his ability to share his
expertise with others. He has taught several generations of Texas flintknappers
and has given many lectures and demonstrations on lithic technology. He also
has been author or coauthor of more than 50 publications and has provided
technical advice on lithic technology for projects of other individuals.
Solly has been engaged in archeological activities in South Central Texas
since 1934. He has surveyed and studied the prehistory of this region and has
shared his ideas in both published and verbal form. Typical of his publications
are site reports (Sollberger 1948, 1949, 1950), naming of the Edwards arrowpoint type, initial postulation of the Turtle Creek phase of South Central Texas
(Sollberger 1967; see also La Tierra, Volume 4, No. 4, October 1978), and
thoughts on the Late Paleo-Indian/Early Archaic transition in South Central
Texas (Sollberger and Hester 1972).
Some of his other publications on the archeology of Texas are a study of an
animal effigy (Sollberger 1978), comments on the possible functions of Guadalupe tools (Sollberger and Carroll 1985), and general reflections on the science
of archeology (Sollberger 1982, 1987).
Sollberger is well known and respected for his general archeological
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (1988)

20

Texas Archeological Society

activities, but he has also earned fame as an experimental flintknapper. He is
recognized as a Master Knapper in both North America and Europe and was
recently honored as a recipient of the annual Don Crabtree Award of the Society
for American Archaeology. Solly once said he got started in flintknapping after
watching someone make a simple unifacial scraper, and once he had the "bug,"
there was no stopping his drive to become one of the best flintknappers of
this era.
One of Solly’s strong points is that he is a very astute observer of fracture
patterns in knapped material. This has allowed him not only to perfect his
knapping techniques, but also to make contributions to fracture theory (Sollberger 1986). He is also an innovator of knapping techniques, seen in his
development of unique pressure methods for controlling the fluting of Folsom
point replicates (Sollberger 1985: Figure 1; Sollberger and Patterson 1980:
Figures 2 and 3; Sollberger, elsewhere in this volume).
Solly constantly works to improve his flintknapping techniques. I once gave
him a cast of a Lindenmeier site Folsom point with a thickness of 3.1 mm. At the
time, Solly’s Folsom replicates averaged about 3.9 mm in thickness. The extreme thinness of the Lindenmeier site point became Solly’s new goal, and
shortly afterwards the average thickness of his Folsom replicates was no more
than about 3.2 mm.
Sollberger has taught many individuals the science and art of flintknapping
and has given many demonstrations of his knapping skill to university groups,
regional and local archeological groups, and the public. He is one of the founders of the Texas Knap-Ins, which serves as a focal point for experimental
flintknappers in this state. Solly is never too busy to give advice to someone who
wants to learn more about flintknapping. He has served as a reviewer for the
journal Lithic Technology and has done replicate experiments in flintknapping
for several professional archeologists, one of which involved replicating methods of Maya tranchet tool production (Shafer 1983:60).
Sollberger’s publications on flintknapping cover subjects such as prismatic
blade manufacture (Sollberger and Patterson 1976), thermal alteration of siliceous stone (Sollberger and Hester 1973), and lithic tool kits (Sollberger 1969).
His report on the technology of Plains Indian beveled knives (sometimes called
Harahey knives) is a classic reference (Sollberger 1971).
J. B. Sollberger is well known for his contributions to Texas archeology and
to lithic technology. Even more, however, he is known to his many associates as
a good friend and advisor. His work typifies what the best serious avocational
archeologists are contributing to the science of archeology.

Patterson ~ J. B. Sollberger

21

REFERENCES CITED
Shafer, H. J.
The Tranchet Technique in Lowland Maya Lithic Tool Production. Lithic
1983
Technology 12(3):57-68.
Sollberger, J. B.
1948
Lamb’s Creek Mound. The Record, Dallas Archeological Society 8(1).
1949

A Prehistoric Rockshelter in Kerr County, Texas. The Record 8(3).

1951

Three Sites in Atascosa County, Texas. The Record 9(3).

1967

A New Type of Arrow Point with Speculations as to Its Origin. The Record
23(3).

1969

The Basic Tool Kit Required to Make and Notch Arrow Shafts for Stone
Points. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:231-240.

1971

A Technological Study ofBeveled Knives.Plains Anthropologist16(53):209218.

1978

An Animal Effigy from Kerr County, Texas. La Tierra, quarterly journal of
the Southern Texas Archaeological Association, 5(3):20-21.

1982

Reflections. La Tierra 9(2):43.

1985

A Technique for Folsom Fluting. Lithic Technology 14(1):41-50.

1986

Lithic Fracture Analysis: A Better Way. Lithic Technology 15(3):101-105.

1987

Archaeology: A Defmition. La Tierra 14(4):38-39.

Sollberger, J. B., and W. B. Carroll
1985
Guadalupe Tools: Were They Used for Defleshing Hides. La Tierra 12(1): 1822.
Sollberger, J. B., and T. R. Hester
1972
The Strohacker Site: A Review of Pre-Archaic Manifestations in Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 17(58):326-344.
1973

Some Additional Data on the Thermal Alterations of Siliceous Stone. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 43:33-65.

Sollberger, J. B., and L. W. Patterson
1976
Prismatic Blade Replication. American Antiquity 41(4): 517-531.
1980

Attributes of Experimental Folsom Points and Channel Flakes. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 51:289-299.

23

The Prehistoric Legacy of the Lower Pecos Region of

Texas
Harry J. Shafer

ABSTRACT
The Lower Pecos River region of Texas stands out as an archeological
district because of its arid environment, deeply incised canyons, many overhangs suitable for human occupation, preserved perishable materials in the dry
archeological deposits, preserved rock art, and long culture history. These
factors have provided an extraordinary opportunity for archeologists to define
an ancient cultural system with a precision rarely possible in archeology.
Progress has been made toward defining and modeling the ancient ways of life
and explaining the functions of specific kinds of sites within the system.
Combined interdisciplinary studies have provided insight into the ancient Lower
Pecos cultures to a degree unmatched in southern North America.

INTRODUCTION
This paper provides an overview of the archeology of the Lower Pecos
Region, a brief description of the environment and a model of the cultural
system (the prehistoric chronology of the region is described elsewhere in this
volume by Thomas R. Hester).
The Lower Pecos Region of Texas and northern Coahuila, Mexico, is where
the Pecos and Devils rivers join the Rio Grande (Figure 1). The region includes
all of Val Verde County and extends about 160 km (100 miles) westward to the
Marathon uplift; it incorporates Sanderson and Dryden canyons, all of Terrell
County, the eastern part of Brewster County, northern Pecos, Crockett, and
Sutton counties, and is bordered on the northeast and east by the Devils River
watershed. The region also encompases the adjacent part of northern Coahuila,
Mexico, for a distance of about 50 km.
The major types of prehistoric sites are rockshelters, caves, and open-air
sites. The uses of these sites often differed, but there was some functional
overlap. For example, people lived in both rockshelters and open-air sites; openair habitation sites include alluvial terraces along the streams as well as upland
surfaces subjected to erosion. Burial sites include caves and rockshelters, and
rock art is protected by the overhangs of rockshelters. Most burned rock middens are in open-air localities, but some are in rockshelters.
There is also a strong overlap in the kinds of material remains recovered
from the various kinds of sites. The greatest difference among the sites in kinds
of material remains recovered is in the perishable inventory from dry rockshelters. When the region’s unusual preservation capacity is considered, one can see
why it is possible in the region to examine the ancient ways of life in greater
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (1988)

24

Texas Archeological Society

BREWSTER
MEXI(

\

Seminole

I
I

Canyon

Lake Amistad~
-=.-.’--- ~Amistad

Dam

~ m’~omiles
O

t

O

I
loo kilometers

I

\

Figure 1. Map showing the approximate extent of the Lower Pecos region.

detail than in moister regions and to venture beyond the more basic questions of
technology and subsistence.
ENVIRONMENT

The surface geology in the region is dominated by outcrops of Cretaceous
limestone, eroded and dissected during millions of years of solution activity.
The downcutting of the three major rivers--Rio Grande, Pecos, and Devils-and their tributary systems resulted in the formation of many deep narrow
canyons in which, because of the variable density of the limestone strata,
countless solution cavities, overhangs, and rockshelters were formed ~igure 2).
Permanent water sources are provided by the Rio Grande and the Pecos and
Devils rivers and by solution potholes (tinajas) and springs. Despite the semiarid
climate, the people were never beyond relatively easy access to water.
The local topography is dominated by a gently eroded limestone plateau
(called the Edwards Plateau east of the Pecos River and the Stockton Plateau
west of the Pecos River) interrupted by deeply incised narrow canyons that drain
into the major rivers. The general north-to-south gradient of the plateau, together with the sometimes marked relief of the lower canyons, produces elevation contrasts of about 380 meters in the area.

Shafer m Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

25

Figure 2. The deeply incised canyon of the Pecos River near its confluence with the Rio
Grande, before the filling of the Amistad Reservoir. Moorehead Cave cart be seen in the
bluff on the left. Photo courtesy of Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

The landscape is typified by much bare rock (Figure 3) which, coupled with
the thin upland soils common over much of the region, leads to rapid runoff of
heavy rainfall and results in frequent flash floods and continued scouring of the
canyons (Patton and Dibble 1982). The three river canyons have narrow, mostly
Holocene, alluvial terraces, and on the more stable of these deposits almost
invariably are traces of prehistoric human activity.
The climate is semiarid, with mild winters and hot summers. The average
annual rainfall for the region varies from 30.5 to 56 cm (12 to 22 inches)
annually, which increases to the east. The climate favors a plant cover dominated by xeric, or dry, land species. The deep shaded and moist canyons,
springs, and the riverine belts sometimes supported stands of more luxuriant
vegetation. The plant diversity for the region as a whole is high, but, since more
than 90 percent of the land is upland, canyon slope, and bluffside, most of the
vegetation is xeric (Dering 1979).
Elevation differences and general decrease in the soil depth from north to
south, together with the east-west decrease in rainfall across the region, produce
a gradual shift in the dominant plant communities. These environmental
conditions also cause a slight maturation cline in plants from south to north that
was probably very important to the ancient hunters and gatherers. The effect of
such a cline would be for populations to prolong the harvesting of such foods as
prickly pear fruits by shifting gathering locations northward as the fruits ripened.

26

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Looking into the dissected landscape of Musk Hog Canyon in Crockett County.

PALEOENVIRONMENT
Archeologists and botanists working with the deeply stratified terrace deposits along the Rio Grande and the Pecos River have collected sequences of
fossil pollen samples from the sediments. Additional pollen samples, often in
association with preserved plant parts, have been taken from stratified deposits
in rockshelters. Analysis of these micro- and macroscopic plant remains, together with sedimentological histories and comparative data from adjacent areas, have led to a remarkably sensitive paleoenvironmental model for the Lower
Pecos Region (Bryant and Shafer 1977, Patton and Dibble 1982). This model
traces rather rapid desiccation in the region at the end of the Pleistocene; a
gradual warming and drying trend began about 10,000 years ago and has continued to recent times. Within this time at least one reversal occurred, about 2,500
to 2,800 years ago, which evidently had a significant impact on the archeology
of the region (Dibble and Lorrain 1968).
Paleoenvironmental models are extremely important tools for understanding patterning in prehistory; they provide a means of testing for anomalies in
cultural patterns in order to determine if such anomalies could be due to some
form of environmental stress or response.
THE CULTURAL SYSTEM
We do not know the ethnic identity of the prehistoric Indians of the lower
Pecos River. However, reliable inferences about their general culture and way of
life can be drawn from Spanish descriptions of hunters and gatherers of northern

Shafer m Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

27

Mexico and southern and southwestern Texas recorded in the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries (Krieger 1956, Covey 1961, Griffen 1969,
Newcomb 1961).
Throughout the culture history of the Lower Pecos Region, the people were
hunters and gatherers. The only possible evidence of the use of domestic plants
is a rare bottle gourd sherd from Conejo shelter (Alexander 1974).
The nature and quantity of the resources available in the environment and
their nomadic or seminomadic way of life strongly influenced the size and social
organization of the groups. The dominant social unit, as is found generally in
hunting and gathering societies with low population densities (Service 1966),
was the band (Griffen 1969, Newcomb 1961). Bands are the simplest form of
human social organization. Bands vary considerably in size from single familysized groups to groups of as many as 150 to 200 people. The number of people in
a particular band depends on several factors, including population density and
the availability of food and water.
In hunting and gathering societies, views about existence and the world tend
to be strongly supematuralistic. Everything in their world has supernatural
explanations. Healing rituals and life-crisis rites such as birth, puberty, marriage, and death usually are supervised by a shaman, who may be male or
female. Healing is typically individualistic, whereas group healing is more
typical of formative (simple agricultural) societies.
One of the more outstanding features of the Lower Pecos Region is the
preservation of the ancient art (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967, Shafer 1986). The
variability and patterning in the art are like those found generally in hunting and
gathering societies. Art in primitive societies is an indirect form of communication. Its purpose is to evoke emotion, and its context is religious ritual. The art
forms are simple and highly traditional. The aim is to control (Service 1966:77).
Hunting and gathering societies also are described as egalitarian; no one
person or group of people outranked anyone else. All people were of essentially
equal status, although differences in age and sex certainly were acknowledged.
Egalitarian societies characteristically do not have designated leaders or chiefs,
as it were; decision making usually is done by consensus. The egalitarian label
does not preclude the viewing of certain individuals as exceptional, in their
magic, their ability to cure illness (as in the case of shamans), or for their skills
as hunters or knowledgeable gatherers. Such individuals may have significant
influence on others in their band, but there is no ranking in status on the basis of
birth (Service 1966).
The mobile lifeway made it necessary for the people to carry with them all
their worldly possessions, which affected both the technology and what was left
at abandoned sites (Shafer 1981). Under these circumstances, it also can be
expected that the people had multiple uses for many of the tools they carried.
Most of the settlements probably were open air; sheltered locations were
reserved for needed shade and for refuge from inclement weather. Consequently, several different kinds of archeological sites could have been created by

28

Texas Archeological Society

a single band’s settlement in a canyon. Both open-air and sheltered locations
could have been used simultaneously. One band, in a single occupational episode, could produce rock art, add to a growing pile of burned rock fragments in a
midden, use bedrock mortars, and deposit a lens of fibrous residue in one or
more rockshelters. Larger bands may have split into family groups, occupying
several nearby sheltered areas simultaneously.
Living areas within the rockshelters also give a general indication of the
size of the social groups who occupied them. Little attention has been paid to
understanding the social aggregates of the Lower Pecos Archaic peoples, but,
considering the space available in rockshelters, it is doubtful that occupying
groups numbered more than about 25 to 30 individuals; smaller family-sized
bands of 10 to 15 may have been more economic for winter or lean seasons.
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES
Archeological sites in the region consist of rockshelters, caves, and open-air
localities. Sites with specific functions are burial locations, bedrock mortar
holes, and burned rock middens.
Rockshelters
Rockshelter sites have received the most attention because of the remarkably well preserved perishable artifacts found in the deposits of larger, betterprotected examples (McGregor 1985).
Examples of excavated rockshelters include Eagle Cave (Ross 1965), Fate
Bell shelter (Parsons 1965), Coontail Spin, and Mosquito Cave (Nunley, Duffield, and Jelks 1965), Centipede and Damp caves ~pstein 1962), 41VV88
(Dibble and Prewitt 1967), Baker Cave (Word and Douglas 1970, Hester 1983,
Chadderdon 1983), Hinds Cave (Figure 4) (Shafer and Bryant 1977, Saunders
1986), Conejo shelter (Alexander 1974), and Parida Cave (Alexander 1970).

Figure 4. Hinds Cave (41VV456), Val Verde Count5,, during excavation by Texas A&M
University.

Shafer ~ Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

29

These sites are invaluable archives for the study of human ecology of
prehistoric hunters and gatherers and their adaptations to the arid lands of
southern North America. The deposits in such sites are enormously complex and
demand methods of excavation and analysis that go far beyond the expertise of
the casual excavator. Unfortunately, nearly all of the larger shelters, which are
multidisciplinary archives of data because of the unusual preservation conditions, have been badly damaged---or, in some cases, totally destroyed--by relic
hunters.
Rockshelters served as habitation sites for task units of one or more family
groups, depending on the number of people in the residential groups and the
amount of space available. The rockshelters vary in size from the huge Fate Bell
Shelter in Seminole Canyon State Park (Fearce and Jackson 1933, Parsons
1965) to small overhangs that are hardly large enough to accommodate more
than one person, to slight overhangs that, although floorless, are adequate for the
protection of prehistoric paintings (Graham and Davis 1958).
Deposits in the rockshelters generally consist of ashy fill mixed with fragments of burned limestone, lithic artifacts, and animal bone. In the drier sites,
perishable plant materials and fibrous artifacts are preserved. In some rockshelters, matted thin lenses or thick layers of fibrous materials are made up mostly of
the residue from processing desert succulents such as sotol (Dasylirion sp.),
lechuguilla (Agave lechuguilla), and prickly pear cactus (Opuntia sp.), and the
remains of grass beds and flooring materials. Mixed with the matted remains of
food and flooring residue are discarded remnants of textiles and other items of
material culture.
Fiber lenses or layers of organic material may have been purposefully
scattered over the living floors of the shelters in order to improve living conditions. This situation was noted at Gobbler shelter (Dering and Shafer 1976) and
Hinds Cave (Shafer and Bryant 1977), where two floors of prickly pear pads
(with spines removed) were found (Figure 5) together with indications that other
floors may have been covered with dry grass and oak leaves collected during the
early spring leaf fall.
Among the fiber lenses are found not only the usual array of stone and bone
cultural items, but also materials--artifacts and other items directly related to
human activities--that usually are not preserved in the archeological record
(Figure 6 A, 6 B). It is this inventory of perishable materials that is so important,
not only to archeologists, but also to botanists, zooarchaeologists, and other
specialists who are often called upon to aid in the analysis of archeological
materials. Items of food and debris from food processing, and desiccated remains of digested food in coprolites recovered from deeply stratified deposits,
have provided an extraordinarily detailed understanding of the subsistence of
the people. Technological items used to harvest, hunt, make fire, and process
foods, together with items of clothing, play items, ritual paraphenalia (painted
pebbles, painted sticks, pictographs), and, occasionally, burials, have provided a
remarkably complete record of the material culture (Shafer 1986:58-131).

30

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Prickly pear floor showing in A-C Trench profile in Hinds Cave, excavated by
Texas A&M University.

When rockshelters were occupied by family groups, floor space predictably
was divided by households. Evidence for cultural patterning during certain
episodes of occupation has been found at Hinds Cave (Shafer 1986:97) and can
be inferred from reports of other sites such as Damp Cave (Epstein 1962) and
Conejo Shelter (Alexander 1974).
The living areas in the better-preserved caves often have shallow, grasslined pits, usually near the back wall, which presumably served as sleeping areas
(Shafer and Bryant 1977, Epstein 1962, Dibble and Prewitt 1967). These pits
sometimes have a rather complex structure; they are oval, scooped out of the
cave floor, and layered with green twigs and branches that are in turn covered
with thick layers of grass. A layer of flat objects--prickly pear pads (with spines
removed), fragments of matting, or discarded sandals--was placed on top of the
grasses Figure 6 A), and over this apparently was placed a petate (rectangular
checker-weave mat).
Fire hearths are generally either ash lenses from in situ burning or shallow
ash-filled basins. It is the author’s impression that at Hinds Cave these kinds of

Shafer ~ Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

31

Figure 6 A. Grass-lined pit covered with prickly pear pads and discarded sandal. These
pit features probably represent ancient bedding areas.

Figure 6 B. Excavation of an ancient latrine area in Area B at Hinds Cave by Texas A&M
University. Note stratification of the perishable deposits.

32

Texas Archeological Society

hearths were found in the sleeping area of the shelter near the back wall and may
have been more for warming-fires than for cooking. The shallow ash-filled
basins measure from less than 1 meter to 2 meters across and are lined with slabs
of burned limestone. These features also are found in the living areas, but are
sometimes nearer the fronts of the shelters.
Wooden stakes forming semicircular patterns that have been found in several professionally explored sites such as Baker Cave (Word and Douglas 1970)
and Coontail Spin (Nunley, Duffield, and Jelks 1965) indicate that partitions
may have been built beneath some overhangs. Living areas occasionally were
floored with organic materials, presumably to improve the living conditions. If
Hinds Cave can be used as an example (Shafer and Bryant 1977, Shafer 1986:99),
latrines were evidently at the edges of the living areas.
Caves
Both vertical shaft and horizontal shaft caves are found in the region, but
few have been investigated systematically (Turpin 1985). Horizontal shaft caves
primarily served mortuary functions (Greer and Benfer 1963, Collins 1969).
Vertical shaft caves are usually sinkholes that lead into large subterranean
solution caverns (Prewitt 1981, Steele et al. 1984, Turpin 1985). Prehistoric
activity usually is confined to the entrance area, often in the form of burned rock
middens, but burials are sometimes encountered at the bottom of vertical drops
near cave entrances (Turpin 1985). Vertical shaft caves were used for burial
places from Central Texas into northern Mexico (Del Rio 1953). These sites
may help solve the nagging mystery of where the ancient people in Central and
southwestern Texas deposited their dead in early and middle Archaic times.
Open-Air Sites
Several types of open-air sites are found in the Lower Pecos Region (Graham and Davis 1958, Moore 1983). Together, these sites have provided highly
significant data on the chronology of the region and on the manner in which
upland resources were used by the hunters and gatherers.
Alluvial Terrace Sites

Alluvial terrace sites, such as the Devils Mouth site (Figure 7) (Johnson
1964, Sorrow 1968a), Arenosa shelter (Figure 8) (Dibble 1967), and Nopal
Terrace (Sorrow 1968b) have deeply stratified deposits. Scouring from overbank flooding of the Rio Grande or Pecos or Devils rivers undoubtedly caused
the loss of many terrace remnants at the same time that others were being
formed, resulting in frequent interruptions in the cultural sequence ~atton and
Dibble 1982).
Holocene terraces were developed by the deposition of sequential layers of
silts, each layer sealing and so preserving cultural materials left on the surface of
the previous layer, resulting in a relatively unmixed stratified sequence. Since

Shafer ~ Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

33

Figure 7. Devils Mouth Site at the confluence of the Devils and Rio Grande rivers prior to
the completion of Amistad Dam. The site was excavated by The University of Texas at
Austin. Photo courtesy of Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.

decay removes most perishable materials from the archeological record in terrace sites, analytical emphasis has to be focused on the features, the functional
and stylistic patterns of the lithic artifacts, and on faunal remains. There is a
potential, where scouring was not a factor, for such deposits to have botanical
data in the form of charred plant remains and pollen. Although rockshelter sites
are intricately stratified, they often do not have sequences of sealed deposits that
can be correlated easily with the lithic and perishable sequence. Instead of
depending on only one type of site, a more complete chronological record was
developed in the Lower Pecos Region by excavating both stratified terrace sites
and deep rockshelters.

34

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Arenosa shelter in the Pecos River canyon near its confluence with the Rio
Grande. The site was excavated by The University of Texas at Austin. Photo courtesy of
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Shafer m Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

35

Burned Rock Middens
Perhaps the most visible open-air sites are the burned rock middens. These
interesting sites are mounded accumulations of fire-cracked limestone fragments
resulting from repeated use of the stones as heat conductors for preparing food
in a single or series of overlapping pits. Reuse of the oven requires replacing the
cobbles or slabs. Single hearths are found far more frequently than the middens,
but investigations at Musk Hog Canyon (Moore 1983) demonstrate that the
middens result from repeated use of the ovens. The forms of the burned rock
middens have temporal and, possibly, functional significance. Dome-shaped
middens are the earliest, dating at least to the middle Archaic period if not
earlier; an example is the Doss site (Nunley, Duffield, and Jelks 1965), which
dates to the middle period of the Archaic sequence in the region. A thick burned
rock midden deposit was encountered in the early Archaic deposits at Hinds
Cave (Shafer and Bryant 1977:43) dating from 7,000 to 4,000 B.C., and burned
rock fragments are found in talus deposits of even the earliest rockshelters in the
region.
The dome-shaped middens are more common in the eastern part of the
region and beyond into Central Texas. These sites probably result from repeated
processing of acorns at Iraditional locations (Creel 1986; see Bean and Saubel
1972 for a description of acorn processing among southern Californian Indians).
Many burned rock middens relate to the processing of desert succulents,
which were used by the first Archaic peoples who settled in the lower canyons
(Dering 1979). Earth ovens were used for baking desert succulents throughout
the cultural sequence; however, one form of midden accumulation--the ring- or
crescent-shaped midden with a distinct central depression or pit (Figure 9 A)--is
particularly distinctive and indeed is the most common midden form (Dibble
and Prewitt 1967, Greer 1965, Moore 1983, Shafer 1971). These accumulations
of burned limestone rock fragments result from multiple use of a single pit or of
a series of overlapping pits (Figure 9 B), which are rock-lined depressions in the
soil or bedrock. Use of the oven causes fire-fracturing of the limestone cobbles
or slabs used for heat conducting. The crest of the crescent or ring midden is
usually on the north or northwest side (Figures 9 A, 10 A, 10 B). This midden
form is late in the archeological sequence, usually dating after A.D. 600 (Greet
1968), and is seen more frequently in western Val Verde and Crockett counties
and throughout the Trans Pecos Region. Their function is convincingly tied to
the baking of sotol and lechuguilla bulbs. The manner of processing these desert
plants has been amply documented in the ethnographic literature (see Moore
1983).
The most thoroughly investigated crescent midden sites are in Crockett and
Pecos counties (Moore 1983). Middens yield very few formal tools, so they are
generally safe from artifact collectors (the greatest danger to middens is root
plowing), but they yield an interesting assemblage of lithic and other artifacts,
consisting most commonly of chert debitage, discarded artifacts such as unifacial tools, burin-struck cores, burin spalls, and, rarely, projectile points. Ashy fill

36

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 9 A. Site 41CX218, a crescent-shaped burned rock midden near the Pecos River in
Crockett County, during excavation by the 1976 Texas Archeological Society Field School.

Figure 9 B. Central pit feature at site 41CX218, a crescent-shaped burned rock midden
near the Pecos River in Crockett County.

Shafer ~ Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

37

! !~ ..................

Figure 10 A. A crescent-shaped burned rock midden in Musk Hog Canyon, Crockett
County, recorded by the 1976 Texas Archeological Society Field School.

Figure 10 B. Mounded accumulation of burned rock on north side of a crescent-shaped
burned rock midden in Musk Hog Canyon, Crockett County, recorded by the 1976 Texas
Archeological Society Field School.

38

Texas Archeological Society

in and adjacent to the pits often yields woody charcoal and charred leaf bases of
the desert succulents, particularly sotol and lechuguilla.
Invertebrates such as large land snails (Rabdotus sp.) and mussel shells
(even in the middens several miles from permanent water) are the faunal remains most frequently encountered in the crescent and ring midden sites. Some
of these sites have additional adjacent middens made up of habitation refuse, in
which vertebrate faunal remains may be quite common.
Scattered burned rock fragments, lithic artifacts, and snail and mussel shells
are found at most sites near potential sources of water--along bluffs overlooking streams, and at the heads of tributary canyons--where they are accompanied
often by burned rock middens. Limestone-paved hearths, or small concentrations of burned rock that presumably are the disarticulated remains of rock-lined
hearth ovens that were used only once, can be found almost anywhere in the
region where soil conditions permit. In addition, artifacts marking locations
where the ancient gatherers exploited the landscape by harvesting the economic
plants and animals are scattered over the upland and canyon slopes (Saunders
1986). Many of these sites, because they are unrewarding to collectors, remain
largely intact for future investigation by archeologists.
Mortar Holes
Bedrock mortar holes--conical holes pecked and pounded out of bedrock
surfaces--are found in many locations throughout the region. Their presence
can be predicted in bedrock exposures near permanent water, but they can occur
wherever human activities were concentrated. Usually, several are found at a
single location, but, in some locations such as Live Oak Creek in Crockett
County, there are more than a hundred. Bedrock mortar holes are assumed to be
associated with the processing of baked bulbs of sotol, lechuguilla, and, possibly, acorns. Because they hold water for a long time, tinajas may have been used
secondarily in making a fermented drink (Griffen 1969).
Rock Circles
Clusters of rock circles were discovered first by David S. Dibble on an
upland flat near Infierno Canyon (now in Seminole Canyon State Park; see
Turpin 1982). Since Dibble’s discovery, several similar sites have been documented in the Lower Pecos and Trans-Pecos areas (Mallouf 1985). These rock
features, which probably represent the stone outlines for wickiup-type structures, are associated consistently with a distinctive lithic and ceramic assemblage that sets them apart from rockshelters and other open sites. The rock circle
sites are associated with brownware and orangeware pottery, scrapers, and
Perdiz and other small arrowpoints. The rock circle sites are probably protohistoric and may be the sites of intrusive groups who were attracted to the area
because of the bison herds that were in the region in protohistoric times.

Shafer ~ Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

39

Burial Sites
Burials are seldom found in the Lower Pecos region, but those that are are in
rockshelters (Collins 1969, Dibble and Prewitt 1967), or horizontal (Collins
1969, Greer and Benfer 1963) or vertical shaft caves (Turpin 1985). Most of the
burials from rockshelter deposits date from late in the prehistoric sequence.
Most are primary burials, both males and females of all ages, flexed or semiflexed in shallow pits, often covered with a layer of cobbles. About 11 percent of
the burials tabulated by Turpin, Henneberg, and Riskind (1986) were cremated
remains wrapped in mats or skins. The burials in horizontal shaft caves apparently were wrapped in flexed positions and dropped into the openings of sinkholes (Del Rio 1953).
Both primary burials and cremations often were wrapped in checkerweave
mats and rabbit fur blankets (Alexander 1974, Shafer 1986:119, 122, Turpin et
al. 1986). Personal possessions such as broken (or "killed") carrying baskets,
other baskets, bags, and various other paraphenalia, are found with some of the
burials, but there is apparently no evidence for status-marking in burial ritual.
No special facilities or formal tombs were built. Turpin (1985) refers to
Seminole Sink as a tomb, but the use of the term tomb for this sinkhole burial
site is unfortunate, since it implies a formally constructed facility such as the
rock cut tombs of the southern Maya Lowlands (Hall 1986). Turpin acknowledges that the sinkhole is a natural formation.
Rock Art Sites
One of the most outstanding characteristics of the Lower Pecos region is the
degree of preservation of the rock art (Jackson 1938, Kirkland and Newcomb
1967, Shafer 1986:138-159). The sheltered recesses and overhangs have provided a protective shield for some of the most impressive Archaic rock art
galleries in the New World. Monochrome, bichrome, and polychrome paintings
are concentrated in the vicinity of the mouth of the Pecos River, but they extend
throughout much of Val Verde County and well into adjacent counties.
Several distinctive styles of rock art have been defined in the region (Shafer
1986:138-159), the dominant and most impressive being the Pecos River Style
(Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:37-80) (Figure 11), which is also clearly the
earliest of the major styles, based on superposition of images (it may have been
preceded by monochrome red paintings at site 41VV75 in Seminole Canyon).
Pecos River Style paintings are entirely prehistoric, and their anthropomorphic
figures using the atlatl and spear place this style before the introduction of the
bow and arrow. There is debate among archeologists as to the antiquity of the
Pecos River Style; guesses as to its beginning range between 1,000 years and
6,000 years ago.
Later styles are the Red Monochrome Style (Kirkland and Newcomb
1967:81-110, Turpin 1986) and a perplexing Red Linear style (Turpin 1984).

40

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 11. Pecos River Style pictograph from Panther Cave (41VV83) in Seminole
Canyon. Photo courtesy of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Shafer ~ Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

41

The Red Monochrome Style undoubtedly extends back into prehistoric times,
after the introduction of the bow and arrow, or about A.D. 1000, but some
clearly historic motifs also are executed in red monochrome (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967:pl. 64 and 65). The depiction of bison in the Red Monochrome
Style may help to place the dates of some examples more precisely, since the
bison range extended this far south only at certain times (Dillehay 1974, Turpin
1987).
The Red Linear Style is difficult to date because of its abstract motifs and
the uncertainty of superposition (see Turpin 1984 for an opinion on the antiquity
of the Red Linear Style).
Discussion
The history of archeological research in the Lower Pecos Region follows a
pattern, seen in other parts of the world, of bias toward excavating the more
productive and impressive sites. Archeological attention was focused on the
rockshelters as early as the 1930s (McGregor 1985), whereas no attention was
paid to excavating or even documenting open-air localities until the start of the
Amistad Reservoir project in the late 1950s and early 1960s (Graham and Davis
1958, Dibble and Prewitt 1967). Even then the emphasis continued to be on
investigating rockshelters and deeply stratified terrace sites. The density and
nature of upland sites is poorly known, even with the recent survey by Joe
Saunders (1986) of the area between Lewis and Still canyons in Val Verde
County, which provided the first comprehensive and unbiased study of an
upland area. Also, an intensive survey has been carried out at Musk Hog Canyon
(Shafer and Moore 1976) on the Pecos River in Crockett County, and, when the
data are published, the distribution and variability of upland sites will be known
much better
The high degree of preservation provided by the climate and selection of
habitation sites, however, has given us an excellent opportunity to examine the
human ecology of the area in a far more detailed way than is usually possible in
archeology. The remarkable preservation of botanical materials has yielded
parallel sequences of data on ancient climate variation and the economic use of
plants and animal resources. These paleoenvironmental reconstructions provide
a unique opportunity to measure cultural responses to environmental change
over a 9,000-year span (Bryant and Shafer 1977, Dering 1979, Shafer and
Bryant 1977).
The region underwent a rather marked desiccation at the end of the Pleistocene to the extent that marginal desert conditions were established there by
about 9,000 years ago. The earliest hunters and gatherers in the region adjusted
quickly to these conditions and established a seasonal pattern and evidently an
equilibrium adequate to sustain descendent populations for some 8,500 to 9,000
years. We cannot be sure whether the chronological sequence represents the
remains of many separate groups who occupied the region over time and exploited the environment in similar ways or documents the historical continuity

42

Texas Archeological Society

of one tradition. The real situation probably was a combination of these possibilities. Although long-term climatic changes may have affected the seasonal
rainfall pattem and amount of available moisture, these changes did not have an
adverse affect on the xeric vegetation pattern or, concomitantly, on the patterns
of human exploitation of this vegetation. In other words, although some climatic
changes may have occurred, no major adaptive adjustments by the Archaic
groups are indicated. Consistent use of bison is not indicated in the archeological record, suggesting that bison were not in the area during most of the
prehistory of the region (Dillehay 1974). Opportunistic exploitation of bison is
documented by a massive kill at Bonfire shelter (Dibble and Lorrain 1968),
which correlates with a mesic interval about 2,500 to 2,800 years ago (Bryant
and Shafer 1977). Bison retreated from the area after the mesic interval and
returned again just before the coming of the white man (Turpin 1987). There is
no indication that the brief mesic period had a lasting impact on subsistence
patterns in the area.
Chronology
Temporal controls on the cultural-historical reconstruction were made possible by the focus on deeply stratified alluvial terrace sites, ample numbers of
radiocarbon dates, and a generally sensitive stylistic sequence of projectile
points (Dibble 1967). By dating deposits that yielded specific projectile point
styles, it has been possible to build a well-dated stylistic sequence that can be
used as a general index for correlating deposits from different sites. Stylistic
changes also have been recognized in sandals (Shafer 1986:131), other textiles
(Andrews and Adovasio 1980), pictographs (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967), and
painted pebbles (Parsons 1986). A review by T. R. Hester of the prehistoric
sequence based on these evidences is presented elsewhere in this volume.
Spatial A nalysis
Much less attention has been given to establishing spatial dimensions for
the prehistoric archeological assemblages. Early attempts to establish regional
limits were based on the geographic ranges of specific projectile point styles.
This approach has some merit, but there is no easy way of correlating such a
distribution with that of any specific ethnic group. Some point types have much
broader ranges than others, or the ranges are indistinguishable when ancient
boundaries are crossed (for example, compare the Lower Pecos Region in
Turner and Hester 1985, Figure 21, and the distribution of Montell points, page
126, whose distribution extends far into Central Texas). In the early studies,
arbitrary cultural areas were established, using the Midwestern Taxonomic
System (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954), and the Pecos River focus was the
Archaic cultural unit imposed in this region; but later work showed that it had
little utility as a culture-historical concept. More recently, the author has attempted to define meaningful territorial margins for the Lower Pecos Archaic

Shafer ~ Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

43

populations by examining the geographic extent of the Lower Pecos Style rock
art (Shafer 1977). The assumption was that the rock art represents ideographic
symbols that could relate most closely to the language of one specific group.
Since group or band affiliation of historic Texas Indian groups has depended
more on linguistic traits than on subsistence or material culture, it was deemed
that the distribution of the Lower Pecos Style would give a better approximation
of the territorial extent of the ancient populations than would traditional diagnostic units.
In retrospect, the projected extent of the "home range" applied only to the
time period during which the Pecos River Style rock art was produced (which
could be anywhere from 1,000 to 6,000 years ago). However, because of the
"oasis" formed by the Rio Grande and the Pecos and Devils rivers, the lower
canyons probably were the focal point of territorial claims throughout most of
human prehistory. The only times when this may not have been the case were
when the distribution of primary resources, such as bison, may have been
different from the territorial range indicated by the Pecos River Style, necessitating a violation or compromise of range boundaries. This may have happened in
later times, when the appearance of bison in the region and their exploitation by
intrusive groups is documented in seventeenth and eighteenth century Spanish
accounts (Turpin 1987).
In this study, once information was available on the approximate geographic range of the Pecos River Style hunters and gatherers, the plant, animal,
and mineral resources in the region could be identified, and species variability,
distribution, density, and behavior could be noted. These ecological data provided a background essential for the study of economic patterns in the archeological record. This approach raises questions about time control and the basis
for assuming that the pictorial symbolism is directly related to the linguistic
symbolism, but the author believes it was a fruitful start toward factoring out
patterns in the prehistoric human ecological situation.
Very little spatial analysis has been done on the site or household level,
either to define households specifically or to ascertain patterns in the distribution of features to define patterns of space use in settlements. The research at
Hinds Cave, where features such as beds, hearths, and latrines associated with
the living area were defined within the context of the site as a habitation area,
serves as a model for beginning such studies (Shafer and Bryant 1977, Shafer
1986:97).
Dietary Studies

No area of study has produced more details on cultures and lifeways than
have the dietary studies based on analysis of human coprolites (desiccated
human feces) from the dry caves in the Lower Pecos Region. These dietary
studies were undertaken on coprolites from Parida Cave (Riskind 1970), Conejo
shelter (Bryant 1974), Hinds Cave (Williams-Dean 1978, Stock 1983, Reinhard
et al. 1988) and Baker Cave (Sobolik 1988). Specimens have been examined

44

Texas Archeological Society

from sites in the Pecos and Devils River canyons, and from early, middle, and
late phases of the Archaic sequence. The specific information on the dietary
patterns reconstructed from these coprolite studies, coupled with studies of the
economic plants from Baker Cave (Sobolik 1988), Hinds Cave (Dering 1979),
and Gobbler shelters (Dering and Shafer 1976) and faunal remains from the
same deposits (Word and Douglas 1970, Hester 1983, Lord 1984), has made
possible the construction of an unusually complete profile of the hunting and
gathering patterns through time. More recently, preliminary parasitological and
nutritional studies of the people, based on coprolite analysis ~einhard et al.
1988) and skeletal analysis (Steele and Olive 1988) show that the ancient people
of the lower Pecos were generally healthy, although the rough fibrous diet did
lead to some nutritional stress.
Major economic plants consumed include the desert succulents such as
prickly pear stems and fruit, sotol and lechuguilla bulbs, wild onions, persimmons, mesquite, and a variety of perennial plants. The diet was heavily vegetarian, but, in addition, hunting, trapping, and foraging were directed mostly at
rabbits and small rodents, fish, deer, river mussels, land snails, lizards, snakes,
turtles, and insects.
Seasonality

Despite the seemingly ideal conditions in the Lower Pecos Region for
studies in seasonality, efforts to define seasonal movements and occupations
have been met with only limited success (Dering and Shafer 1976, Sobolik
1988, Williams-Dean 1978). Seasonal changes and clinal shifts in ripening
times of wild plant foods undoubtedly necessitated a significant degree of
seasonal emphasis on resource exploitation. However, due to the variability in
the environment brought about by such factors as amount and timing of rainfall,
temperature, and sunlight, which bear directly on the germination and maturation of plants, it is doubtful that archeologists ever will be able to compile an
almanac for the ancient Lower Pecos Region.
The real stresses on the populations came during the winter and early spring
months. Bulbs of sotol and lechuguilla and prickly pear stems were available the
year round (Brown 1988), but little information is available on the actual winter
foods. Perennial plants grow in protected recesses most of the year, but it is not
known to what degree these weedy plants were consumed. Hunting may have
been emphasized more in the winter to offset meager supplies of fruits and
vegetables in that season.
Pecans (found only along the Devils River) and acorns were available from
late spring to early fall in most years, together with a variety of lesser fruits and
vegetables. The importance of pecans and acorns in the fall and winter diets
cannot be measured by coprolite studies, since these nuts leave no recognizable
trace (except for identifiable shell fragments) undigested. Undoubtedly these
nuts were exploited, since cracked pecan hulls and acorns are found in some
deposits at Baker Cave (Kenneth M. Brown, personal communication), and

Shafer m Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

45

acorn fragments are found throughout the dry deposits of Hinds Cave. Although
no storage facilities have been found to indicate that these nuts were in fact
stored, they may have been extremely important, and we may have interpreted
the winter diet as being leaner than it actually was.
Technology
The dry caves also have given us a rare opportunity to examine specific
aspects of the technology of their occupants. Such technological items as hafted
tools, perishable parts of weapons, fragments of snares, baskets, and other
textiles, bone awls, fire drills and hearth sticks, digging sticks, and organic
residue on stone tools all provide a rather complete view of the day-to-day
technology.
An item usually found in the kit of a band was a knife made of a large oval
flake hafted in the center of a wooden handle, making it resemble an Eskimo ulu.
These artifacts are similar to but date much earlier than the mescal knives found
in the American Southwest (Heizer 1970). Hafted examples are in the collections of the Witte Museum (Shafer 1986:111), and discarded blades comprise
the most common chipped stone artifacts, except for projectile points, found in
archeological deposits in the region. They have been misclassified as scrapers
(Epstein 1962, Dibble and Prewitt 1967), but analysis of organic residue and
use-wear on these oval unifaced tools from Hinds Cave showed that at that site
they were hafted knives used to slice leaves from the bulbs of desert succulents
(Shafer and Holloway 1979). Animal hair in the residue matrix also indicated
that the tools were used to cut almost anything. Plant residue in the form of sotol
epidermis recovered from the use-worn tip of a persimmon wood digging stick
from Hinds Cave confirmed its suspected use.
Overall, the environment provided the materials necessary for making the
tools needed for harvesting resources or for accomplishing all necessary tasks.
This was a simple, highly efficient technology that fitted the mobile way of life
of the people. Few tools were curated; a mobile group would carry only essential
possessions such as weapons, digging sticks, carrying baskets, tool bags with
accoutrements, cradles, and, probably, petates. Other items simply were left at
the habitation sites, since they could be replaced quickly at the next campsite.
SUMMARY

Archeologists who have worked in past years in the region have established
an important point of departure for their present-day colleagues by establishing
a sensitive cultural sequence that is keyed to artifact style change and radiocarbon dates. Research efforts of the Amistad Reservoir salvage program and
continued research stimulated by that project have provided a large body of data
on the kinds of sites and their distribution. Early studies focused on the ancient
technology and artifacts; more recently, analysts have shifted attention to the
perishable and inferential aspects of these ancient cultural systems such as the

46

Texas Archeological Society

economic uses of plants and animals, dietary patterns, seasonality, resource
scheduling, and systems of belief. With the help of excellent chronological
control, models of environmental variability, and ecological studies, understanding of the lower Pecos Archaic world has been developed to a degree rarely
experienced by archeologists for any area. Indeed, in tribute to the archeologists
who have worked in the region, it can be said that the current model of the lower
Pecos hunters and gatherers is the most comprehensive Archaic culture model in
North America.
With a more nearly complete view of the lower Pecos River paleoenvironment, archeologists can continue to explore the ancient world with a better
understanding of what the people faced and how they coped with the realities of
day-to-day living. But in coping they went beyond the basic technology and
subsistence aspects of their culture. They had psychological needs to meet, and,
presumably, they met them in part by arriving at a satisfactory neutrality with
uncertainty. Magic, religion, and witchcraft are among the ways primitive societies customarily guard against the unexpected and, at the same time, allow
individuals to achieve inner strength and confidence.
The rock art of the Lower Pecos Region presumably functioned in this
realm as a means of communicating ritual symbolism. Each art medium, however,,
probably was created in its own specific context. Interestingly, few, if any, of the
end products of the art forms were regarded as sacred, since overpainting of
pictographs in the Lower Pecos Style is common, and both painted pebbles and
clay figurines, discarded after use, are found in midden deposits (Shafer 1975).
The Lower Pecos Region was occupied for about 9,000 years by populations that followed essentially the same way of life. One cannot help but be
impressed by the simplicity and durability of these ancient people. Indeed, their
resourcefulness wins the admiration of all who become familiar with the area.
What to us appears to be a marginal desert was, perhaps, to them a veritable
garden.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The original draft of this paper was presented at a workshop informally
labeled the "Lower Pecos Think Tank" at the Witte Museum in May 1984. The
"Think Tank," a concept of the museum’s director Mark Lane, was a retreat
attended by a group of invited scholars for the purpose of establishing a foundation for the book, Ancient Texans, and a permanent exhibit depicting the lifeway
of the ancient lower Pecos River people. The exhibit was to use materials
gathered during expeditions in the 1930s to the Lower Pecos Region sponsored
by the Witte Museum (McGregor 1985). The Think Tank was the most intellectually stimulating (if not exhausting) meeting the author ever has experienced.
In addition to Mark Lane, participants who shared their knowledge of hunters
and gatherers or of the Lower Pecos Region are: Megan Biesele, Vaughn M.
Bryant, Juan Chavira, Richard Gould, Terence Grieder, Thomas R. Hester,
Roberta McGregor, Fred Valdez, George Zappler, and Jimmy Zintgraff. Others

Shafer n Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

47

who have provided valuable insights into the archeology of or about the ways of
the ancient people are Kenneth M. Brown, David S. Dibble, and Peter Furst.
REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, R. K.
1970
Archeological Investigations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 19. The University of
Texas. Austin.
1974

The Archeology of Conejo Shelter: A Study of Cultural Stability at an
Archaic Rockshelter Site in Southwestern Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Andrews, R. L., and J. M. Adovasio
1980
Perishable Industries from Hinds Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Ethnology Monographs 5, Department of Anthropology, University of Pittsburgh.
Bean, L. J., and K. S. Saubel
1972
Temalpakh: Cahuilla Indian Knowledge and Usage of Plants. Malki Museum Press. Morongo Indian Reservation. Banning.
Brown, K. M.
1988
Some Annotated Excerpts from Alonzo De Leon’s History of Nuevo Leon.
La Tierra 15(2):5-20.
Bryant, V. M., Jr.
1974
Prehistoric Diet in Southwest Texas: The Coprolite Evidence. American
Antiquity 39(3):407-420.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and H. J. Shafer
1977
The Late Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A Model for the
Archeologist. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48:1-26.
Chaddedon, M. F.
1983
Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas: The 1976 Excavations. Center for
Archaeological Research Special Report 13. The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Collins, M. B.
1969
Test Excavations at Amistad International Reservoir, Fall, 1967. Papers of
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 16. The University of Texas. Austin.
Covey, Cyclone
1961
Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. University of New Mexico Press. Albuquerque.
Creel, D. G.
A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas. Ph.D.
1986
dissertation, University of Arizona. Tucson.

48

Texas Archeological Society

Del Rio, P. M.
1953
A Preliminary Report on the Mortuary Cave of Candelaria, Coahuila, Mexico.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 24:208-256.
Dering, J. P.
Pollen and Plant Macrofossil Vegetation Record Recovered from Hinds
1979
Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. M.A. thesis, Texas A&M University.
College Station.
Dering, J. P. and H. J. Shafer
1976
Analysis of Matrix Samples from a Crockett County Shelter: A Test for
Seasonality. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47:209-229.
Dibble, D. S.
1967
Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. Mimeographed report submitted
to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas. Austin.
Dibble, D. S., and Dessamae Lorrain
Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
1968
Texas Memorial Museum Miscellaneous Papers 1. Austin.
Dibble, D. S., and E. R. Prewitt
Survey and Test Excavations at Amistad Reservoir, 1964-65. Texas Arche1967
ological Salvage Project Survey Reports 3. The University of Texas. Austin.
Dillehay, T. D.
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
1974
Anthropologist 19-65, 180-196.
Epstein, J. F.
Centepede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1962
1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 33:1-130.
Graham, J. A., and William Davis
1958
Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Diablo Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. Report to the National Park Service by the Archeological
Salvage Program Field Office, The University of Texas. Austin.
Greer, J. W.
1965
A Typology of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits. Southwestern Lore 31(3):4155.
1968

Notes on Excavated Ring Midden Sites, 1963-1968. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 38:39-44.

Greer, J. A., and R.A. Benfer
1963
Langtry Creek Burial Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 33:229-252.

Shafer m Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

49

Griffen, W. B.
1969
Culture Change and Shifting Populations in Central Northem Mexico. Anthropological papers of the University ofArizona 13. University of Arizona.
Tucson.
Hall, G. D.
1986

Results of Tomb Investigations at Rio Azul, Season of 1984. In Rio Azul
Reports Number 2. The 1984 Season, edited by R. E. W. Adams, pp. 69-110.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Heizer, R. F.
1970
A Mescal Knife from Near Overton, Moapa Valley, Southern Nevada.
Papers on the Anthropology of the Great Basin, Contributions of the University of California Archeological Research Facility 7:28-38.
Hester, T. R.
1983
Late Paleo-Indian Occupations at Baker Cave, Southwestern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 53:101-120.
1989

Jackson, A.

A Chronological Framework for Lower Pecos Prehistory. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeolog&al Soc&ty 59: 53-64.
T.

1938 Picture Writing of Texas Indians. Anthropological Papers Vol. H.
The University of Texas Publication No. 3809. Austin.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1964
The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Department ofAnthropology Archeology Series, 6.The
University of Texas. Austin.
Kirkland, Forrest and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
Rock Art of Texas Indians. The University of Texas Press. Austin.
Krieger, A. D.
1956
Food Habits of Texas Coastal Indians in the Early Sixteenth Century.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 27:57-58.
Lord, K. J.
1984

Zooarcheology of Hinds Cave (41VV456). Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.

McGregor, Roberta
1985
Episodes in the History of Texas Archeology: Excavations at Shumla and
Eagle Caves, Witte Museum. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
56:127-142.
Mallouf, R. J.
1985
A Synthesis of Eastern Trans-Pecos Prehistory. M.A. thesis, The University
of Texas at Austin.

50

Texas Archeologieal Society

Moore, W. E.
1983
Archeological Investigations at Musk Hog Canyon, Crockett County, Texas:
A Report of the 1976 Texas Archeological Society Field School. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 53:13-82.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas. The Universit,y of Texas Press. Austin.
Nunley, J. P., L. F. Duffield, and E. B. Jelks
1965
Excavations at Amistad Reservoir, 1962 season. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Miscellaneous Papers 3. The University of Texas. Austin.
Parsons, M. L.
1965
1963 Test Excavations at Fate Bell Shelter, Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Miscellaneous Papers
4, The University of Texas. Austin.
1986

Painted Pebbles: Styles and Chronology. In: Ancient Texans, pp. 180-185.
Texas Monthly Press. Austin.

Patton, Peter, and D. S. Dibble
1982
Archeologic and Geomorphic Evidence for the Paleohydrological Record of
the Pecos River in West Texas. American Journal of Science 282:97-121.
Pearce, J. E., and A. T. Jackson
A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde County, Texas. The University of
1933
Texas Bulletin No. 3327. Austin.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981
Wooden Mortar from the Stockton Plateau of Texas. Journal of Field
Archaeology 8(1): 111-117.
Reinhard, K. J., J. G. Jones, and R. P. Barros
1988
Biocultural Overview of the Lower Pecos Region, Texas. In: Health and
Disease in the Prehistoric Southwest II, edited by Stan Rhine and R. Ted
Steinbock (in press). Maxwell Museum, University of New Mexico. Albuquerque.

Riskind, D. n.
Pollen Analysis of Human Coprolites from Pafida Cave. In Archeological
1970
Investigations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project 19. The University of Texas. Austin.
Ross, R. E.
The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
1965
Project 7. The University of Texas at Austin.
Saunders, J. W.
The Economy of Hinds Cave. Ph.D. dissertation, Southern Methodist Uni1986
versity. Dallas.

Shafer ~ Prehistoric Legacy of Lower Pecos

51

Service, E. R.
1966
The Hunters. Prentice Hall. New Jersey.
Shafer, H.J.
1975
Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos Region, Texas. American Antiquity
40(2):148-157.
1977

Art and Territoriality in the Lower Pecos Archaic. Plains Anthropologist
22-75, 13-22.

1971

An Archeological Reconnaissance of the Sanderson Canyon Watershed,
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Report 7. The University of Texas. Austin.

1981

The Adaptive Technology of the Prehistoric Inhabitants of Southwest Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 26-92, 129-138.

1986

Ancient Texans. Texas Monthly Press. Austin.

Shafer, H. J., and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1977
Archeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde County,
Texas. Annual report to the National Science Foundation by the Department
of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, pp. 1-66. College Station.
Shafer, H. J., and Richard Holloway
1979
Organic Residue Analysis in Determining Stone Tool Function. In Lithic
Use-Wear Analysis, edited by Brian Hayden, pp. 385-400. Academic Press.
Shafer, H. J., and G. L. Moore
1976
Texas Archeological Society Field School Archeologists’ Report. Texas
Archeology 20(4):5-10.
Sobolik, K. D.
1988
The Prehistoric Diet and Subsistence of the Lower Pecos Region, as Reflected in Coprolites from Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. M.A.
thesis, Texas A&M University. College Station.
Sorrow, W. M.
1968a
The Devil’s Mouth Site: Third Season, 1967. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 14. The University of Texas. Austin.
1968b

Test Excavations at the Nopal Terrace Site: Val Verde County, Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 15. The University of
Texas. Austin.

Steele, D. G., and Ben Olive
1988
Bioarcheology of Region 3 Study Area. Manuscript on file at the Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University. College Station.
Steele, D. G., K. E. Byrd, A1 McNatt, and G. Veni
1984
Human and Non-human Skeletal Remains Recovered from Sorcerer’s Cave,
Terrell County, Texas. Texas Journal of Science 36(2-3):169-184.

52

Texas Archeological Society

Stock, J. A.
The Prehistoric Diet of Hinds Cave (41VV456), Val Verde County, Texas:
1983
The Coprolite Evidence. M.A. thesis, Texas A&M University. College
Station.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook to Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
1954
Archeological Society 25.
Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press.
Austin.
Turpin, Solveig
1982
Seminole Canyon: The Art and Archeology. Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report 83. The University of Texas at Austin.
1984

The Red Linear Style Pictographs of the Lower Pecos River Region. Plains
Anthropologist 29:181-198.

1985

Seminole Sink: Excavation of a Vertical Shaft Tomb, Val Verde County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 93. The University of
Texas at Austin.

1986

The Red Monochrome Style: Pictographs of the Lower Pecos River Region,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeolog&al Society 55:123-144.

1987

Ethnohistoric Observations of Bison in the Lower Pecos River Region:
Implications for Environmental Change. Plains Anthropologist 32(118):424430.

Turpin, S. A., Maciej Henneberg, and D. H. Riskind
1986
Late Archaic Mortuary Practices of the Lower Pecos River Region, Southwest Texas. Plains Anthropologist 31 (114):295 -316.
Williams-Dean, Glenna
1978
Ethnobotany and Cultural Ecology of Prehistoric Man in Southwest Texas.
Ph.D. dissertation, Texas A&M University. College Station.
Word, J. H., and C. L. Douglas
Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas Memorial
1970
Museum Bulletin 16. Austin.

53

A Chronological Framework
for Lower Pecos Prehistory
Thomas R. Hester
ABSTRACT
This very brief review of the culture history of the Lower Pecos Region of
Texas identifies and describes major trends and patterns during 11,000 years of
prehistory. The paper provides a chronological perspective for the papers on
the Lower Pecos in this issue of the Texas Archeology Society Bulletin.

INTRODUCTION

The Lower Pecos archeological region is one of the few areas in Texas for
which there is a detailed chronological record. The preservation of organic
materials suitable for radiocarbon analysis, coupled with the excellent stratigraphy in open site and rockshelter deposits, provides a remarkably precise culture
history of the ancient hunter-gatherers of this area.
This paper is a brief review of the chronological framework of the Lower
Pecos Region; it places into temporal perspective some of the major sites,
artifact types, rock art, and other cultural patterns and phenomena. It was
designed originally as a working paper to provide background material for a
1984 Witte Museum planning session on the Lower Pecos. Here, it serves as an
overview of Lower Pecos archeology. Several chronological schemes have been
published for the Lower Pecos (for one of the first, see Johnson 1964), and an
effort has been made here (Table 1) to correlate some of the most recent ones.
THE PALEO-INDIAN PERIOD

The earliest indications of possible human occupation in the Lower Pecos
come from two sites, Bonfire shelter (Dibble and Lorrain 1968; Bement 1986)
and Cueva Quebrada rockshelter (41VV162A; Collins 1976, Lundelius 1984).
At the base of the Bonfire deposits, Bone Bed 1 has a variety of Pleistocene
fauna, including mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. No definite evidence of
human association has been found, but recent excavations by Bement (1986)
have shed new light on this early deposit. Some of the faunal remains were
fractured, and among the materials were several large stones that may have been
carried in by humans.
The Cueva Quebrada site (41VV162A) is a small rockshelter about 4 km up
the Rio Grande from the mouth of the Pecos River. Excavations of Zone I at the
site exposed broken and charred animal bones, flakes, a uniface, and a late
Pleistocene antelope bone with cut marks (Collins 1976). The materials have not
been published fully, except for the faunal remains (see Lundelius 1984), and
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (1988)

54

Texas Archeological Society

0
0

0

! i

i:>

;>

0

;>

d

_o

0
0

0

;>

0

0
°~
¢.)
oo
0

0

[-

0

S
0
0
0

0

0

0

0
0
0
¢’4

0
0
0

o’)

0
0
0

Hester-- Chronological Framework

0

©

<

o

~

0

0

0

0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0

55

56

Texas Archeological Society

the radiocarbon assays of 11,970 to 12,350 B.C., which imply a pre-Clovis age,
have not been evaluated in terms of a late Pleistocene human occupation of the
shelter. In an overlying stratum, Zone II, were additional burned and broken
bones, 10 chert flakes, and a Clear Fork tool--a gougelike form (M. B. Collins,
personal communication). A radiocarbon determination of 10,330 B.C. was
obtained, but, again, a full review of this date, and the possibly associated
artifacts from Zone II, has yet to be published.
No occupation or kill sites of the Clovis complex have been found in the
Lower Pecos Region, but it is possible that Bone Bed I at Bonfire, upon further
examination, might be linked to this cultural pattern. Some scattered surface
finds of Clovis-like points have been made in the Val Verde County area
(Greer 1968).
The Folsom complex is documented in Bone Bed 2 (Figure 1, a) at Bonfire
shelter (Dibble and Lorrain 1968). Indeed, the bone bed in which was a classic
Folsom point (Figure 1, a) represents a bison drive involving perhaps as many as
27 animals (though some of these may be from a later drive in Plainview times).
Radiocarbon dates indicate that the Folsom activity took place around or before
8200 B.C. (Dibble 1970). Another Folsom point from Val Verde County (Figure
1, b) has been described by Bement and Turpin (1988).
Later Paleo-Indian complexes are more numerous in the Lower Pecos.
Referring again to the research published for Bonfire shelter, we read of a
Plainview complex bison kill, dated at about. 8200 to 8000 B.C. (Figure 1, c is a
point from this kill). At the Devils Mouth site, at the confluence of the Devils
River and the Rio Grande, Late Paleo-Indian points were found in gravel bar
deposits in Area C (Johnson 1964). These include distinctive specimens such as
Plainview and Angostura as well as a type originally defined as the Golondrina
"variant of Plainview" (Figure 1, e). Projectile points now called Early Stemmed
(Figure 1, d) also were found associated with these lanceolate forms.
Subsequent excavations at Devils Mouth by Sorrow (1968) provided more
information on the Late Paleo-Indian era, especially on the dating of what is now
called the Golondrina type (Figure 1, e), which was dated at 6820 B.C. on the
basis of a single radiocarbon assay. At about the same time, James H. Word’s
excavations at Baker Cave, on a tributary of the Devils River, exposed stratigraphically secure deposits that had Golondrina points associated with faunal and
floral remains. He obtained two radiocarbon assays of about 7000 B.C. for the
Golondrina zone (Word and Douglas 1970). Later excavations in 1976 at Baker
Cave by Hester and Heizer, led to the recovery of more Golondrina data (Chadderdon 1983). Hester (1983) has defined the Golondrina complex, which was
represented at Baker Cave by Golondrina points, a bifacial Clear Fork tool, other
lithic implements, and a hearth that yielded abundant floral and faunal remains--all deposited when the climate was somewhat more moist than today
and when there was a notable absence of modern-day xeric plants such as sotol
and lechuguilla. Two more radiocarbon dates of about 7000 B.C. have been
obtained from the Golondrina occupation.

Hester ~ Chronological Framework

a

57

b

d
5 cm

g

h

Figure 1. Projectile points typical of Pateo-Indian and Early Archaic occupations in the
Lower Pecos: a, b, Folsom; c, Plainview; d, Early Stemmed; e, Golondrina; f, Baker; g,
Bandy; h, Early Triangular. Provenience: a, c, Bonfire; b, possibly Hinds Cave; d, e,
Devils Mouth; f, g, Witte Museum lower Pecos collections; h, Early Triangular point
from Uvalde County (Turner and Hester 1985) resembles Baker Cave specimens. All
drawings except b are by Kathy Roemer, courtesy of Turner and Hester (1985); b was
drawn by Richard McReynolds (La Tierra, Vol. 15, No. 1, 1988).

58

Texas Archeological Society

Other early radiocarbon assays in the 6000 to 7000 B.C. range have come
from sites such as Coontail Spin and Eagle Cave (Ross 1965, Story 1966) and
from Arenosa shelter. However, the contexts of these dates and the associations
of artifacts remain unclear, particularly in the case of Arenosa (e.g., Patton and
Dibble 1982). At Hinds Cave, excavated by Shafer and Bryant (1977), more
early radiocarbon dates have been recorded, and a Golondrina occupation (and
possibly earlier material) is reported. Important to the culture history of the
Lower Pecos is establishment of the antiquity of the basketry and other perishable materials found in the earliest occupations. These have been studied by
Andrews and Adovasio (1980) and integrated into broad patterns of early textile
manufacture in northern Mexico and the western United States.
Perhaps indicative of the terminal Paleo-Indian era in the Lower Pecos is
the Angostura point (cf. Johnson 1964, Story 1966). An Angostura point was
found in association with a hearth during the 1984 excavations conducted at
Baker Cave by the author, James H. Word, and Kenneth M. Brown, and as yet
unpublished. The hearth was at the base of a stratified series of cooking pits
associated with Middle and Early Archaic occupations. A charcoal sample
collected by Brown from the hearth that had the associated Angostura point was
dated by radiocarbon assay at 6510+80 B.P. (Beta-14733), which can be calibrated within a range of 5705 to 5205 B.C. (Klein et al. 1982:126).
THE ARCHAIC PERIOD
Early Archaic

This era encompasses Early Holocene occupations from about 6000 B.C.
(or earlier) to around 3500 B.C. (or somewhat later). It is distinguished, in terms
of diagnostic point types, by Baker and Bandy points, "Early Barbed" (many
resembling the Bell type), Gower, and Early Triangular ~igure 1, f-h). All of
these have what the author perceives to be contemporary counterparts in Central
and southern Texas, and they apparently reflect a broad Early Archaic cultural
pattern---once called the Pre-Archaic (Hester 1983)--that did not become associated with a particular region until Middle Archaic times. Radiocarbon dates
are fairly numerous, but, as indicated above, there is some fluctuation in what
are considered the beginning and ending dates for the period. Examples of
radiocarbon dates include Baker Cave (6010 to 3000 B.C., Chadderton 1983),
Eagle Cave (6810 to 2930 B.C., Ross 1965, Story 1966), and Bonfire shelter
(5510 B.C., Ross 1965, Story 1966). Xeric plants such as sotol and lechuguilla
appear at Baker Cave at about 6000 B.C., and, at Hinds Cave to the west on the
Pecos River drainage, even earlier.
Coprolite studies at Hinds Cave have shed considerable light on the diet of
the Early Archaic people (Shafer 1986:74). Little is known about burial patterns,
but Turpin (1985) has reported the use during the Early Archaic of a sinkhole in
Seminole Canyon for multiple interments that had an "early corner notched"
point (cf. Baker) associated. Bement, in the same volume (Turpin 1985:41-43),

Hester-- Chronological Framework

59

provides a detailed review of Early Archaic deposits with associated radiocarbon assays in the Lower Pecos.
Middle Archaic Period

The early phase of the Middle Archaic is distinguished by the first regional
Lower Pecos cultural pattern, noted in the archeological record by a distinctive
index marker, the Pandale projectile point type (Figure 2, a). Radiocarbon dates,
many of which fall between 2700 and 2100 B.C., are available for the Pandalerelated materials from several sites (Baker Cave, Eagle Cave, Fate Bell, and
Arenosa). Items of material culture such as basketry, matting, dart shafts, cordage, and netting are particularly well preserved. At Baker Cave, a large refuse pit
containing worn-out sandals, discarded Pandale points, and other debris was
partially excavated (Chadderdon 1983). In the early phase there is also a wide
range of chipped and ground stone artifacts. Painted pebbles appear at this time,
if not somewhat earlier (Shafer 1986).
The late phase of the Middle Archaic is perhaps the most distinctive and
dominant occupational period in the Lower Pecos in terms of the sheer amount
of cultural refuse. Characterized by contracting-stem Langtry points (Figure 2,
b), and Val Verde points (Figure 2, c), which appear to postdate Langtry points,
the late Middle Archaic has been dated by radiocarbon determinations between
2100 and 1100 B.C. The Langtry type appears to change in stem form through
time at some sites, e.g. at Baker Cave (Word and Douglas 1970, James H. Word,
personal communication). Other point styles include Almagre .(probably unfinished Langtrys or Langtry preforms) and Arledge.
Almost all rockshelters have deposits of the Middle Archaic’s late phase;
radiocarbon assays have been made on materials from Fate Bell and Arenosa
shelters, and Eagle and Centipede caves, among others (Story 1966, also Epstein
1963). There is an abundance of fiber, wood, bone, shell, and leather artifacts,
and a wide range of lithics--projectile points and preforms, thin bifaces used as
knives, unifacial scrapers, burins, and artifacts of ground stone. Painted pebbles
also are found, and it is likely that much of the Pecos River Style polychrome art
was executed during this phase of the Middle Archaic (Shafer 1986, Bement
1988).
Other types of sites also are commonly found in addition to rockshelters;
open occupation sites on terraces were heavily used. Burned rock midden sites,
which represent specialized plant processing areas, probably reflect a technology that was prevalent in Central Texas at the same time.
Late Archaic Period
The Middle Archaic appears to have been uniquely regional in character,
whereas the Late Archaic reflects influences from Central Texas and from areas
to the north. For example, during this period, bison--absent since the late PaleoIndian period---once again were in the Lower Pecos region in some numbers,

60

Texas Archeological Society

1
b

a

C

e

d

g

0

5cm

h

Figure 2. Projectile points typical of Archaic and Late Prehistoric occupations in the
Lower Pecos: a, Pandale (early Middle Archaic); b, Langtry; c, Val Verde (late Middle
Archaic); d, Shumla; e, Conejo (Late Archaic); f, Paisano; g, Figueroa ~ransitional
Archaic); h, Toyah (Late Prehistoric). All drawn by Kathy Roemer, courtesy of Turner
and Hester (1985).

Hester m Chronological Framework

61

and a bison drive and kill has been recorded in Bone Bed 3 at Bonfire shelter
(Dibble and Lorrain 1968). Associated with the bison bones were large, broadbladed Castroville and Montell dart points. Projectile point styles of this era that
are distinctive of the Lower Pecos are the Shumla type (Figure 2, d) and Conejo
type (Figure 2, e). In general, the Late Archaic is dated between 1000 B.C. and
the beginning of the Christian era (but see Turpin 1982:25 for a slightly different
view). Dates of 360 to 800/860 B.C. come from the bison kill at Bonfire; other
radiocarbon dates come from Coontail Spin and Fate Bell shelter (Story 1966).
Perishable materials, chipped and ground stone artifacts, and other items of
material culture characteristic of the Middle Archaic persist, albeit sometimes in
different form, into this period. Turpin (1982:195, 198) indicates that the Red
Linear Style of rock art was introduced into the Lower Pecos at about this time,
noting that hunting motifs, perhaps related to the movement of bison hunters
into the area (e.g., into Bonfire shelter, Bone Bed 3), are its central theme.
Transitional Archaic Period
This period is sometimes combined with the Late Archaic (see Table 1).
However, it is identified by distinctly different index marker projectile points,
such as Ensor, Frio, Paisano (Figure 2, f), and Figueroa (Figure 2, g) and can be
dated to the period between the first or second century of the Christian era and
about A.D. 1000 or somewhat later. Transitional Archaic deposits are widespread in rockshelters and open terrace sites in the Lower Pecos. Indeed, there
may have been an intensified use of open sites at this time. The distinctive ringor crescent-shaped burned rock middens (see Shafer 1986), which presumably
were related to the roasting of bulbs of desert plants, are found in the uplands
during the Transitional Archaic. Painted pebbles, found in the rockshelter refuse, and, perhaps, the Red Linear Style rock art, continue.
LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD

From around A.D. 1000 to 1600 there is a notable difference in certain
aspects of Lower Pecos archeology. There seems to have been a reduction in
occupation (even of population?), or perhaps there was a shift away from
intensive use of rockshelters to a more mobile life style that led to frequent use
of open terrace and upland sites. Change in material culture is most notable in
the introduction of the bow and arrow. Arrowpoint types include Perdiz, Scallorn, Livermore, and Toyah (Figure 2, h), as well as several minor styles and
arrowpoint preforms. Sherds of plain, bone-tempered ceramics are found at a
handful of sites, but never in large numbers. Other traits include distinctive end
scrapers (Bement and Turpin 1987), brownware sherds (Turpin 1982), and
beveled knives (Greer 1968).
Depictions of the bow and arrow in the Red Monochrome rock art style
clearly date that style to the Late Prehistoric. Although it is probably safe to say
that an "Archaic" style hunting and gathering lifeway persisted from earlier

62

Texas Archeological Society

times, it is possible that the age-old traditions of the Lower Pecos region were
disrupted in the Late Prehistoric, perhaps by new groups moving into the region.
The shifts in settlement pattern (which, owing to the bias for excavation of
¯ rockshelters, we know little about), the appearance of new types of sites such as
Infierno (41VV446), with its stone tipi rings (Turpin 1982), and the introduction
of a new rock art style, might together indicate disruption of the indigenous
groups by intrusive peoples. The Late Prehistoric materials often form, quite
literally, a thin veneer over the long-lived Archaic. Much more research is
needed in practically every facet of study involving this period.
HISTORIC PERIOD
Equally little is known about the succeeding Historic period, when Apache
and, later, other Indian groups from various regions moved into the Lower
Pecos. Fielder Canyon Cave reported by Kirkland in 1942 (Kirkland 1942)
remains one of the few Historic Indian occupation sites that have been reported.
In addition to a few scattered metal arrowpoints, these groups left behind only
their distinctive rock art depicting Spaniards, guns, missions, and priests (Kirkland
and Newcomb 1967, Turpin 1989). A recent paper of Turpin’s (1987) presents a
detailed review of the ethnohistoric problems surrounding the study of the
Historic Indians of the Lower Pecos region.
REFERENCES CITED
Andrews, R. L., and J. M. Adovasio
1980

Perishable Industries from Hinds Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, University of Pittsburgh, Ethnology Monographs 5.

Bement, L. C.
1986
Excavation of the Late Pleistocene Deposits of Bonfire Shelter, Val Verde
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin. Archeology Series 1.
1988

The Lower Pecos Canyonlands. In A Cultural Resources Overview of Region 3, Southwest Division, Corps of Engineers, by T. R. Hester et al. In
press. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Bement, L. C., and S. A. Turpin
1987
Technological Continuity and Functional Change: The Case of the Dorso
End Scraper. Plains Anthropologist 32(116): 191-196.
1988

A Folsom Point from Hinds Cave, 41VV456, Val Verde County, Texas. La
Tierra 15(1):5-7.

Collins, M. B.
1976
Terminal Pleistocene Cultural Adaptations in Southern Texas./X Congress
of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Colloque XVII: 120-135, Nice.

Hester ~ Chronological Framework

63

Chadderdon, M. F.
1983
Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas: The 1976 Excavations. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio. Special
Report 13.
Dibble, D. S.
On the Significance of Additional Radiocarbon Dates from Bonfire Shelter.
1970
Plains Anthropologist 15(50):251-254.
Dibble, D. S., and Dessamae Lorrain
Bonf’tre Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
1968
Texas Memorial Museum, Miscellaneous Papers 1.
Epstein, J. F.
1963
Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 33 (for 1962):1-130.
Greer, J. W.
Some Unsual Artifacts from Val Verde County, Texas. Texas Journal of
1968
Science 20(2): 183-192.
Hester, T. R.
Late Paleo-Indian Occupations at Baker Cave, Southwestern Texas. Bulle1983
tin of the Texas Archeological Society 53:101-120.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1964
The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amis~ad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, University of Texas.
Archeology Series 6.
Kirkland, Forrest
Historic Material from Fielder Canyon Cave. Bulletin of the TexasArcheo1942
logical and Paleontological Society 14:61-71.
Kirkland, Forrest, and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
The Rock Art of Texas Indians. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Klein, J., J. C. Lerman, P. E. Damon, and E. K. Ralph
1982
Calibration of Radiocarbon Dates. Radiocarbon 24(2):103-150.
Lundelius, E. L., Jr.
1984
A Late Pleistocene Mammalian Fauna from Cueva Quebrada, Val Verde
County, Texas. In Carnegie Museum of Natural History. Special Publication 8:456-481.
Patton, P. C., and D. S. Dibble
1982
Archeologic and Geomorphic Evidence for the Paleohydrologic Record of
the Pecos River in west Texas. American Journal of Science 282:97-121.

64

Texas Archeological Society

Ross, R. E.
The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
1965
Project 7.
Shafer, H. J.
Ancient Texans: Rock Art and Lifeways Along the Lower Pecos. Photo1986
graphs by Jim Zintgraff. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Shafer, H. J., and V. M. Bryant
Archeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde County,
1977
Texas. Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Special Series 1.
Sorrow, W. S.
1968
The Devil’s Mouth Site: The Third Season, 1967. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project 14.
Story, D. A.
Archeological Background. In D. A. Story and V. M. Bryant, eds., A
1966
Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad Reservoir Area, pp.
7-30. Report submitted to the National Science Foundation.
Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,
Austin.
Turpin, S. A.
Seminole Canyon: The Art and the Archeology. Texas Archeological Sur1982
vey, The University of Texas at Austin. Research Report 88.
1984

The Red Linear Style Pictographs of the Lower Pecos River Region. Plains
Anthropologist 29(105 ): 181-188.

1987

Ethnohistoric Observations of Bison in the Lower Pecos River Region:
Implications for Environmental Change. Plains Anthropologist 32(118):424430.

1989

The Iconography of Contact: Spanish Influence on the Rock Art of the
Middle Rio Grande. In Columbian Consequences Vol. L Archaeological
and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West, ed. by D. H.
Thomas, pp. 277-299. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C.

Turpin, S. A., compiler
1985
Seminole Sink: Excavation of a Vertical Shaft Tomb, Val Verde County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Research Report 93.
Word, J. H., and C. L. Douglas
Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas Memorial
1970
Museum Bulletin 16.

65

The Live Oak Hole Complex: Plains Indian Art and
Occupation in the Lower Pecos River Region
Solveig A. Turpin and Leland C. Bement

ABSTRACT
A search for historic Indian occupation sites in the Lower Pecos River
Region, centered on demonstrably postcontact pictographs, resulted in the recording of several circular stone features near Live Oak Hole, where a rock art
panel was painted between A.D. 1700 and 1775. Site 41VV828 was surveyed,
surface collected, and mapped with computer-aided photographics. One intact
feature, a possible Plains Indian stone ring, was excavated. Two artifacts of
equivalent age, a Guerrero arrowpoint and a ceramic fragment, were exposed
on the surface of the site and cannot be related to any of the stone features or the
pictograph panel. The sparsity of artifactual material may be attributable to the
mobility of the horse nomads of this era and to severe erosion of the shallow
site deposits.
INTRODUCTION

Most of archeological research in the Lower Pecos River Region has concentrated on Archaic-age material culture preserved in dry rock shelter deposits
and in the spectacular pictographic sequence. The total evidence for historic
Indian occupation of this region consists of one rockshelter reported by Kirkland
(1942), scattered metal arrowpoints (Parsons 1962; files of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory), scanty ethnohistoric references (Griffen 1969,
Daniel 1955), and 15 rock art panels (Turpin 1989) (Figure 1). The need for
more detailed studies of the protohistoric and historic periods became apparent
during a recent synthesis of the historic pictographs (Turpin 1989). On the
premise that the best place to search for camp sites of this age was in the vicinity
of the postcontact pictographs, in 1986 the area surrounding several known
historic panels was surveyed. At Live Oak Hole, 41VV169, a series of sites
consisting of stone circles--features usually identified as tipi rings on the
Great Plains--was recorded.
In addition to the well-known pictograph (Jackson 1938, Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967, Grieder 1966), Graham and Davis (1958) had recorded one
burned rock midden, 41VV170, slightly upstream from the pictograph site.
Newly recorded were 41 VV827, comprising two stone circles and a burned rock
midden above the pictograph; 41VV828, comprising four stone circles, a cairn,
and extensive burned rock middens across the creek; and 41VV844, disturbed
stone features and a dense lithic scatter above 41VV170, upstream and across a
small tributary from the pictograph (Figure 2). The recovery of one small

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (1988)

66

Texas Archeological Society

) Pandale

Comstock
Canyon Park

Del Rio

0

5

I0

20

miles

Figure 1. Map of the Lower Pecos River Region of Texas.

fragment of plain brown pottery from one stone circle at 41VV828 confirmed
the late date of at least one component at that site. Another stone circle at this
site was substantially intact and retained sediments sufficient to have buried
artifactual material within and adjacent to the ring. This feature seemed to hold
potential for the recovery of more evidence of a historic period occupation and
was selected for excavation.

Turpin and Bement-- Live Oak Hole Complex

67

1

E

E
"

u~

n

0
0

o

"N
o

E
o
o
o

©
o
o~

,..1
o

o

e4

\
\

68

Texas Archeological Society
THE LIVE OAK HOLE SITE COMPLEX

Live Oak Hole is a permanent tinaja on a long, meandering tributary of the
Rio Grande east of the mouth of the Pecos River. The tinaja abuts the limestone
bluff on the outside of a horseshoe bend in the creek. Three entrenched tributaries (L1, L2, and L3) cut through the bluff on the left bank (Figure 2). A smaller
water hole is contained within the uppermost (L1) tributary. The right bank
stairsteps down from a rounded hilltop, creating level benches above the stream.
The surrounding countryside is rolling hills cut by relatively gentle drainageways that eventually entrench nearer the Rio Grande.
Soils in this area are stony residual sediments, deflated and eroded to
bedrock on the level benches. The creek bottom is mobile gravel, washed and
scoured by recurrent discharge. The slopes are rocky scree gravels. The vegetation is typical desert scrub, its growth intensified by abnormally abundant recent
rainfall.
41VV169, Live Oak Hole
A shallow overhang, protected by roof fall across the front, lies under the
left bank at a corner formed by the confluence of the L1 tributary and the creek
(Figure 2). The cultural deposits in the shelter are eroded and vandalized.
Bedrock mortars, burned rock, flint flakes, mussel shell, a large metate, and,
above all, the pictographs testify to former occupation of the shelter.
The Pictograph at Live Oak Hole
The pictograph at Live Oak Hole, 41VV169, has been known to students of
Lower Pecos rock art for 50 years (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:Plate 52,
Jackson 1938:Site 195, Figure 195; Graham and Davis 1958, Grieder 1966:34),
but its historic importance has been overlooked. All previous descriptions remark about the length of the serpentine line that traverses the shelter wall
~igure 3); more than 13 meters (44 feet) long, this undulating red streamer
originates in three concentric circles and ends in a trident. Above and below are
monochromatic deer and geometric designs, and next to the concentric circles
stands a small, frontally posed stick figure. All of these designs are roughly of
the same soft red hue and are probably contemporaneous. Superimposed on the
small stick figure is a larger, darker red rectangular-bodied male figure with
pronounced genitals and half-painted face. The frontal half of a horned animal-bison or cow faces the larger man. Central in the shelter, above the undulating
line, is a triangular-bodied bison with horns, beard, and hooks for hooves
painted in the same dark red. Below, on the downstream corner of the shelter
wall, are two bright red miniature figures. One stands facing the viewer; the
other, in profile astride a horse, carries a lance that is longer than his steed.
The serpentine line, deer, and smaller stick human are not easily dated, but
they would not be out of place in an Archaic context. The small, square geometric design could belong to the Bold Line Geometric style, estimated to be of Late

Turpin ~ Live Oak Hole Complex

69

>

O

~

°~

70

Texas Archeological Society

Prehistoric age (Turpin 1986). The small horse and rider are undoubtedly historic; their companion figure is probably of the same age. The triangular bison
and the largest human figure are stylistically akin to iconography characteristic
of the Northern Plains between A.D.1700 and 1775 (Keyser 1987). Static, rectangular bodied figures are attributed to the late prehistoric Ceremonial style,
dated from A.D. 1000 to 1700, and the protohistoric transition to the Early
Biographic style between A.D. 1625 and 1775 (Keyser 1987). The rectangular
male and triangular bison of Live Oak Hole bear a strong resemblance to figures
at North Cave Hills in South Dakota (Keyser 1987:Figure 3f).
The advent of the Plains Indians in the Lower Pecos Region presumably
transpired after the Great Pueblo revolt of 1680. By 1729, Berroter~in, who was
leading a punitive and exploratory mission to the Lower Pecos Region, commented that the area was under the domination of Apache, Jumanos, and Pelones, all fierce and hostile tribes (Weddle 1968:200). The ethnohistory and the
stylistic similarities, therefore, place the pictograph at Live Oak Hole within the
eighteenth century, probably before 1775. Although the Apache were in control
of the area at this time, neither the pictograph panel nor any of the surrounding
sites can be attributed firmly to any specific ethnic group. The recognition of the
historic age of these human and animal figures at Live Oak Hole, however, led
to our intensive survey of the surrounding area under the assumption that the
best place to start searching for historic period camps was in the vicinity of their
pictograph sites.
41VV170, Live Oak Midden
Graham and Davis (1958) recorded one burned rock midden in the floor of
the canyon above the mouth of the L1 tributary that marks the upper end of
41VV169, the pictograph shelter. The plotting of the site location in the TARL
files was corrected, but little could be added to their description. The midden is
scoured by each discharge down the creek and is scattered into the creek bed, so
it no longer has any distinctive morphology. This burned rock accumulation lies
slightly upstream and below 41VV844 (Figure 2).
41VV844, Robertson Camp
On the flat rim of the L1 tributary, above the smaller tinaja and 41VV170
and across from the pictograph shelter, a large site composed of several highly
disturbed rock features overlooks the creek from the left bank (Figure 2). A
rough ranch road, leading to a hunting blind, ends on the site. The placement of
the blind, which, incidentally, is anchored by large blocks borrowed from the
features, testifies to the broad view of the surrounding countryside commanded
by the site. A dense lithic scatter, exposed on the barren limestone, included
burned rock, flakes, biface fragments, and several projectile points. Langtry,
Shumla, Ensor, Frio, and Figueroa dart points and four arrowpoints of differing
morphology reflect occupation from Middle Archaic to Late Prehistoric or
historic times, with the more recent types predominating.

Turpin m Live Oak Hole Complex

71

41VV827, Live Oak Camp
On the bluff, between the L1 and L2 tributaries and above the pictograph
shelter, are two highly disturbed stone rings, a small burned rock scatter, and
moderately dense lithic debris, mostly near the burned rock scatter. At present,
the rock features are two abutting circular piles of angular blocks, with a larger
pile paralleling the rim of the canyon. The dispersed midden is some 10 meters
northwest of the stone features. Two Ensor points were found during the survey
on the western periphery of the rings, midway between them and the midden,
and one Montell point was recorded on the slope near the burned rock scatter.
41VV828, The Tonto Site

The Tonto site, 41VV828, lies on the right creek bank, opposite the water
hole and pictograph. On initial survey, four relatively intact stone rings, a cairn,
and dense lithic debris on the second bench above the creek met expectations for
the layout of a historic aboriginal campsite. Temporal diagnostics recorded
during the survey included Uvalde and Late Archaic dart points, three arrowpoint fragments, and one small fragment of plain brown pottery associated with
one of the rings.
Site Features
Five stone features, a historic debris area, and a series of burned rock
middens were mapped at 41VV828 (Figure 2). A long, linear concentration of
burned rock, fire-darkened soil, and flint debris parallels the creek at the base of
the slope opposite the permanent water hole in the canyon bottom. This lowlying, densely occupied area has been frequently subjected to high water flooding and erosion. The rich soil and high moisture content have promoted the
growth of dense, thorny brush, so a veritable scrub thicket extends some 80
meters along this inside meander of the creek. A second burned rock concentration lies on the second bench above the creek at the west end of the site.
Projectile point styles probably related to the midden areas include Uvalde,
Langtry, Shumla, Marshall, and Ensor, covering the entire span of the Archaic
Period.
A cluster of historic trash--glass, ceramics, and metal scraps--lies opposite
the water hole on the first bench above the creek bed. Nothing of singular merit
or great antiquity was noted. Such debris concentrations are common in these
settings, since they were favored camping locations for shepherds, hunters, and
ranch workers.
The five aboriginal features of possible Late Prehistoric to Historic age are
four complete or partial rings of stone and one rectangular cairn. All lie on the
second bench above the creek on deflated and eroded surfaces.

72

Texas Archeological Society

Feature E
Feature E--the cairn--consists of 17 large and about a dozen smaller rocks
in a pile 60 cm tall, 1.3 meters on the north-south axis, and 1 meter on the eastwest axis. The longer dimension can be attributed to collapse of a once-taller
pile. The function of this cairn is problematical, but its antiquity is apparent in
the dense lichen growth and discoloration of the exposed surfaces.
FeatureD
Two contiguous rock ovals lie side by side on the west end of the second
bench above the creek. One has eroded to bedrock; the other is filled with
sediments that support thorny scrub. The original configuration of the structures
is not easily discerned, but this is the area of densest lithic debitage, perhaps
because of its proximity to a burned rock midden. A few burned rocks are
trapped against the west edge of the feature.
Feature C
Two parallel lines of rock are aligned roughly north and south. C-east is a
pile, consisting of 22 rocks, 3.2 meters long and 1.5 meters wide. C-west,
separated from C-east by a gap 1.3 meters wide, is 1.9 meters long and 1.3
meters wide. Scattered blocks on the south end suggest that this feature was
originally an oval ring. The one fragment of plain brownware found during site
recording was next to a block in C-west.
Feature B

A semicircle of approximately 55 contiguous rocks from 2 to 5 blocks thick
lies on exposed bedrock 50 meters east of Feature C. The largest component
block measures 35 by 30 by 14 cm. The interior diameter of this crescentic
feature is 2.6 meters; the exterior 3.8 meters. The horseshoe opens 50 degrees
west of north. Minimal sediment is entrapped within the rock pile. Dense lichen
growth and in situ cracking of blocks testify to considerable antiquity for this
feature.
Feature A
The most intact ring, Feature A, is on the eastern edge of the upper site area,
50 meters east of Feature B (Figure 2). A double ring of 71 large blocks forms a
circle 2.5 meters in diameter (Figure 4). The component blocks are massive, the
largest measuring 94 cm along its longest dimension. A few blocks have been
displaced into the interior of the ring. An opening, 50 cm wide, faces south. The
apparent integrity of the stone structure and the sediments trapped within suggested that excavation might confirm the estimated historic age of this feature.
Between February 12 and 14, Michael W. Davis, David G. Robinson and Jeff
Turpin joined Bement and Turpin to excavate the interior of Feature A.

Turpin ~ Live Oak Hole Complex

73

A

B
Figure 4. Plan (A) and photograph (B) of stone ring, Feature A, at the Tonto site
(41VV828).

74

Texas Archeological Society
Methods

The site was first mapped with transit and stadia rod to establish the
locations of all features and the site’s relationship to adjacent sites 41VV169,
41VV170, 41VV827, and 41VV844 (Figure 2). Surficial artifacts and features
were flagged and plotted; the formal artifacts were later collected. Center and
end points were established in and around Feature A as controls for vertical
photographs taken from a bipod built by E. Mott Davis, of The University of
Texas, Department of Anthropology. A series of black-and-white photographs
was taken with a 35 mm Nikkormat FTN camera elevated 3 meters above the
stone circle (Figure 5). The grid, stadia rod, and folding ruler served as scales.
Four overlapping photographs covered the entire feature. Series of photographs
were taken before, during, and after excavation.

Figure 5. Vertical photography in action. The bipod in use at the Tonto site (41VV828),
Feature A.

The feature was then gridded into 50-cm squares, and the matrix was
removed with trowels and water-screened through window screen at the tinaja in
the canyon bottom. The excavation continued until the sloping bedrock floor
was exposed between 5 and 20 cm below the surface. At the upper (north) end
bedrock was encountered just beneath the vegetation mat of moss and small
grasses; at the lower (south) end as much as 20 cm of sediment was trapped
within the feature. No cultural strata were apparent; only the root mat at the

Turpin ~ Live Oak Hole Complex

75

surface, and the increase in clay content with depth differentiated the interior
matrix from the surrounding soil.
The area surrounding the ring was barren bedrock, so no test pits could be
dug to compare exterior and interior artifact densities. As is so often the case on
these exposed surfaces, most of the surficial artifacts have been moved from
their original contexts and are lying trapped in pockets in the limestone or along
the edges of the vegetation that fringes the benches.
Analysis of the recovered materials was carried out at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), The University of Texas at Austin, where
all site information is curated. Site and feature maps Were computer-generated
from the transit data and vertical photographs using IBM-ATs equipped with
digitizing table and AUTOCAD software, a system assembled and refined at
TARL by H.H. Eling, Jr.
Results of Excavation

The artifactual recovery from within the feature was minimal. The one
possible interior feature, a cluster of burned rocks, extended under the eastern
peripheral blocks, indicating that the hearth predated construction of the ring.
The upper bench surrounding the rings is largely exposed bedrock, and it can be
assumed that much of the cultural material originally exposed on the surface all
over the site area had been displaced by sheetwash and deflation.
Artifacts

A total of 27 lithic items was recovered during the excavation and screening
of the ring deposits, including 15 pieces of burned chert, 3 secondary flakes, 4
tertiary flakes, and 5 chips. All materials could be attributed to ground clutter,
and none had ties to the structure or its inhabitants.
In addition to the items recovered during the excavation, 14 temporally
diagnostic artifacts were recovered during intensive surface survey (Figure 6).
The part of the site area around the rock alignments and the uppermost burned
rock midden was the focus of this search. Each diagnostic artifact was flagged,
plotted on the site map, and collected for inclusion in the analysis of site
materials. The 14 specimens collected represent 8,000 years of prehistoric use of
this campsite. Projectile points, from oldest to most recent, are Uvalde, Langtry,
Shumla, Marshall, Marcos, and Ensor types (Figure 6, f-k). Minimally Late
Prehistoric (post-A.D. 600) times are indicated by the stemmed arrowpoints,
including one with broad barbs similar to those of the Sabinal type (Figure 6, d)
(Turner and Hester 1985:188). The most recent projectile point is an unstemmed
triangular form (Figure 6, b) assigned to the Guerrero type (Turner and Hester
1985:177).
In addition to projectile points, an end scraper (Figure 6, e) morphologically
consistent with the Dorso type (Bement and Turpin 1987) was collected. Use
wear along its distal edge includes the rounding, striated pattern attributed to
hide preparation (Hayden 1979:25, Bement and Turpin 1987:194). Also a single

76

Texas Archeological Society

d

e

h

,.......... ~
J

=, ~’i~!!~¸¸¸¸ ¯
i

Scale

0

5

I0

I centimeters
Figure 6. Artifacts from the Tonto site (41VV828): a) fragment of plain brownware
pottery, b) Guerrero arrowpoint, c) stemmed arrowpoint, d) Sabinal arrowpoint, e) Dorso
end scraper, f-g) Ensor dart points, h) Marcos-like dart point, i) Shumla dart point, j)
Langtry-like dart point, k) Uvalde dart point.

Turpin m Live Oak Hole Complex

77

fragment of bone-tempered brownware pottery was collected adjacent to Feature C-west (Figure 6, a).
The stemmed arrowpoints, Dorso end scraper, and ceramic sherd are components of an assemblage consistently associated with circular rock alignments
in the Lower Pecos Region (Turpin 1982:109). They are defining characteristics
of the Infierno phase (Dibble 1978), now estimated to be Late Prehistoric or
protohistoric in age, ranging from A.D. 1400 to 1600 in this region. No absolute
dates have been obtained for Infierno phase sites. The Guerrero arrowpoint is
common on mission-era sites, dated to about A.D. 1700 (Turner and Hester
1985). Unfortunately, at 41VV828, none of the artifacts could be securely tied to
any feature, with the possible exception of the one sherd found directly adjacent
to Feature C-west.
DISCUSSION
Stone circle sites, especially those considered to be tipi rings, are a common
phenomenon throughout the Plains, where they have aroused archeological
interest for decades (Davis 1983). In Texas, Mallouf (1985, personal communication) has investigated several ring sites in the Big Bend, where they are a
major component of the Cielo complex, dated from A.D. 1200 to 1750. Young
(1985) excavated several wickiup rings at the Squawteat Peak site in Pecos
County. Similar sites were first recognized in the Lower Pecos River Region on
the margins of the Southern Plains at Infierno Camp, the type site of the Infierno
phase, in the 1970s (Dibble 1978).
Subsequent survey in the heart of the Lower Pecos River Region has increased the inventory of stone circle sites, leading to more precise definition of
their salient characteristics and permitting an assessment of the variability at
different sites. With the notable exception of Infierno Camp, which has more
than 100 stone rings (Dibble 1978), most of the sites have from one to four such
features. Characteristically, stone circles are found on high promontories, canyon rims, or level limestone benches above permanent water holes. Due to
massive erosion in these exposed locations, the building surfaces usually are
barren limestone, with pockets of sediment trapped behind rock outcrops or in
shallow depressions in the bedrock. Vegetation is sparse, restricted to desert
shrubs such as ocotillo and prickly pear and low grasses.
The typical Infierno ring is a circle of paired stones, presumably used as
pole supports for brush- or hide-covered huts. Morphological variations at other
sites include subrectangular, semicircular, or straight lines of piled rock, rarely
more than one course high. The Lower Pecos rings are usually only about 3
meters in diameter, much smaller than the classic late tipi rings of the Plains
(Davis 1983). The superstructure probably resembled the more casual domed
huts often seen in early historic photographs (Figure 7). The stone ring excavated at 41VV828, the Tonto site, is unusual in that it is a continuous circle,
broken only by a possible doorway on the south side. The configuration of this
ring could have resulted from rocks piled around a hide superstructure to help it

78

Texas Archeological Society

withstand high winds. A few examples of this contiguous placement of blocks
were identified at Infierno Camp (see Patterson 1987: Figure 38).
The orientation of the two intact features, A and B, permits some estimation
of the seasonality of occupation. The semicircular course of rock (B), arcs into
the southeast wind; the opening faces 50° west of north. During the excavation
of Feature A in mid-February, the wind was blowing strongly from the southeast
directly toward the buffer formed by this arc. Feature B would have served
admirably as a windblock on this winter day. The opening, or doorway, of
Feature A faces south; the densest grouping of rock clusters is on the north end
(Figure 4). The opening is also slightly upslope, suggesting that runoff from the
hill was not a serious consideration. The double arrangement of stones implies
that considerable weight had to be applied along the base to enable the structure
to withstand the wind. The ring is the best construction for warding off the
effects of cold, windy, dry weather that, in this region, usually comes as blue
northers--icy blasts of Arctic air blown down from the Plains between December and March. The different orientations of Features A and B suggest that they
were not contemporaneous.
The small number of artifacts found within the stone circle supports the
implication that Feature A at 41VV828 was used only for shelter, possibly as
sleeping quarters for two or three individuals. Cooking and other day-to-day
activities would have been conducted outside the hut, and the residue from those
activities would have blended with the long-term habitation debris at the site.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The mapping and excavation of 41VV828 provided no conclusive evidence
that the stone features are directly related to the historic pictograph or the
historic period. The surface artifact assemblage yielded two temporal diagnostics of protohistoric or historic age--a Guerrero arrowpoint assigned to the
mission era in Texas and northern Mexico, about. A.D. 1700 (Turner and Hester
1985) and a minute sherd of plain brownware (Figure 6, a, b). Similar ceramics
were recovered from Infierno Camp, usually considered protohistoric in age
(Dibble 1978), and at San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz, the Lipan Apache mission
established in 1762 on the headwaters of the Nueces River and abandoned in
1771 (Tunnell and Newcomb 1969).
The entire span from Early Archaic through Late Prehistoric is evidenced in
the lithic assemblage at the site. Predictably, population concentrated around
permanent water sources such as Live Oak Hole throughout prehistory. The
distribution of sites and features at Live Oak Hole illustrates in microcosm the
larger settlement pattern in the Lower Pecos, with the burned rock middens on
the floodplain and lowest slopes and the stone circles on the high, flat limestone
benches above. The burned rock middens fringing the creek are probably Archaic as are the older pictographs. The stone features and later pictographs are
much more characteristic of the late Late Prehistoric and early Historic periods.
In their setting, the three adjacent stone ring sites typify these sites throughout

Turpin m Live Oak Hole Complex

79

the region, situated as they are on promontories with views up and down the
water course. The location of the pictograph, under a shallow overhang facing a
broad, fiat, grassy expanse, is typical of the historic art in this region (Turpin
1989).
These few stone features, arranged in clusters, that comprise the sites
described here, possibly reflect the size and composition of the groups who built
them. The dearth of occupational debris associated with the features and the
distance between rings give the impression of small groups camping independently around the water hole. Some of the rings may have been contemporaneously occupied, but the orientation of the more intact features suggests that they
were constructed to meet differing weather conditions.
The difficulty in detecting historic (and prehistoric) campsites is best explained by referring to a photograph of a historic Indian campsite (Figure 7). To
change their camp, this family had to move only one basket, one water jar, two
kettles, a couple of cans, and the hut coverings. All that would remain would be
the dirt embankment surrounding their hut, soon to be leveled by erosion, and
the hearth. The limited artifactual material attributable to the historic period at
41VV828 is consistent with the mobile lifeways of the intrusive Plains Indians.
During one episode, they lingered long enough to paint the pictograph in Live
Oak Hole, but, otherwise, their tenure is marked only by one tiny fragment of a
protohistoric or historic ceramic vessel and one complete arrowpoint of the
mission era. Therefore, although there can be no doubt that people camped at
Live Oak Hole during the historic period, the threads of evidence can not tie the
artifacts to the stone circles or the circles to the pictograph. The excavation of
Feature A at 41VV828 proved useful in identifying construction techniques and
site layout, estimating the season of occupation, and emphasizing the fragility of

Figure 7. Photograph of a historic Indian camp in New Mexico. (Photo from the National
Archives, iii-sc-85775.)

80

Texas Archeological Society

the archeological record in a region best known for the preservation of deposits
in dry rock shelters. The value of the bipod and the computer-generated mapping
of the site and its features was demonstrated, but the presence of the Plains
Indians in the Lower Pecos remains best documented in the ethnographic and
pictographic record while the search for occupational sites continues.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Our deepest appreciation goes to Mrs. R. C. (Johnnie) Robertson, who gave
us permission to carry out archeological studies on her property. David G.
Robinson, Michael W. Davis, and Jeff Turpin donated their time to complete the
excavation of Feature A, 41VV828. Deirdre Rushing and Nan Olson, of Bastrop, helped map the site. E. Mott Davis lent his bipod and gave lessons in its
use. Herbert H. Eling, Jr. introduced the use of Autocad for archeological
mapping to TARL and helped in the preparation of the site and feature map. He
also provided the Nikkormat camera used in the field and prepared the photographs. The computers used in this experiment were obtained through a research
grant from Project Quest, a cooperative program of IBM and The University of
Texas at Austin. Funding for the field research was provided by the Joseph H.
Thompson Fund of Cleveland, Ohio.
REFERENCES CITED
Bement, L. C., and S A. Turpin
1987
Technological Continuity and Functional Change: The Case of the Dorso
End Scraper. Plains Anthropologist 32(116): 191-196.
Daniel, J. M.
The Advance of the Spanish Frontier and the Despoblado. Masters thesis,
1955
The University of Texas at Austin.
Davis, L. B.
1983
From Microcosm to Macrocosm: Advances in Tipi Ring Investigation and
Intepretation. Plains Anthropologist Memoir 19, Vol. 28(102).
Dibble, D. S.
1978
The Infierno Phase: Evidence for a Late Occupation in the Lower Pecos
River Region, Texas. Paper presented to the 43rd Annual Meeting, Society
for American Archeology, Tucson, Arizona.
Graham, J. A., and W. B. Davis
1958
Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Diablo Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. Report to the National Park Service by the Inter-Agency
Archeological Salvage Program, Field Office, Austin, Texas.

Turpin ~ Live Oak Hole Complex

81

Grieder, Terence
1966
Speculations on Some Pictograph Sites in the Region of Amistad Reservoir.
Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Griffen, W. B.
1969
Culture Change and Shifting Populations in Central Northern Mexico. Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona 13, Tucson.
Hayden, Brian
Snap, Shatter and Superfracture: Use-Wear of Stone Skin Scrapers. In Lithic
1979
Use-Wear Analysis, edited by B. Hayden. Academic Press, New York.
Jackson, A. T.
1938

Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. Anthropological Papers, Vol. II and Bureau of Research in the Social Sciences Study No. 27, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Keyser, James
1987
A Lexicon for Historic Plains Indian Art: Increasing Interpretive Potenial.
Plains Anthropologist 32(115):43-72.
Kirkland, Forrest
1938
A Description of Texas Pictographs. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological
and Paleontological Society 1:11-40.
1942

Historic Material from Fielder Canyon Cave. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society 14:9-25.

Kirkland, Forrest, and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
The Picture Writing of Texas Indians. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Mallouf, R. J.
1985
A Synthesis of Eastern Trans-Pecos Prehistory. Masters thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Parsons, Mark
1962
Testing and Reconnaissance in Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde County,
Texas. A report to the National Park Service on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Patterson, P. E.
1987
Archaeological Excavations at 41LL78, The Slab Site, Llano County, Texas.
Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division, Publications in Archaeology Report No. 34, Austin.
Tunnell, C. D., and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
A Lipan Apache Mission, San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz 1762-1771. Texas
1969
Memorial Museum Bulletin 14, The University of Texas at Austin.

82

Texas Archeological Society

Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts in Texas. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
¯ Turpin, S. A.
Seminole Canyon: The Art and the Archeology. Texas ArcheologicalSurvey
1982
Research Report 83, The University of Texas at Austin.
1985

Toward the Definition of a Pictograph Style: The Lower Pecos Bold Line
Geometrics. Plains Anthropologist 31(112): 153-161.

1989

The Iconography of Contact: Spanish Influences on the Rock Art of the
Middle Rio Grande. IN: Columbian Consequences, Vol. I: Archaeological
and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West. Smithsonian
Institution Press.

Weddle, R. S.
1968
San Juan Bautista, Gateway to Spanish Texas. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Young, W. C.
1981
Investigations at the Squawteat Peak Site, Pecos County, Texas. State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division
Publications in Archaeology Report No. 20, Austin.

83

The 1987 Parida Cave Conservation Project,
Val Verde County, Texas
Joseph H. Labadie

ABSTRACT
Parida Cave (41VV187) is an extensive rockshelter in an isolated part of
the Amistad International Reservoir near Del Rio, Texas. The site long has
been a popular place to visit for the local population and, more recently, by
boaters on the reservoir and long has been the target of illegal digging and
vandalism. During the summer of 1987 the National Park Service spearheaded
a major conservation project to clean up and revitalize the site. The Parida Cave
Conservation Project, with a volunteer work force, picked up trash, back-filled
potholes, and built a rock pathway for visitors. The project dramatically illustrates the kind of success that is possible through cooperative undertakings involving the National Park Service, private landowners, and a responsive regional archeological community.
INTRODUCTION

Parida Cave is a large rockshelter on the Rio Grande at Amistad Reservoir
near Del Rio, Texas (Figure 1). The site has historic and prehistoric pictographs
together with significant archeological deposits. In the recent past this site has
been a popular destination for the boating public, campers, and local fishermen,
since it is readily accessible from the lake (see Figure 2). This popularity has led
to great damage to the site; campers inadvertently harmed the archeological
deposits by digging fire pits and latrines and burying garbage. Other visitors to
the site have vandalized the pictographs and dug for artifacts.
The site is unusual in that it is owned jointly by the federal government and
two private owners. The shelter floor and lower half of the site are the property
of the International Boundary and Water Commission (IBWC), and this part of
the property is administered by the National Park Service. The upper half of the
site (the part above 1144.3 feet above mean sea level (amsl)) and the cave walls
that have the pictographs are coowned by Amos Humphrey and Clifton Lowry,
of Del Rio. Vandalism of the lower, publicly owned, half of the site is a
prosecutable offense under the Archeological Protection Act of i979, but vandalism above 1144.3 feet amsl, on private property, can be prosecuted only
under the Texas Antiquities Code.
The degree of vandalism, the legal situation, and the sheer proportions of
Parida Cave all combine to create a complex and formidable preservation
problem. During the summer and fall of 1987, the Parida Cave Conservation
Project was formed to find solutions to these problems. The project, begun under
the joint sponsorship of the National Park Service and the Texas Historical
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (1988)

84

Texas Archeological Society

oo

AMISTAD

=. !

contour interval 100 feet
2OOOft
1

I

500m

RKA

CAVE
UPLAND

Figure 1. Topographic map of part of the Lower Pecos River Region showing the location
of Parida Cave (from Alexander 1979:Figure 1, courtesy of Texas Archeological Research Laboratory).

Labadie-- Parida Cave

85

A

B
Figure 2. Photographs showing views; (A) Parida Cave from the Rio Grande, and (B)
Arroyo de la Parida, in Mexico, from Parida Cave.

86

Texas Archeological Society

Commission, relied on volunteers for the bulk of the labor and included personnel from the Texas Archeological Society, the Southern Texas Archaeological
Association, the Coastal Bend Archeological Society, the Center for Archaeological Research at The University of Texas at San Antonio, and anthropology
students from The University of Texas at Austin and at San Antonio. National
Park Service employees, Youth Conservation Corps members, and several high
school students from Del Rio also participated in the project. On December 10,
1987 a completely rejuvenated Parida Cave, complete with a public boat dock,
rock-lined trails, and interpretive signs that explain the key aspects of the site,
was reopened to the public.
BACKGROUND
A 1944 Water Treaty between the United States and Mexico created the
International Boundary and Water Commission (National Park Service 1987).
The original intent was to plan, construct, operate, and maintain three international hydroelectric dams along the Rio Grande. Two---Falcon and Amistad
dams--have been built, and before they were closed, preinundation surveys and
inventories of the reservoir basins were mandated by the National Archeological
Salvage Program.
The IBWC controls all land adjacent to the reservoir on the American side
up to 1117.0 feet (335 meters) amsl and owns or has a permanent flowage
easement on all land up to 1144.3 feet amsl. Under a 1965 agreement with the
IBWC, the National Park Service became responsible for administering all
recreational activities on the reservoir, including the conservation and protection
of all historic and prehistoric sites on IBWC property adjacent to the reservoir
(National Park Service 1987:Appendix A).
Construction of the Amistad Dam was completed in 1969, and the storing of
water began with the closing of the floodgates on May 31, 1969. The dam was
dedicated by Presidents Richard Nixon and Diaz Ordaz on September 8, 1969.
The Amistad Reservoir stores about 67,000 surface acres of water at a pool level
of 1117.0 feet (335 meters) amsl. Impounded waters are used primarily for flood
control and irrigation downriver. At the normal pool level (1117.0 feet [335
meters] amsl), impounded water extends in the United States about 40 km (25
miles) up the Devils River, 22 km (14 miles) up the Pecos River, and 118 km (74
miles) up the Rio Grande. The reservoir has an estimated shoreline of about
1,360 km (850 miles), about 864 km (540 miles) of which are in Texas (National
Park Service n.d.).
PREVIOUS RESEARCH
Overview
The Amistad Reservoir basin is probably the most extensively and intensively studied geographic region in Texas. The region, known as the Lower

Labadie-- Parida Cave

87

Pecos River Archeological Region, has become one of the most well defined
culture areas in Texas (cf. Shafer 1986). The limited geographic distribution of
regionally distinctive artifact types and unique pictograph styles has long suggested a culture core area at the mouth of the Pecos River at the Rio Grande
(Suhm et al. 1954).
The Lower Pecos River Region has some of the oldest and best-preserved
archeological deposits in North America. Dry rockshelter deposits often contain
deeply stratified cultural remains consisting of textiles, bone and wooden artifacts, stone tools, and food remains. Many walls of the rockshelters are adorned
with pictograph panels. Radiocarbon dates have determined that there has been
about 10,000 years of near-continuous human habitation in the region. The first
archeological survey for the proposed Amistad Reservoir in 1958 described the
significance of the area.
In several respects the Diablo [Amistad] Reservoir area is one of
the unique archeological regions in North America. Probably no
area of comparable size can boast of so rich a series of archeological and pictographic sites, and in the stratified terrace sites are preserved an unusually complete array of materials. For this reason
alone the archeology of the area is of exceptional scientific significance. But in addition to this rich inventory of archeologic materials, here exists one of the truly unique pictograph regions of the
world. The magnificent galleries of superb cave murals, executed
in polychromatic and monochromatic styles, in stylized and naturalistic forms, are perhaps comparable only to the famous cave
paintings of Europe [Graham and Davis 1958:84, 85].
Four archeological districts and a single site are listed in this region on the
National Register of Historic Places. All are in or adjacent to the Amistad
Recreation Area. In the four districts are 183 sites that are listed at the national
level of significance. Historic sites are associated with the building of the second
transcontinental railroad from 1881 to 1882. Almost as many recorded sites
have yet to be nominated to the Register but are, in the opinion of Curtis
Tunnell, State Historic Preservation Officer, also clearly eligible for listing
(personal communication, December 1987). A complete inventory of resources
on federal lands adjacent to the reservoir has never been completed. Twentyseven new archeological sites were documented by the National Park Service in
1987; twenty-nine more were documented in 1988. It is clear that hundreds more
sites remain to be identified and recorded.
There have been three major historical periods of archeological research in
the Amistad Reservoir basin. They are Early Research, Preinundation Research,
and Current Research.

88

Texas Archeological Society
Early Research (1930-1958)

Several nineteenth century explorers and travelers noted the presence of
pictographs in caves of the Devils and Pecos rivers (see Turpin 1984a). However, Gutzeit and Carson (1931) are generally recognized as the first to document accurately some of the sites in the region. Sponsored by the Witte Museum
in San Antonio, they produced watercolor paintings of 18 pictograph panels
from about half a dozen sites ~oberta McGregor, personal communication,
January 1988). Gutzeit and Carson’s original works and field notes are part of
the Witte Museum’s permanent collection.
A. T. Jackson (1938) included extensive research on pictographs and petroglyphs of the Lower Pecos River Region in his monumental work Picture
Writing of Texas Indians. He did not limit his book to just the lower Pecos but
included his research for the entire State of Texas. In 1932, Jackson visited
Parida Cave (Jackson’s site 71), and his drawings (Jackson 1938:185) were the
first to record accurately the pictographs at Parida Cave (Figure 3). Jackson’s
original field notes and glass negatives with proofs are cataloged and are on file
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Figure 3. A. T. Jackson’s illustrations of pictographs at Parida Cave (Jackson 1938:185,
Figures 164 and 165).

The best-known early pictograph researcher is Forrest Kirkland. Kirkland
(1937a, 1937b, 1938, 1939), with the assistance of his wife Lula, produced
detailed watercolors for many of the region’s better-known sites. However, it
was not until the publication of The Rock Art of Texas Indians (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967) that many of his original works were first seen by the public.

Labadie-- Parida Cave

/

89

90

Texas Archeological Society

O

t’--

c-:

O

c~

u~

Labadie-- ParMa Cave

91

Kirkland visited Parida Cave in July 1937 and completed watercolors of all of
the pictograph panels ~igures 4 and 5) (Jackson had copied only one of the four
panels). Kirkland’s original artwork and field notes are cataloged and maintained in acid-free archival folders and boxes at the Texas Memorial Museum at
The University of Texas at Austin (Causey 1985:16).
The first archeological excavations in the reservoir basin were made by
Pearce and Jackson (1933, Thomas 1933) who dug at Fate Bell Shelter (41VV74).
In 1965, this site was briefly reinvestigated (Parsons 1965) by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project of The University of Texas as part of their l~ger
preinundation study. Fate Bell Shelter is now part of Seminole Canyon State
Historical Park, which is operated by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
Public tours of the site are offered twice a day all year round.
The Witte Museum conducted several private projects at Shumla Caves and
Eagle Cave. These expeditions investigated nine rockshelter sites that are collectively named the Shumla Caves. Shumla Cave No. 5 (41VV115) was completely
excavated by Martin (1933, 1935). The archeological assemblages have since
been analyzed by Schuetz (1956, 1961, 1963). The first radiocarbon dates from
the Lower Pecos River Region came from the Shumla Caves (Schuetz 1957).
The unusual hafted knife illustrated on the cover of Turner and Hester’s Field
Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians (1985) was excavated by Martin
(1953) at Shumla Cave No. 5. Another site, Eagle Cave (41VV167), also was
first dug by the Witte Museum (Davenport 1933). It was later reinvestigated by
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project (Ross 1965) during preinundation
studies.
The Smithsonian Institution sponsored several early expeditions to the
Lower Pecos River Region. In 1933, Frank Setzler dug at Moorehead shelter
(41VV55) and Goat Cave (41VV67) on the Pecos River, but these excavations
were only briefly reported (Setzler 1933, 1934), and none have been made at
either site since the 1930s. Prewitt (1970) reported on some Moorehead shelter
materials he examined at the Smithsonian Institution, and Masolowski (1978)
analyzed the Smithsonian collection from Moorehead for his dissertation at the
University of Pittsburgh.
In 1937 the West Texas Museum excavated Murrah Cave (41VV351),
located about 40 km (25 miles) up the Pecos River from its mouth at the Rio
Grande, and a brief report was published by Holden (1937). The lithic assemblage from Murrah Cave has since been analyzed by Holiday (n.d.); Horseshoe
Cave (41VV 171) was later excavated by Woolsey and The University of Texas.
These excavations were not published (Woolsey 1936) but were later the topic
of Butler’s (1948) M.A. thesis at The University of Texas. Other early reports on
sites or artifacts from what is now the Amistad Reservoir basin include Davenport, Walker, and Chelf (1941), Gardner, Fletcher, and Martin (n.d.), Harris and
Lewis (1941), Martin and Woolford (1932), Sayles (1935, 1941), and H. C.
Taylor (1948, 1949a, 1949b).

92

Texas Archeological Society
Preinundation Research Period (1959-1969)

Early research in the Amistad Reservoir basin firmly established the scientific value of the region. However, early research was tremendously biased,
since it concentrated almost exclusively on rockshelter sites and the collection
of museum specimens. In contrast, preinundation research was holistic in approach and was the first systematic survey of the entire Lower Pecos River
Region. The definition of a regional chronology, reconstruction of past lifeways,
and the study of the larger cultural processes involved, were the hallmarks of the
Preinundation Research Period. The period began in the late 1950s and lasted
until about mid- 1969.
The Austin Field Office of the Archeological Salvage Program of the
National Park Service conducted the initial survey for the proposed Diablo (later
changed to Amistad) Reservoir. The survey (Graham and Davis 1958) located
188 sites on the United States side of the reservoir. The initial National Park
Service study recommended that implementation of the recommendations of the
Graham and Davis survey be contracted to the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Surveys on the Mexican side of the reservoir basin have located 78 sites.
Herbert Taylor (1948) had found 10 sites along the Rio Grande in northern
Coahuila before the reservoir was planned. Sixty-eight sites on the Mexican
side, all prehistoric, were inventoried during preinundation research by W. W.
Taylor, Direccion de Prehistoria, Mexican National Institute of Anthropology
and History (Taylor 1958, Taylor and Ruhl 1961). No other surveys, excavations, or mitigating actions were undertaken on the Mexican side of the reservoir
during preinundation studies, andnone have been taken since.
Graham and Davis (1958:2) surveyed about 70 percent of the area to be
affected by the reservoir. Later surveys (parsons 1962, Dibble and Prewitt 1967)
would eventually reduce the unsurveyed area to about 10 percent. Dibble and
Prewitt (1967) located an additional 68 sites. Parson’s research (1962) is the
only historic sites survey made in the reservoir area. He surveyed and documented 11 historic sites associated with the construction from 1881 to 1882 of
the southern transcontinental railroad along the Rio Grande. By the end of 1967,
about 300 archeological sites had been located, and 24 had been tested or
extensively excavated (Story and Bryant 1966:8).
Several major pictograph surveys and studies were completed as part of the
preinundation studies. These include Gebhard (1960, 1961, 1965) and Grieder
(1965, 1966a; see also 1966b).
Site survey and excavation reports and other articles have been published on
many of the sites investigated by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project at
Amistad Reservoir. Reports completed for and submitted to the National Park
Service, Denver Service Center, include Damp and Centipede caves (Epstein
1960, also 1963), the Devils Mouth site (Johnson 1961, 1964, Sorrow 1968a),
Arenosa Shelter (Dibble 1967), the Javelina Bluff site (McClurkan 1968), Fate
Bell shelter (Parsons 1965), Bonfire shelter (Dibble 1965, 1970, Dibble and

Labadie-- ParMa Cave

93

Lorrain 1968), Eagle Cave (Ross 1965), the Nopal Terrace site (Sorrow 1968b),
Parida Cave (Alexander 1970), the Perry Calk site, Conejo shelter, and 41VV162A, Cueva Ponderosa, sites 41VV160, 41VV161, 41VV163, 41VV176, 41VV186,
and 41VV422 (Collins 1969), and Coontail Spin, Zopolite Cave, Mosquito
Cave, and the Doss site (Nunley, Duffield, and Jelks 1965).
Extensive excavations were conducted at Parida Cave (Alexander 1970) in
1967. The site was then coowned by Perry Calk, of Comstock, and the International Boundary and Water Commission. There are no photographs of the 1967
excavations because a mechanical failure of the field camera went unnoticed
until the film was developed after the field season was over (Alexander 1970:17).
The Texas Archeological Salvage Project excavated five major test units at
Parida Cave (41VV 187), the deepest of which extended more than three meters
from the ground surface. Postexcavation studies indicated that the principal
occupations of the site were from about 4000 to about 200 B.C. A later component at the site was dated to A.D. 1000 to 1600. More than 100 dart points were
recovered (notably absent were Ensor and Frio dart points), nine painted pebbles,
mostly decorated with thin black lines, and a fragmentary valve of a freshwater
mussel that had traces of red ochre, apparently in a liquid state when deposited,
adhering to the inner surface (Alexander 1970:45). Among other artifacts recovered were bone awls, pieces of abraded dark red hematite, bone beads, matting,
basketry, cordage, sandals, netting, and a variety of knotted vegetable fibres.
Only a small part of the total faunal assemblage has been analyzed, but
identified taxa (Alexander 1970:64) include cottontail (Sylvilagus sp.), jackrabbit
(Bepus californicus), coyote (Canis latrans), fox (Urocyon sp.), deer (Odocoileus
sp.), squirrel (Citellus sp.), catfish (Ictalutus sp.), flathead catfish (Pylodictris
olivaris), and gar (Lepisosteus sp.). All of the materials from Texas Archeological Salvage Project excavations at Amistad are in long-term curation at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.

Current Research (1970-present)
National Park Service research in the Amistad Reservoir basin has been
sporadic since the completion of the preinundation studies in 1969. Most research since then has been outside the basin. Regional research projects have
been sponsored by non-National Park Service agencies, many of which have
concentrated on pictograph research (Turpin 1979, 1984b, 1985a), and significant archeological research projects have been undertaken at Baker Cave (Chadderden 1983) and Hinds Cave (Shafer 1977). The Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department established Seminole Canyon State Historical Park in 1980, and
since then, Seminole Canyon Park has been the focus for most regional research.
Several significant reports on the rock art (Turpin 1986a, Silver 1986) and
archeology (Turpin 1982, 1985b, Patterson 1980) of Seminole Canyon Park
have been completed. The Pecos River style (Turpin 1986b), the Red Monochrome style (Turpin 1986c), the Bold Line Geometric style (Turpin 1986d),
and the Red Linear style (Turpin 1984c) have been defined as the primary

94

Texas Archeological Society

prehistoric rock art styles. Several historic period pictographs (Turpin 1988a,
1988b) also have been reported recently.
A detailed analysis of a Lower Pecos child bundle burial from a private
collection was funded and published by the Texas Archeological Foundation
(Banks and Rutenburg 1982), and the Texas Historical Foundation funded the
construction of the protective fence at Panther Cave (41VV83) and the interpretive shelter at the National Park Service boat dock on the Pecos River. Regional
Late Archaic mortuary practices have been described by Turpin, Henneberg, and
Riskind (1986).
Ethnohistoric observations on bison in the Lower Pecos Region have been
reported by Turpin (1987). The Dorso end scraper (Bement and Turpin 1987)
has been suggested as a regional Late Prehistoric bison-processing tool. A reexamination of the deepest materials at Bonfire shelter (Bement 1986) has provided additional information on the Western Hemisphere’s oldest known bison
jump site.
Salvage excavations were conducted by the National Park Service at three
sites in the Amistad Recreation Area. At Skeleton Cave (41VV671) on the Rio
Grande, a back-country camper discovered a burial while digging a pit for
garbage disposal at the rear of the shelter (Anderson 1978). Anderson (ibid.)
reported that a bison-horn core and an arrowpoint of unspecified type were
found in association with the human remains. A second burial was salvaged
from this site in 1988. The author (Labadie 1988) noted that an Ensor dart point
was found in situ in matrix between the left scapula and clavicle. At Techo Bajo
(41VV621), also on the Rio Grande, a fisherman reported a skeleton (Lehnert
1983) washing out at the waterline of a partly inundated rockshelter, and a
partial skeleton of an adult male was excavated there by Lehnert (1983). In May
1987, Texas Historical Commission archeologist Wayne Bartholomew found a
skeleton eroding out of the deposits at the dripline of a shelter (41VV129) on the
Pecos River. Dental patterns suggested that the skeleton was probably prehistoric (Bartholomew, personal communication 1987), but before a salvage operation was organized, the skeleton was stolen from the site.
Since 1970, several major reports have been published by the National Park
Service that involve the cultural resources at Amistad Recreation Area. A
review of previous research and delineation of future resource management
needs at the park were completed in 1974 by NPS archeologist Bruce Anderson.
A new General Management Plan/General Development Concept (National
Park Service 1987) for the park was issued recently by the National Park
Service. Issued every 10 years, this document establishes short- and long-term
resource management priorities for the park. The addition of two archeologists
to park staff was recommended (National Park Service 1987:99); one permanent
archeologist has been hired, and a seasonal archeologist was added during the
summer of 1988. Also in 1988, the Park Service began a major project to catalog
materials from the Amistad Reservoir at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory. Artifacts, field notes, photographs, maps, and drawings will be

Labadiem Parida Cave

95

inspected, reinventoried, and cataloged. The project is part of a nationwide
effort by the Park Service t~, account for, and upgrade the curation of, federally
owned archeological collections.
Historic Archeology in the Region
The first historic sites survey in the Lower Pecos River Region was part of
the Park Service preinundation studies (Parsons 1962); several identified sites
were later resurveyed by Briggs (1974:5) in 1969. Briggs (1974) has reported on
the artifacts from two Southern Pacific Railroad 1881 to 1882 construction
camps, one near Langtry and the other just east of the mouth of the Pecos along
the Rio Grande. The only other research in historic sites has been Patterson’s
(1980) at Seminole Canyon State Historical Park and at the Jersey Lilly site
(Patterson 1987) near Langtry. A compilation of State Historical Markers inVal
Verde County has been published by the Val Verde County Historical Commission (Val Verde County Historical Commission 1986).
The Historic Era for the Lower Pecos River Region technically begins from
1590 to 1591, with Gaspar Castano’s expedition from Monclova, Mexico to the
Pecos Pueblo in New Mexico (Turpin 1984a:32). DeSosa’s expedition probably
crossed the Rio Grande near modem Del Rio and may have camped near
Seminole Canyon (Turpin 1984a:32). During the next two centuries, at least six
more Spanish incursions took place. Cabeza deVaca did not travel through the
Amistad Reservoir basin (Campbell 1988:Fig. 1). In 1674, Brother Manual de
La Cruz crossed the Rio Grande near the Devils River in pursuit of Indians who
had left Mission Santa Rosa de Maria on the Rio de Las Sabinas (Turpin 1989).
In the following year (1675), Femando del Bosque led an expedition that
crossed the Rio Grande near Del Rio in search of the "Sierra Dacate y Yascole,"
mountains Bolton identifies as those southeast of modem Bracketville, Texas
(Bolton 1908:297). Jose de Barroteran traveled through the modem reservoir
basin in 1729 (Castafieda 1936:336), crossing the Rio Grande near present-day
Langtry and from there proceeding northward to near Dryden, Texas (Turpin
1984a:37). Garza Falcon passed through the area in 1735 (Patterson 1987:7). In
1773, Vincete Rodriguez attacked a Mescalero camp near the mouth of the
Pecos, killing many, capturing 16 women and children and 200 horses, and
freeing three Spanish captives (Turpin 1984a:37). In 1775, Ugarte and Loyola
are reported (Turpin 1984a:37) to have lost three Spanish soldiers in a battle
with Indians on the San Pedro (Devils) River.
Texas statehood and the arrival of the U.S. Army signaled the beginning of
the end of the long succession of Native Americans who inhabited the reservoir
basin. By the nineteenth century, the Comanche and, later, the Apache dominated the region. In 1853, the U.S. Army skirmished with Indians at the mouth
of the Pecos (Turpin 1984a:37). Later, in 1873, the army engaged a group of
Lipan Apache at the mouth of the Pecos; their chief and 40 women and children
were captured (Turpin 1984a:37).

96

Texas Archeological Society

The eradication or removal of the Indians from the area by the U.S. Army
and the Texas Rangers was essentially completed by 1881, when the first
Southern Pacific Railroad surveys were made in the reservoir basin. By 1882,
construction of the second transcontinental railroad was in full swing, with more
than 10,000 laborers comprising Germans, Italians, Mexicans, Afro-Americans,
and Chinese building grades and laying track between Shumla and Del Rio. On
January 12, 1883 east and west sections of the first southern transcontinental
railroad were joined with a silver spike about 1-1/5 km (1 mile) north of the
mouth of the Pecos (Patterson 1980:12).
The Southern Pacific Railroad built a station between Tunnel No. 1 (the
first railroad tunnel in Texas) and the bridge across the mouth of the Pecos. It
was named Painted Cave--a reference to Parida and two other nearby rockshelters with pictographs. For nine years, passenger trains pulled by American
Standard 4-4-0s and freight trains pulled by 4-6-0s (the numbers describe wheel
alignment of the locomotives) passed the Painted Cave Station (Seminole Canyon State Historical Park display, n.d.).
Parida Cave provided a welcome water stop for weary train travelers, who
sometimes left painted messages on the shelter’s walls (Figure 6). Painted Cave
Station consisted of at least two wooden buildings, one of which housed a
section gang whose job it was to maintain the dangerous stretch of track between
Comstock and Shumla. This stretch of track had two 450-meter (1,500 foot)
rock tunnels, 900 meters (3,000 feet) of wooden trestle, and 14 metal spans
between 36 and 90 meters (120 and 300 feet) long (Briggs 1974). In 1892,
Painted Cave Station and a 39-km (24.5-mile) section of track were closed in
favor of a newer, shorter, and less treacherous 18-km (ll.l-mile) route that
crossed the Pecos River about 8 km (5 miles) upstream from the mouth of the
Rio Grande (Briggs 1974).
The buildings were gone before the area was flooded in 1969; foundation
remnants that might have survived into the twentieth century were most probably swept away in the flood of 1954. An International Boundary and Water
Commission marker on the Pecos River near the railroad bridge tells of rains
spawned by a tropical depression that raised the prereservoir level in a 24-hour
period from about 321 meters (1,070 feet) amsl to 347 meters (1,156.78 feet)
amsl. The highest recorded level for the Amistad Reservoir is 341 meters
(1,138.0 feet) amsl in 1975; the level in Figure 2 is 335 meters (1,117.0 feet) amsl.
All that remains today of the Painted Cave Station is old photographs
(Figure 7). Much of the old railroad grade is now inundated by the waters of the
reservoir, and the physical evidence of the railroad grade below Parida Cave is
about 9 to 12 meters (30 to 40 feet) under water.
The 1987 Parida Cave Conservation Project
The 1987 Parida Cave project is part of a much larger conservation project
at the Amistad Recreation Area. In 1985, the Texas Historical Commission
(THC) initiated a public response campaign to focus the regional archeological

Labadie~ ParMa Cave

Figure 6. Photographs showing historic graffiti in Parida Cave.

97

98

Texas Archeological Society

A

B

Figure 7. Southern Pacific Railroad photographs: A, Painted Cave Railroad Station, 1883
to 1892); B, Southern Pacific locomotive crossing the bridge at the mouth of the Pecos

Labadiem ParMa Cave

99

community’s attention on the area. In 1986, the Historical Commission issued
an invitation to concerned archeologists to attend a public hearing in Austin that
was jointly sponsored by the Commission and the National Park Service. As a
result of this meeting, the Park Service agreed to a joint cultural resources
evaluation whose goals were to update the archeological data base and evaluate
current and projected site management needs. Fieldwork on the project began in
November 1986.
The work focused on the Lower Pecos River Region, which probably has
the highest concentration of sites in the park. To solicit support, staff archeologists of the Texas Historical Commission and National Park Service personnel
met with owners of adjacent land, for archeological resources on their lands also
were being adversely impacted as a result of increased public access occasioned
by the reservoir construction. Texas Historical Commission archeologists met
with representatives of the news media and local historical associations with the
result that 40 volunteers representing eight organizations and private landowners donated more than 1,750 hours to the project. More than 30 previously
recorded sites were visited and evaluated; many were rerecorded on new site
forms, mapped, photographed, and cleaned up. Modern human organic and
inorganic waste was removed.
In spring, 1987 a seasonal archeologist was hired by the Park Service at
Amistad Recreation Area in Del Rio, and, by the fall, the Park Service upgraded
the archeologist’s position to a full-time staff position.
The Parida Cave Conservation Project became the first priority for the
seasonal archeologist. Before this project was initiated, the Park Service had
made no attempt to restrict access or to set up onsite interpretive displays.
The first phase of the restorative work began with making the site off-limits
to all overnight camping and day-use activities. Modern accumulations of trash,
including latrine-related waste, were removed. Thirty-one potholes (one meter
in diameter or larger) were mapped, photographed, and backfilled (two potholes
that remain open are incorporated into the interpretive display). In all, 91
artifacts were found during the backfilling, among them 13 dart points, 2 painted
pebbles, a sandal fragment, cordage, manos, and trimmed and utilized flakes.
After the backfilling was completed, the topography of the ground surface
before the potholing was estimated and reconstructed.
The second phase of development consisted of designing and placement of
a trail system of more than 120 meters (400 feet) of rock-bordered trails leading
from about 335 meters (1,117 feet) amsl to an estimated level of about 352
(1,175 feet) amsl--the top of the midden at the rear of the shelter. The trails
were designed to maximize the effect of a trip to Parida Cave while minimizing
the impact of increased traffic. All rocks on the floor of the cave, except the
largest roof spalls, were incorporated into the rock trail. Nearly 800 man hours
were spent just in collecting and placing the rocks after the path had been laid
out and graded.

100

Texas Archeological Society

A

B
Figure 8. Photographs of Parida Cave before (A) and after (B) the conservation project.

Labadiem ParMa Cave

101

The third phase of the project was the development of texts for five interpretive signs that explain the key aspects of the site. Texts were so designed that
they could be understood by the average park visitor with no background in
history or archeology. DesCriptive signs explain Parida Cave’s geological history, its colorful rock art panels, the composition of the archeological deposits,
and the damage done by vandalism at the site. The signs were typeset and silkscreened by the Institute of Texas Cultures of The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
The final phase of development was the placement of the interpretive signs
and the construction of a National Park Service courtesy boat dock, since the site
is accessible only from the water. The dock, similar to the one at Panther Cave,
accomodates as many as four boatloads of visitors at a time.
The Parida Cave project was the labor of many unsung heros who worked
behind the scene picking up trash, backfilling potholes, and carrying bucketfulls
of rocks. The project dramatically illustrates the kind of successes that result
from cooperative undertakings among the National Park Service, private landowners, and a responsive regional archeological community (Figure 8). For their
part in this project, Edward C. Rodriguez, Jr., Superintendent of Amistad Recreation Area, and Amos Humphreys and Clifton Lowery, coowners, received
1987 Texas Historic Preservation Awards from the Texas Historical Commission. Preservation awards were also presented to Jack and Missy Harrington and
the Val Verde County Historical Commission for their roles in the overall efforts
of the Amistad cultural resources evaluation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Parida Cave Conservation Project was successful due solely to the
determined efforts of many dedicated individuals. Deserving of special recognition are Don Goldman, Wayne Bartholomew, Jim Rancier, Ray Smith, Jennifer
Zeyen, and Kathy Labadie. Several organizations provided volunteer labor for
the project--the Val Verde County Historical Commission, the Southern Texas
Archaeological Association, the Texas Archeological Society, the Coastal Bend
Archeological Society, students from The University of Texas at Austin, and
students and staff from the Center for Archaeological Research at The University of Texas at San Antonio. The 1987 Youth Conservation Corps employees
from Amistad Recreation Area devoted hundreds of hours to the construction of
the rock trail. National Park Service employees from Amistad who participated
actively in the project were Don Goldman, Eldon Kohlman, Dennis Schmidt,
Bob Gamer, Greg Garetz, Emory (Smokey) Lehnert, Charlie Lawson, Robert
Trevifio, and James Dillon. Ron Ice, Jim Rancier, Thomas R. Hester, Jimmy L.
Mitchell, and Wayne Bartholomew graciously reviewed and commented on
early drafts of the manuscript. Lastly, I thank my wife Kathy, who patiently
typed several drafts, each with many revisions, without the aid of a wordprocessor.

102

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Alexander, R. K.
1970
Archeological Investigations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 19, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Anderson, B. A.
1974

An Archeological Assessment of Amistad Recreation Area, Texas. Division
of Archeology, Southwest Region, National Park Service.

1978

Preliminary Report on the Salvage Excavation of a Burial From an Inundated Rockshelter at Amistad Recreation Area, Texas. Southwest Cultural
Resources Center, Sante Fe, New Mexico. Ms. on file, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Banks, K., and G. Rutenburg
1982
A Child Bundle Burial from Val Verde County, Texas.. Texas Archeological
Foundation, Inc. Austin.

Bartholomew, Wayne
Personal communication regarding vandalism at site 41VV129, July 1987,
1987
notes and photographs on file at the Texas Historical Commission.
Bement, L. C.
1986
Excavation of the Late Pleistocene Deposits of Bonfire Shelter, Val Verde
County, Texas. Texas Archeologicat Survey, Archeology Series 1. The University of Texas at Austin.
Bement, L. C., and S. A. Turpin
Technological Continuity and Functional Change: The Case of the Dorso
1987
End Scraper. Plains Anthropologist 32:191-196.
Bolton, H. E.
1908
Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1705. Barnes and Noble, New
York.
Briggs, Alton K.
1974
The Archeology of 1882 Labor Camps on the Southern Pacific Railroad,
Val Verde County, Texas. M. A. thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Butler, C. T., Jr.
1948
A West Texas Rock Shelter. Unpublished M. A. thesis. Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Castafieda, Carlos E.
1936
Our Catholic Heritage in Texas. Vol. II. St. Edwards University. Austin.
Causey, C. A.
1985
Texas Rock Art: Sixty Years of Preservation. Heritage, Fall, 1985: 11-17.

Labadie-- Parida Cave

103

Chadderdon, M. F.
1983
Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas: The 1976 Excavations. Center for
Archaeological Research, The Un~,ersity of Texas at San Antonio Special
Report 13.
Collins, M. B.
1969
Test Excavations at Amistad International Reservoir, Fall 1967. Miscellaneous Papers of the Texas A rcheological Salvage Project 16, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Davenport, J. W.
1938
The Archeotogical Explorations at Eagle Cave, Langtry Texas. Witte Memorial Museum Bulletin 4. San Antonio.
Davenport, J. W., and C. Chetf
1941
Painted Pebbles from the Lower Pecos and Big Bend Regions of Texas.
Witte Memorial Museum Bulletin 5. San Antonio.
Dibble, David S.
1965
Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site in Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Miscellaneous Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Projuet 5, The University of Texas at Austin.
1967

Excavations at Arenosa Shelter 1965-1966. Texas Archeological Salvage
Project Report, The University of Texas at Austin. Report submitted to the
National Park Service.

Dibble, D. S., and E. R. Prewitt
1967
Survey and Test Excavations at Amistad Reservoir, 1964-65. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Report 3, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Epstein, J. A.
1960
Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas 1958.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Report. Report submitted to the National Park Service.
1963

Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas 1958.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 33:1-129.

Gardner, Fletcher, and Martin
n.d.
A New Type of Attatl from a Cave Shelter on the Rio Grande near Shumla,
Val Verde County, Texas. Witte Memorial Museum Bulletin 2. San Antonio.
Gebhard, D.
Prehistoric Paintings of the Diablo Region of Western Texas. Roswell
1960
Museum and Art Center, Publication in Art and Science No. 3. Roswell
New Mexico.
1961

The Diablo Cave Paintings. The Art Journal 20 (2):79-82.

1965

Prehistoric Rock Paintings of the Seminole Canyon Area, Val Verde County
Texas. Report submitted to the National Park Service.

’"

104

Texas Archeological Society

Gilmore, M. R.
1937
An Interesting Vegetal Artifact from the Pecos Region of Texas. University
of Texas Publication 3734:17-26. Austin.
Graham, J. A., and W. B. Davis
1958
Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Diablo Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. A Project of the Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program, Archeological Salvage Program Field Office, Austin. National Park
Service, U. S. Department of the Interior.
Grieder, T.
1965

Report on a Study of Pictographs in the Satan Canyon, Val Verde County,
Texas. Miscellaneous Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 2.
The University of Texas at Austin.

1966a

Speculations on Some Pictograph Sites in the Region of Amistad Reservoir.
Report submitted to the National Park Service.

1966b

Periods in Pecos Style Pictographs. American Antiquity 37:710e

Gutzeit and Carson
1931
Field notes and original artwork from 18 different pictograph panels on file
at the Witte Museum, San Antonio.
Harris, R. K. ,and R. L. Lewis
1941
A Report on an Indian Burial Blanket from Val Verde County, Texas. The
Record 2 (6):27-29, Dallas Archeological Society.
Holden, W. C.
Excavations at Murrah Cave. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Pale1937
ontological Society 9:48-73.

Holiday, V.
n.d.
Manuscript on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
Jackson, A. T.
1938
Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. The University of Texas Publication 9.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1961
The Devils Mouth Site: A River Terrace Midden, Diablo Reservoir, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 30 (for 1959): 253-285.
1964

The Devils Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Texas.
Archeology Series, 6, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas
at Austin.

Kirkland, F.
1937a
A Comparison of Texas Indian Pictographs With Paleolithic Paintings of
Europe. Central Texas Archeologist 3:9-26.
1937b

A Study of Indian Pictures in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeolological
and Paleontological Society 9:98-119.

Labadiem ParMa Cave
1938

105

A Decription of Texas Pictographs. Bulletin of the Texas Areheolological
and Paleontological Society 10:11-40.

1939

Indian Pictures of the Dry Shelters of Val Verde County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 11: 47-76.

Kirkland, F., and W.W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
The RockArt of Texas Indians. University of Texas Press. Austin.
Labadie, J. H.
1988
Archeological Salvage of Human Remains at Skeleton Cave (41VV962),
Amistad Recreation Area, 1988. Manuscript on file with the National Park
Service, Southwest Cultural Resources Center, Santa Fe.
Lehnert, E. C.
1983
Report on the Salvage of a Burial from a Previously Inundated Cave in the
Cliffs along the Rio Grande Arm of Amistad Recreation Area, Texas.
Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. Austin.
Martin, G. C.
1933
Archeological Explorations of the Shumla Caves. Witte Museum Bulletin 3.
San Antonio.
1935

Report on Four Shumla Cave Packets. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 7:115-117.

Martin, G. C., and S. Woolford
1932

Painted Pebbles of the Texas Big Bend. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 4:20-24.

Masolowski, R. F.
1978
The Archeology of Moorehead Cave: Val Verde County, Texas. Ph.D
dissertation, The University of Pittsburgh.
McClurkan, B.B.
1968
Test Excavations at the Javelina Bluff Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
Mimeographed. Report submitted to the National Park Service.
National Park Service
1987
General Management Plan/Development Concept Plan for Amistad Recreation Area, Val Verde County, Texas. U.S. Department of the Interior,
National Park Service, Southwest Cultural Center. Sante Fe.
n.d.

National Park Service pamphlet and map on Amistad Recreation Area.

Nunley, J. P., L. F. Duffield, and E. B. Jelks
1965

Excavations at Amistad Reservoir, 1962 Season. Miscellaneous Papers of
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 3. The University of Texas at
Austin.

106

Texas Archeological Society

Parsons, M. L.
1962
Testing and Reconnaissance in Amistad, 1962. Unpublished manuscript on
file at the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1965

1963 Test Excavations at Fate Bell Shelter, Amistad Reservoir Area, Val
Verde County, Texas. Miscellaneous Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project 4. The University of Texas at Austin.

Patterson, P. E.
1980
Relocation and Restoration of a Baking Oven (Site 41VV588) in Val Verde
County, Texas. Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Publications in Archeology, Highway Design Division Report No.
18. Austin.
1987

Test Excavations at Site 41VV199 The Jersey Lilly Val Verde County,
Texas. Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
Highway Design Division, Publications in Archeology Report No. 33. Austin.

Pearce, J. E., and A. T. Jackson
1933
A Prehistoric Rockshelter in Val Verde County, Texas. University of Texas
Bulletin 3327, Austin.
Prewitt, E. R.
1970
The Piedra Del Diablo Site, Val Verde County, Texas, and Notes on Some
Trans-Pecos, Texas Archeological Material in the Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D. C. Texas Historical Survey Committee, Archeological Report No. 18. Austin.
Ross, R. E.
1965
The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Miscellaneous Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project No. 7, The University of Texas at Austin.
Sayles, E. B.
1935
An Archeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 17. Gila Pueblo,
Globe, Arizona.
1941

Some Texas Cave Dweller Artifacts. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 13:163 - 168.

Schuetz, M. K.
1956
An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 27:129-160.
1957

A Carbon-14 date from Trans-Pecos Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 28:288-289.

1961

An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Materials: Part II. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 31:167-205.

1963

An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Materials: Part m. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Soc&ty 33:131-165.

Labadie-- Parida Cave

107

Texas Parks and Wildlife Department/SCSHP Display
n.d.
Seminole Canyon State Historical Park display on the Southern Pacific
Railroad, located at Park Headquarters, Seminole Canyon State Historical
Park, Comstock, Texas.
Setzler, F. M.
1933
Prehistoric Cave Dwellers of Texas. Explorations and Fieldwork of the
Smithsonian Institution in 1932:53-56.
1934

Cave Burials in Southwestern Texas. Explorations and Fieldwork of the
Smithsonian Institution in 1933:35-37.

1935

A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwestern Texas. American Antiquity 37
(1):104-110.

1939

Exploring a Cave in Southwestern Texas. Explorations and Fieldwork of
the Smithsonian Institution in 1938:75-78.

Sharer, H.J.
1977
Archeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde County,
Texas. Texas A & M University, Anthropology Laboratory, Special Series 1.

1986

Ancient Texans: The Rock Art and Lifeways Along the Lower Peeos. Texas
Monthly Press. Austin.

Silver, Constance
1985
The Rock Art of Seminole Canyon State Historical Park: Deterioration and
Prospects for Conservation. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Contract
340-299. Austin.
Sorrow, W. B.
1968a
The Devil’s Mouth Site: The Third Season. Miscellaneous Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project 14, The University of Texas at Austin.
1968b

Text Excavations at the Nopal Terrace Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
Miscelaneous Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 15, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Story, D. A., and V.M. Bryant, Jr. (eds.)
1966
A Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad Reservoir Area.
Report to the National Science Foundation (GS 667) by the University of
Texas at Austin.
Suhm, D. A., Alex Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Taylor, H. C., Jr.
1948
An Archeological Recormaissance in Northern Coahuila. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 19:74-87.
1949a

A Tentative Cultural Sequence for the Area About the Mouth of the Pecos.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 20:73-78.

108

Texas Archeologieal Society

1949b

The Archeology of the Area About the Mouth of the Pecos. M. A. thesis
Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Taylor, W. W.
1958
Archeological Survey of the Mexican Part of Diablo Reservoir. Appendix
A, published in Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Diablo Reservoir, Val Verde Country, Texas. Archeological Salvage Program Field Office, Austin. National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior.
Taylor, W. W., and Francisco Gonzales Rul
An Archeological Reconnaissance Behind the Diablo Dam, Coahuila,
1961
Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 31:153-165.
Thomas, S. J.
1933
The Archeological Investigation of Fate Bell Shelter, Seminole Canyon,
Val Verde County, Texas. M. A. thesis, The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology.
Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press.
Austin.
Turpin. S. A.
Seminole Canyon: The Art and Archeology. Texas Archeological Survey
1982
Research Report 83. The University of Texas at Austin.
1984a

Prehistory in the Lower Pecos River Region: An Overview. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 90, The University of Texas at Austin.

1984b

Smoke Signals on Seminole Canyon: A Prehistoric Communication System?
Plains Anthropologist 29(104): 131-138.

1984c

The Red Linear Style Pictographs of the Lower Pecos River Region. Plains
Anthropolog ist 29( 105): 181 - 198.

1985a

Pictograph Support for the Smoke Signal Hypothesis. Plains Anthropologist 30(108):165-166.

1985b

Seminole Sink: Excavation of a Vertical Shaft Tomb, Val Verde County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 93. The University of
Texas at Austin.

1986a

Absolute Dating of Red Monochrome Pictographs: A Failed Experiment.
Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 88. The University of Texas
at Austin.

1986b

An Example of a Mythical Creature in Pecos River Style Art: Southwest
Texas. La Tierra 13(4):15-19.

1986c

Pictographs of the Red Monochrome Style in the Lower Pecos River Region, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55: 123-144.

1986d

Toward a Definition of Pictograph Style: The Lower Pecos Bold Line
Geometric. Plains Anthropologist 31 (112): 153-162.

Labadie-- Parida Cave

109

1987

Ethnohistoric Observations of Bison in the Lower Pecos River Region:
Implications for Environmental Change. Plains Anthropologist 32:424-429.

1988a

Arroyo de los Indios: A Historic Pictograph in Northern Coahuila, Mexico.
Plains Anthropologist 33(120):279-284.

1988b

Rock Art of the Despoblado. Archaeology 41(5):50-55.

Turpin, S. A., M. Henneberg, and D. H. Riskind
1986
Late Archaic Mortuary Practices of the Lower Pecos River Region, Southwest Texas. Plains Anthropologist 31:295-316.
Turpin, S. A., R. P. Watson, S. Dennett, and H. Mussig
1979
Stereophotogrammetric Documentation of Exposed Archeological Features.
Journal of Field Archeology 6(3):329-337.
Woosley., A. M.
1936
Excavations of a Rock Shelter on the Martin Kelly Ranch Six Miles Southeast of Comstock in Val Verde County, Texas, February 13 to February 19,
1936. Unpublished manuscript on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Val Verde County Historical Commission
1986
Historical Markers of Val Verde County, Texas. Val Verde County Historical Commission. Del Rio, Texas.

111

Diet Change in the Lower Pecos:
Analysis of Baker Cave Coprolites
Kds~n D. SoboHk
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the many coprolite studies that have been conducted in
the Lower Pecos Region, where coprolites range in time between about 7500
B.C. and A.D. 900 and geographically throughout southwestern Texas and
northern Mexico. A study of coprolites dated at about A.D. 900 from Baker
Cave, Val Verde County, Texas has provided new data from the Lower Pecos.
Comparison of the data from Baker Cave with those from the previous studies
illustrates the changes in diet in the prehistoric Lower Pecos Region through
time. The diet, although increased in diversity, particularly in the amount of
fish, birds, and flowers consumed, has continued to revolve primarily around
stable resources such as prickly pear, agave, sotol, and rodents.
INTRODUCTION

Coprolite analyses are important for determining the diet, seasonality of
occupation, and subsistence patterns of the prehistoric inhabitants of the Lower
Pecos Region of southwestern Texas, where, due to the aridity of the climate,
they are sometimes abundant in dry limestone rockshelters. The many analyses
of coprolites from this area have revealed some aspects of the prehistoric Lower
Pecos diet over a long time range and sizeable geographic area.
An analysis of the coprolites from Baker Cave (Sobolik 1988), which are
dated to about A.D. 900, is important for two reasons. It provides additional
dietary data on prehistoric Lower Pecos populations, and it extends knowledge
of dietary habits into Late Prehistoric time. Baker Cave, although it is in the
Lower Pecos Region, has a more mesic biological environment than the rockshelters examined in previous studies. The cave is on a tributary of the Devils
River in an ecotonal environment bordered by the mesquite-chaparral zone of
the Tamaulipan biotic province in southern Texas, the oak-cedar zone of the
Edwards Plateau in the Balconian biotic province to the east, and the sotollechuguilla zone of the Chihuahuan biotic province to the west (Blair 1950;
Chadderdon 1983).
The Lower Pecos Region is in southwestern Texas and Coahuila in northern
Mexico, centering on the confluence of the Pecos and Devils Rivers with the Rio
Grande. The mainly semiarid environment, which is similar to much of the
southwestern United States, contributes to the excellent preservation of the
cultural remains in the rockshelters and open sites of the area. The marginally
desertic conditions in the area are probably the same today as in much of the

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (for 1988)

112

Texas Archeological Society

past, but around 750 B.C. there may have been a brief climatic shift in the area to
more mesic conditions (Dering 1979; Bryant and Holloway 1985).
Prehistoric occupation of the Lower Pecos canyon areas began at least
9,000 years ago (Shafer 1981). The lifeways of these populations, determined by
the semiarid environment, were mainly conservative foraging adaptations.
However, slight shifts in the pattern have been noted (Stock 1983; Shafer 1986).
The continuous subsistence search of the prehistoric occupations of the Lower
Pecos Region was centered around a stable resource, the desert succulents,
consisting mainly of sotol, prickly pear, and lechuguilla (Shafer and Bryant
1977; Williams-Dean 1978; Dering 1979; Shafer 1981; Stock 1983; and Brown
1986). These desert succulents were eaten and burned and were used in textiles,
basketry, sandals, and netting (Shafer 1986). One of the main reasons why
subsistence and cultural practices probably remained stable for such a long time
was that the xeric conditions prevailed, and the flora and fauna of the area
remained relatively unchanged (Dering 1979; Lord 1984).
Paleoecology became an important consideration for Lower Pecos archeologists, with the focus of research centering on obtaining new kinds of information. Some of the Lake Amistad Reservoir salvage excavations during the late
1960s that focused on obtaining paleoecological material (Figure 1) were conducted at Parida Cave, 41VV187 (Alexander 1970), and Conejo Shelter, 41VV162
(Alexander 1974). The coprolites from these excavations--the first to systematically save coprolite material were analyzed by Riskind (1970) and Bryant
(1969, 1974b) respectively. Among other archeological investigations conducted
in order to further the information on Lower Pecos paleoecology were extensive
excavations at Hinds Cave, 41VV456 (Sharer and Bryant 1977), and Baker
Cave, 41VV213 (Brown n.d.; Hester 1983, 1986). The excavations at Hinds
Cave yielded more than two thousand bags of plant remains and cultural material and more than a thousand human coprolites. The careful recovery procedures used at Hinds and Baker Caves will permit continued analysis of the
prehistoric Lower Pecos Region long after all of the archeological sites in the
area are gone.
THE VALUE OF COPROLITE STUDIES

The evaluation of prehistoric subsistence practices has become important
for archeologists. Knowledge of subsistence, the reconstruction of diet, and
information on health status can be obtained by several means, most significantly, the analysis of coprolites (dessicated human feces), ethnobotanical material, faunal remains, and ethnographic information. All of these analyses need to
be made in order to support comprehensive statements about the diet or nutritional status of a population. Coprolites, however, are a unique resource for
determining prehistoric subsistence; their analyses offer direct answers to questions of diet (Bryant 1974a) and encompass most other types of information. The
constituents of a coprolite are mostly the remains of intentionally eaten food

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

La

JO

SHELTER "

x BA

113

R CAVE

Figure 1. Plan of the Lower Pecos Region, showing sites in Texas from which coprolites
have been analyzed. Coprolites were also recovered at Frightful Cave, in Coahuila, Mexico, which is off the map to the south.

114

Texas Archeological Society

items, but they also contain wind-blown pollen, contaminants, grit, and fecesthriving insects. Coprolites, therefore, can, under ideal conditions, be used to
determine diet, health, seasonality of occupation, processing practices, and
overall subsistence patterns. Coprolites, since they are the dietary remains of
specific individuals, are precise samples, supplying data that cannot be replicated accurately from the other animal and plant debris from archeological sites.
Although the potential of human coprolites as dietary indicators was realized by Harshberger as early as 1896, the first scientific analyses of coprolites
were conducted in the early twentieth century. Initial studies were conducted on
materials from North American caves (Young 1910, Loud and Harrington 1929),
and dried fecal remains from Nubian mummies (Smith and Jones 1910). The
processing techniques for these early analyses consisted of either cutting open
the dry coprolites and observing the large, visible contents, or grinding the
samples through screens, breaking much of the material in the process.
Improved techniques for analyzing coprolites were developed by Callen
and Camerion (1960), who refine a technique developed by Benninghoff (1947)
for herbarium specimens, and by Van Cleave and Ross (1947), for zoological
specimens. The samples are rehydrated in a mild solution of the detergent
trisodium phosphate in order to break apart the materials gently for ease in
screening. These techniques, which are still used, revolutionized the science of
coprolite analysis.
However, some problems are inherent to coprolite analysis, mainly that
they comprise only undigestible foods; the digestible portions have been absorbed in the digestive process--it is estimated that meat protein is usually
completely absorbed during digestion 0:ry 1985). The underrepresentation of
meat in coprolites is apparent when the amount of bone materials recovered
from zooarcheological analyses at a site is compared to the amount of meat
protein in the coprolites. Lord (1984) recovered 64 different faunal taxa in his
analysis of Hinds Cave material, and 40 different taxa were identified from
Baker Cave material (Douglas 1970). Macroremains of Hinds Cave coprolites
contained 11 (Stock 1983)and 20 (Williams-Dean 1978)different taxa respectively, and the Baker Cave coprolites contained only nine different faunal taxa.
This strongly suggests that coprolites tend to severely underepresent meat intake. How closely the coprolite contents reflect actual food intake is unknown.
Another problem is the direct association of a coprolite or a group of
coprolites with a group of people, as in a latrine, where the actual defecators are
unknown. The coprolites may reflect deposition and food usage by the specific
group, since "rarely are feces found away from the designated latrine area;"
(Shafter 1986:99) indicating that almost everyone used the latrine. Alternatively, coprolites may reflect the deposition of one sick person forced to defecate
in the area near his or her bed. In this example, the coprolites may contain a high
amount of medicinal materials, although medicines probably were also used by
the population in everyday life for minor problems.
A group of coprolites could also represent the fecal matter of mainly women
and children of hunting and gathering groups, who stay near camp during the

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

115

day while the men mainly defecated away from the camp during their hunting
expeditions. This could be misleading when women and children eat different
foods from the men or are deprived of certain dietary items due to cultual
constraints, such as taboos.
BAKER CAVE COPROLITES
The coprolites studied here were excavated from Baker Cave (41VV213), a
dry rockshelter on a high bluff, one of several archeological sites in Val Verde
County in the Lower Pecos Region of southwestern Texas (Figure 2) The cave is
70 meters above Phillips Canyon, a dry tributary of the Devils River, and
measures 15 meters in width, 37 meters in length, and has an overall surface area
of about 451.5 square meters (Word and Douglas 1970). The fill of Baker Cave,
which consists of spalls, limestone dust, and cultural material, is about 3 to 3.3
meters deep (Hester 1983). The occupational debris dates from no earlier than
7,000 B.C., during the late Paleo-Indian period (Word and Douglas 1970; Hester
1983), but most of the habitation was during the Archaic and Late Prehistoric
periods.
The most recent excavations at Baker Cave were conducted by Thomas R.
Hester and James H. Word during the 1984 and 1985 field seasons (Brown n.d.,
Hester 1986). The coprolites analyzed for this study were recovered from a
latrine area during the 1984 season. Others working at Baker Cave were Thomas
R. Hester and Robert F. Heizer in 1976 (Hester 1983; Chadderon 1983), John W.
Greer, a graduate student at the University of Texas in 1968 (Greer 1968), and
avocational archeologist James H. Word from 1962 to 1966 (Word and Douglas
1970).
The coprolites analyzed for this study were in a buried latrine area near the
entrance to Baker Cave (Figure 2) in unit N6E9 stratum 2. Samples 1 and 2 from
the latrine area were mapped at 98.37 meters elevation and are tentatively
considered a part of the intact occupation floor found 10 to 20 cm below the
surface that extends for a least 5 meters over the area of excavation (Brown,
n.d.). Feature 84-3, from this occupation floor at grids N3E8 and N3E9, was a
large grass-lined pit at least 30 cm deep. This feature contained bundles of green
sotol flower stalks that radiated from the center of the pit to the outside rim,
where they were bent down over the rim and covered with a thick layer of grass
(Brown, n.d.). The green sotol flower stalks (Lab No F84-3) were dated in
uncorrected radiocarbon years to l l00-&100 B.P. (Beta-15634; ~13C adjusted
radiocarbon age 1090&_100 B.P.; K. M. Brown, personal communication 1988).
Since the latrine area has been tentatively placed within the same living floor as
feature 84-3, the coprolites are considered to date to the same time period (K. M.
Brown, personal communication, 1988).
Since some of the specimens in the latrine area could not be distinguished
from one another and were taken out in chunks, each of the 38 specimens may
not necessarily be a single, whole coprolite. However, in this analysis each of
the 38 specimens will be considered a coprolite, although that may not always be
the case.

116

Texas Archeological Society

\

__--

\

-.~

=.--/~1
o

""-

=5M

LATRINE

DA TUM

Figure 2¯ Plan of Baker Cave (41VV213), showing area (gridded) excavated in 1984 by
the Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, and the
Witte Museum of San Antonio. Drawn by Kenneth M. Brown.

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

117

The specimens analyzed were processed for extraction of dietary information from pollen and macroremains. Half of each coprolite, except in cases
where the coprolite weighted less than 10 grams, was analyzed. The samples
were halved, mainly to preserve some of the sample for analysis at a future time
when techniques may be more sophisticated. The samples were then placed in a
0.5 percent trisodium phosphate mixture for at least 48 hours, in accordance
with the method descibed by Callen and Cameron (1960). At this time, one
tablet of an exotic marker (Lycopodium spores 11,300+400 spores) per gram of
sample weight was added to permit calculation of overall pollen concentration.
After the samples had broken apart, they were screened through 850- and
250-micrometer mesh screens. The macroremains on the screens were allowed
to dry, were separated, and were identified with the help of the reference
collection at Texas A&M University of material collected near Baker cave, and
a seed manual (Martin and Barkley 1973).
The heavy sedimentation material that passed through the screen was processed for pollen. Chemical extraction techniques were used in order to remove
organic debris and silicates. The cellulose material was softened with 10 percent
potassium hydroxide (KOH) and subsequently removed, together with organic
material, during acetolysis (9 parts acetic anhydride to 1 part sulfuric acid).
Silicates removal by heavy density separation was conducted with zinc chloride,
and the material remaining was placed in vials with glycerol and mounted on
slides for identification of pollen, which was made with the aid of the pollen
reference collection at Texas A&M University and with Kapp’s pollen identification key (1969).
Macrofossil contents not readily identified from local reference materials
were sent to specialists for identification. The insect renains were identified by
Richard Blume, of Bryan, Texas, the fish scales were sent to David J. Lee, of the
Department of Wildlife and Fisheries, Texas A&M University, and the bird
feathers were sent to Keith Arnold, also of the Department of Wildlife and
Fisheries, Texas A&M University.
Baker Cave Diet
The occupants of Baker Cave at about A.D. 900 used what was available in
their environment in order to obtain a balanced diet and for medicinal needs. The
coprolites reflect a diet that included a large variety of plants and small game
animals. Another material that should have been important to the Baker Cave
diet yet is not reflected in the coprolites is meat from larger game animals.
All of the coprolites analyzed had large quantities of fiber, mainly from the
prickly pear cactus, which probably provided the stable subsistence base for the
Lower Pecos populations (Williams-Dean 1978, Stock 1983). Prickly pear items
identified from the Baker Cave coprolites included fiber, fruit seeds, calcium
oxylate druse crystals, epidermis, and spines. Prickly pear pollen was not observed in the samples, indicating that at the time of deposition prickly pear

118

Texas Archeological Society

flowers were not eaten. Most of the prickly pear seeds were fragmented, suggesting that the fruit was processed before consumption, possibly by milling or
grinding with metates.
Although a few spines were recovered from the coprolites, the processing
technique used on the prickly pear tunas probably involved a way of removing
the spines; they could have been burned off (Vestal 1952, Whiting 1978),
rubbed off (Millspaugh 1974, Stevenson 1915), or rolled off (Whiting 1978).
Onion bulbs and fibers were also prevalent in the coprolite samples. Onion
was probably eaten whole and unwashed, fresh from the ground, because sand
and dirt were found in high frequency in coprolites associated with the onion
remains. Onion bulbs were also found in association with fish remains, suggesting that the onion may have been used as a seasoning or relish (Whiting 1939,
Vestal 1952).
The fiber from desert succulents--yucca, agave, and sotol was also observed in the coprolite samples, indicating that these plants, which have been
considered staples (Williams-Dean 1978, Stock 1983), were also important
dietary resources for the Baker Cave inhabitants. No pollen grains from yucca
and agave were seen in the coprolite samples, suggesting that the flowers of
these plants were not ingested at the time of deposition. But sotol pollen was
observed, although in frequencies so low that it is doubtful that sotol flowers
were ingested. If they were eaten, the coprolites that contained sotol pollen
probably were deposited many days after the flowers were ingested (Sobolik
1988).
Seeds were also eaten by the Baker Cave occupants, mainly those of the
prickly pear cactus, as discussed above, but also seeds of juniper, mesquite,
goosefoot, pincushion cactus, mustard family, hackberry, oak, and walnut. None
of these seed remains, however, were observed in more than three of the samples
analyzed, indicating that they probably were not a main dietary item.
Pollen grains from plants that produce the smaller seeds of Chenopodium
(goosefoot) and Brassicaceae (mustard family) also were observed in the samples.
One sample had a high frequency of both Cheno-am pollen (pollen from Chenopodiceae or Amaranthus) and Chenopodium seeds, suggesting that the seeds
and inflorescences were eaten together. This is a likely possibility since the
small goosefoot seeds would have been hard to separate from the rest of the
plant. The most frequent pollen was Brassicaceae, but these same samples did
not contain Brassicaceae seeds. Brassicaceae inflorescences and seeds could
have been eaten together, with the remains showing up in different fecal samples
(Sobolik 1988), but the evidence is not conclusive.
Hard hulls of Juniperus seeds and Juglans microcaropa walnut shells
indicate that these items were ground up and ingested for the nutritious internal
meats, shell, hull, and all.
Pollen analyses provided evidence that the flowers, seeds, or inflorescences
of certain plants were also dietary or medicinal items of the Baker Cave occupants. The pollen from Brassicaceae, Artemisia (sagebrush), and Gramineae
(grass family) occured in high frequencies in the samples, indicating that pollens

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

119

from these plants were ingested a few days before sample deposition (Sobolik
1988). Grass pollen and seeds have been observed in all of the lower Pecos
coprolite studies (Riskind 1970, Bryant 1974b, Williams-Dean 1978, Stock
1983, Reinhard et al. 1989), indicating that this resource may have been a stable,
unchanging aspect of prehistoric Lower Pecos diet. Grass seeds in samples from
Hinds Cave, however, have been interpreted as accidental ingestants through
rodent or bird remains (Williams-Dean 1978, Stock 1983).
Fish, the most important faunal dietary item as determined from the coprolites, was seen in 37 percent of the samples. The scales extracted from the
coprolites were mainly from the Perciformes and the Cypriniformes families.
Scales from sunfish, from a member of the salmon family (probably trout), and
from gizzard shad or threadfin shad were also identified. Fish bone and scale
remains were associated with a high frequency of charcoal, suggesting that the
fish were roasted on coals.
The remains of rodents were also prevalent in the Baker Cave coprolite
samples, identified in 34 percent of the samples. These remains included bones
of the mouse (Peromyscus), wood rat (Neotoma), and cotton rat (Sigmodon). A
large amount of rodent hair was also observed, and all parts of the rodent were
represented, suggesting that they were eaten whole.
Bird bones and feathers were extracted from 16 percent of the Baker Cave
coprolites. Almost the entire array of bird bones were represented from these
samples, indicating that birds too were ingested whole. The other faunal remains
observed in the Baker Cave coprolites were a snake vertebra and scale, lizard
bones and skin, a rabbit bone, and unknown mammal bones. Coprolite~, however, do not provide identification for the entire dietary array; larger animals
whose remains could not be identified in the coprolites were also important in
the diet of the Baker Cave occupants. These animals probably were a large
variety of mammals, reptiles, and amphibians and, to a lesser degree, large fish
and bird species, such as those identified in the faunal array at Hinds Cave
(Lord 1984).
OTHER LOWER PECOS COPROLITE STUDIES

Many coprolite studies have been conducted on Lower Pecos material,
suggesting a time span of about 8,400 years (Table 1). The first analyses of
coprolites were from Hinds Cave (6,280 B.C.; Stock 1983) and Frightful Cave
(7,500 to 5,000 B.C.; Bryant 1975, Fry n.d.). Time periods represented from
Hinds Cave also include 4,800 to 5,500 B.C. (Stock 1983), 4,000 B.C. (Williams-Dean 1978) and 2,500 to 3,680 B.C. (Reinhard et al. 1989). Coprolites
were also analyzed from the 5,000 to 2,000 B.C. and 2,000 B.C. to A.D. 300
levels at Frightful Cave (Bryant 1975, Fry n.d.). The youngest coprolites previously analyzed included samples from Conejo shelter dating from about 500
B.C. to A.D. 800 (Bryant 1969, 1974a). The analysis of the Baker Cave coprolites presented here (which date to about A.D. 900) provides the most recent information on Lower Pecos diet (Sobolik 1988).

120

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1.

Date
7,500-5,000 B.C.
6,280 B.C.
5,500-4,800 B.C.
4,000 B.C.
3,680-2,500 B.C.
5,000-2,000 B.C.
2,000 B.C-A.D. 300
500 B.C-A.D. 800
A.D. 900
No Dates

Lower Pecos Coprolite Studies

Location
Frightful Cave
Hinds Cave
Hinds Cave
Hinds Cave
Hinds Cave
Frightful Cave
Frightful Cave
Conejo Shelter
Baker Cave
Parida Cave

Sample
Size
15
29
26
100
25
16
16
43
38
11

Researcher
Bryant (1975), Fry (n.d.)
Stock (1983)
Stock (1983)
WiUia~s-Dean (1978)
Reinhard et al. (1989)
Bryant (1975), Fry (n.d.)
Bryant (1975), Fry (n.d.)
Bryant (1974b)
Sobolik (1988)
Riskind (1970)

The most comprehensive analysis of coprolites in this area was a study of
100 coprolites from Hinds Cave by Williams-Dean (1978). These samples are
dated to about 4,000 B.C. and reflect a diet centered around gathering (plant
foods) and foraging (animal foods such as rodents, avifauna, and herpetofauna).
The main plant items recovered were fiber, epidermis, spines, and seeds of the
prickly pear cactus. Other plants identified from the samples were onion, persimmon, hackberry, sotol, lechuguilla, and walnut.
Other studies of Hinds Cave (41VV456) coprolites include analyses by
Stock (1983) and Reinhard, Jones, and Barros (1989). Stock (1983) analyzed the
macroremains of 55 coprolite specimens from two different areas of occupation
at Hinds Cave. Twenty-six coprolites with an average date of 5,286 B.C. and 29
specimens with an average date of 6,280 B.C. were analyzed for comparison
with those in Williams-Dean’s study and to support generalizations about diet
change and subsistence of the Hinds Cave occupants. Stock’s analysis also
showed that prickly pear was the main dietary item; other significant dietary
items were onions, persimmons, walnuts, fish, and rodents.
Stock (1983) conducted extensive statistical comparisons (analysis of variance and Wilcoxon test) between the Hinds Cave coprolites as represented in her
study and the chronologically later samples analyzed by Williams-Dean (1978).
She found that the incidence of fiber decreased as the number of species
increased. Cacti and succulents remained important in the diet at all time
periods, but a trend toward increase in the amount of constituents--particularly
fauna, rodent, and rodent hair--was observed. Animal protein and fish were
observed--but not in abundance--in the earlier time periods; bird remains were
observed only in the later period.
Pollen remains from Hinds Cave coprolites were studied by Williams-Dean
(1978) who noted a variety of pollen types in the coprolites, including sotol,
agave, cenizo, cactus, and prickly pear.

SoboHk~D&tChange

121

In the recent study of 25 coprolite samples conducted by Reinhard, Jones,
and Barros (1989), parasites, pollen, and macroremains were analyzed. The
samples were excavated from levels dating between about 2,500 and 3,680 B.C.,
(slightly later than those analyzed by Williams-Dean) and contained a variety of
economic pollen types, including grass pollen aggregates (suggesting the eating
of anthers), agave, sotol, hackberry, and Lycium. Opuntia seeds and fiber were
major constituents, and bone was observed in 64 percent of the samples.
Only about 25 percent of the more-than-1,000 coprolites excavated from
Hinds Cave (Shafer and Bryant 1977) have been analyzed; the remaining specimens are being held in reserve for future analysts when new methods and
proceedures may yield more information. The reservation of coprolite samples
is especially important, since substantial numbers of coprolites from Lower
Pecos sites already have been lost, discarded by previous excavators as unimportant (Bryant 1987)
Macroremains (Fry n.d.) and pollen content of 47 coprolites recovered from
Frightful Cave in Coahuila, Mexico (Bryant 1975) have been analyzed. These
samples were divided into three groups; 15 samples date from 7,500 to 5,000
B.C., 16 samples date from 5,000 to 2,000 B.C., and 16 samples date from 2,000
B.C. to A.D. 300. Bryant (1975) analyzed the diet of the Frightful Cave occupants, observing that in all of the time periods they were eating flowers or
inflorescences. Opuntia pollen was very important in the early levels, as well as
Leucaena and Umbelliferae pollen. Other items became important in the diet,
but Opuntia pollen was not one of them. Bryant (1975) proposed from these data
that the change in Opuntia pollen usage resulted mainly from cultural change
rather than from degree of availability in the environment. Ingestion of other
parts of Opuntia (prickly pear) did not drop off; it remained a steady, stable
dietary item (Fry n.d.). Animal hair also was present in all of the macroremains
(Fry n.d.), indicating that mammals remained an important dietary item.
Forty-three coprolites (Bryant 1969, 1974b) excavated from various levels
of Conejo Shelter (41VV162) and dated from 500 B.C. to A.D. 800, are the
youngest samples outside of the Baker Cave study. They indicated that the
inhabitants of Conejo shelter were mainly eating a large variety of flowers and
inflourescences, including yucca, agave, sotol, prickly pear, pincushion cactus,
persimmon, gilia, leadtree, and mesquite. The plant macroremains (fiber and
seeds) from 47 coprolites recovered from Frightful Cave in Coahuila, Mexico,
indicated that Opuntia was still a main staple in the diet, and succulent fibers
such as sotol and agave were also prevalent. The animal macroremains reflected
the ingestion mainly of rodents but also some fish, lizards, and grasshoppers.
The remains of mammals were observed in 23 percent of the samples--fewer
than in the Hinds Cave studies (Williams-Dean 1978, Stock 1983).
Riskind’s (1970) analysis of the pollen spectra from 11 coprolites from
Parida Cave (41VV187)--all excavated from test pit 4 and representing many
levels of occupation--identified the economic pollen types agave, pincushion
cactus, yucca, grass, and mormon tea. The data from the Parida Cave coprolites

122

Texas Archeological Society

(Riskind 1970) are not included in this analysis, since the samples represent all
levels of the cave matrix and have not been dated.
CONCLUSIONS
From the analysis of a variety of coprolites representing a wide time range
in the Lower Pecos Region, prickly pear was found to be a main dietary staple.
Evidence of prickly pear usage; fiber, seeds, spines, calcium oxylate crystals,
and glochids, shows up in all of the coprolite studies. Other prominent dietary
items include sotol, agave, and yucca fiber, which were used consistently in the
Lower Pecos diet, and possibly during all seasons, but they may have been
winter staples (Brown 1988).
The other dietary items observed in the coprolites varied in cosistency and
variety. Rodent remains were observed with varying frequencies in all of the
coprolites. The highest amount and variety of rodents in the diet was at Hinds
Cave from 6,280 to 4,000 B.C.. Other coprolites studied indicate rodent usage,
although in lower frequencies and with less variety. Instead of dietary change
through time, the differences in rodent frequencies may indicate a difference in
the distribution of rodent species through time. This difference may also indicate
that larger game made up most of the animal protein during other time periods.
Since protein from meat sources is entirely digested in the system and meat from
larger game is usually removed from the bones before eating, no remains of
larger animals would be seen in the coprolite material. For this reason, the
importance of their meat protein to the diet cannot be estimated.
Together with the rodent remains, there apparently was an increase in
faunal diversity, mainly bird and fish, through time. The Baker Cave coprolites
had the highest incidence of fish and bird remains in the Lower Pecos Region.
No bird remains were observed in the early copro!ite samples, and fish were
only observed at low frequencies.
Flower and inflorescence ingestion has also been observed in all time
periods of the Lower Pecos. Through time, however, there tends to have been an
increase in the diversity of flowers ingested, although this probably reflects
seasonal differences. The mustard family, sagebrush, leadtree, and gilia are
some of the new pollen types added toward the end of the Lower Pecos occupation. Grass pollen was observed in all of the coprolite studies, suggesting that
their inflorescences and seeds were also a staple.
These differences through time and differences in the several coprolite
studies may merely reflect seasonality. This is evident in the economic pollen
assemblage at Conejo shelter, which has been tentatively designated a springearly summer occupation. The pollens in these samples represent a large variety
of plants. More plants bloom in the spring and summer months, and if flowers
were a dietary item, more pollen types would be found in samples that were
deposited during the spring and summer.

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

123

There were fewer economic pollen types at Baker Cave than at Conejo
shelter. Since Baker Cave is postulated as a late summer-fall occupation (Sob:
olik 1988) when fewer plants bloom, less pollen variety would be expected in
the coprolite samples. The economic pollen types observed, however, may
indicate that new flower or inflorescence types were being ingested. The Baker
Cave coprolites may also be the only ones analyzed that reflect a late summerfall occupation, so the different pollen types observed in the samples reflect only
seasonality and not the addition of a wider variety of species.
Turpin (1984, 1986) and Shafer (written communication) have indicated
that the Late Prehistoric time period differed from the Archaic in the Lower
Pecos Region, and that there may have been great social mobility and unrest as
populations intruded from the north and west. The bow and arrow replaced the
atlatl, the art stlye changed, the earlier pictograph styles were replaced by a
different red monochrome style, and there was a shift in burials and living sites
during this time period from the rockshelters to the uplands (Turpin 1984, 1986).
A change in the diet of the Lower Pecos Region, as reflected in the most recent
coprolites, may merely reflect this cultural change.
Diet change in the Lower Pecos Region may have several explanations. The
differences among the coprolite studies may actually indicate change through
time. Other explanations include seasonality differences, differences in species
distribution through time, or changes in cultural practices and preferences.
Overall, the lower Pecos diet, as reflected by coprolites, has not changed
drastically but has maintained a stable economic subsistence that has supported
a population in the region for more than 9,000 years. The staples of the diet-items that were probably eaten year round--were prickly pear pads and yucca,
sotol, and agave fiber and tissue. An increase in the variety of the diet, however,
has been observed and is represented by a larger amount of fish and birds and an
increase in the variety of flower types ingested.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Kenneth M. Brown and Harry J. Shafer for information pertaining to
the Lower Pecos Region, and Kenneth M. Brown for providing the excellent
map of Baker Cave. Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr., D. Gentry Steele, and Harry J.
Shafer also provided interesting discussions and ideas.
REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, R. K.
1970
Archeological Investigations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project No. 19, Austin.
1974

The Archaeology of Conejo Shelter: A Study of Cultural Stability at an
Archaic Rockshelter Site in Southwestern Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthhropology, The University of Texas, Austin.

124

Texas Archeological Society

Benninghoff, W. S.
Use of Trisodium Phosphate with Herbarium Material and Microfossils in
1974
Peat. Science 183:1206-1207.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Brown, K. M.
n.d.
The 1984 Season at Baker Cave. Manuscript on file at the Anthropology
Library, Texas A&M University.
1986

Prehistoric Economics at Baker Cave: Some Thoughts on Optimal Rummaging. Paper presented in the symposium Recent Advances in Texas
Archeology. Annual meeting of the Archeological Institute of America, S an
Antonio, Texas.

1988

Some Annoted Excerpts from Alonso De Leon’s History of Nuevo Leon. La
Tierra !5(2):5-20.

Bryant, V. M., Jr.
1969
Late Full-Glacial and Post-Glacial Pollen Analysis of Texas Sediments.
Unpublished PhD. dissertation, Department of Botany, The University of
Texas, Austin.
1974a

The Role of Coprolite Analysis in Archeology. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 45:1-28.

1974b

Prehistoric Diet in Southwest Texas: The Coprolite Evidence. American
Antiquity 39(3):407-420.

1975

Pollen as an Indicator of Prehistoric Diets in Coahuila, Mexico. Bulletin of
the Texas ArcheologicaI Society 46:87-106.

1987

Pollen Grains: The Tiniest Clues in Archaeology. Environment Southwest
519:10-13, San Diego Society of Natural History.

Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of
the Pollen Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American
Sediments, Bryant and Holloway (eds.). American Association Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas.
Callen, E. O., and T. W. M. Cameron
1960
A Prehistoric Diet Revealed in Coprolites. The New Scientist 8(190):35-40.
Chadderdon, M. F.
1983
Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas: The 1976 Excavations. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special
Report 13.
Dering, J. P.
Pollen and Plant Macrofossil Vegetation Record Recovered from Hinds
1979
Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Unpublished M. S. Thesis, Department of
Anthhropology, Texas A&M University.

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

125

Douglas, C. L.
1970
Analysis of the Faunal Remains. In Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde
County, Texas, Bulletin of the Texas Memorial Museum No. 16, The University of Texas at Austin.
Fry, G.F.
1985

n.d.

Analysis of Fecal Material. In The Analysis of Prehistoric Diets. Academic
Press, New York.
Analysis of Human Coprolites from Frightful Cave. in Contributions to
Coahuila Prehistory, (R. C. Carlisle., Ed.) Ethnology Monographs
Series (n.d.).

Greer, J. W.
1968
Excavations at Baker Cave in Central Val Verde County, Texas. Notes on
file at Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Harshberger, J. W.
1896
The Purpose of Ethnobotany. American Antiquarian 17(2.)
Hester, T. R.
1983
Late Paleo-Indian Occupations at Baker Cave, Southwestern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 53:101-119.
1986

Baker Cave: A Rich Archaeological Record. In Ancient Texans: Rock Art
and Lifeways Along the Lower Pecos. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.

Kapp, R. O.
How to Know Pollen and Spores. William C. Brown Company, Dubuque.
1969
Lord, K. J.
1984

The Zooarchaeology of Hinds Cave (41VV 456). Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Loud, L. L., and M. R. Harrington
1929
Lovelock Cave. University of California Publications in America Archeology and Ethnology 25(1).
Martin, A. C., and W. D. Barkley
1973
Seed Identification Mannual. (Second edition.) University of California
Press, Berkley.
Millspaugh, C. F.
1974
American Medicinal Plants. Dover Publications, New York.
Reinhard, K. J., J. G. Jones, and R. P. Barros
1989
Bioculture Overview of the Lower Pecos Region of Texas. Health and
Disease in the Prehistoric Southwest IL (Stan Rine and R. Ted Steinbock,
Editors) Maxwell Museum, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque. In
press.

126

Texas Archeological Society

Riskind, D. H.
1970
Pollen Analysis of Human Coprolites from Parida Cave. In Archaeological
Investigations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project 19. Austin.
Shafer, H. J.
1981
The Adaptive Technology of the Prehistoric Inhabitants of Southwest Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 26:129-138.
1986

Ancient Texans: Rock Art and Lifeways Along the Lower Pecos. Texas
Monthly Press, Austin.

Shafer, H. J., and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
Archaeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde County,
1977
Texas. Annual Report to the National Science Foundation 1-66.
Smith, G. E., and F. W. Jones
1910
Archeological Survey of Nubia 1907-1908. Cairo.
Sobolik, K. D.
1988
The Prehistoric Diet and Subsistence of the Lower Pecos Region, as Reflected in Coprolites from Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Unpublished M.A. thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University.
1989

The Importance of Pollen Concentration Values from Coprolites: An Analysis of Southwest Texas Samples. Palynology 12:201-214.

Stevenson, M. C.
1915

Ethnobotany of the Zuni Indians. Thirtieth Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology.

Stock, J. A.
The Prehistoric Diet of Hinds Cave (41VV456), Val Verde County, Texas:
1983
The Coprolite Evidence. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University.
Turpin, S. A.
1984
The Red Monochrome Style Pictographs of the Lower Pecos River Region,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55:123-144.
1986

The Red Monochrome Style and Later Pictographs: The Art of Newcomers
to the Lower Pecos. In Ancient Texans: Rock Art and Lifeways Along the
Lower Pecos, Harry J. Shafer (Ed.). Texas Monthly Press, Austin.

Van Cleave, H. J., and J. A. Ross
1947
A Method for Reclaiming Dried Zoological Specimens. Science 105.
Vestal, P. A.
Ethnobotany of the Ramah Navaho. Papers of the Peabody Museum of
1952
American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, 40(4).

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

127

Whiting, A. F.
1939
Ethnobotany of the Hopi. Museum of Northern Arizona Bulletin 15.
Williams-Dean, G. J.
1978
Ethnobotany and Cultural Ecology of Prehistoric Man in Southwest Texas.
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M
University.
Word, J. H., and C. L. Douglas
Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
1970
Memorial Museum 16.
Young, B. H.
The Prehistoric Men of Kentucky. Filson Club Publications 25. Louisville,
1910
Kentucky.

129

A Preliminary Report on Archeological Resources
in Southern Culberson County in the Vicinity of
Van Horn, Texas
John A. Hedrick
ABSTRACT
This paper reports results of an ongoing survey of sites in six study areas
in southern Culberson County, Texas. The region appears to have been occupied from the Paleo-Indian period through Late Prehistoric times.
INTRODUCTION

The locus of this study of archeological resources in the region around Van
Horn, in southern Culberson County, Texas is a 3,500-km2 area comprising six
study areas. The study focuses on (1) surveying and recording sites and (2)
cataloging private projectile point collections, particularly those with known
proveniences. In conjunction with documenting the collection of Harold O.
(Hock) Haynes, both Haynes and the late R. K. Wylie greatly furthered the
survey by securing access to private property and assisting in recording the
sites--described in this report from which the projectile points were collected.
THE AREA

The 3,500-km2 region (Figure 1) encompasses Salt Flat, Michigan Flat,
Lobo Valley, and adjacent mountain ranges of southern Culberson County,
southeastern Hudspeth County and western Jeff Davis County. The area is part
of a broad corridor of classic basin and range topography that extends from the
Guadalupe Mountains and Salt Basin in the north to the Davis Mountains in the
south. It is bordered on the west by the Sierra Diablo, Baylor, Beach, Carrizo,
and Van Horn mountains, and on the east by the southern Delaware, Apache,
and northern Davis mountains. The Wylie and Chispa mountains divide the
southern basin into the Lobo Valley and Michigan Flat. Elevations range
between 1,110 meters (3,700 feet) at Salt Flat and more than 1,800 meters
(6,000 feet) in the Sierra Diablo and Davis Mountains.
The topography is typical of the Trans-Pecos region, varying from rugged
mountains with deep canyons, flat-topped mesas, alluvial fans, slopes, and
terraces to volcanic cones and lava flows. In the survey area are alluvial valleys,
large dune fields, flatlands, and alkaline flats.
Water resources include large draws that carry runoff from the mountains
into the basin and eventually into Salt Flat to the north. There are also many
arroyos, springs, seeps, and tinajas (bedrock pools) in the hills and mountains,
and playas in the flatlands.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (for 1988)

130

Texas Archeological Society

’.::::::~!!:’

10

km

10

N

;TUDY

~EACH

®VAN HORN

"%

i
I

. . i ;~~T~S. "%..4
""" ....

Figure 1. Map of parts of Culberson, Hudspeth, and Jeff Davis counties showing the
extent of the survey area.

Hedrick-- Culberson County

131

The basin and mountains contain enormous quantities of lithic resources. In
addition to very fine grades of chert, these resources include limestone, sandstone, schist, shale, rhyolite, felsite, conglomerate (puddingstone), basalt, vesicular basalt, quartz, quartzite, talc, soapstone, agate, jasper, chalcedony, petrified wood, and small obsidian nodules.
To the north are the salt deposits of the Salt Basin and Salt Flat (Henry and
Price 1986; Price et al. 1986).
The basin is part of the north-central Chihuahuan Desert and has the flora
and fauna usually associated with the district. Annual average precipitation is
239 mm, about half of which falls as thunderstorms during July, August, and
September (Foster and Kelley 1987:1).
Archeological reports on the region are few; the first is by Joe Ben Wheat in
Lehmer’s (1960:122) A Review of Trans-Pecos Texas Archeology. Other investigations have been reported by Hedrick (1968, 1975, 1986), and additional
work in the region has been in conjunction with construction of a floodwater
diversion channel between Three-Mile and Sulphur draws (Skinner and Bousman
1973, Banks 1975, Gerald 1978, Cliff and Fifield 1980, Foster and Kelley 1987).
The peripheral areas of the study region, particularly those in the Guadalupe
Mountains and Guadalupe Mountains National Park, have been studied more
thoroughly (Clark 1974, Katz and Katz 1974, Phelps 1974, Katz, P. 1978,
Boisvert 1980, Katz and Lukowski 1981, Katz, S. 1983).
THE SURVEY
The focus of the survey is toward establishing an overview of the kinds of
sites that can be expected in the region. It is hoped that this phase will be
followed by intensive, controlled follow-up surveys of selected areas and recording of all sites.
Site data have been recorded on specifically designed survey forms, with
close attention to key informational categories such as site and feature description, cultural material density and description, land forms, soil types, vegetation,
and water resources. Sites were plotted on U. S. Geological Survey 15-minute
quadrangles. Surface collections were selective, with emphasis on lithic and
diagnostic samples. Most, but not all, sites were photographed. Trinomial site
numbers have been assigned by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
No subsurface testing or excavation has been undertaken.
For the purposes of this survey, four ecological zones have been defined:
1. Flatlands and dune areas, with amaranth, beargrass, creosote, dock,
flowers, grasses, mesquite, mormon tea, sage, salt bush, snakeweed, and yucca.
2. Hills and slopes, with agave, cholla, ocotillo, prickly pear, sotol, and
Yucca baccata.
3. Canyons and watercourses, with allthorn, catclaw, desert willow, and
sumac.
4. Mountains, with buckeye, juniper, and scrub oak.

132

Texas ArcheoIogical Society
The six study areas in the region are:
Study Area 1---The Plateau complex (Figure 3).
Study Area 2---Central and southern Wild Horse Draw (Figure 4).
Study Area 3 ,,ran Horn Mountains Area 1 (Figure 4).
Study Area 4--Van Horn Mountains Area 2 (Figure 4).
Study Area 5---Carrizo Mountains Area 1 (Figure 5).
Study Area 6---Carrizo Mountains Area 2 (Figure 5).
SURVEY RESULTS

The Sites
One hundred twenty-seven sites are reported here (Table 1). Sixteen had
been reported previously (Hedrick 1975), and three already had been assigned
site numbers by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. A tabulation of
data for all sites is presented in the Appendix.
Base Camps
Base camps are the second largest category of sites. They are extensive
areas of cultural debris and associated features that may include multiple,
separate, or overlapping rock hearths, burned rock scatters, fire-blackened sand,
lithic work areas, and, occasionally, ring middens. Moderately dense to very
dense cultural debris at these sites consists of chipped stone debitage, chipped
stone tools, and ground stone tools. Artifact assemblages include, in addition to
very few ceramics, projectile points, scrapers, choppers, knives, bifaces, retouched and utilized flakes, cores, manos, and metates in all stages of manufacture and use. Base camps appear to be multiuse sites that may have been either
seasonally or continuously occupied, and seem to be associated with hunting,
food processing, and tool manufacture.
Twenty-three base camps were recorded in the survey area. All but two are
in the Plateau Complex Study Area (Table 1), but their absence cannot be
assumed in other areas. The average area of the sites is 18,930 m2; all are near
water resources (Table 2).
Campsites
The largest category of sites recorded is campsites. Campsites are similar to
base camps but they are smaller and have a lower density of cultural debris.
Features may include multiple--sometimes overlapping--hearths, scattered
burned rock, and areas of fire-blackened sand areas. Cultural material is scattered throughout the site in light-to-moderate density but may be concentrated
around hearths. Artifact assemblages are similar to those at base camps and
include, in addition to ceramics, projectile points, scrapers, choppers, knives,
bifaces, retouched and utilized flakes, cores, manos, and metates in all stages of
manufacture and use. Campsites appear to be hunting, food processing, and tool
manufacture sites.

Hedrick-- Culberson County

2:
L)
0
0

<
.,if,

i

I11~1

Ill~l

I ~~-~

I ~-’~

I "~"

t

I

I

0
r~

80
<

r..)
o9

o

133

Texas Archeological Society

134

Table 2.

Distribution of Base Camps in Relation to Water
Resources

(PC, Plateau Complex; C/SWHD, Central and Southern Wild Horse
Draw; VHM-1, Van Horn Mountains Area 1.).
Study Area
C/SWHD

Water Resource
PC
Draw or Creek
Draw/Creek Edge
0.5 km or Less
0.6 to 1.5 km
More than 1.5 km
Arroyo

VHM-1

10
2
7
1
1

Playa
Fifty-nine campsites, with average areas of 4,650 mz were recorded in the
survey area. Fifty-five are near draws, arroyos, or playas (Table 3).
Rockshelters
Eighteen rockshelters were recorded in the survey area, two of which
contained stratified cultural material. All but one of the remaining sixteen had
talus slope midden or ground level midden deposits. All of the shelters are near
creeks, draws, springs, seeps, or tinajas.

Quarries
Eight quarries were recorded. The Purple-Tan Chert quarry (41CU449) and
Table 3.

Distribution of Campsites in Relation to Water
Resources

(PC, Plateau Complex; C/SWHD, Central and Southern Wild Horse Draw;
VHM-1, Van Horn Mountains Area 1; CM-1, Carrizo Mountains, Area 1).
Water Resource
PC
Draw or Creek
Draw/Creek Edge
0.5 km or less
0.6 to 1.5 km
More than 1.5 km
Arroyo
Playa

12
14
7
2
1
2

Study Area
C/SWHD
VHM-1

2
1
1

CM-1

2
5

5

1

Hedrickl Culberson County

135

the white chert quarries (41CU349, CU372, and CU379) have been reported by
Hedrick (1975:58-60; 1986:17).
The Purple-Tan Chert quarry (41CU449) covers about 390,000 mz on the
ridge and slopes of a range of Cretaceous limestone hills in the eastern part of
the Plateau Complex. The chert, exposed in nodules, is extremely dense, and
has a fine, glossy texture. It produces an excellent concoidal fracture andthin,
translucent flakes. Predominant colors are grayish orange (10YR7/4), very pale
orange (10YR8/2), grayish red-purple (5RP4/2). pale red (5R6/2) and pinkish
gray (5YR8/1) (Rock Color Chart Committee 1984). The entire area of the
quarry is densely covered with evidence of removal from matrix, testing, and
trimming of the chert.
Three white chert quarries (41CU349, CU372, and CU379) are on ridges
and slopes of three separate cretaceous limestone hills in the Plateau Complex
Study Area. The sites range in size between 4,800 and 70,000 mz. Colors range
between white (N9) and medium light gray (N6)--some have fossil inclusions-and pinkish gray (5YR8/1) (Rock Color Chart Committee 1984). The
chert is coarse to fine grained and has good conchoidal fracture. The three sites
are densely covered with debris from testing and preparation of material.
The Van Horn Mountain quarry (41CU389) is on a mesa in Study Area 4,
the Van Horn Mountains, Area 2. The material is scattered over an area of about
9,000 mz and consists of broken nodules that have eroded out of the limestone
cap. The raw material is spotted and/or marbled combinations of moderate
red(5R5/4) to grayish red (5R4/2) and very pale orange (10YRS/2) (Rock Color
Chart Committee 1984). It has a medium- to fine-grained, matte texture and
excellent conchoidal fracture. Debris from testing and preparation of material is
scattered over the area.
Pebbles and boulders of a felsite quarry (41 HZ397) are scattered among the
pediment gravels in Study Area 6, Carrizo Mountains, Area 2. The coarse- to
fine-grained material is extremely hard and dense. Colors are dark reddish
brown (10YR3/4), dark red (5R3/4), moderate red (5R5/4), and grayish red
(5YR4/1 and 5R4/2). Activity areas are easily recognized by the remnants of
pebbles and boulders that have been broken in the initial stages of tool
manufacture.
Two more felsite quarries (41CU441 and CU443) are on terraces 300
meters and 500 meters east of 41HZ397. The materials and preparation areas
are like those at site 41HZ397.
Tumbled fragments of agate, jasper, and chalcedony are found in the gravels, which are identical to those at the three felsite quarries.
An additional source for raw material in the north end of the Wylie
Mountains has been described by Joe Ben Wheat (personal communication
1988), and by Garry and Sally Elder (personal communication 1987). The
precise location has not been recorded because of lack of access to the property,
but a type site, 41CU424, has been identified about 3,200 meters from the area
pointed out by Wheat and the Elders. About 60 to 75 percent of the lithics on the

136

Texas Archeological Society

site are of the distinctive agate that looks like butterscotch taffy. Colors vary
from light brown (5YR5/6) and dark yellowish brown (10YR6/6) to moderate
brown (5YR4/4) (Rock Color Chart Committee 1984). This agate is found
throughout the basin.
Ring Middens
Five ring midden sites were recorded. Greer (1968:127) defines a ring
midden as a "doughnut-shaped structure appearing as a ring of mounded hearthstones, ash, or a combination of these surrounding a depression of almost rockfree gray ash." Creel (1981:175) reported that 170 such features in the Eagle
Mountains were 8 to 10 meters in diameter with rings 2 to 3 meters wide, and
were only rarely more than 30 cm high.
Site 41CU416 has five ring midden features, apparently partially buried,
ranging between 5 and 11 meters in diameter with central depressions ranging
between 3 and 8 meters in diameter; heights vary from 10 to 20 cm. The
middens are on the flatlands below and on a saddle in the limestone hills west of
the Apache Mountains in the Plateau Complex Study Area. Associated cultural
debris is light and scattered and consists, in addition to a single mano, of chips
and flakes.
Site 41HZ396 has two ring middens and one piled rock hearth. The
middens have outside diameters of 7 and 8 meters and central depression
diameters of 2.8 and 3.5 meters; heights are 10 to 20 cm. Diameter of the hearth
is 1.5 meters. The partially buried site is on a gravel terrace in the Carrizo
Mountains, Area 1. Associated cultural material consists of chips and flakes.
Rock Circle
Two rock circle sites were recorded. Site 41CU378 is on top of and on
ledges near the top of a limestone hill east of Michigan Draw in the Plateau
Complex Study Area. The site has 18 rock circle features 1.2 to 3 meters in
diameter (Figure 2). The location provides an unobstructed view for at least 60
km (about 40 miles) in all directions. There appear to be no interior features or
stratigraphy, and the purpose of the circles is unknown. Mallouf visited the site
in 1985 and determined that these features are not the same as the circular stone
enclosures of the Cielo complex (Mallouf 1985:Figure 58). Similar rock circles
are found in the Jornada del Muerto of southern New Mexico and may be
observation posts of the historic Apache Indians (Jay Sharp, personal communication 1988). The site is on the same hill as 41CU349, one of the white chert
quarries.
Site 41CU384 is on a small hill of volcanic tuff in the southern Wild Horse
Draw area of the Lobo Valley. The four rock circle features, lying directly on
bed rock, are 3 to 5 meters in diameter. The circles are similar in construction to those at 41CU378 and also afford an unobstructed view in all directions.

Hedrickm Culberson County

137

Figure 2. Photograph of a rock circle feature overlooking Michigan Flat at site 41CU378.
Rock Art

Two rock art sites were recorded. Site 41CU446 is on sandstone boulders in
a canyon of the Van Horn Mountains. The petroglyphs are mainly a series of
random straight and wavy lines. Identifiable elements are a sunburst, several
circles, and one handprint.
The second rock art site (41CU259) was recorded originally by Jackson
(1938). It is on conglomerate sandstone boulders near a small range of hills in
the eastern part of the Plateau Complex Study Area. The petroglyphs consist of
straight and wavy lines, and circles.
Lithic Concentrations and Scatters
Lithic concentrations and scatters are defined in this report as areas of
chipped stone debris and chipped stone tools that have no discernible associated
features. Lithic concentrations have moderate to heavy density; scatters have
light to moderate density. Cultural materials may include cores, flakes, chips,
tools, and projectile points. Five of these sites were recorded, averaging 2,500
mz in size.

138

Texas Archeological Society
Isolated Hearths

Three isolated hearths--single hearths with or without associated cultural
material--were recorded. Cultural material, which, when present, is of light to
moderate density and scattered, may include chipped stone debris and artifacts.
These hearths apparently are single or short-term occupation areas that were
used for food preparation, for keeping warm, or in hunting and gathering
activities.
Cairns
The only cairn site, 41CU442, comprises five distinct piles of large rocks on
a gradual slope below the terrace between the felsite quarries, 41CU441 and
CU443. The most concentrated pile of rocks measures about 80 by 200 cm and
is 30 to 40 cm high. The remaining four are scattered in more or less circular
patterns 1.5 to 3 meters in diameter. These features are similar to a cache
reported by Betancourt and Ralph (1981b:105, 106, Figure 19) on a high saddle
in the Hueco Mountains.
Isolated Finds

The only isolated find (a single artifact with no associated features or
evidence of activity) of the survey, recorded as site 41CU373, is a Folsom point
fragment. The point, which has a broken base, measures 30 mm long and 23 mm
wide; it is made from butterscotch agate. Three tiny flakes of different materials, possibly unrelated to the point, were nearby.
Study Areas

Study Area lmPlateau Complex
Study Area 1--Plateau Complex is the best known of the study areas. It has
been the focus of attention for many years (Hedrick 1968, 1975, 1986), and
about 80 percent of it has been surveyed. The area lies between the eastern
slopes of the Wylie Mountains and the western and southern slopes of the
Apache Mountains (Figure 3). Water resources are Michigan Draw, China
Draw, Plateau Draw, and the northern part of Wild Horse Draw. A chain of
mesquite-stabilized, aeolian dune fields on packed sand extends northward from
the southern end of Michigan Draw, near its intersection with Bunton Draw, and
then northwestward across the basin to North Wild Horse Draw. The dune field
is moderately covered with mesquite and yucca of Zone A, and the dune fields
on the eastern side of Michigan Draw have been partially destroyed by the
introduction of watermelon and cotton fields. A series of limestone hills to the
west of the Apache Mountains have a moderate cover of Zone B vegetation-sotol, agave, prickly pear, cholla, and ocotillo.
The Plateau complex includes 69 sites; 38 (55 percent) are campsites, and
21 (30 percent) are base camps. Four of the quarries--the Purple-Tan chert

Hedrick~ Culberson County

139

VAN HORN

N

\.

;

.j"

Draw ~."\

China

0

I

O

Figure 3.
Complex.

i

5 miles
I

I
5 kilometers

Map of part of Culberson County, showing Study Area 1--The Plateau

quarry (41CU449) and the white chert quarries (41CU349, CU372, CU379)-are also in the complex. The other six sites are a lithic scatter, a ring midden, an
isolated hearth, a rock circle, a rock art display, and an isolated find. Most of the
sites are eroded and are covered and uncovered depending on climatic conditions. This covering and uncovering has caused a mixing of components;
however, the cultural remains at several of the sites have not been subjected to
this erosion-caused blending.

140

Texas Archeological Society

Campsites and Base Camps
Campsite and base camp features include many multiple--sometimes overlapping--hearths, scattered burned rock, and areas of fire-blackened sand.
Density of cultural debris is moderate in general and moderate to heavy around
hearths.
Artifacts include chips, flakes, utilized flakes, retouched flakes, choppers,
hammerstones, knives, scrapers, bifaces, cores, gravers, mano and metate fragments, and ceramics. Dart points and arrowpoints are complete, broken, and in
all stages of manufacture. Most of the finer artifacts such as projectile points,
chips, and flakes were made of raw material from the Purple-Tan and white
chert quarries. Many larger artifacts such as choppers, large knives, and hammerstones were made of stone from the felsite quarry across the basin in Study
Area 6, the Carrizo Mountains, Area 2.
Site 41CU348 is a base camp measuring 120 by 60 meters on a mesquitestabilized dune terrace east of Michigan Draw. Features include rock hearths 50
to 80 cm in diameter, burned sand areas, and a ring midden of burned limestone
7 meters in diameter and 30 to 40 cm high. The rocks in the midden apparently
were brought in from the limestone hills about 500 meters to the east. Cultural
materials include chipped stone tools and debris. Fragments of ground stone
tools were also noted. The site is on the edge of a draw, 500 meters from
a quarry.
Site 41CU361 is a base camp measuring 275 by 80 meters on an isolated
dune terrace on the edge of Michigan Draw. The terrace is apparently eroded
and has become isolated from the other dune ridges. Below the mesquitestabilized dunes is a hard-packed sand deposit that apparently was the original
formation of the terraces along the draw.
Features include many isolated and overlapping hearths 50 to 80 cm in
diameter in strata stair-stepped from the erosion of the dunes, and several areas
of concentrated lithic debris may be work areas. Cultural debris is dense and
includes chipped stone tools and debris and ground stone tool fragments.
Another base camp (41CU370), measuring 150 by 50 meters, is also on the
dune terrace on the edge of Michigan Draw. The site slopes from east to west
providing protection from the extensive erosion and sand movement that occur
on most of the dune sand sites. Features include rock hearths, burned rock
scatters, and a ring midden 7 to 8 meters in diameter. Cultural debris is dense
and, in some areas, is concentrated around the hearths.
Base camp 41CU444, measuring 200 by 100 meters, is on a sand-covered
limestone hill and saddle about 2 km northeast of Plateau Draw. Features
include rock hearths, burned rock scatters, lithic debris, a ring midden 7 meters
in diameter, and an 80-by-150-cm rock caim. Cultural debris is dense.
Study Area 2---Central and Southern Wild Horse Draw
Spot surveys in Study Area 2--Central and Southern Wild Horse Draw
(Figure 4) have been conducted near the community of Lobo and in the area east

Hedrick-- Culberson County

141

of Van Horn. Wild Horse Draw drains the western slopes of the Chispa and
Wylie mountains and the eastern slopes of the Van Horn Mountains. The area is
a combination of bench terraces--some with low sand dunes--and flatlands,
and there is a small volcanic hill in the center of the area near Lobo. Large areas
of the Lobo Valley around Wild Horse Draw are under cultivation or are
abandoned fields. Vegetation in uncultivated areas includes creosote, mesquite,
and grasses characteristic of Zone A.
0

I

0

i l il i II i

5 miles

I

s kilometers

"’7

N

.*

/..

’
’:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:!::
"i:i:i:i:!:!:!::

MTNS.

@

i

~iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii~iiiiiiiiiM:.
. . . ~:;:~i~i~i~iiiiiiiiiiii~iiiiiiiiiii~..-..:.

"::~:::i:i::!:i:i..,:.:.::i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:!:i:i:i::-.
..... :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Figure 4. Map of parts of Culberson and Hudspeth Counties, showing Study Areas:
2-Central and Southern Wild Horse Draw, 3-Van Horn Mountains Area 1, and 4-Van
Horn Mountains Area 2.

142

Texas Archeological Society

The 12 sites in this study area consist of seven campsites, one base camp,
one lithic scatter, two isolated hearths, and one rock circle. Sites are on low
dune terraces and in eroded, exposed flatlands. The cultural debris, scattered in
all sites and ranging between light and moderate in density, consists of chips,
flakes, hammerstones, cores, and complete and fragmentary dart points and
arrowpoints. Mano and metate fragments were observed in the campsites and
base camp. Some moderate concentrations were found around hearths in the
base camp. Chipped stone tools are of material from a variety of sources, about
half of which are identifiable.
Campsites and base camp are smaller and their concentrations of cultural
materials are less dense than in sites in Study Area 1, the Plateau complex. The
remaining sites are small, scattered, and isolated along the draw.
Study Area 3mVan Horn Mountains Area 1
Study area 3--Van Horn Mountains Area 1 is in the western and northern
drainages of the Van Horn Mountains (Figure 4), an area that includes mountain
canyons, deep arroyos, alluvial and colluvial gravel ridges and terraces, and
mountain slopes. Vegetation zones vary from the agave and sotol of Zone B to
oak and sumac of Zone C.
At this time, only a few parts of Study Area 3--Van Horn Mountains, Area
1 have been surveyed. Eight sites have been recorded--five campsites, one base
camp, and two rockshelters. Cultural materials consist of chips, flakes, utilized
flakes, bifaces, complete and fragmentary projectile points, knives, scrapers,
choppers, cores, and core fragments. A predominance of heavy tools, i.e.,
choppers, knives, large scrapers, and large bifaces, primarily of felsite, apparently were made for food processing.
Lithic sources for the artifacts in Study Area 3--Van Horn Mountains Area
1 include felsite quarry materials, exotics such as chalcedony, agate, and jasper,
and materials from unknown sources. Purple-Tan, white, and butterscotch quarry
sources are represented, but much less frequently than in basin sites.
Study Area 4--Van Horn Mountains Area 2
Study Area 4--Van Horn Mountains, Area 2 (Figure 4) is on the upper
plateaus and mesa tops of the central part of the mountains. Vegetation is
primarily the agave, sotol, cholla, and prickly pear of Zone B with occasional
oak and juniper of Zone C.
From occasional brief surveys that have been conducted in this study area,
five sites---one rockshelter, one quarry, two lithic scatters, and one rock art
site-- have been recorded. The quarry (41CU389) and rock art site (41CU446)
have been described above. Lithic samples from all sites indicate a preponderance of felsite and the spotted material from quarry site 41CU389, but lesser
quantities of materials from other quarries are also present.
The rockshelter 41CU294, variously known as Lodge Cave, Lookout shelter, or Blue Finger shelter, is one of the sites that previously had been reported to

Hedrickm Culberson County

143

the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. It is in the conglomerate tuff
formation of the central part of the Van Horn Mountains. The shelter is 25
meters across at the opening, 7.5 meters deep, and 6 meters high at the drip line.
It has a large, steep, dark-colored talus-slope midden in front. The cultural
deposits at both sides of the interior have been vandalized, but the central part of
the shelter appears to be undisturbed. Fragments of cordage and two dart points
were recovered from the surface of the disturbed area, and a dart point was
recovered from the surface of the exterior talus midden.
Study Area 5--Carrizo Mountains Area I
Study Area 5--Carrizo Mountains, Area 1 (Figure 5) encompasses the
western slopes of the Beach Mountains, the basin between the Beach and
Carrizo mountains, and the eastern slopes of the Carrizos. Eroded sandstone
formations have formed hills, steep terraces, benches, high mesas, and deep
canyons. Hackberry and Carrizo creeks form canyons and eventually flow into
Three-Mile Draw. Vegetation is primarily of Zones C and D: agave, sotol,
prickly pear, cholla, ocotillo, oak, sumac, white thorn acacia, and stands of
juniper; mesquite, and yucca are also found.
Recorded sites are 15 rockshelters, 9 campsites, 4 ring middens, and 1 lithic
scatter. At least one shelter midden has evidence of stratigraphic deposits as
deep as 1.5 meters in eroded areas. Identifiable quarry resources are represented
fairly evenly among the lithic samples from all sites, and there are some exotics
and unknowns.
A rockshelter (41CU406) with interior cultural deposits is in a bench- or
ledge-forming fracture in a contact zone in layered sandstone on the western
slopes of the Beach Mountains. The shelter measures 40 meters across the
opening and is 6 to 12 meters deep. Occupational areas are under the southeastfacing overhang, and apparently undisturbed cultural debris is under the overhang, across the exterior, and down the talus slope.
There are a few very faint rock art elements on the back walls of the shelter.
Several red and yellow pictographs are in such poor condition that no elements
are discernible, but four white pictographs appear to be anthropomorphic and
zoomorphic figures.
Deer shelter (41CU408) is in a steep side canyon in the western Beach
Mountains. This overhang shelter was formed by erosion and weathering of the
Van Horn conglomerate sandstone formation. The overhang is 24 meters wide at
the opening, 4.5 meters deep, and 2.5 meters high. There are no stratified
cultural deposits, but three bedrock mortars are in the floor below the overhang,
and a few flakes and chips of cultural material are scattered about.
On the ceiling of the southwest-facing shelter is what appears to be a prepared charcoal-colored background measuring 3 by 4 meters on which a tannishwhite deer (Figure 6) is painted. The deer is 1.7 meters long and has a body
thickness of 46 cm.; the painting is in excellent condition, showing only slight
weathering. This figure conveys the sense of being early historic Indian in origin.

144

Texas Archeological Society

Sulphur Draw

iii

ii

i

iI

I

5~
I

5 kilometers

Figure 5. Map of parts of Culberson and Hudspeth counties, showing Study Area
5-Carrizo Mountains Area 1, and Study Area 6-Carrizo Mountains Area 2.

Study Area 6----Carrizo Mountains Area 2
Study Area 6---Carrizo Mountains, Area 2 (Figure 5) lies along Eagle Flat
Draw between the Carrizo and Van Horn Mountains. Coarse gravel-boulder
pediments form terraces cut by arroyos that expose the pediment gravel and
boulders. Fragments and nodules of exotics (agate, chalcedony, petrified wood,
and jasper) are abundant in the gravels, so the pediment gravel and boulders

Hedrickw Culberson County

145

Figure 6. Photograph of the deer pictograph at site 41CU408. The scale is 1 meter long.

could be the resource area for these materials. Vegetation is primarily Zone A
grassland with creosote and occasional mesquite, yucca, and ocotillo.
This study area is another that has received only superficial examination.
The three felsite quarries (41HZ398, CU441, and CU443) and one cairn
(41CU442), discussed earlier, are the only sites recorded.
Diagnostic Artifacts
Ceramics
Two hundred eighty-nine sherds were recorded from 55 (43 percent) of the
127 surveyed sites. The frequency ranges from a single sherd to a maximum of
39 sherds on a Plateau complex base camp. Ceramics represent a mixture of
cultural associations and are found throughout the region (Table 4). Because
most of the recorded sites are in the Plateau complex and Carrizo Mountains,
Area 1, it is not unexpected that most of the sherds are from those two areas.
Specifically, they are from the base camps and campsites of the Plateau complex
and the middens associated with shelters in the Carrizo Mountains, Area 1.
Ceramics represent varied origins, primarily the Jornada Branch of the
Mogollon culture and northern Mexico. They are apparently considerably less
dense in the Plateau complex and the Carrizo Mountains Study Areas than in the

146

Texas Archeological Society

Table 4.

Distribution of Ceramic Sherds by Study Area

(PC, Plateau Complex; C/SWHD, Central and Southern Wild Horse Draw;
VHM-1, Van Horn Mountains, Areal; CM-1, Carrizo Mountains, Area 1.).

Cultural Association/Ceramic Type

PC

SOUTHERN JORNADA MOGOLLON
E1 Paso Brown
66
(A.D. 400-1000)
E1 Paso Polychrome
13
(A.D. 1000-1350)
Chupadero Black on White
5
(A.D. 1150-1400)
NORTHERN JORNADA MOGOLLON
Jomada Brown
23
(A.D. 900-1200)
Three Rivers Red on Terra Cotta
(A.D. 900-1200)
MIMBRES
Mimbres Black on White
(A.D. 850-1150)
NORTHERN CHIHUAHUA, MEXICO
Polished tan, plain
2
Corrugated tan
11
Playas Red Incised
1
(A.D. 1060-1340)
Unknown
2
CENTRAL AND NORTHERN NEW MEXICO
Galisteo Black on White
(A.D. 1300-1400)
Black on Red glaze
MIDDLE PECOS
Middle Pecos Micaceous Brown
1
(A.D. 900-1000)
UNKNOWN
Brownware
22
Polished brown
4
TOTALS

150

Study Area
C/S VHM-1
VvT-ID

6

6

2

2

2

CM-1TOTAL

61

139

9

22

7

14

2

25

3

3

2

4

1
5

5
16
1

6

8

2

2

1

1
1

1

4

1
16

23
25

11

12

116

289

Hedrickm Culberson County

147

Guadalupe Mountains to the north ~helps 1974:136,147); this supports Mallouf’s
theory (1985:130) that "ceramics become more rare as one progresses southward."
Projectile Points

Ninety-one projectile points were recorded during the survey; 58 percent
are made of local quarry material (Table 5).
Projectile points that could be assigned to recognized types include 32
arrowpoints and 28 dart points (Table 6).
Many dart points and arrowpoints made of local material do not fit into any
established typology. They may be variants of recognized types or they may be
undescribed types peculiar to the Trans-Pecos or a part of it.
DISCUSSION

The study region, situated as it is in a natural basin and range corridor,
provides a north-south passageway from the Davis Mountains northward to the
Guadalupe Mountains and Salt Basin. The density of sites and cultural debris in
the region indicates that it was inhabited extensively through time; it is reasonable
to presume that migrating animal and human populations followed this corridor.
Establishment of northern Chihuahua desert-shrub communities began
around 8000 B.P. (Van Devender and Spaulding 1979). This provided a stable
and diverse plant community in the basin, hills, slopes, and mountains--a
substantial resource base for hunting and gathering. Features and artifacts
reflect these activities, as well as those of tool manufacture and repair.
Salt, extensively available cherts, felsites, and other lithic resources undoubtedly contributed to the attractiveness of the corridor, and uplifted, fractured, and eroded limestone and sandstone mountain and canyon formations
provided numerous shelters. Sandstone fragments were readily available as
raw materials for one-handed wedge manos and basin and slab metates
(Hedrick 1975).
Base camps, campsites, and shelters are situated near plant communities
and lithic and water resources. Cultural materials indicate occupation from
Archaic to Late Prehistoric times and therefore point to an efficient, successful
adaptation to a relatively stable environment.
Resources of the quarries in the region were used extensively through time
and appear in all forms of artifacts and in all parts of the area. There is evidence
of preference for specific resource materials for specific tool types, i.e., felsite
was used for heavier and larger tools; the finer cherts and exotics (agate, jasper,
and chalcedony) were used for projectile points and smaller tools. Projectile
points from the survey and private collections show this to be particularly true in
all Archaic through Late Prehistoric periods.
From the density of the debitage, tools, and projectile points recorded at
sites, it can be inferred that prehistoric populations occupied the area long
enough to locate and make extensive use of the enornous quantities of local
lithic resources.

148

Texas Archeological Society

e,l

’

0

c~

<1

’,D
L~

e-I

i

i

<1

t" 3

<l
m

’,D

<l

oo
t",,1

e,I

<l

i

!

I

I

i

i

i

i

~D

~D

<

<

I

i

o

~ o~o

Hedrickm Culberson County

149

Table 6.
Chronological Distribution of Projectile Points
According to the Eastern Pecos Chronology
Period
Late Prehistoric
ca. A.D. 1000-1500

Late Archaic
ca. 500 B.C. -A.D. 1000

Middle Archaic
3~-500 B.C.

Early Archaic
6500-3000 B.C.
Late Paleo-Indian
8000-6500 B.C,
SOURCE: Mallouf 1985

NO.

P0in~ Type and Reference

9
7
7
5
2
1
1

Livermore (Turner & Hester 1985:181)
Livermore variant (Hedrick 1986:115-127)
Toyah (Kelley 1957:46)
Fresno (Suhm & Jelks 1962:273, 274)
Foyle flakes Coster & Kelley 1987:36)1
Garza (Runkles & Dorchester 1987:94)
Bonham (Suhm & Jelks 1962:267-281)

4
4
4
3

Ensor (Dibble 1967:36, 37)
Ellis (Suhm & Jelks 1962:167, 168)
Paisano (Suhm & Jelks 1962:227, 228)
Palmillas (Suhm & Jelks 1962:229, 230)

5
3
1

Langtry (Turner & Hester 1985:114, 115)
Shumla (Dibble 1967:40, 41,
Marcos (Dibble 1967:38, 39)

1
1
1

Pandale (Suhm & Jelks 1962:231,232)
Nolan (Turner & Hester 1985:132)
Bulverde ~umer & Hester 1985:73)

1

F01s0m (Suhm & Jelks 1962:193, 194)

1Not included in Malloufs Eastern Pecos Chronology; see Foster and Kelley
1987:37.
Many Livermore and Toyah arrowpoints made of local material indicate
that this is a core area for Kelley’s (1957) Livermore focus. There also appears
to be interaction between prehistoric populations in the Late Prehistoric as
evidenced by the presence of Jornada and northern Mexican ceramics. However,
contact with the Jornada does not appear to have been in a settlement situation
but rather in forays or trade. There simply is not enough ceramic evidence to
indicate that the Jornada presence in the area was more than transient.
A large percentage of projectile points from the eastern Trans-Pecos, Big
Bend, and Lower Pecos areas in both the survey and private collections are made
of local materials. They provide the strongest affirmation of continuous occupation of the corridor from Paleo-Indian through Late Prehistoric times. A predominance of points of temporally diagnostic types made from local materials
indicates that the area was occupied more intensely from Middle Archaic through
the Late Prehistoric times and possibly into the early historic era. The highest
density of occupation appears to be in the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric
periods.

150

Texas Archeological Society

APPENDIX

1 Plateau Complex
2 Central & South
Wild Horse Draw

Key to Study Areas
3 Van Horn Mts Area 1
4 Van Horn Mts Area 2

5 Carrizo Mts Area 1
6 Carrizo Mts Area 2

Key to Ecological Zones
A Flatlands and/or dunes B Hills and/or slopes C Canyons and/or watercourses
D Mountains
Site
No.

Elevation
in Feet

Size
m2

Kind of Site

Study
Area

Ecological
Zone

Culberson County
41CU22
41CU259
41CU294
41CU334
41CU335
41CU336
41CU337
41CU338
41CU339
41CU340
41CU341
41CU342
41CU343
41CU344
41CU345
41 CU346
41CU347
41CU348
41CU349
41CU350
41CU351
41CU352
41CU353
41CU354

3920
41004200
5140
3870
3870
3850
3850
4100
4130
4140
3970
3900
3900
4080
4050
40004020
40004020
4010
41205000
39804000
3940
3940
39303950
39303950

Campsite
Rock art

1
1

A
A, B

800
11,205
11,234
5,617
2,079
3,984
6,724
2,700
2,400
24,090
13,695
5,400
3,600

Rockshelter
Base camp
Base camp
Base camp
Campsite
Campsite
Campsite
Campsite
Campsite
Base camp
Base camp
Campsite
Campsite

4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

B,D
A
A
A
A
B
B
B
A
A
A
A
A

6,000

Base camp

1

A

8,000
7,200

Campsite
Base camp

1
1

A
A

4,800

Quarry

1

A,B

6,000
11,250
7,500

Campsite
Base camp
Campsite

1
1
1

A
A
A

4,800

Campsite

1

A

6,000

Campsite

1

A

6,000
8,000

Hedrick-- Culberson County

Site
No.
41CU355
41CU356
41CU357
41CU358
41CU359
41CU360
41CU361
41CU362
41CU363
41CU364
41CU365
41CU366
41CU367
41CU368
41CU369
41CU370
41CU371
41CU372
41CU373
41CU374
41CU375
41CU376
41CU377
41CU378
41CU379
41CU380
41CU381
41CU382
41CU383
41CU384
41CU385
41CU386
41CU387
41CU388
41CU389
41CU390
41CU391
41CU392
41CU393

Elev~
tion
in Feet
3900
3900
3920
3910
3910
3930
3950
3950
3950
3960
3960
39003920
3920
3920
3920
3940
3940
40204120
4020
3920
3930
4010
4020
4080
4025
4020
4050
4050
4050
4100
4560
4560
5040
5040
5040
4780
4720
4160
4200

Size
m2

Kind of Site

Study
Area

151

Ecological
Zone

7,000
2,500
3,750
3,750
12,000
4,800
22,000
6,000
6,375
4,500
6,000

Campsite
Lithic scatter
Campsite
Campsite
Base camp
Campsite
Base camp
Campsite
Campsite
Campsite
Campsite

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A

6,000
6,000
5,100
12,000
7,500
6,000

Campsite
Base camp
Campsite
Campsite
Base camp
Campsite

1
1
1
1
1
1

A
A
A
A
A
A

70,000
625
10,000
3,600
6,000

Quarry

1

B

Isolated find
Base camp
Campsite
Campsite
Campsite
Rock circle

1
1
1
1
1
1

A
A
A
A
A
B

Quarry

1

B

Isolated hearth
Base camp
Campsite
Isolated hearth
Rock circle
Rockshelter
Rockshelter
Lithic scatter
Lithic scatter
Quarry
Campsite
Campsite
Rockshelter
Rockshelter

1
2
2
2
2
3
3
4
4
4
3
3
5
5

A
A
A
A
A
A
A
B,D
B,D
B,D
B,C
B,C
B,C
B ,C

8,0O0
2,400
20,000
5O0
16,000
4,500
4,000
4,800
2,400
200
1,800
2,400
9,000
2,400
3,600
3,600
12,000

152

Texas Archeological Society

Site
No.
41CU394
41 CU395
41CU396
41CU397
41CU398
41CU399
41CU400
41CU401
41CU402
41CU403
41CU404
41CU405
41CU406
41CU407
41CU408
41CU409
41CU410
41CU411
41CU412
41CU413
41CU414
41CU415
41CU416
41CU417
41CU418
41CU419
41CU420
41CU421
41CU422
41CU423
41CU424
41CU425
41CU426
41CU427
41CU428
41CU429
41CU430
41CU431
41CU432

Elevation
in Feet
43004500
5600
4660
4340
4260
4260
4260
4430
4220
4400
4300
4380
4600
4300
4500
43004380
4400
4400
3670
3670
3687
3800
4300
3800
3796
3970
4860
4760
4660
4600
3980
3880
3880
3880
3960
3830
3840
3850
4260

Study
Area

Ecological
Zone

Size
m2

Kind of Sire

150,000
2,400
1,200
4,800
600
1,500
70
450
1,140
176
1,400
660
480
3,200
108

Rockshelter
Rockshelter
Rockshelter
Campsite
Rock circle
Campsite
Rockshelter
Rockshelter
Rockshelter
Rock circle
Campsite
Campsite
Rockshelter
Rockshelter
Rockshelter

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

B,C
B,C
B,C
B,C
B,C
B,C,D
B,C
B,C
B,C
B,C
B,C
B,C
B,C
B,C
B,C

Campsite
Campsite
Rockshelter
Campsite
Base camp
Base camp
Campsite
Rock circle
Campsite
Base camp
Base camp
Campsite
Campsite
Campsite
Base camp
Lithic scatter
Campsite
Campsite
Isolated hearth
Campsite
Campsite
Campsite
Campsite
Rockshelter

5
5
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
5

A
B,C
B,C
A
A
A
A
A,B

4,800
3,600
2,400
6,000
12,000
9,300
3,200
12,000
2,400
45,000
20,000
4,800
2,400
7,200
4,800
2,400
1,600
1,800
600
2,100
4,800
2,400
4,000
2,000

A,B
A
A
B,C
B,C
B,C
B,C
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
B

Hedrick-- Culberson County

Site
No.

41CU450
41CU451
41CU452
41CU453

Elevation
in Feet
4240
4280
4260
4520
4260
4000
3990
4050
4160
4180
4200
3837
3800
4800
3680
3680
42504400
3910
3900
3910
3940

41HZ395
41HZ396
41HZ397
41HZ398

4360
4500
4560
4180

41CU433
41CU434
41CU435
41CU436
41CU437
41CU438
41CU439
41CU440
41CU441
41CU442
41CU443
41CU444
41CU445
41CU446
41CU447
41CU448
41 CU449

153

Size
m2

Kind of Site

1,600
2,400
600
800
9,000
2,500
4,200
8,000
8,000
2,400
4,000
20,000
6,000
3,000
6,000
8,000

Campsite
Rock circle
Rockshelter
Rockshelter
Campsite
Campsite
Campsite
Campsite
Quarry
Calm
Quarry
Base camp
Campsite
Rock art
Campsite
Campsite

5
5
5
5
5
1
1
1
6
6
6
1
1
4
1
1

B
B
B
B ,C
B
A~
A
A
B
B
B
B
B
B,C
A
A

Quarry
Base camp
Base camp
Base camp
Campsite
County

1
1
1
1
1

B
A
A
A
A

Lithic scatter
Campsite
Rock circle
Quarry

5
5
5
6

B
B,C
B,C
B

390,000
60,000
55,000
45,500
2,400
Hudspeth
3,600
2,800
1,600
12,000

Study
Area

Ecological
Zone

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Among those who have made this survey possible, I thank H. O. (Hock)
Haynes, Otis Hill, and the late R. K. Wylie for showing us the sites and helping
us record them, and I thank the ranch owners and managers for allowing access
to their property. Thanks to Harold Naylor, Marguerite Davis, Sidney Shepperd,
Floyd (Twister) Geery, Martha and Jay Sharp, Christine Ward, Robert Davis,
Megan McDonald, Rachel Knox, Shane Nalen, Sunny Brockmoller, Susanne
Ferrell, Kristen Barber, and Doreen Haverland for helping with the survey,
recording, and lab work, and to Jack Goss for helping with the lab work.
Special thanks go to Elton R. Prewitt and Robert J. Mallouf for their advice and
encouragement, and, to my wife Carrol, very special thanks for entry and
analysis of computer data, word processing, preliminary editing and preliminary

154

Texas Archeological Society

drafts of the maps, and, especially, for putting up with my absences during the
survey.
REFERENCES CITED
Betancourt, Julio, and R. W. Ralph
1981a
Preliminary Reconnaissance of Archeological Resources in the Southern
Quitman Mountains Hudspeth County, Texas. In: Five Archeological
Investigations in the Trans-Pecos Region of Texas. Texas Antiquities
Committee Permit Series 6.
1981b

Preliminary Reconnaissance of the Archeological Resources in the Lower
Hueco Mountains E1 Paso and Hudspeth Counties, Texas. In: Five
Archeological Investigations in the Trans-Pecos Region of Texas. Texas
Antiquities Committee Permit Series 6.

Boisvert, Richard
1980
A Technical Analysis of Lithic Assemblages from the Guadalupe Mountains National Park. M.A. Thesis, Anthropology, Texas A & M University.
Clark, John
Rock Art of the Guadalupe Mountains National Park. Bulletin of the Texas
1974
Archeological Society 45:97-120.
Cliff, M. B., and Terrence Fifield
1980
An Archaeological Evaluation of the Floodwater Diversion in the ThreeMile and Sulphur Draw Watershed, Culberson County, Texas. Environmental Consultants, Inc., Dallas.
Creel, Darrell
1981
An Archeological Reconnaissance in the Eagle Mountains Hudspeth County,
Texas. In: Five Archeological Investigations in the Trans-Pecos Region of
Texas. Texas Antiquities Committee Permit Series 6.
Dibble, D. S.
1967
Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, The University of Texas, Austin. Division of Natural Resources and
Environment, The University of Texas at Austin.
1975

Mount Livermore and Sawtooth Mountain: A Natural Area Survey. Division of Natural Resources and Environment. The University of Texas at
Austin.

Foster, M. S., and J. C. Kelley
1987
Archaeological Investigations of Portions of Eight Sites Within the Proposed Floodwater Diversion Three- Mile and Sulphur Draw, Three-Mile
and Sulphur Draw Watershed, Culberson County, Texas. Jornada Anthropological Research Association, E1 Paso.

Hedrickm Culberson County

155

Gerald, R. E.
1978
Report on a Preliminary Archeological Survey of the Revised Location of a
Floodwater Diversion in Three-Mile and Sulphur Creeks Watersheds, Culberson County, Texas. Report submitted to Soil Conservation Service, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Temple.
Greer, John W.
1968
Notes on Excavated Ring Midden Sites, 1963-1968. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 38 (for 1967):39-44.
Hedrick, J. A.
1968
Plateau Station Area Survey (EPAS-68). The Artifact 6(1): 1-16.
1975

Archaeology of the Plateau Site, Culberson County. The Artifact 13(4):4582.

1986

Five Arrowpoint Types from the Plateau Complex, Van Horn, Texas. Transactions of the Twenty-Second Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas: 15-27.

Henry, C. D., and J. G. Price
1986
The Van Horn Mountains Caldera, Trans-Pecos Texas: Geology and Development of a Small (lOkm2) Ash-Flow Caldera. Bureau of Economic
Geology, Austin.
Jackson, A. T.
1938
Picture-writing of Texas Indians. University of Texas Publication 3809.
Katz, P. R., and P. D. Lukowski
1981
Results of Archaeological Survey in the Salt Flat Locality of Northern
Hudspeth County, Texas. In: Five Archeological Investigations in the
Trans-Pecos Region of Texas. Texas Antiquities Committee Permit Series
6.
Katz, S. R.
1983

Late Prehistoric Period Environment and Economy of the Southern Guadalupe Mountains, Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas.

Katz, S. R., and Paul Katz, editors
1987
Advances in Middle Pecos Archaeology. Proceedings of a Symposium Held
at the Fourth Jornada Mogollon Conference, Tularosa, New Mexico, on
October 12, 1985.
Kelley, J. C.
1947a
The Lehmarm Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 18.
1947b

The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork
Focus. American Antiquity XIII(2):97-109.

1957

The Livermore Focus: A Clarification. EIPalacio 64(1-2):44-52.

156

Texas Archeological Society

Lehmer, D. J.
1958
A Review of Trans-Pecos Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 29:109-144.
MaUouf, R. J.
1985
A Synthesis of Eastern Trans-Pecos Prehistory. Masters thesis, Department
of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin.
Las Haciendas: A Cairn-Burial Assemblage from Northeastern Chihuahua,
1987
Mexico. Office of the State Archeologist Report 35, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
McNatt, Logan
1981
An Archeological Reconnaissance of the Lower Pecos River Crockett,
Terrell and Val Verde Counties, Texas. In: Five Archeological Investigations in the Trans-Pecos Region of Texas. Texas Antiquities Committee
Permit Series 6.
Phelps, A. L.
An Analysis of the Ceramics of the Guadalupe Mountains National Park.
1974
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45:121-150.
Price, J. G., C. D. Henry, D. F. Parker, and D. S. Barker, Editors.
Igneous Geology of Trans-Pecos Texas: Field Trip Guide and Research
1986
Articles. Bureau of Economic Geology, Texas Mining and Mineral Resources Research Institute, The University of Texas at Austin.
Rock Color Chart Committee
1984
Rock Color Chart. Originally published 1948. Distributed by the Geological Society of America.
Runkles, F. A., and E. D. Dorchester
The Lott Site (41GR56): A Late Prehistoric Site in Garza County, Texas.
1987
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57 (for 1986).
Suhm, D. A., and E. B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4,
Austin.
Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,
1985
Austin.
Van Devender, T. R., and W. G. Spaulding
Development of Vegetation and Climate in the Southwestern united States.
1979
Science 204:701-710.

157

Long-Bone Implements from Some Prehistoric
Sites in Texas: Functional Interpretations
Based on Ethnographic Analogy
Grant D. Hall
ABSTRACT
Alternative functions axe proposed for certain implements made from the
long bones of deer, antelope, or bison found at several prehistoric sites in
Texas. These long-bone implements axe often identified as awls or hairpins, but
their use as head scratchers, louse crushers, or sweat scrapers is hypothesized
here. These functional interpretations axe based on analogies drawn from the
ethnographic literature of the American Southwest and California. Variations
in the geometric design patterns incised on the surfaces of some of these
implements suggest that the patterns may have been unique to their prehistoric
owners or perhaps to particular bands or lineages. If this is true, future tracking
of the occurrence of the decorative patterns from site to site in Texas may yield
information on the movements of individuals and bands, the social organization
of bands, and intergroup relationships.

INTRODUCTION
Because of their shapes, long bones from deer, antelope, and bison are
particularly well suited for the manufacture of certain artifacts, most commonly
ones called awls or awllike tools by archeologists. As Hough (1907:120) has
noted concerning the function of awls,
the awl was used to make perforations through which thread of
sinew or other sewing material was passed when skins for
moccasins, clothing, tents, etc., were sewed, and in quillwork,
beadwork, and basketwork. Other uses for awls were for making holes for pegs in woodwork, as a gauge in canoe-making,
for shredding sinew, for graving, etc. Various awllike implements that were used by the Indians in weaving and making
pottery, as pins for robes, as head-scratchers, pipe-picks, blood
pins for closing wounds in game to save the blood, marrowextractors, forks, corn-huskers, etc., have sometimes been
classed as awls.
Prehistoric people in many areas of Texas worked long bones into a variety
of implements and ornaments. This study is concerned with long-bone artifacts
that are often called awls, hairpins, or basket- or mat-weaving tools and especially with one class of these artifacts, which have relatively blunt tips. There
may have been other functions for these blunt-tipped tools.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (for 1988)

158

Texas Archeological Society
DESCRIPTION OF THE IMPLEMENTS

Most of the specimens in this study are made from metapodial bones of
deer, but antelope or bison also may be represented. All of the implements
discussed here were made by splitting long bones into two symmetrical pieces
that were then worked by abrasion into long, tapering artifacts. In horizontal
cross section, these implements vary from essentially flat, to gently planoconvex, to subcircular, depending on the intended function and the location on the
tool of the cross section. The proximal end of the split long bone is usually only
lightly modified. The proximal articular surface is usually ground down to some
extent, but its original contours remain apparent. The distal end is worked into a
tip that ranges between very sharply pointed and rounded. Reflecting the morphology of the long bone, the tip is sometimes slightly upturned, but, except for
this, all signs of the articular surface are completely obliterated. The specimens
are between 8 and 22 cm long, between 1 and 3 cm wide, and between 0.5 and 1
cm thick. Some of the implements are perforated at the broader proximal end,
and some are decorated on the exterior (convex) surface with incised geometric
designs.
INFERRED FUNCTIONS
In the Texas archeological literature, artifact functions have most often been
inferred from their shapes, supported (usually tacitly) by ethnographic analogy,
and, to a lesser extent, by context. Specimens with sharp, slender points would
be useful for punching holes and are, not unreasonably, called awls. Polished
areas or striations, presumably signs of wear resulting from use, are sometimes
detectable and reinforce the notion that some of the implements did indeed
function as awls. However, long-bone implements found near skulls in graves
provide contextual evidence for an alternative view that the artifacts functioned
as hairpins. A third hypothesized function--supported mainly by ethnographic
analogy--is for weaving baskets or mats.
LONG-BONE IMPLEMENTS FROM TEXAS SITES

A representative sample comprising 118 complete long-bone implements
from sites in Texas (Figure 1) has been sorted according to morphological characteristics, contextual information, or postulated function. The specimens are
categorized as implements with the sharp, slender points characteristic of awllike
tools (Table 1), a smaller group that were thought to have functioned as hairpins
based on their locations in the graves from which they were recovered (Table 2),
and the largest group of artifacts, with tips that vary from narrow and pointed to
rounded (Table 3). These specimens differ from most of those in Table 1 in that
the tips are flat or convex in cross section, and, although it is technically accurate to describe them as pointed, their tips are not nearly as slender or sharp as
those of the awllike tools (Table 1). The bluntness of the tips of these tools did
not result from use wear; they were intentionally worked into this shape (Figures 2 to 7).

Hall--- Long-Bone Implements

159

o

@
WACO
~ROCKI=TT

NORTH

~~

-~UST,.

"

"~

HOUSTON

O

t~

SAN
ANTONIO

VICTORIA

EDO

’

0~0 miles
0

50 kilometers

E

1

Key to Sites
1-Ernest Witte

8-Green Lake

15-Baker Cave

2-Albert George

9-Olmos Dam

16-Fall Creek

3-Crestmont

10-Loma Sandia

17-McCann

4-Goebel

11-41WY50

18-Brawlwy’s Cave

5-Brandes

12-Unland

19-Kyle

6-Konvicka

13-Centipede Cave

20-Blue Bayou

7-TWI

14-Shumla Caves

Figure 1. Map of Central and South Texas showing the prehistoric sites in which bone
implements have been found.

160

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Bone Implements With Sharp, Slender Points from
Some Prehistoric Sites in Texas.
No. of
SpeciSite
mens
1
Fall Creek
McClure Mound
1
Shumla Caves
*3
Kyle
3
Centipede Cave
2
Jim Arnold
5
Brawley’s Cave
6
McCann
*3
Baker Cave
2
1
Loma Sandia

County
Llano
Williamson
Val Verde
Hill
Val Verde
Hall
Bosque
Lampasas
Val Verde
Live Oak

Stated
Function

Reference

Awl
Awl
Awls
Awls
Awls
Awls
....
Awls?
Awls
....

Jackson 1938:104-5
Jackson 1938:104-5
Schuetz 1961:191-2
Jelks 1962:62-4
Epstein 1963:81-2
Tunnell 1964:85-92
Olds 1965:136-9
Preston 1969:188
Word and Douglas 1970:91-3
Highley in press

*Implements from the Shumla Caves and the McCann site have incised
decorations but are not illustrated here. The three decorated Shumla Cave
specimens have simple diagonal lines or criss-crossed lines incised over small
areas of their proximal (broad) ends. The specimen from the McCann site has a
simple zig-zag line pattern running most of its length. The scale published with
the illustration of the McCann specimen indicates that it is only about 7 cm
long, but it is possible that the scale is incorrect.

Table 2. Bone Hairpins from Some Prehistoric Sites in Texas.

No. of
Specimens

Site

Unland

County

Cameron

Reference

Mallouf and Zavaleta 1979:18,21

Stated
Function

Hairpin
or

weaving
implement
1 41 WY50

Willacy

1 Loma Sandia

Live Oak

Day, Laurens-Day, and Prewitt
1981:333, 336
Highley in press

Hairpin
Hairpin

Hall-- Long-Bone Implements

Table 3.

Bone Implements with Blunt Tips from Some
Prehistoric Sites in Texas.

No. of
County
SpeciSite
mens
Fred Acree Farm
Coryell
1
Amistad Reservoir Val Verde
2
Fort Bend
23+ Albert George

1
72a
2b
2
?
1
2+
1
2
1
1b

Green Lake
Ernest Witte
Leonard K
Goebel
Crestmont
Konvicka
TWI
Brandes
Olmos Dam
41BX36
Blue Bayou

161

Reference
Jackson 1938:104-105
Collins 1969:73-75
WaUey 1955:218-234
Duke 1970

Stated
Function
Awls
Awls
Hairpins
or
weaving
tools

Wingate and Hester 1972:119-126
Calhoun
Hall 1981:225-230
Austin
Austin
Hall 1981:107, 241
Awls
Austin
Duke 1970:7; 1982:6
Wharton
Joe Hudgins (pers. com.)
Fort Bend Patterson and Hudgins 1987
Birmingham and Huebner n.d.
Victoria
Hairpin
Highley et al. 1988
Austin
Hairpin
Bexar
Lukowski 1988
Bexar
Lynn Highley (pers. com.)
Awl
Victoria
Huebner 1988:97-99

aThe total of 72 does not take into account 40 implements represented by
fragments (Hall 1981:235-236).
bDecorated implements from the Leonard K and Blue Bayou sites are not
illustrated here. The two specimens from the Leonard K site have elaborate
design patterns, but are too decomposed to be drawn accurately. The Blue Bayou
specimen has one line incised across its proximal (broad) end.

ETHNOGRAPHIC CORRELATES
The inferred identifications of the awls (Table 1) are accepted here as
correct. However, the relatively blunt tips of other specimens (Tables 2 and 3)
rendered them useless for piercing holes in tough materials such as hide, leather,
or plant fiber. In pursuing the idea that long-bone implements, especially those
with fairly blunt tips (Table 3), may have functioned as hairpins or mat- or
basket-weaving tools, a survey of the Handbook of North American Indians
(Heizer 1978, Ortiz 1983, D’Azevedo 1986) and several other ethnographic
sources indicated that the tool most often used in basket-making has a sharp,
slender point capable of perforating the fiber coils of baskets (Spier 1978:475,
Bowen 1983:241, Roessel 1983:601, Aikens and Madsen 1986:156, Cain and
Farmer 1981:84). The tools illustrated in these sources are of bone and are
shaped much like awllike artifacts (Table 1). Cactus spines (Fowler and Dawson

Texas Archeological Society

162

A

D

B
o

E

SCM

Figure 2. Drawings of incised bone implements from the Albert George site. (Redrawn
from Walley 1955:P136 and 37, Bulletin of the Texas Archeology Society 26.)

Hall-- Long.Bone Implements

!

163

I

I
I

I
!

///

/

I

I

I
I

!

E

I

I

A

!
I
I

I

I

!
I

I
|
l

D

o

B

5CM

C

Figure 3. Drawings of incised bone implements from the Albert George site. (Redrawn
from Walley 1955:P1 36 and 38, Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 26.)

164

Texas Archeological Society

©

©

A

©

/
D

B
0

E

SCM

Figure 4. Drawings of incised bone implements from the Ernest Witte site. (Redrawn
from Hall 1981 :Figures 50 and 51, courtesy of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.)

Hall-- Long-Bone Implements

165

0

E

A

B

C

o

D

F

5CM

Figure 5. Drawings of incised bone implements: A-D, from the Emest Witte site; E, from
the Albert George site; F, from the Konvicka site. (A-D redrawn from Hall 1981:Figures
50 and 51, courtesy of the Texas Archeological Survey, The Universtiy of Texas at
Austin; E , redrawn from Duke 1970, courtesy of Alan R. Duke: F redrawn from
Patterson and Hudgins 1987, courtesy of Leland W. Patterson and Joe D. Hudgins.)

166

Texas Archeological Society

0
0

I
I
I

1
I
I

E

B

F"

D

O
0

5CM

Figure 6. Drawings of incised bone implements from the Crestmont site. (Courtesy of Joe
D. Hudgins.)

Hall-- Long-Bone Implements

167

C
I
I

I

E
A
8

F
o

5CM

D
Figure 7. Drawings of incised bone implements. A, from the Green Lake site; B, from the
Loma Sandia site; C and D, from the TWI site; E, from 41BX36; F, from the Brandes site.
(A is redrawn from Wingate and Hester 1972, courtesy of Thomas R. Hester; B is
redrawn from Highley, in press, courtesy of A. J. Taylor, Lynn Highley, and the Texas
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation; C and D are redrawn from Birmingham and Huebner, n.d., courtesy of William W. Birmingham and Jeffery A. Huebner;
E, courtesy of Lynn Highley and the Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio; F, redrawn from Highley et al. 1988, courtesy of Lynn Highley.)

168

Texas Archeological Society

1986: 720) and metal awls (Cain and Farmer 1981: 84) are also documented for
the same purpose. In their mention of bone awls, Aikens and Madsen (1986:156)
note that these are suitable for perforating both leather and basketry coils.
A specimen very similar to the blunt-tipped tools (Table 3) is illustrated in
Volume 10 of the Handbook of North American Indians (Schwartz 1983:21).
Made from a long bone, it is decorated on one face with geometric, anthropomorphic, and zoomorphic designs. The reverse is decorated only with geometric
designs. The specimen is perforated at the proximal end and a leather thong is
knotted through the hole. Collected from a Yuman group in the Southwest, the
specimen is identified as a scratcher.
Other bone implements identified as head scratchers, louse crushers, hairpins, hair ornaments, or sweat scrapers are described and illustrated in other
ethnographic and archeological sources for the Southwest and California (Wallace 1978:173; Loud 1918:Plate 20; Heye 1921:3, 94-97; Gifford 1940; Ragir
1972:66-67; Hester 1974:Figure 6). Although these specimens vary considerably from bipointed to subrectangular, some are shaped much like the bluntpointed specimens in this study (Table 3) (see especially Heye 1921). The
subrectangular to rectangular specimens illustrated by Heye and identified as
louse crushers are reminiscent of bone implements found at several Late Prehistoric sites in Texas; Huebner (1987:6-15) has suggested that such rectangular
bone implements functioned as fleshing tools. Hester (1974) has reported on a
decorated long-bone implement from western Nevada, which he speculates may
have functioned as a sweat scraper, or strigil. Ragir (1972:66) illustrates a
similar specimen, also identified as a sweat scraper, from a site yielding Archaic
remains in California.
Wing and Brown (1979:104-105) discuss bone implements called husking
pins that were used by prehistoric and early historic farming peoples in North
America and Mesoamerica for shucking corn. The specimens illustrated by
Wing and Brown are in some cases identical to the blunt-tipped artifacts in this
study (Table 3), except that they lack decoration.
Most striking is the fact that many of the specimens illustrated in these
sources have incised geometric designs on the convex faces and are perforated at
one end. The sources specifically mention that females, both those involved in
menarche rituals (Teit 1900:311-14; Swanton 1910:314-15; Elsasser 1978:196;
Wallace 1978:172-3; Loud 1918:383) and postpartum females (Kelly 1978:
421) used bone head scratchers to touch their bodies (when scratching, eating,
etc.) in compliance with taboos against touching themselves with their fingers at
these times. These were apparently items that everyone would need now and
again, but the sources do not specifically state that everyone was equipped with
a head scratcher or louse crusher.

Hall-- Long-Bone Implements

169

TEXAS LONG-BONE IMPLEMENTS
AS HEAD SCRATCHERS OR LOUSE CRUSHERS
On the basis of the ethnographic data from the Southwest and California, it
is proposed that use as head scratchers or louse crushers be added to the list of
possible functions for the blunt or flat-tipped long-bone implements (Tables 2
and 3). These newly proposed functions do not preclude concurrent service of
long-bone implements as hairpins or sweat scrapers, since both of these functions are also indicated for such tools in the ethnographic record.
Considering the presumed hunter-gatherer subsistence orientation of prehistoric peoples represented by the long-bone specimens in this study, it is not
likely that they used the implements for husking maize.
Referring back to the blunt and flat-tipped specimens (Tables 2 and 3), how
do the proposed functions agree with the available contextual information? All
three of the long bone implements listed in Table 2 were found in burials beside
or beneath the skulls, and, as already noted, are suggested by their respective
analysts to be hairpins or, in one case, a weaving implement. Most of the flattiped specimens listed in Table 3 also came from burial contexts. This is largely
because many specimens were recovered from Late Archaic cemeteries in Texas,
especially at the Albert George and Ernest Witte sites.
At the Albert George and Ernest Witte sites, which together yielded at least
95 specimens, the contextual distribution is decidedly postcranial. Only three
burials at Ernest Witte had long-bone implements positioned around the skulls.
Further confounding the issue, such implements, together with other types of
bone artifacts made from limb bones, were found in stacks or side-by-side in
echelon. All of the Albert George site specimens were found together in one
such cache (Walley 1955:233), and at the Ernest Witte site, seven stacks of bone
implements were found and account for most of the recovered specimens (Hall
1981:225-30). The graves of at least 14 individuals in the Group 2 component at
the Ernest Witte site were furnished with long-bone implements. Of further
significance is the fact that all long-bone artifacts (in fact, all bone artifacts) in
the Group 2 Ernest Witte component were associated with individuals more than
20 years old. An analysis of the Crestmont burials revealed that the grave of one
individual 13 to 14.5 years old was furnished with bone implements (Vernon, in
press). At Green Lake (Wingate and Hester 1972), Brandes (Highley et al.
1988), and Olmos Dam (Lukowski 1988), long-bone implements were found
around the skulls.
The contextual data from many of the sites therefore support the hairpin or
head scratcher functions proposed for the long-bone implements. However, the
strong contextual information from the Albert George and Ernest sites does not.
Is it possible to reconcile the contextual data with the hypothesized hairpin/head
scratcher/louse crusher functions? Single specimens with perforated ends found
in the upper torso areas of skeletons may have been attached to clothing or
suspended from the neck so that they would have been close at hand when head

170

Texas Archeological Society

scratching or louse crushing needs arose. Stacks of long-bone implements may
represent personal tool kits containing different types of tools intended for a
variety of functions. Alternatively, the stacks may be aggregates of individual
memorial tokens contributed as grave furnishings by survivors participating in
the funeral ceremonies. The last two alternatives neither confirm nor deny the
functional speculations made about the implements.
DECORATIONS ON LONG-BONE IMPLEMENTS
Geometric designs are incised into about 10 percent of the long-bone
implements from 10 prehistoric sites in Texas (Figures 2 to 7); they comprise
almost all of the incised specimens known to the author. Remarkably, no design
pattern is repeated among the 36 known specimens, but variations on certain
decorative themes are apparent. It is possible that study of the design elements
and themes on the decorated specimens will yield insights into social relationships among the individuals or bands responsible for their manufacture. For
example, did certain kin groups use variations on a particular geometric theme?
If so, a study similar to the work done with designs on Arikara pottery in the
Northern Plains (Deetz 1965) might prove fruitful.
As an example of how such a study of decorative themes might proceed,
attention is called to three sets of design patterns found at the Albert George,
Ernest Witte, and Crestmont sites (Figure 8). One group of similar patterns--a
zigzag, or lightning bolt--is represented by specimens from the Albert George
(Figure 2: A, E) and Crestmont (Figure 6: B) sites. A second group--the
diamond pattern (Figures 3, E and 6, C)--also involves the same two sites. A
third style of design links the Albert George and Ernest Witte sites (Figures 3, A
and 4, A) and could be described as a band/crisscross pattern. It is suggested that
tracking of the occurrence of these patterns as new specimens are found in the
future will yield useful insights into the movements and social structure of the
band represented by the specimens.
Not all of the long-bone implements have incised decorations; this observation may be significant. At the Ernest Witte site, only about 10 percent of the
implements have the incised decorations. Did a person need to reach a certain
age, achieve a certain status, or accomplish some other milestone in life to be
eligible for a personalized design pattern? The ritual/ceremonial uses recorded
for head scratchers in the Southwest suggest that the implements, with or
without designs, may be symbolic of particular conditions or status rather than
purely functional objects. At the Ernest Witte site, bone implements were
distributed about equally between males and females. As previously noted at the
Ernest Witte site, there was a definite lower age limit for association with bone
implements as grave furnishings. All those who had them were over 20 years old
at the time of death. This strong age-discriminant pattern is slightly confounded
by the findings at the Crestmont site, where a teenager was accompanied by such
artifacts. If the implements were indeed contributed by survivors, the tools and
their characteristics may be saying more about the survivors than about the deceased.

Hall-- Long-Bone Implements

171

y
A

!

I

!

I
I

Figure 8. Drawings showing comparison of design patterns. A, zigzag or lightning bolt
patterns from the Albert George and Crestmont sites (see Figures 2, A, E and 6, B); B,
diamond patems from the Albert George and Crestmont sites (see Figures 3, E and 6, C);
C, band/crisscross patterns from the Albert George and Ernest Witte sites (see Figures 3,
A, and 4, A).

172

Texas Archeological Society
CONCLUSION

The ethnographic data reviewed here support the contention that the sharply
pointed long-bone implements (Table 1) were used as awls. In this capacity they
could have served several hole-punching needs, including the perforation of
fiber coils in basket making. The blunt- or fiat-ended specimens (Tables 2 and 3)
are too dull to have functioned well as awls and were more likely to have been
used principally as hairpins, head scratcher/louse crushers, or sweat scrapers
In addition to the proposal concerning some other functions, there is a
possibility of exclusivity in the usage of design patterns on the long-bone
implements. The data suggest that ownership (or, at least, inclusion as burial
furnishings) was restricted to adults and, possibly, later adolescents, suggesting
that social identity developed late in the second decade of life for these groups.
Finally, it is speculated that the design patterns may have been band-, lineage-,
or person-specific and that the use of these patterns survived the individuals who
commissioned them. The contention that design patterns are specific to persons
or bands is the most tenuous of the propositions presented here, but it can be
tested when additional data are recovered.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I was assisted greatly in this study by the following individuals who provided me with illustrations of incised bone specimens and gave me permission
to publish them: Bill Birmingham, Darrell Creel, Alan Duke, Tom Hester, Lynn
Highley, Joe Hudgins, Jeff Huebner, Paul Lukowski, Jim Mitchell, Lee Patterson, Sharon Quirk, and A. J. Taylor. Earlier drafts of the manuscript were
reviewed by Jeff Brain, Ian Brown, Jim Mitchell, Brian Shaffer, A1B. Wesolowsky, and two anonymous TAS Bulletin reviewers, all of whom gave me very
useful suggestions on ways of improving the content and wording of the article.
I thank these colleagues for their assistance and input.
REFERENCES CITED
Aikens, C. M., and D. B. Madsen
1986
Prehistory of the Eastern Area. In: D’Azevedo,Warren L. (Volume Editor).
Great Basin. Handbook of North American Indians 11. William C. Sturtevant, General Editor. Smithsonian Institution. Washington, D. C.
Birmingham, W. W., and J. A. Huebner
n.d.
Incised Bone and Conch Shell Artifacts from the Texas West Indies Ranch
Site (41 VT 9), Victoria County, Texas.
Bowen, Thomas
1983
Seri. In: Ortiz, Alfonso (Volume Editor). Southwest. Handbook of North
American Indians 10. Williams C. Sturtevant, General Editor. Smithsonian
Institution. Washington, D. C.

Hall-- Long-Bone Implements

173

Cain, W. C., and J. F. Farmer
1981
Materials, Techniques, and Styles. In: Lopez, Raul A. and Christopher L.
Moser (editors). Rods, Bundles, and Stitches - A Century of Southern California Indian Basketry. Riverside Museum Press. Riverside, California.
Collins, M. B.
1969
Test Excavations at Amistad International Reservoir, Fall, 1967. The University of Texas at Austin. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project 16.
Day, D. W., Jane Laurens-Day, and E. R. Prewitt
1981
Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in Portions of Hidalgo and
Willacy Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports ofInvestigations 15. Austin.
D’Azevedo, W. L. (Volume Editor)
1986
Great Basin. Handbook of North American Indians 11. William C. Sturtevant, General Editor. Smithsonian Institution. Washington, D. C.
Deetz, James
1965
The Dynamics of Stylistic Change in Arikara Ceramics. Urbana: University
of Illinois Press.
Duke, A. R.
1970
Indian Artists of the Gulf Coast. Newsletter of the Houston Archeological
Society 31:3-7.
Elsasser, A. B.
1978
Mattole, Nongatl, Sinkyone, Lassik, and Wailaki. In: Heizer, Robert F.
(Volume Editor). California. Handbook of North American Indians 8. William C. Sturtevant, General Editor. Smithsonian Institution. Washington,
D.C.
Epstein, J. F.
1963
Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County,Texas, 1958.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 33 (for 1962): 1-129.
Fowler, C. S., and L. E. Dawson
1986
Ethnographic Basketry. In: D’Azevedo, Warren L. (Volume Editor). Great
Basin. tlandbook of North American Indians 11. William C. Sturtevant,
General Editor. Smithsonian Institution. Washington, D. C.
Gifford, E. W.
1940
Californian Bone Artifacts. Anthropological Records 3(2): 153-237. University of California Press. Berkeley.
Hall, G. D.
1981

Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River
Valley, Texas.Texas Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at Austin
Research Report 61.

174

Texas Archeological Society

Heizer, R. F. (Volume Editor)
1978
Califomia. Handbook of North American Indians 8. Williams C. Sturtevant,
General Editor. Smithsonian Institution. Washington, D. C.
Hester, T. R.
Archaeological Materials from Site NV-Wa-197, Western Nevada: Atlatl
1974
and Animal Skin Pouches. In: Four Papers on Great Basin Anthropology.
Contributions of the University of California Archaeological Research Facility No. 21. University of California, Department of Anthropology,
Berkeley.
Heye, G. G.
Certain Artifacts from San Miguel Island, California. Museum of the Ameri1921
can Indian, Heye Foundation, Indian Notes and Monographs 7(4).
Highley, C. L.
In Press Bone and Antler Artifacts. In: Taylor, A. J., and Cheryl Lynn Highley,
Archaeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41 LK 28): A
Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Texas State
Department of ltighways and Public Transportation Publications in Archaeology, Highway Design Division.
Highley, C. L., Jeffery A. Huebner, J. H. Labadie, R. J. Leneave, and R. R. Harrison
Salvage Archaeology at the Brandes Site (41 AU 55), Austin County,
1988
Texas. La Tierra 15(3):6-19.
Hough, Walter
1907
Awls. In: Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico. F. W. Hodge,
Editor. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 30, Pt. 1. Washington, D. C.
Huebner, J. A.
A Toyah Horizon Tool from Victoria County. La Tierra 14(4):6-15.
1987
1988

The Archaeology of Blue Bayou: A Late Prehistoric and Archaic Mortuary
Site, Victoria County, Texas. Unpublished Master’s Thesis. The University
of Texas at San Antonio.

Jackson, A. T.
1938
The Fall Creek Sites. The University of Texas Publication 3802. Austin.
Jelks, E. B.
The Kyle Site - A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
1962
Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin
Archeology Series 5.
Kelly, Isabel
1978
Coast Miwok. In: Heizer, Robert F. (Volume Editor). California. Handbook
of North American Indians 8. William C. Sturtevant, General Editor. Smithsonian Institution. Washington, D. C.

Hall--- Long-Bone Implements

175

Loud, L. L.
1918
Ethnogeography and Archaeology of the Wiyot Territory.University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 14(3):221436. Berkeley.
Lukowski, P. D.
1988
Archaeological Investigations at 41BX1, Bexar County, Texas. Center for
Archaeological Research. The University of Texas at San Antonio Archaeological Survey Report 126.
Mallouf, R. J., and A. N. Zavaleta
1979
The Unland Site. Office of the State Archeologist Special Report 25. Texas
Historical Commission. Austin.
Olds, Doris L.
1965
Report on Materials from Brawley’s Cave, Bosque County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 36:111-152.
Ortiz, Alfonso (Volume Editor)
1983
Southwest. tlandbook of North American Indians 10. William C. Sturtevant, General Editor. Smithsonian Institution. Washington, D. C.
Patterson, L. W., and J. D. Hudgins
1987
The Konvicka Collection (41 FB 95), Fort Bend Co., Texas. Journal of the
Houston Archeological Society 89:11-18.
Preston, N. E.
1969
The McCann Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40: 167-192.
Ragir, Sonia
1972
The Early Horizon in Central California Prehistory. Contributions of the
University of California Archaeological Research Facility Number 15. University of California, Department of Anthropology, Berkeley, California.
Roessel, Ruth
1983
Navajo Arts and Crafts. In: Ortiz, Alfonso (Volume Editor). Southwest.
tlandbook of North American Indians 10. William C. Sturtevant, General
Editor. Smithsonian Institution. Washington, D. C.
Schuetz, M. K.
An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material: Part II. Bulletin of the
1961
Texas Archeological Society 31 (for 1960): 167-205.
Schwartz, D. W.
1983
Havasupai. In: Ortiz, Alfonso (Volume Editor). Southwest. Handbook of
North American Indians I0. William C. Sturtevant, General Editor. Smithsonian Institution. Washington, D. C.

176

Texas Archeological Society

Spier, R. F. G.
1978
Foothill Yokuts. In: Heizer, Robert F. (Volume Editor). California. Handbook of North American Indians 8. William C. Sturtevant, General Editor.
Smithsonian Institution. Washington, D. C.
Swanton, J. R.
1910
Puberty Customs. In: Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico. F.
W. Hodge, Editor. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 30, Pt. 2. Washington, D. C.
Taylor, A. J., and C. L. Highley
In Press Archaeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41 LK28): A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Texas State
Department ofHighways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division, Contract Reports in Archaeology.
Teit, J. A.
1900

The Thompson Indians of British Columbia. In: Boas, Franz (Editor), Jesup
North Pacific Expedition. Memoirs of the American Museum of Natural
History 2, Anthropology 1(4). New York.

Turmell, C. D.
1964
Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 35: 83-93.
Vernon, C. R.
In Press The Prehistoric Skeletal Remains from the Crestmont Site, Wharton County,
Texas. Studies in Archaeology No 1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Wallace, W. J.
1978
Hupa, Chilula, and Whilkut. In: Heizer, Robert F. (Volume Editor).
California. tlandbook of North American Indians 8. William C. Sturtevant,
General Editor. Smithsonian Institution. Washington, D. C.
Walley, Raymond
1955
A Preliminary Report on the Albert George Site in Fort BendCounty.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 26: 218-234.
Wing, E. S., and A. B. Brown
1979
Paleonutrition. Academic Press, New York.
Wingate, R. J., and T. R. Hester
Ten Burials from Green Lake, Texas. Florida Anthropologist 25(3):1191972
127.
Word, J. H., and C. L. Douglas
Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas Memorial
1970
Museum Bulletin 16, Austin.

177

Exploring The Possibilities of Acorn Utilization
in the Burned Rock Middens of Texas
Ellen Sue Turner
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the possibility of a correlation between acorn processing and some types of burned rock middens in Texas, using known interrelationships between North American aboriginal culture and the technology of
acorn gathering and utilization. The acorn industry, as reported in ethnographic
records and reconstructed through archeological excavations, is reviewed, and
the processing of acorns in the Texas environment is considered.

INTRODUCTION
Many burned rock midden sites of varying forms or types are found in
Central Texas along the east edge of the Edwards Plateau (Hester 1980:63). In
addition to an abundance of fire-cracked rocks, some middens typically yield
large amounts of sandstone, chert, ash, and baked clay, indicating that prehistoric
people camped on and around them. Other types of burned rock middens comprise little else but burned rock and some ashy soil. There is much controversy
over the nature and function of the different kinds of burned rock middens, but
some may have been specialized food-cooking or plant-processing areas (Hester
1980:63).
ETHNOGRAPHIC RECORDS OF ACORN UTILIZATION
Some of the highest population densities for North American Indians were
among the acorn-gathering groups of California and the sedentary Pueblo farmers of the Southwest. The native culture of central California followed a hunting-and-gathering-based subsistence pattern in an unusually rich environment.
In most cases, the basic staple was acorns, which were consumed annually in
vast quantities, indicating their high food value in that culture. The hunting-andgathering culture of central California reached ecological stability around 2000
B.C.; later changes were primarily in artifact styles (Sanders and Price 1968:85-

86).
Sweet acorns were eaten by the Omahas and the Delawares of the midwestern prairies (Hecklewelder 1882), and by the Tonkawas, Coahuiltecans, and
Karankawas of Texas (Newcomb 1973:139). In the Southeast, the Choctaw of
Louisiana also ate acorns (Merriam 1918). In the Northeast, the Algonquins,
Iroquois, Hurons, and other tribes stretching from Canada to the Gulf of Mexico
included acorns in their diets (Merriam 1918).
There are some 60 species of oaks in North America (genus Quercus), and
Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society 59 (for 1988)

178

Texas Archeological Society

acorns of 27 species are known to have been eaten by the Indians. At least half of
the Indian tribes in the United States ate acorns, but they were a staple food only
in California, where they were eaten in greater quantity than any other foodanimal or vegetable (Driver 1975:91).
In California, wherever tan oak acorns (Quercus densiflora) were obtainable, they and Quercus kelloggii were most preferred overall. Quercus kelloggii
was preferred by the Southern Maidu or Nisenan, Miwok, Shasta, and Luiseno,
Quercus dumosa by the Cahuilla, Quercus gambeli by the Southern Maidu,
Quercus kelloggii, Quercus chrysolepis, and Quercus wislizenii by the Northern
Maidu, and Quercus agrifolia by the Pomo (Gifford 1936:240).
The nuts of the bur oak, Quercus macrocarpa, which grows in moist forests
along streams in East and Central Texas, eastward to the Atlantic Ocean, and
northward to New Brunswick and Saskatchewan (Correll and Johnston 1970:472),
were gathered in late autumn by the Ojibwa and buried for winter or spring use
(Densmore 1928:320). The red oak, Quercus rubra, was used by the Ojibwa and
the Iroquois. The Potawatomi used all kinds of acorns (Smith 1932:369, 1933:100,
Waugh 1916:123). The white oak, Quercus alba, grows in moist forests in the
timber region of East Texas, eastward to the Atlantic Ocean, and northward to
Canada (Correll and Johnston 1970:473). The Ojibwa depended on the nuts for
soup stock. The tree is common in lower Michigan and was also used by the
Menomini, the Sauk-Fox, and the Iroquois (Smith 1923:66, 1932:401, Waugh
1916:123).
Acorn Gathering and First Fruit Rites
Collecting acorns was a simple annual event in almost all California native
groups, initiated with a First Acorn Ceremony in the fall. The community was
organized for the collection and distribution of acorns by the shaman, moiety
chief, or secret society headman (Swezey 1975:14), and harvesting or eating of
acorns before the rite was a strict ritual prohibition (Voegelin 1942:175). There
were many varieties of regulatory rites, all emphasizing the central position of
ritual specialists in the direction of the work of the fall harvest (Swezey 1975:15).
Acorns matured and were gathered in the late autumn and early winter.
Rapid and efficient gathering simultaneously with the onset of the mature crop
was essential; natural competition from birds, mammals, and insects was an
ever-present factor that threatened to reduce the harvest (Wolf 1945:19). In
times of shortage, the trees in which the California woodpecker had drilled holes
and stored acorns were examined, and the fresh acorns were pried out with a
pointed instrument (welup) of deer antler (Barrett and Gifford 1933:143). Both
men and women engaged in acorn-gathering; the men climbed the trees to shake
the nuts down, and the women retrieved the falling and already fallen acorns.
The men and boys shook down or dislodged the nuts with long poles (Spencer,
Jennings, et al. 1968:243). "The acorn harvest lasted many days, perhaps as long
as a month" (Gayton 1948:178), "until enough nuts had been picked up to last
over the winter when food was scarce" (Baumhoff 1963).

Turner m Acorn Utilization

179

Acorn Processing
The acorns were gathered in large conical burden baskets, each large enough
to hold a bushel or two (Spencer, Jennings, et al. 1968:233). Two methods of
removing the hulls have been reported; the first engaged all the family--men,
women, and children--who removed the hulls with their teeth, but the more
common method was to crush the acorns with a hand-held stone and a rock
platform. Sometimes unworked flat stones were used as anvils, but frequently
special stones with several small pecked cuppings were used.
After hulling, the plump meats were placed on a bedrock mortar and ground
into meal. The bedrock mortars were merely fiat outcroppings of the bedrock of
the region. Development of the basket- or hopper-mortar was particularly important. It was a special stone mortar, provided with a conical basket hopper
stuck to the rim with asphalt for use in the processing (Snow 1976:162). If the
acorns were too oily, Spanish clover was pounded with them to absorb some of
the oil, and roots of pond lilies, or sometimes rattails, were mixed with the meal
that was intended for bread (Barrett and Gifford 1933:144-145).
Many procedures were involved in the preparation of acorns for consumption. The striking thing about the California Indians was their almost universal
knowledge of leaching (Barrett and Gifford 1963:250). Boiling was practiced in
the eastern Woodlands, but no other areas are known to have developed the
acorn industry (except for sweet acorns) to the magnitude reached by the
California Indians.
Various methods were used to leach the tannin from the acorns. In one
method, a shallow basin about a meter in diameter was scooped out in the sand.
The ground meal was placed in the basin and water was poured over it. "As the
water soaked through the fine meal, it dissolved out the acid and leached it down
through the porous sand" (Barrett and Gifford 1933:145). In other methods,
leaves were put in the bottom of a hole, and bark was put on the sides and over
the top. Green acorns were pounded and leached in the same way as dried acorns
or, in some cases, were simply boiled whole and eaten. Green (undried) acorns
were sometimes placed in long cylindrical openwork baskets that were laid
across the flow of a stream until the shells cracked open. Often acorns were
buried for at least a year (Kroeber et al. 1937:382); caches of acorns that have
lain in cold boggy places for more than 30 years have been turned up by farmers’
plows. The acorns were black, but still good (Merriam 1918). The Yurok
considered the quantity of acorns they had buried in the mud a partial measure of
a family’s wealth and prestige; a good family had at least a year’s supply. One
informant told that his buried acorns were not ripe after three years in the ground
because he had forgotten to bite a rotten branch, which was part of the burial
ritual (Kroeber et al. 1937:381). When smaller amounts of meal were to be
processed, the meal was placed in a sifting basket, which was lined with a layer
of leaves to keep the ground meal from leaking out. The meal was then leached
as in the leaching pit (Barrett and Gifford 1933:146).
The Algonquins, Iroquois, and Hurons used all available species of acorns

180

Texas Archeologieal Society

and removed the tannin by soaking or boiling them in hot wood ash lye water
(Smith 1932:402). The Omaha boiled the acorns until the water was almost
gone, then added fresh water and ashes. They boiled the nuts again until they
turned black, threw out the water and ashes, and added more fresh water until
they were clean; then they cooked them until they were soft. The Delaware
Indians prepared the Q. stellata (post oak) acorns in a similar way, then mixed
them with hominy (Heckewelder 1882). In the Southeast, acorns were boiled
whole, and the valuable oil was skimmed off the top of the hot liquizl (Merriam
1918).
The acorns were either dried before processing or processed green. The
hulled green acorns were put into "large, flattish, circular receptacles of basket
work which were placed on top of a high frame over the fire in the house so that
the heat in rising dried them" (Merriam 1918). They were also spread out in the
sun to dry.
Cooking and Preparation
One common method of preparation of acorn meal was by stone-boiling in
baskets. To prevent the basket from burning, the meal was stirred with a wooden
paddle or a looped stick with string binding. The meal became a thin gruel soup,
or, if the consistency was thicker, it was mush--a thick, glutenous porridge
(Barret and Gifford 1933:141). Acorn bread was made by dipping out the hot
mush ~to a special basket and turning it out into a cold running stream where
the cold water caused the loaves to contract and harden. They were then placed
on racks to dry, and, when hardened, they could be carried for weeks. The
naturalist John Muir often carried the dry acorn bread of the Indians on his field
trips into the California mountains and claimed that this slightly sour-tasting
bread was the most compact and strength-giving food he had ever used (Merriam 1918). Another way to make bread was to mix the meal with red clay, one
part clay to twenty parts meal, then to wrap it in leaves to bake overnight on hot
stones either in the ground or covered with earth and hot stones.
When removed the next morning, the bread previously mixed
with clay is as black as jet, and while still fresh has the
consistency of rather soft cheese. In the course of a few days it
becomes hard.., the sweet taste is very evident [Merriam
1918].
Algonquin tribes of the northeast used acorns for bread and for oil, and
mixed the boiled acorns with their fish and meat. The Iroquois pounded the nuts
and boiled them slowly in water. Then they skimmed off the oil and seasoned it
with salt to be used with potatoes, squash, pumpkins, and other foods. They
mixed the nut meats with mashed potatoes or added them to hominy and corn
soup to enrich them (Merriam 1918).
In the New World and the Old World, the use of acorns as food for men and
beasts dates back to prehistoric times. In England, France, and Italy, boiled

Turner ~ Acorn Utilization

181

acorns were used for bread in times of scarcity, and in most Mediterranean
countries the sweet fruit of Quercus esculenta was prized. In Algeria and
Morocco, the large acorns of an evergreen oak were eaten both raw and roasted;
in Spain those of the Gramont oak were considered superior to chestnuts. In
Spain and Italy in the early part of this century, as much as 20 percent of the total
food of the poor consisted of sweet acorns (Merriam 1918).
ARCHEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE

From the beginning of the Archaic, nuts and acorns have been an important
food resource in the diet of North American Indians (Yarnell 1970). Oak trees
grow throughout the continent, and acorns have been found in archeological
sites from Canada to Mexico.
Two charred acorn fragments were found at the Holdsworth III site in the
Tortugas Creek drainage east of Crystal City, Texas (Hester and Hill 1975:160),
and acorn fragments were also found at the Davis site in Cherokee County,
Texas (Yarnell 1970). Acorn hulls decompose, and when they are burned they
make a hot and lasting fire. Evidence of their use will be difficult to find in the
typical open sites of Central Texas, but not all of the shells would have been
completely burned; charcoal remains of such acorn shells might be found by
flotation of soil samples in these areas.
Ethnohistorical sources indicate that although acorns were used extensively
by Woodland groups, they were more often regarded as an emergency food to be
used in the event that more usual and desirable food sources failed. They
probably were gathered by groups to supplement the more reliable and staple
foods and to add variety to the diet, but they probably were not regarded as a
major resource (Betteral and Smith 1973:129).
Sites where acorns have been documented archeologically are the Koster
site in Illinois (Asch, Ford, and Asch 1972) (the report on which is one of the
best studies showing evidence of acorn use) the Fisher site in northeastern
Illinois (University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology, Ethnobotanical, and
Archeological Records, Report 75, as cited in Yarnell 1970), the McGraw
Hopewell site in Ohio and Moccasin Bluff (Yarnell 1970:70), the Franks, Feurt,
and Ash sites in Ohio, Richmond Mills (Parker 1918:29), Westfield (Guthe
¯ 1958:39), Silverwheels (Parker 1910:P1.31), and the Iroquolan sites--the Bates
and Castle Creek Owasco sites, Vine Valley site ~itchie 1959:11, 1944:64,
187), the Frontenac Island Archaic site (Ritchie 1945:8), the Lawson site in New
York (Wintemberg 1939:6), the Alway site (Jury 1937:2), the Sidney-Mackay
site (Wintemberg 1946:55), and a site in Ontario near Aylmer (University of
Michigan Museum of Anthropology, Ethnobotanical and Archeological Records, Report 176, as cited in Yarnell 1970).
Acorns also have been identified in five localities at the Feeheley site, the
Stroebel site, the Verchave II site (20MB181), three localities at the Juntunen
site and the Hopewell site in Michigan (Yarnell 1970:70). Montet-White
(1968:19) reported that the most abundant plant foods of the Middle Woodland

182

Texas Archeological Society

cultures of the Illinois Valley were acorns and nuts. They were found at the
Stillwell, Snyder, and Apple Creek sites (Streuver 1962). "Between 7840 and
6910 B.C. (as estimated on the basis of radiocarbon determinations) the Indians
who camped seasonally in Guila Naquitz Cave in Mexico collected acorns,
pinyon nuts, mesquite beans ... all of which were preserved within the cave by
desiccation" (Flannery et al. 1970).
Quercus L. Oak In Texas
The Edwards Plateau, 59 million ha (24 million acres) that comprise the Hill
County in west-central Texas, is predominantly rangeland, with usually shallow
soils underlain on the Plateau proper by limestone or caliche and in the central
basin by granite or gneiss (Correll and Johnston 1970:9). On the east and south,
the plateau ends at the Balcones Escarpment, but on the north and west it
extends into and interfringes with other regions (Correll and Johnston 1970:9).
The rough rocky areas of the plateau typically support a tree cover primarily of
live oak, Texas oak, shinnery oak, junipers, and mesquite (Correll and Johnston
1970:9). Some species of oak whose acorns conceivably could have been used
by the Texas Indians in the Edwards Plateau area are described briefly below.
Quercus Drummondii (Post Oak) Small or moderate-sized trees found in
the deep sand belts of Central Texas eastward; bears acorns annually (Correll
and Johnston 1970:477).
Quercus glaucoides Varies from shrubs to moderate-sized trees, on limestone surface and in canyons of the Edwards Plateau in Central Texas; also in
northeastern Mexico; small acorns produced annually (Correll and Johnston
1970:474).
Quercus Havardii (Shin Oak or Shinnery Oak) Very low shrubs spreading
by rhizomes, or small trees. Found in deep sand across the southern Panhandle
Plains; fruit annual, very polymorphic and very variable in size (Correll and
Johnston 1970;477-478).
Quercus macrocarpa (Bur Oak) Large trees with coarse twigs found in
moist forests along streams in East and Central Texas; fruit annually (Correll
and Johnston 1970:472).
Quercus Margaretta (Sand Post Oak, Runner Oak) Low or moderate-sized
shrubs branched from the base; found in deep sandy soil in low woodlands of
Central and East Texas; fruit annually (Correll and Johnston 1970:477).
Quercus marilandica (Blackjack Oak) Small trees as much as 10 meters
tall, with short trunks and very roughly furrowed hard black bark; abundant on
sand or on clay and gravel hills in Central Texas; fruit biennially (Correll and
Johnston 1970:490-491).
Quercus Mohriana (Scrub Oak) Shrubs or small trees that grow on limestone hills and mountains at low elevations in West and west-Central Texas,
northward into the Plains and also southward into Coahuila, Mexico. Fruit
annually (Correll and Johnston 1970:479).
Quercus Muehlenbergil (Chinkapin Oak) Moderate-sized or large trees

Turner ~ Acorn Utilization

183

found in calcareous upland forests of northeastern, Central, and West Texas;
small fruit produced annually (Correll and Johnston 1970:473-474).
Quercus Shumardii (Shumard Red Oak, Southern Red Oak) Large trees as
much as 18 meters tall with straight trunks and hard, furrowed black or platedgray bark; found in moist forests in the timber region of East Texas and
westward along waterways to the escarpment of the Edwards Plateau; fruit
biennially (Correll and Johnston 1970:488-489).
Quercus sinuata (Bastard Oak) Large trees as much as 20 meters or more
high, found in moist forests in the timber region of East Texas and westward
along the river courses to the escarpment of the Edwards Plateau; fruit annually
(Correll and Johnston 1970:481).
Quercus stellata (Post Oak) Moderate-sized trees, found in dry upland
woods, frequently on sandy soil in Central Texas (one of the dominant species of
the Cross Timbers region) and the timber region of East Texas; fruit annually. Q.
stellata x Q. sinuata var. breviloba is found with both parents on mixed gravel
and limestone banks (Correll and Johnston 1970:475-476).
Quercus texana (Texas Red Oak, Spanish Oak) Moderate or small trees as
much as 10 meters tall, with hard rough furrowed black or smooth gray bark;
peculiar to rocky limestone slopes of the Central Texas uplands; fruit biennially
(Correll and Johnston 1970:489).
Quercus virginiana (Live Oak) Small or very large spreading trees; several
natural hybrids occur sporadically in Texas; usually found in sandy loan but also
may occur in heavy clay; fruit annually (Correll and Johnston 1970:482).
Productivity in the various species of oaks is determined by many factors
and varies greatly in each region. Some oaks require two to three years to mature
whereas others (such as the white oak) mature in a year but have heavy yields
only every three years, with light crops intervening. The acorns of the Emory
oak ripen from June to September; those of the post oak mature from September
to November. White-tailed deer, squirrels, wild turkeys, prairie chickens, and
peccaries eat the acorns and would have competed with the Indians for the
harvest. Weir (1976:125) states that "nut collection and deer hunting go hand
and hand.., great quantities of the functionally specific artifact--the projectile
point--are found within the first type of midden" (middens with sufficient
occupational debris to indicate that prehistoric peoples camped on or around
them). The wide diversity and range of Texas oaks would have been an abundant
food source for the prehistoric hunters and gatherers.
BURNED ROCK MIDDENS OF CENTRAL TEXAS
Climatic conditions today approximate those of about 5,000 years ago,
when there was an apparent expansion in population together with a greater
density of oak and the development of the diagnostic burned rock midden (Weir
1976:125). There is no ethnographic record of an acorn industry in Texas, but in
comparing processing procedures in other parts of the country, significant similarities suggest a possible correlation of acorn processing with some types of
burned rock middens.

184

Texas Archeological Society

Burned rock middens are the most characteristic Archaic sites in Central
Texas. One type is a low mound of cracked and burned limestone rocks varying
in depth from a few centimeters to as much as 2.14 meters (7 feet). This type
ranges in size between 4.5 meters (15 feet) and as much as "an acre [0.40 hal in
diameter" (Schuetz 1971:131). Along the Balcones Escarpment these middens
are on bedrock or on residual soil near streams and springs and are also found on
alluvial terraces of spring valleys. The assemblages found in these middens
reflect hunting economies, sometimes with projectile points, bone, shell, and
faunal remains (Weir 1976:39).
Another type of burned rock midden, which dates from the late Archaic
(Weir 1976:39), has a central pit extending to bedrock; (sometimes bedrock
slabs have been removed from the center of the pit for greater depth [Jarvis and
Crawford 1974]). The middens are surrounded by massive concentrations of
burned rock fragments; they contain few or no diagnostic artifacts, but charred
remains of plant foods are often found in them (Weir 1976:39).
Burned rock middens of still another variety, found on the western periphery of Central Texas, were described by Wilson (1930) as circular piles or
mounds of burned rocks that are smaller than a doubled fist. The mounds vary in
circumference from 4.88 to 15.24 meters (16 to 50 feet), and they are from a few
centimeters to as much as 0.91 meters (3 feet) deep in the center; the base of the
mound proper always extends into the ground. All of the rocks in the mounds
show the effect of thorough, but not excessive, burning. They contain ashes and
dirt and, as a rule, are some distance from the campsites. Thousands of these
mounds are scattered over west-central Texas in Menard, Edwards, and Kimble
counties and westward from there toward the Pecos River, always near a wetweather water hole, stream, or lake. The streams of this area are bordered with
pecan trees, and the tops of the hills are covered with live oaks (Wilson 1930).
Wilson (1930:62) believes the mounds were hearth ovens for baking sotol
roots. F. W. Buckelew, who was captured by the Indians in 1886, related the
following eyewitness account to Wilson.
A large circular hole was then dug three or four feet deep and
several feet in diameter. In this hole they would place a large
pile of wood and rock in such a way that the rocks would
become thoroughly heated by the time the wood was consumed. The rocks were then replaced in such a way that the
sotol could be placed on and around them. When this was
completed, brush and leaves were placed next to the sotol and
the entire heap covered over with dirt so as to make it airtight.
This was allowed to remain several days during which time
the heat from the rocks would penetrate the sotol and thoroughly cook it... The bulbs were then spread out in the sun
where they could dry [Wilson 1930:62, 63].

Turner m Acorn Utilization

185

Hearths similar to those described by Buckelew often are associated with
burned rock middens, most commonly with those on open terrace sites. These
basin-shaped pits are no more than 30.48 cm (1 foot) deep and are filled with
limestone cobbles or ashy soil and contain little or no burned rock. Kelley and
Campbell (1942) believe that burned rock mounds came about as a byproduct, or
dump area, from the use and reuse of favored areas for the building of stonelined hearths. In addition to the stone-lined hearths, another variety was made by
scooping out a small cavity in the silt and sand and surrounding it with large
stones to hold the fire. In some instances stones were put into the fire, suggesting
that they might have been used for stone boiling.
W. Max Witkind conducted "An Experiment in Stone Boiling" (Gunn and
Mahula 1977:205) using dolomite stream cobbles and pieces of tabular limestone fired on a campfire of oak wood. Prefiring and postf’~ng weights were
measured, and they were boiled in a 15-quart plastic dishpan. Changes in color
were obvious (Gunn and Mahula 1977:207). Fracture lines and a proclivity to
fragment after several heatings suggest that there must have been only limited
reuse of both boiling- and cooking-pit stones and that each stone could be used
only several times before it was discarded on a nearby midden. Stones discarded
by people who visited the same location repeatedly for extended periods of time
could could have made the many and sometimes massive burned rock middens.
Courtenay J. Jones performed "A Further Experiment in Stone Boiling: A
Calcining Process for Acorns" (Jones 1980), in which he also determined the
prefiring and postfiring weights and colors of the cobbles used. In a mesquite
wood fire, Jones first rotated the limestone cobbles between a fire and a cooking
vessel; later, he rotated the cobbles between the fire and a vessel containing
water until they fractured. He then put ground acorn meal and water into the
cooking vessel and added the fractured cobbles to the thin gruellike mixture one
at a time until the mixture boiled. He took colorpHast readings, and the neutralization of the increased acidity (caused by the addition of the acorns, which
increased the acidity one hundredfold) suggested to Jones that
knowledge of the benefits of using limestone rocks in acorn
processing (eliminating the need for a leaching process to
remove the acid prior to cooking) could easily have been
gained by aboriginal peoples without requiring an understanding of the mechanics of calcination [Jones 1980:35].
Jones also noted a sizable amount of fatty, oily substance on the surface of
the water after boiling the acorn meal. Since the matrix in some middens is
greasy, this observation may be of some significance.
The possibility that the Indians used heated limestone cobbles to boil or
steam acorns or other plant foods could also account for the relative absence in
South Texas of acorn-leaching pits like those that are described above for the
acorn-gathering peoples of California.

186

Texas Archeological Society

LIMESTONE

Figure 1. Pictorial (top) and diagrammatic (bottom) representations of the chemical
interactions in acorn-processing. On the introduction of fire and water, limestone (CaCO3)
decomposes into its components CAO and CO2 to produce a base (CaO2Hz), which
neutralizes and leaches the tannic acid from the acorns.
DISCUSSION

Many hypotheses have been proposed to solve the burned rock midden
mystery of Central Texas. Exploration of areas surrounding the burned limestone rock accumulations (Hester 1971, Suhm et al. 1954) indicate that the
burned rock middens are functionally specific intrasite features (Hester 1973).
Hester further states that it "may be no coincidence that some of the major sites
are located among, or in the immediate vicinity of, large groves of oaks." Weir
(1976) suggests that the middens may have come about as a result of specialized
nut processing, including the leaching and cooking of acorn bread.
Limestone is composed of the mineral calcite (CaCO3), which has been
deposited by either inorganic or organic processes. The rocks are soft, and
moistening them with dilute acid produces vigorous effervescence caused by the
liberation of copious amounts of carbon dioxide gas. When heated in a hearth pit
with burned wood, limestone breaks down into calcium oxide (CaO) and carbon
dioxide (CO2), and the addition of water makes calcium hydroxide (CaO2I-I2) or

Turner ~ Acorn Utilization

187

Ca(OH)2, a base that would neutralize and serve as an excellent leaching agent
for the bitter tannic acid (C14H1003) in the acorns (Figure 1).
There are 75 carbon atoms in the complex molecular structure of tannic acid
(C14H~003). It is a sacroid glucosinate whose ingredients include phenolics,
which give it its acidity. The ability of tanninates to extract water and combine
with the base Ca(OH)2 is low, but the wood burned to heat the limestone rocks in
the pit would have produced sodium ash, which is even more effective as a
leaching agent. When galls (made by wasps) are burned with the branches they
are attached to, the sodium ash leaches out their tanninates and leaves the galls
palatable.
Heating the limestone rocks or using them as boiling stones with water for
processing acorns and other plant foods would have left the limestone fragments
chemically altered, so reuse of the stones as either boiling stones or cooking-pit
stones would have been limited. Therefore, the burned rock middens that are so
common in Central Texas might be explained, in accordance with the Aboriginal Dump Theory of Hester (1971) and Sorrow (1969), as accumulations of
discarded altered stones.
REFERENCES CITED
Asch, N.B., R.I. Ford, and D.L. Asch
1972
Paleo Ethnobotany of the Koster Site. Illinois State Museum Reports of
Investigation 24.
Barrett, S. A., and E. W. Gifford
1933
Miwok Material Culture. Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of
Milwaukee 2:117-376.
Baumhoff, M. A.
1963
Ecological Determinants of Aboriginal California Populations. University
of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 49:155236.
Betteral, R. L., and H. G. Smith
1973
The Moccasin Bluff Site and the Woodland Cultures of Southwestern
Michigan. Anthropology Papers of the Museum of Anthropology.23. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Correll, D. S., and M. C. Johnston
1970
Manual of the Vascular Plants of Texas. Texas Research Foundation, Renner, Texas.
Densmore, Francis
1928
Uses of Plants by the Chippewa Indians. Bureau of American Ethnology
Annual Report.44:275-397.

Texas Archeological Society

188

Driver, H. E.
1975
Indians of North America (fifth ed.). University Chicago Press, Chicago.
Flaamery, K. V., Anne Kirkley, Michael Kirktey, and A. W. Williams
1970
Farming Systems and Political Growth in Ancient Oaxaca. Plant identification by C. Earl Smith, U. S. Department of Agriculture.
Gayton, A. H.
1948
Yokuts and Western Mono Ethnography II: Northern Foothill Yokuts and
Western Mono. University of California Anthropology Records 10(2): 143302.
Gifford, E. W.
1936
California Balanophagy. In : Essays in Anthropology Presented to A. L.
Kroeber. University of California Press. pp. 87-98.
Gunn, Joel, and Royce Mahula
An Experiment in Stone Boiling by W. Max Witkind. In: Hop Hill: Culture
1977
and Climatic Change in Central Texas. The Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Guthe, A. K.
The Late Prehistoric Occupation in Southwestern New York: An Interpre1958
tive Analysis. New York State Archaeological Association, Research and
Transactions 141.
Hecklewelder, John
1882
History, Manners and Customs of the Indian Nations Who Once Inhabited
Pennsylvania and the Neighboring States. New and revised edition, Members Historical Society 12, Pennsylvania.
Hester, T. R.
Archaeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas.
!971
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42, Dallas.
1973

The Formation of a ’Burned Rock Midden’: A California Example. The
Record (Dallas Archaeological Society) 29(3).

1980

Digging Into South Texas Prehistory. Corona Publishing Co., S an Antonio,
Texas.

Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1975
Some Aspects of Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric Archaeology in Southem Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio. Special Report No. 1.
R. W., and D. D. Crawford
Archaeological Excavations on Interstate Highway 10, Sutton County, Texas.
1974
Texas Highway Department Publications in Archaeology 4, Austin.

Jarvis,

Turner ~ Acorn Utilization

189

Jones, C. J.
1980
A Further Experiment in Stone Boiling: A Calcining Process for Acorns. La
Tierra 8(2):31-38.
Jury, Wilfred
1941
The Clearville Prehistoric Village Site in Oxford Township, Kent County.
Bulletin of the Museum, University of Western Ontario 2. London, Ontario,
Canada.
Kelley, J. C., and T. N. Campbell
1942
What are the Burned Rock Mounds of Texas? American Antiquity 7(3):319322.
Kroeber, A. L., R. L. Olson, R. H. Lowie, and E. W. Gifford
1937-1939
Culture Element Distribution. University of California Publ&ations
in Anthropological Records 1. University of California Press, Berkley.
Merriam, C. H.
The Acorn, A Possibly Neglected Source of Food. National Geographic
1918
Magazine, 34:129-137. Washington, D. C.
Montet-White, Anta
1968
The Lithic Industries of the Illinois Valley in the Early and Middle Woodland Period. Anthropology Papers of the Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan 35.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1973
The Indians of Texas. The University of Texas Press. Austin.
Parker, A. C.
1910
Iroquois Uses of Maize and Other Food Plants. New York State Museum
Bulletin 144.
1918

A Prehistoric Iroquoian Site on the Reed Farm, Richmond Mills, Ontario
County, New York. Research Transactions of the New York State Archaeological Association 1:1-41.

Ritchie, W. A.
1945
An Early Site in Cayuga County, New York: Type Component of the
Frontenac Focus Archaic Pattern. Rochester Museum of Arts and Sciences
Research Records 7.
1959

Excavation of an Owasco Village Site in New York: Report on 1958
Settlement Pattern Studies in the Northeast. Eastern States Archaeological
Federation 18:11-12.

Sanders, W. T., and B. J. Price
1968
Mesoamerica: The Evolution of a Civilization. Random House, Inc.
Scheutz, M. K.
1957
A Report on Williamson County Mound Material. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 28:135-168.

190

Texas Archeological Society

Smith, H. H.
Ethnobotany of the Menomini Indians. Bulletin of the Museum of the City of
1923
Milwaukee 4(1):1-174.
1928

Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki Indians. Bulletin of the Museum of the City of
Milwaukee 4(2):175-326.

1932

Ethnobotany of the Ojibwa Indians. Bulletin of the Museum of the City of
Milwaukee 4(3):327-525.

1933

Ethnobotany of the Forest Potawatomi Indians. Bulletin of the Museum of
the City of Milwaukee 7(1 ):1-230.

Snow, Dean
The Archaeology of North America. Viking Press, New York.
1976
Sorrow, W.

1969

n.

Archaeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site: A Burned Rock Midden in Williamson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project
Paper 18.

Spencer, R. F., J. D. Jermings, C. E. Dibble, Elden Johnson, A. R. King, Theodore Stem,
K. M. Stewart, O. C. Stewart, and W. J. Wallace.
1965
The Native Americans. Harper and Row, New York.
Struever, Stuart
1962
Implications of Vegetal Remains From an Illinois Hopewell Site. American
Antiquity 27(4):584-587.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Kreiger, and E. B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
1954
Archeological Society 25.
Swezey, Sean
1975
The Energetics of Subsistence-Assurance Ritual in Native California. Contribution.s of the University of California Archaeological Research Facility.
University of California, Berkley.
Voeglin, E. W.
Culture Element Distribution: XX, Northeastern California. University of
1942
California Anthropology Records 7(2):47-251.
Waugh, F. W.
1916
Iroquois Foods and Food Preparation. Canada Department of Mines, Geological Survey, Anthropology Series, No. 12.
Weir, F. A.
1976
The Central Texas Archaic. Doctoral Dissertation. Department of Anthropology, Washington State University.
Wilson, E. W.
1930
Burned Rock Mounds of Southwest Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society 2.

Turner ~ Acorn Utilization

191

Wintemberg, W. J.
1939
Lawson Prehistoric Village Site, Middlesex County, Ontario. National
Museum of Canada Bulletin 94:1-104.
1946

The Sidney-Mackay Village Site. American Antiquity 11(3):154-182.

Wolf, C. B.
1945
California Wild Tree Crops. Rancho Santa Aria Botanical Gardens.
Yarnell, R. A.
1970
Aboriginal Relationships Between Culture and Plant Life in the Upper
Great Lakes Region (reprint of 1964 ed.). Museum ofAnthropology, University of Michigan 23.

193

Notes on Obsidian from the Fort Hood Area of
Central Texas
Richard E. Hughes
ABSTRACT
Nondestructive energ~ dispersive x-ray fluorescence analyses were performed on two obsidian artifacts from the Fort Hood area of Bell and Coryell
counties in Central Texas. These studies showed that the obsidian came from
two different sources in southwestern and north central New Mexico.
INTRODUCTION

The presence of obsidian in Texas archeological sites has evoked comment
for more than half a century (e.g. Studer 1931; Ray 1935). Although obsidian
has not been found in great abundance at any archeological site in the state,
speculation on the parent geological sources has had a long history (see Krieger
1947, Newell and Krieger 1949:160). Today, however, it is no longer necessary
to speculate, because sophisticated measurement techniques developed in the
physical sciences (i.e. x-ray fluorescence and neutron activation) can be used to
detect the geochemical composition of obsidian artifacts. First, the minor, trace,
and rare earth element compositions of obsidian sources are measured to construct an elemental "profile" for each source. The corresponding elemental profiles, or "fingerprints," of particular artifacts are then generated and compared
with profiles of obsidian samples from known geologic sources to determine the
most likely origin for each artifact. This procedure, sometimes known as fingerprinting or obsidian-sourcing research, has been pursued steadily in Texas for
more than a decade (e.g. Hester and Mitchell 1974, Hester et al. 1975, 1980,
1986; Hester, Asaro, and Stross 1980; 1982, Mitchell et al. 1980). Consequently, despite the relative rarity of obsidian in the state, comparatively more is
known about its prehistoric distribution in Texas than currently is known about
distributions in adjacent areas that are richly endowed with natural deposits of
volcanic glass. This paper reports the results of the analysis of two obsidian
artifacts from the Fort Hood area and offers some brief comparisons with
previous sourcing research in Central Texas.
THE SAMPLES

The two obsidian artifacts studied here were recovered from two archeological sites---one (site 560) in Coryell County, within the boundaries of the U.S.
Army’s Fort Hood Military Installation, the other (41BL59) in Bell County near
Morgan’s Point (Figure 1).
A small, concave-base projectile point (Figure, 2, a) (Cat. no. 86-1005) was
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (for 1988)

Texas Archeological Society

194

recovered in Coryell County at site 560 in Fort Hood on the surface of a terrace
that overlooks Owl Creek. The site also contained Baird, Bulverde, and Wells
type dart points (Briuer, personal communication), but the shape and size of this
specimen suggest that it is either a Fresno or Maud type arrowpoint. This
particular specimen is slightly smaller than illustrated Fresno and Maud points
(cf. Suhm and Jelks 1962:Plates 137, 141): its shallow basal concavity is somewhat greater than those of illustrated Fresno points, yet less extreme than on the
Maud examples. Despite this classification ambiguity, the overall morphological attributes of the point suggest that it probably was manufactured no earlier
than A.D. 1000 and no later than A.D. 1800 (Suhm and Jelks 1962:273,281).
The other specimen (Figure, 2, b) is an obsidian biface fragment (Cat. no.
86-1006) recovered by avocationalists from excavations at site 41BL59 along
Cedar Creek at Morgan’s Point in Bell County. Briuer (personal communication) indicated that the obsidian flake was associated with Perdiz and Cliffton
points and Leon Plain pottery, below historic material, but above late Archaic
deposits (including Ensor and Montell projectile points). Although the morphological attributes of this artifact provide no clues as to its age, if the specimen
was associated with these points and pottery, it would date from about A.D.
1200 to 1500 (cf. Suhm and Jelks 1962:95,269,283).
ANALYTICAL METHOD
Laboratory analyses on these artifacts were performed on a SpectraceTM
5000 (Tracor X-ray) energy dispersive x-ray fluorescence spectrometer equipped

MEXICO

A

SCALE

Obsidian~
Ridge

.~CORYELL COUNTY’\

Gatesville
\

~\
Site

~

560

’\
\\

",\

/-~

"\

/\

41 BL 59\’\

~"

0
0

~

1OKra
lOMi

G Temple

Killeen

"~,. BELL COUNTY

//

\,

I

"~

SCALE

Figure 1. Map of the study area, showing archeological sites (open triangles) and obsidian sources (solid triangles) discussed in the text.

Hughes m Notes on Obsidian from Fort Hood

a
0

195

b
1

2

3

4

5
¢nl.

Figure 2. Obsidian artifacts from the Fort Hood area, Texas: a) projectile point (Cat. no.
86-1005) from Fort Hood site 560; b) biface fragment (Cat. no. 86-1006) from site
41BL59.

with a rhodium (Rh) x-ray tube, a 50 kV x-ray generator, and a lithium-drifted
silicon solid state detector with 150 eV resolution (FWHM) at 5.9 keV in a 30
mm2 area. The analysis technique is completely nondestructive; no part of the
specimen was powdered or otherwise altered. The only sample preparation
undertaken before analysis was a simple rinsing in distilled water to remove
possible surface contaminants. Technical details of the analyses (e.g. primary
beam filter selection, calibration) appear in Hughes (n.d.), but operating conditions for the x-ray tube were similar to those reported elsewhere (Hughes
1986a, b).
RESULTS
Trace element concentration values for these two artifacts (Table 1) show
that whereas titanium (Ti), iron (Fe), rubidium (Rb), strontium (Sr), and yttrium
(Y) are similar in both specimens, their manganese (Mn), zirconium (Zr), niobium (Nb) and barium (Ba) values are quite different, indicating that two
distinct geochemical varieties of obsidian are represented. Comparison of these
trace element values with those generated from parent obsidian sources to the
west (Baugh and Nelson 1987, Hughes 1988, Nelson 1984, Newman and Nielsen
1985), the north, (i.e., Malad, Idaho; Hughes 1984:Table 3, Hester et al. 1986),
and south (Hester et al. 1985:Table 1) indicates that both specimens were
fashioned from obsidian originating in New Mexico.
Specifically, the projectile point from Fort Hood site 560 in Coryell County
matches the trace element profile of Mule Creek obsidian from southwestern
New Mexico (see Hughes 1988), indicating that obsidian from this source was
more widely distributed than previously believed (see Findlow and Bolognese
1982a, 1982b). To the author’s knowledge, this is only the second report of
Mule Creek obsidian in Texas; the first reported specimen was from a site in

196

Texas Archeological Society

8
0

~

+J
0 ,...I

t~.

,,D

r~

’,~

e,l

2:

t’~

t’-,I
+l

.~ ~-s
~drz
~’~

+l

~ ~..~
e¢3
~

~
o

,-~

+1

0

r~

,~-

=

un +[

0

e-I

"~"

+l

0
0

+1 Z

Hughes m Notes on Obsidian from Fort Hood

197

McMuUen County south of San Antonio (Hester and Mitchell 1974), even
farther from the source than the Fort Hood specimen.
The obsidian biface fragment from site 41BL59 conforms to the fingerprint
of Obsidian Ridge glass from the Jemez Mountains volcanic field in northern
New Mexico. In reporting on obsidian sourcing analyses from Hutchinson and
Roberts counties, Texas, Mitchell and his co-workers (Mitchell et al. 1980:304,
305) identified an obsidian type they termed (following R. N. Jack’s suggestion)
"High Nb" obsidian, and tentatively suggested that the geographic source counterpart for this group was somewhere in the Valles Caldera, west of Santa Fe, New
Mexico. Specimen 86-1006 from Fort Hood contains a high amount of Nb
(about 92 ppm), and its Rb, Sr, and Zr composition also agrees with the High Nb
profile (Mitchell et al. 1980:Table 1). Recent geochemical analyses conducted
on obsidians from northern New Mexico (e.g. Newman and Nielsen 1985,
Baugh and Nelson 1987) support Mitchell’s hypothesis that Obsidian Ridge, in
the Bandelier Tuff within the Jemez Mountains volcanic field, which circumscribes the Valles Caldera (see Smith and Bailey 1966), is probably the source
for the High Nb group.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Christopher Stevenson, of Archaeological and Historical Consultants, Inc., for sending the specimens to me for analysis, Thomas R. Hester, of
The University of Texas at Austin, and Jimmy L. Mitchell, editor of this
Bulletin, for providing copies of relevant literature, David L. Carlson, of Texas
A&M University, for provenience data, and Fred Briuer, Staff Archaeologist at
Fort Hood, for providing chronological information on both specimens. Thanks
also to Tracy Farbstein for drafting Figure 1, and Rusty Van Rossmann for
Figure 2. This work was supported in part by the Cultural Resources Management Division at New Mexico State University and by a Research Grant from
the Anthropological Studies Center at Sonoma State University.
REFERENCES CITED
Baugh, Timothy, and F. W. Nelson, Jr.
1987
New Mexico Obsidian Sources and Exchange on the Southern Plains. Journal of Field Archaeology 14:313-329.
Findlow, F. J., and Marisa Bolognese
1982a
Regional Modeling of Obsidian Procurement in the American Southwest.
In: Contexts for Prehistoric Exchange, edited by Jonathon E. Ericson and
Timothy K. Earle, pp. 53-81. Academic Press, New York.
1982b

A Preliminary Analysis of Prehistoric Obsidian Use Within the Mogollon
Area. In: Mogollon Archaeology: Proceedings of the 1980 Mogollon Conference, edited by Patrick H. B eckett, pp. 297-316. Acoma Books, Ramona,
California.

198

Texas Archeological Society

Hester, T. R., Frank Asaro, and Fred Stross
1980
Source Analysis of Obsidian Artifacts in Texas: new results. Houston Archaeological Society Newsletter 68:12-16.
1982

Results of Some Recent Studies by the Texas Obsidian Project. Journal of
the Houston Archaeological Society 73: 8-10.

Hester, T. R., Frank Asaro, Helen Michel, Fred Stross, & F.W. Nelson
1986
Trace Element and Geologic Sources Studies of an Obsidian Artifact from
Site 41LK51, Live Oak County, Texas. Appendix V in The Prehistoric Sites
at Choke Canyon Reservior, Southern Texas: Results of Phase II Archaeological Investigations, by Grant D. Hall, Thomas R. Hester, and Stephen L.
Black. Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San
Antonio, Choke Canyon Series, Volume 10:510-522
Hester, T. R., G. L. Evans, Frank Asaro, Fred Stross, T.N. Campbell, and Helen Michel
1985

Trace Element Analysis of an Obsidian Paleo-Indian Projectile Point from
Kincaid Rockshelter, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56:
143-153.

Hester, T. R., J. W. House, R. N. Jack, and F. H. Stross
X-ray Fluorescence of Obsidian Artifacts from the Rio Grande Plain, South1975
ern Texas. Texas Journal of Science 26 (1-2): 286-289.
Hester, T. R., and J. L. Mitchell
1974
Source Analysis of Obsidian Artifacts from McMullen County, Southern
Texas. Lower Plains Archeological Society Bulletin 4:25-32.
Hester, T. R., J. L. Mitchell, Frank Asaro, and Fred Stross
Further Notes on Obsidian Artifacts From Dimmit County, Southern Texas.
1980
La Tierra 7 (3): 30-33.
Hughes, R. E.
1984
Obsidian Sourcing Studies in the Great Basin: Problems and Prospects. In
Obsidian Studies in the Great Basin, edited by Richard E. Hughes. Contributions of the University of California Archaeological Research Facility
45: 1-19.
1986a

Trace Element Composition of Obsidian Butte, Imperial County, California.
Bulletin of the Southern California Academy of Sciences 85: 35-45.

1986b

Energy Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence Analysis of Obsidian from Dog Hill
and Burns Butte, Oregon. Northwest Science 60: 73-80.

1988

Archaeological Significance of Geochemical Contrasts Among Southwestern New Mexico Obsidians. Texas Journal of Science, 40(3).

n.d.

The Coso Volcanic Field Re-examined: Implications for Obsidian Sourcing
and Hydration Dating Research. Geomorphology. In press.

Krieger, A. D.
Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of Texas
1947
Publication No. 4640.

Hughes ~ Notes on Obsidian from Fort Hood

199

Mitchell, J.L., T. R. Hester, Frank Asaro, and Fred Stross
1980
Notes on Trace Element Analysis of Obsidian from Hutchinson and Roberts
Counties in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
51: 301-308.
Nelson, F. W., Jr.
1984
X-ray Fluorescence Analysis of Some Western North American Obsidians.
In Obsidian Studies in the Great Basin, edited by Richard E. Hughes.
Contributions of the University of California Archaeological Research Facility 45: 27-62.
Newell, H. P., and A. D. Krieger
1949
The George C. Davis site, Cherokee County, Texas. Society for American
Archaeology Memoir 5.
Newman, J. R., and R. L. Nielsen
1985
Initial Notes on the X-ray Fluorescence Sourcing of Northern New Mexico
Obsidians. Journal of Field Archaeology 12: 377-383.
Ray, C. N.
1935

The Pottery Complex Artifacts of the Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society 7:70-88.

Smith, R.L., and R.A. Bailey
1966
The Bandelier Tuff: A Study of Ash-flow Eruption Cycles from Zoned
Magma Chambers. Bulletin Volcanologique 29: 83-103.
Studer, F. V.
Archaeological Survey of the North Panhandle of Texas. Bulletin of the
1931
Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society 3: 70-75.
Suhm, D. A., and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeo!ogical
Society Special Publication 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4,
Austin.

201

Prehistoric Subsistence Strategies
in Northeastern Central Texas
David O. Brown
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the hypothesized paleoenvironment of the Aquilla
Lake area at the margin of the Cross Timbers and Blackland Prairie biotic
regions in northeastern Central Texas. Quantitative approximations are offered
for both the faunal and floral resources of the area during the prehistoric period.
Prehistoric resource procurement is discussed in light of faunal data excavated
from the McDonald site at Aquilla Lake. The data are then utilized to offer
suggestions concerning possible adaptive strategies in the northeastern Central
Texas area. Prehistoric subsistence and the exploitation of various food resources along the northeastern edge of the Central Texas culture area are
discussed. At the core of the discussion is a model proposed by Skinner, Shaw,
Huckaby, and Bartsch for the Aquilla Lake area in Hill County. The plant
resources of the Aquilla Lake area are discussed, and some preliminary figures
are presented. The previously developed quantitative model of faunal exploitation is tested against actual excavation data from the McDonald site at Aquilla
Lake. The revised model is examined in the context of proposed adaptive
strategies for the northeastern Central Texas area.
INTRODUCTION
Aquilla Lake is a reservoir project of the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers in
central Hill County about 16 km (10 miles) west of Lake Whitney (Figure 1).
Geologically, the area is underlain by sandstone as well as shales and clays of
Cretaceous age. The western part of the lake area, along Aquilla Creek, is
underlain by sands of the Woodbine Formation and forms the west boundary of
the eastern Cross Timbers vegetation zone. The eastern arm of the lake, which
follows Hackberry Creek, cuts into Eagle Ford clays and shales that underlie the
Blackland Prairie.
The region has been the scene of much archeological activity, most notably
that associated with Lake Whitney (Jelks 1962, Stephenson 1970, Lynott 1978).
have been undertaken in Aquilla Lake by both Southern

Archeological projects

Methodist University (SMU) (Lynott and Peter 1977, Skinner and Henderson
1972, Skinner et al. 1978, 1979) and the Texas Archeological Survey (Watson
1982, Brown 1987a). Surveys of the lake area recorded more than a hundred
prehistoric archeological sites ranging in age from Late Paleo-Indian to Late
Prehistoric.
As with many archeological projects in Central Texas, lithic artifacts comprise most of the materials recovered from the Aquilla Lake. Analysis of the
stylistic and functional variability of lithic materials provides an essential base
for the

understanding of prehistoric lifeways, but there are noticeable limitations
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (for 1988)

Texas Archeological Society

202

\
Hillsboro

?
[]
Peoria

Creek

N

Brazil Site

McDonald Site
Lake
Jilla Lake Dam
cobb

o~

0

Aquilla

6

1
"[

2 miles
2 kilometers

Figure 1. Map of the Aquilla Lake area, Northeastern Central Texas.

in attempting to extrapolate from lithic material culture to other cultural subsystems. One area in which these limitations leave unfortunately large lacunae is
the interpretation of the exploitation by the prehistoric group of the biotic
resources of their environment. Although it is possible to make limited ecological inferences from tool forms (e.g., hunting activities based on the presence of
projectile points), for the most part such interpretations cannot substitute for the
actual faunal or floral remains that make up the primary data.

Brown -- Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

203

One approach to the study of utilization of environmental resources that is
not necessarily limited by the fortuitous preservation of faunal or floral materials is catchment analysis. This technique, originally devised by Higgs, VitaFinzi, Harris, and Fagg (1967) for Paleolithic sites in Epirus, Greece, and later
expanded upon by Vita-Finzi and Higgs (1970) in a study of Upper Paleolithic
and Neolithic sites in Palestine, involves determination of the resources available within a stated distance from a site. Site catchment analysis has been widely
used in many parts of the world in the study of both hunter-gatherers and village
agriculturalists (Davidson 1976, Findlow and Erickson 1980, Flannery 1976,
Peebles 1978, Webley 1972, Zarky 1976, Zvelebil 1983). Roper (1979) and
Dennell (1980) have discussed some of the better applications of catchment
analysis as well as some of the limitations of the technique.
In the report on the 1976 testing at Aquilla Lake (Skinner et al. 1978), SMU
conducted preliminary catchment analysis of the area. This analysis, centered on
the Brazil site (41HI76), described the faunal and floral resource potential for
the Cross Timbers and Blackland Prairie biotic zones. A detailed list was
compiled of potentially exploited faunal and floral species, and some quantitative approaches were suggested for the derivation of yield values. Faunal resource potential was explored in greater detail, taking into account animal
population densities, maximum harvest rates, kilograms of usable meat, and
calories per individual. This potential was compared with the estimated caloric
requirements necessary for the survival of human groups of various sizes.
The complexities of catchment analysis are beyond the scope of this paper,
but a brief discussion of some of the more troublesome problems is in order. One
of the major difficulties in any such analysis is the identification and characterization of aboriginal resource zones. The identification of microareal resources
zones is all but impossible, and even the use of generalized resource zones can
be problematical in areas where agriculture and grazing have radically altered
the landscape. At Aquilla Lake, where the major biotic zones are controlled by
readily identifiable geologic features (sandstones versus shales and clays), this
problem is somewhat alleviated. There are still many questions, however, about
the character of the aboriginal vegetation of the two major biotic zones and
about the nature and extent of a possible ecotonal region between the two.
Other major problems include the choice of a catchment area of appropriate
size. Following Lee’s (1968) observation of foraging distances among the !Kung
Bushmen, 10 km (6 miles)--the figure used by the analysts at SMU--has
become common. However, the use of a single value without question brings on
difficulties. In addition to the problems with distance, there remains the critical
problem of aboriginal selection of resources. No known group exploits the full
potential of its environment, and many groups exploit resources such as roots
and insects, which are rarely quantified in modern environmental studies.
Due to the lack of preservation at the Brazil site and at many such sites in
the area, the question of which resources were used cannot be answered completely, but, fortunately, a faunal collection is available from the McDonald site
(41HI105). Although the resources in the McDonald site might differ somewhat

204

Texas Archeological Society

from those at the Brazil site, the 10-km catchment rings for both are nearly
identical. There are slightly more Blackland Prairie and slightly less Cross
Timbers in the McDonald site 10-km catchment ring than in the Brazil site
catchment ring, but the differences are certainly within the margin for error for
estimating aboriginal resource zones from modem topographic maps. For this
reason, the figures derived from the 1978 catchment analysis will be used here
as a first approximation.
FLORAL RESOURCES
Modeling the Aquilla Lake Paleoenvironment
The catchment analysis developed at Southern Methodist Univesity describes in some detail the floral resources that were available to the aboriginal
populations, but stops short of providing quantitative estimates.
In this analysis, Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978:150-151)
divide the Blackland Prairie into three zones. The principal climax dominant of
their upland zone is little bluestem grass (Schizachyrium scoparium), with
subdominants including Indian grass (Sorghastrum nutans), big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii), Texas wintergrass (Stipa leucotricha), and dropseed
(Sporobolus sp). Areas along drainages are divided into a drier grassy lowland
zone with big bluestem grass as the dominant and Indian grass and switchgrass
(Panicum virgatum) as subdominants. The wetter bottomland zone includes an
overstory of red ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica), cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia),
and hackberry (Celtis sp.), with an understory of weedy vines such as grapes
(Vitis sp.), poison ivy (Toxicodenron radicans), and greenbriar (Smilax bonanox) and frutescents such as rough-leaf dogwood (Cornus drummondii), downy
and green haws (Crataegus mollis and C. viridis), big-tree and hog plums
(Prunus mexicana and P. rivularis), Eve’s necklace (Sophora affinis), black haw
(Viburnum rufidulum), and coralberry (Symphoricarpos orbiculatus). Occasional
overstory species include red oak (Quercus shumardii), pecan (Carya illinoiensis),
post oak (Quercus stellata), red mulberry (Morus rubra), and live oak (Quercus
virginiana).
Although there is not complete agreement regarding the original vegetation
of the Cross Timbers region, it seems likely that various species of oak wood
were more important in the upland areas of the Cross Timbers than in the
Blackland Prairie. Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978) apparently
favor an upland savannah with stands of post oak and blackjack oak (Quercus
marilandica), with some white oak (Quercus sp.), red oak, and black hickory
(Carya texana). The understory, in addition to greenbriar, probably consisted
primarily of little bluestem, big bluestem, Indian grass, tall dropseed (Sporobolus asper), sideoats grama (Bouteloua curtipendula), and hairy grama (B. hirsuta).
They also suggest that the Cross Timbers bottomland was very much like the
Blackland Prairie bottomland.
As Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978) point out, grasses were the
predominant vegetation over much of the upland area of the Aquilla Lake

Brown m Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

205

region. Some of the Quaternary terrace surfaces and some of the bottomland
areas may have been predominantly grassy. They also suggest that the small size
of the seeds of these grasses would not have made them very desirable as
aboriginal food resources. In any case, many grass species are widely spread
throughout the are in several biotic zones or subzones. Ubiquitous in the lake
area are little and big bluestem grasses, which account for as much as 70 percent
of the cover in some areas (Skinner et al. 1978). Except for Texas wintergrass,
which produces seed in the spring, all of the grasses produce seed in the
(generally late) summer and in the fall Figure 2).
JAN 1

FEB

I MAR [ APRIL I MAY ~ JUNE I JULy I AUG I SEPT I

OCT t

NOV t DEC

[’,’,: Chinquapin oak";’;’;

ed muibe’r#";:l
I Fo~.grape,t
UBIQUITOUS BOTTOMLAND SPECIES l’"" Mustang grape

[ #~ack ha~Vo~.n

i: areen ha~horn,"t

I.,,,.,., Cor~! 9e~7 ,,,,.,,.,~
[,I,1<,’:,I,1,!. Soapberry .i,.,i,:<,i,1, .1
JAN I

FEB

I MAR 1 APRILI MAY ~ JUNE I JULy 1 AUG I SEPTI

CROSS TIMBERS BOTTOMS

OCT t

NOV l DEC

~-~.Post. o~k ~1
~,.~!v.o.o~k.J

JAN I

FEB

I MAR I APRIL[ MAY ~ JUNE I JULy I AUG 1 SEPTI

CROSS TIMBERS UPLANDS

OCT 1

NOV t DEC

I~. Blackjack oak

Figure 2. Chart showing seasonality of grass seeding in the Cross Timbers and Blackland
Prairie of Texas. Adapted from Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978:Table 14).

206

Texas Archeologicat Society

Aboriginal vegetal resources would have been found in the bottomland
areas as well as in stands of oaks in the upland areas of the Cross Timbers. In the
chart showing the seasonality of the major nongrass vegetal species (Figure 3), it
should be noted that there are no major species listed for the Blackland Prairie
uplands, which are thought to be almost exclusively grasslands. This figure
shows the productivity of the bottomlands of both biotic zones and their similarity; the Cross Timbers biotic zone differs from the Blackland Prairie only in the
addition of various oak species. The greatest potential resource production
period for both areas is fall, although both bottomland zones have secondary
fruiting seasons in the spring and available plant foods in summer, as well.
Limited largely to oak, the upland Cross Timbers is a major food resource
production area probably used almost exclusively during the fall.

JAN I FEB 1 MAR IAPRILI MAY

FEB

DEC

[:i:i:i:i’;:.’,:; Little Bluestem ::-:;:;:;:-:;~,;~.,:]

UB aU TOUS
JAN I

i JUNEI JULyI AUG 1 SEPTI OCT I NOV I

9 u,estem .::’":’N

I MAR I APRIL I MAY i JUNE I JULy’ 1 AUG I SEPT I

OCT I

NOV 1 DEC

! ’d an’glras’sl
;ROSS TIMBERS UPLANDS[~,X~%%,’~,\\"~IS,ide~Oa!s~ g~r~a}n’a" ,~\\\\\\"x~

JAN 1

FEB I MAR t APRILI MAY i JUNE I JULy’ I AUG I SEPT1

OCT t

NOV I DEC

Indian grass
BLACKLAND PRAIRIE UPLANDS
[

JAN I

FEB

{

I Prairie droplseed

Needle grass

I MAR t APRILI MAY i JUNE I JULy I AUG I SEPTI

OCT 1

NOV I DEC

Figure 3. Chart showing plant seasonality in the Cross Timbers and Blackland Prairie of
Texas. Adapted from Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978:Table 14).

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

207

The list of edible plants (Table 1) by no means exhausts the edible plants
available, many of which have been documented as used by historic Indian
groups and by early settlers. Nonetheless, the lack of both preserved botanical
remains and detailed ethnohistoric and ethnographic information from the area
hinders further investigation.
Elaboration of the Paleoenvironmental Model
The original SMU catchment model attempted quantification of the available faunal resources of the Aquilla Lake area, but no such model was created
for the floral resources of the area. Any attempt to recreate the paleoflora of a
disturbed ecosystem such as that in the study area is obviously fraught with
difficulties, but quantitative estimates of the modern vegetal communities were
unavailable for the area at the time of the original model (Skinner et al. 1978:152),
so the task was almost impossible. A more recent study by Texas A&M University (Slack and Marcy 1983), which provides valuable data on the density of
modern floral resources in the Aquilla Lake area, has been used here to estimate
the amounts of available floral resources.
Areal figures used for this reanalysis are ones provided by Southern Methodist University for the 20-km-diameter catchment circle around the Brazil site,
which was considered by them to be an example of a Late Archaic base camp
(Skinner et al. 1978:150). These figures include 15,450 ha of upland and 390 ha
of bottomland in the Blackland Prairie, 13,560 ha of upland and 1,640 ha of
bottomland in the Cross Timbers biotic province, and 360 ha of remnant terraces
that do not fall into either biotic zone. Although the potential food value of
grasses to the aboriginal inhabitants might have been great, the following estimates are confined primarily to hardwood nuts and fruits, which are thought to
have contributed a significant portion of the vegetal resources in the Aquilla
Lake area. The differential preservation of floral remains introduces considerable bias into quantitative analyses, but hardwood nuts are the primary vegetal
remains at many East Texas Caddo sites (Keller 1974:!42; Jackson 1981;
Perttula and Bruseth 1983:18-19).
For this study, only two major biomes are considered in estimating resource
potential. These are the riparian forests lining the creeks and major lateral
tributaries of both biotic zones and the oak savannah of the Cross Timbers
uplands. The bottomland area of both the Blackland Prairie and Cross Timbers is
assumed to be part grassland and part riparian forest. Although the percentages
of forest would have fluctuated through time, with perhaps much greater areas of
grassland occurring during both very wet and very dry climates, a figure of 50
percent riparian forest is assumed here for bottomland areas. In not precisely
comparable figures, the Slack and Marcy (1983) study recorded 278 ha of
riparian forest in the 4,133-ha project study area, which corresponds closely to
the actual lake area; this yields 6.7 percent riparian forest. In their broad study
area of 17,465 ha, which coi-responds more closely to the range of habitats found
in the catchment circle, only 394 ha of riparian forest was recorded, yielding 2.3

Texas Archeological Society

208

g

~=.-~o~
~

0

~

0

o

0

t~
o~

.-Z
.<
o~
~J

r~
0

oo
-o

o

~.~

~

;~.0

0~’~

~ ~ ~ ~:~.i
¯ ~’~
~
-~"~~.~.~:~
~"
~
~’~ ~.~ ~0"~ ~ ~’~ ~.
~ ~ ~-~’~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~.

¯~

~ ~

~

~.0 ~<~ ~.~

~ [b~ ~ ~,~.~

¯

0

~

_

o

~ 8~’~

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

209

percent riparian forest. Adding to this figure the 149 ha of developed riparian
land yields an overall figure of 3.1 percent potential riparian forest, which is
almost identical to the 3.2 percent figure from an estimation of 50 percent of the
catchment area bottomland as forested.
Reconstructing the vegetation of the upland Cross Timbers area is more
difficult. Slack and Marcy describe 1,029 ha (24.9 percent of the smaller study
area) as forest during the original 1979 survey (by the 1982 vegetation survey).
Additional forested acreage had been cleared, so the later figures are not used
here. This 1,029-ha figure includes some parkland and savannah, however, only
644 ha (15.6 percent) are described as woodland forest.
Despite recent lossses to cropland, the invasion of brushy species following
historic grazing and agriculture and the inlyoduction of modern fire control
measures may have contributed to increased woodland area in the Cross Timbers. An examination of Slack and Marcy’s less disturbed primary habitat
types---cedar elm woodland, oak woodland, pecan woodland, mesquite/cedar
elm parkland, mesquite woodland, mesquite savannah, and riparian woodland--shows that only one----oak woodland--approximates the original habitat. For the
sake of simplicity, the oak woodland habitat has been chosen to represent the
original forest, estimated as comprising only 10 percent of the total upland Cross
Timbers area. Admittedly, this figure may a gross underestimation of the extent
of the upland forest during moist climatic periods, but it provides a starting point
for further analysis. The remaining 90 percent of the upland and terrace areas is
assumed to be grasslands and is not considered further here.
Production figures used here (Tables 2, 3) are, with some adjustments,
extrapolated into the Aquilla Lake area from those reported by Keller (1974) for
similar species in East Texas. The climate at Aquilla Lake is drier than in East
Texas, so these figures may overestimate the available resources, but the overestimation of resources should be offset by the underestimation of upland forest.
Keller (1974:146-147) gives the average annual weight and the caloric value per
pound of fruit produced annually by many common species (Tables 2, 3).
The total estimated production from these two areas is 10,909,800,000
kilocalories, which is enormously greater than the 137,051,207 kilocalories
estimated for animal resource potential for the catchment area. However, the
bulk of the vegetal production is acorn production from the Cross Timbers
upland area, where the estimated percentage of forested area was set quite low.
The implications of this figure will be discussed in the concluding section of
this paper.
FAUNAL RESOURCES
The Paleoenvironmental Model
Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978) have discussed the Aquilla
Lake fauna in some detail, estimating animal population densities, potential
harvest rates, meat yields, and caloric values for several important game species.

210

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2.

Species
OVERSTORY
Quercus macrocarpa
(Bur oak)
Carya illinoiensis
(pecan)
Morus rubra
(Red mulberry)
Celtis laevigata
(Texas sugarberry)
Gleditsia triacanthos
(Honey locust)
Crataegus spathulata
(Pasture haw)
TOTAL

Productivity of Bottomland Forest
Annual
Kcal/b
Yield (Kg)
Kg

Total
Kcal

Density
(N/Ha)

Total
Treesa

4.5

4568

4.54

13.1

13297

22.68

22.4

22736

2.72

661

40.9x106

11.6

11774

2.72

441

14.1x106

7.4

7511

4.54

772

26.3x106

4.5

4568

2.49

551

6.3x106
1318.3x106

70.7

71761

9.07

2789

907.7X106

10.6

10759

2.72

661

9.7x106

196.4

199346

2.72

441

119.6x106

35.3

35830

4.54

772

61.5x106

50.7

51461

2.49

551

35.3x106
1133.8x106

3726

77.2x106

3825 1153.5x106

UNDERSTORYc
Carya texana
(Black hickory))
Morus rubra
(Red mulberry)
Celtis laevigata
(Texas sugarberry)
Gleditsia triacanthos
(Honey locust)
Crataegus spathulata
(Pasture haw)
TOTAL

BOTFOMLAND PRODUCTION

2452.1x106

a Kilocalories
b Based on half of the estimated bottomland, or 1015 ha.
c Understory kilocalorie figures halved to account for smaller yields and
immature trees.

These species include deer, racoon, opossum, turkey, cottontail, fox squirrel,
and blacktailed jackrabbit. Several other potential animal food resources are
listed, but no yield calculations are offered for individual species. The minor

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas
Table 3.

Species
OVERSTORY
Quercus stellata
(Post oak)
UNDERSTORYc
Quercus stellata
(Post oak)
Quercus marilandica
(Blackjack oak)
Crataegus spathulata
(Pasture haw)
TOTAL

211

Productivity of Cross Timbers Forest
Density
(N/Ha)

Total
Treesa

Annual Kcalb/Kg
Yield (Kg)

Total
Kilocal0ries

607.2

823363

1.68

3726

5148.8x106

593.4

804650

1.68

3726

2518.4x106

86 7

117565

3.45

3726

755.0x106

38.2

51799

2.49

551

35,3x106
3308.9X106

CROSS TIMBERS PRODUCTION

8457.7x106

aBased on 10% of upland Cross Timbers area or 1356 hectares.
bKilocalories
CUnderstory kilocalorie figures halved to account for smaller yields and immature
trees.
game resources consist of gray fox, coyote, bobcat, weasel, mink, striped skunk,
shrew, swamp rabbit, pocket mouse, gray squirrel, ground squirrel, muskrat,
gopher, rat, vole, woodchuck, otter, frog, toad, salamander, lizard, box turtle,
snakes, waterfowl, other birds, fish, and shellfish. Nutria, a historically introduced species (Burt and Grossenheider 1964:210), is incorrectly listed. Together, these minor species are estimated to comprise about one-fourth of the
total meat calories consumed by the aboriginal populace.
Deer are a major source of animal protein as projected for the aboriginal
population, providing almost 90 percent of meat consumed by weight (Table 4).
Since there are no data on the prehistoric capacity of the Cross Timbers and
Blackland Prairie to support deer, and the prehistoric population has become all
but extinct, these figures for deer, which are extrapolated from the ecologically
quite different Edwards Plateau area, may be too high. On the other hand, it is
probably realistic to expect deer to form the greatest single component of the
faunal assemblage.
After deer, whose available meat weight per individual is more than ten
times that of any other animal on the list, the fox squirrel, with the smallest
available meat weight, is listed as providing the greatest caloric addition to the
diet. Racoon and opossum each provide more than half of the caloric total of the
fox squirrel, while both lagomorph species each provide only about half of this
total. Wild turkey, with a meat weight equal to or larger than any of the smaller
mammals, provides only a minor fraction of the total calories. The minor species

212

Texas Archeological Society

Table 4.

Estimated Meat Yields and Caloric Values, Southern
Methodist University Catchment Model
Meat
Yield (Kg)

Species

Kcal/
Kg

Total
Kcala

Protein/
Kg

Total
Protein

PRIMARY RESOURCES

White-tailed deer
Raccoon
Opossum
Turkey

71,974
986
927
156

1,260

90,687,240

2,800

2,760,240

2,800
2,180

2,585,600
340,080

Cottontail

1,080

1,350

1,458,000

Fox squirrel
Black-tailed
jackrabbit
TOTAL

4,029

1,000

4,029,000

878

1350

1,185,3013
103,046,020

210

15,114,540

201
210

31,356
226,800

SECONDARY RESOURCES

Pocket mouse

Vole

Snake
Box turtle
Muskrat
Rat
Salamander
Frog

Swamp rabbit
Striped skunk
Gopher
Lizard

Bobcat
Shellfish
Waterfowl
Shrew
Weasel
Gray fox
TOTAL
GRAND TOTAL

Toad
Otter
Woodchuck
Fish
Birds
Ground squirrel
Mink
Coyote
34,005,187
137,051,207

a Kilocalories

listed in the paragraph above are not individually quantified by SMU but are
estimated to provide collectively an additional 34,005,187 kilocalories, or onethird of the 103,046,020 kilocalories estimated for the major game species.
Dividing 34,005,187 by the 28 potential minor game resources (excluding
nutria) yields 1,214,471 kilocalories per resource; each minor game resource
provided a contribution to the faunal diet equal to that of the jackrabbit. Of
course, all of these minor species were not likely to have been exploited with
equal diligence, and many animals not included on the list may have comprised
a significant minor portion of the diet. Fish and shellfish, for example, may have
played an important dietary role at some riverine sites.

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

213

The construction of a model describing the food resources potentially exploited by the aboriginal inhabitants in the Aquilla Lake area could be approached from the point of view of the biotic potential of the study area, as
Smith (1975) has done for Late Prehistoric populations in the upper part of the
Lower Mississippi Valley, or from the point of view of human subsistence
requirements, as done by Reidhead (1979) for Late Woodland populations in
Illinois. Although the parameters of a subsistence model, considering the current
knowledge of human nutritional needs, are much more likely to be recovered
than prehistoric faunal densities are, the complexities of such a model might
outweigh its utility. As Jochim (1983) has pointed out with respect to Reidhead’s
study, the actual data show a stronger correlation with biomass estimates than
with the Reidhead model.
SMU’s biotic potential model (Skinner et al. 1979) is similar in many
respects to Smith’s (1975), substituting locally available animal population
figures. Unfortunately, the study suffers from the lack of figures for the Cross
Timbers and Blackland Prairie biotic zones. Even if such figures were available,
the extent of historic land modification in these areas would make them
automatically suspect when extrapolated backwards to the prehistoric condition.
The difficulties in accurate paleofauna reconstruction render any model
questionable.
But even without such data, the SMU model can serve as a first approximation of the aboriginal resource exploitation of the area, i.e, a hypothesis to be
tested by the data.
McDonald Site Fauna: Quantifying the Paleoenvironmental Model
The McDonald site is a deeply buried prehistoric occupation site on the
floodplain adjacent to the modem channel of Hackberry Creek ~igure 1).
Cultural remains recovered from the site range between the Middle Archaic and
the Late Prehistoric periods. Most occupational debris accumulated during the
Late Prehistoric period and, in addition to lithics and ceramics collected from
the site, an excellent sample of faunal remains was recovered. The site is divided
into two areas by a gully that apparently follows an old creek channel. Area A is
closest to the modern channel, and Area B is across the paleochannel to the east.
Both areas have extensive and possibly contemporaneous deposits of Late
Prehistoric occupational debris. Cultural strata sloping toward the creek, observed in a backhoe trench cut laterally into the creek bank, indicate that the
modem channel was active at least during the Late Prehistoric occupation; i.e,
during the occupation the site was on the river bank and probably was surrounded by riparian forest. The riparian woodland--possibly a virgin stand-that surrounded the site at the time of excavation in 1982, had a remarkable
diversity of species, and was relatively clear of undergrowth. Although no
stumps were evident, it is possible that some hardwoods were logged out of the
bottoms during the nineteenth or early twentieth century.
A few hundred meters to the east of the site, an oak forest covers the valley

214

Texas Archeological Society

slopes and the deeply incised drainages that cut back into them. Because of the
unsuitability of these slopes for agriculture, it is unlikely that this area has been
cleared in the past. Between the riparian woodland and the oak forest is a strip of
grassland that extends to the creek south of the site. Much or all of this grassland
may be land that was cleared for agriculture, but, if partly natural (i.e., if it is part
of SMU’s grassy lowland zone described above), it would have been part of a
relatively large edge forest that would have made the area attractive to deer and
other species that exploit diverse resources.
Above the oak-lined hillsides are rolling hills that are now almost completely cleared and cultivated. Although patches of the hillside forest would
have extended over the top and spilled out onto the rolling hills, as they do now,
these fields are at the west edge of the Blackland Prairie, which begins only
about half a kilometer east of the site. (For a more detailed discussion of the
environment, see the site descriptions in Peter, Brown and Jackson (1987) and
Brown, Watson, Peter, and Rawn-Schatzinger (1987)).
The Brazil site, a few kilometers west of the McDonald site (Figure 1), also
represents occupation over a long period of time, with artifacts ranging between
the Early Archaic and the Late Prehistoric periods. The environmental setting of
the Brazil site is similar in many respects to that of the McDonald site. Situated
on a low alluvial terrace, it abuts the modem floodplain of Aquilla Creek, but it
is some distance from the modem channel; an apparent filled channel, which
marks the east edge of the site, may have been the course of the creek at the time
of occupation. The Brazil site is somewhat closer to upland slope and upland
forested areas than the McDonald site, but, because the slope and forest follow a
narrow projecting finger ridge, the Brazil site is nevertheless much farther from
the main upland landform. Although oak forest still grows on the projecting
upland remnant, only a very thin strip of riparian woodland remains along the
edge of the stream in this area.
A major distinction between the two sites is that the Brazil site is near the
east edge of the Cross Timbers, whereas the McDonald site is at the extreme
west edge of the Blackland Prairie. The immediate environments of both are,
however, similarly riparian. The major differences between the two are the
closeness of the Brazil site to oak forest, which it abuts and actually extends on
to, and the possible distance of the Brazil site from major upland prairie areas.
Faunal materials (Table 5) were collected during the three seasons of
excavation at the McDonald site (see Brown et al. 1987). All of the material described here was recovered from quarter-inch-mesh screen, so the smaller species are underrepresented. Dry screening was carried out at the first two seasons
of excavation; water screening was used during the third season, a change that
may have affected the sample recovery.
The faunal data are grouped by broad cultural strata. The shallower excavations in Area A included some Late Archaic material, but, because of the
difficulty in matching stratigraphy between widely separated test excavations,
the small sample of Late Archaic materials cannot be separated out. It is estimated that the total faunal sample from Area A probably includes less than 10

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

215

percent Late Archaic material. In Area B, the divisions between the cultural
strata were more easily identified, but, since the diagnostic markers were limited
in number, the divisions may not always have been equally precise. The larger
amounts of material in the upper strata of Area A primarily reflect larger
excavation unit sizes, but there was also some decrease in the quality of bone
preservation with depth.
Faunal figures (Table 5) are for number of identified specimens (NISP)
rather than for minimum numbers of individuals (MNI). MNI figures are generally preferable, since they make it possible to calculate meat yield per individual
animal more accurately, but such calculations present several problems. Binford
(1978) has criticized the standard calculation of meat yield from MNI based on
differential utilization of animal parts. Yates (1982) has pointed out the difficulties in calculating MNI from small samples where many species are represented
by only one or two bones. Additionally, the McDonald site faunal analysis was
conducted by two different analysts over three seasons of investigation. A
combination of the MNI figures, based on different elements for each season,
has been attempted in the Aquilla Lake excavation report (Brown et al. 1987)
but these are probably underestimates of the actual figures. Even while recognizing the potential for errors that can result from the comparison of SMU’s
kilocalorie figures with NISP faunal material figures, an approximation still can
be generated. In such a comparison, differential recovery becomes important.
White-tailed Deer (Odocoileus virginianus)
As predicted by the SMU catchment analysis model, the white-tailed deer is
apparently the most commonly exploited faunal resource at the McDonald site.
Based solely on the frequency of bones identified to the the species level alone,
white-tailed deer comprise 10.4 percent of the McDonald site faunal remains.
The intentional fragmentation of deer bone for marrow complicates the interpretation of this percentage, since many bones probably attributable to this species
have been fragmented beyond identification. In fact, all of the bone fragments
identified simply as large mammal remains probably represent large artiodactyls
other than bison (which is included in the extra large mammal category or in the
bison category, based on bone wall thickness). In the Aquilla Lake area, such
artiodactyls are limited to white-tailed deer and pronghorn (Antilocapra americana). Pronghorn remains have been identified from the McDonald site and
from other Central Texas sites, but the density of this grassland-loving species
was apparently low in aboriginal Central Texas, and they may represent only a
tiny fraction of the total large mammal remains. The modern distribution of
pronghorns is restricted to the western half of Texas from the panhandle to the
lower Rio Grande area (Davis 1974:248). On the other hand, pronghorn remains
are difficult to identify without relatively complete articular surfaces on bone
elements, so some misidentification of material is possible. A third possibility is
the occurrence of an occasional mule deer (Odocoileus hemionis), but the usual
range of this species is much farther to the west and it is not expected in the

2,16

Texas Archeological Society

,~’<l c

=
o

<

.

~

~c
2
o

~

Brown -- Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

oO

6
oo

00o0

000~

o

~O0000000000~

0

oo

,-~ %0

0000 0

un

O00000000000~

N
~ o o [’- o

d~

000000~00000~

ddddddddddddo od
m

dddd d

~
t~

d
0000000000000

(-,1 ~

d~
t’N 0

<

=

M

<

o

0

217

218

Texas Archeological Society

~O~~O00C

~dd~d~dc

~- oO.i
el

el
o
el

~q~qq%qq~c

~.

.ol ~

~.

ol

iz

<

o

kO

,,q

oI

0£.

m
el

OI

"~-

el
t-’,q
el

ol

~0~0~0~0 el

OI

4d4dd~dddd

,-4

ol

00

m

el

el

el

~:~

m

t¢3
~ ~ ~0~ 0 ~ ~ ~

t’~

~

<

~- ~,~ ~ ¯
~a

ge
g
>=,g>

Brown m Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

219

Aquilla Lake fauna. At present, their range is restricted to the Trans-Pecos area
and parts of the High Plains (Davis 1974:254).
A total of 71.1 percent of all the identifiable faunal remains from the
McDonald site is attributed to large mammals. If these are assumed to be whitetailed deer, the total percentage of deer remains would be 81.5, a figure even
greater than the 66.2 percent meat yield predicted by SMU. Comparing such
figures is, of course, unrealistic. Bone for bone, white-tailed deer yield a much
larger quantity of meat, on the order of ten times as much as other commonly
exploited small mammals (Skinner et al. 1978) Contrasted with this is the
extreme fragmentation of deer bone at the McDonald site, suggesting that
marrow extraction was an important activity. The true percentage of exploitation
may be somewhat closer to a figure suggested by a comparison of the MNI
figures for all species.
Whatever the method of accounting, it is clear that white-tailed deer was the
single most important faunal resource at the McDonald site, both in terms of
individuals and caloric yield, a not uncommon finding in Texas prehistoric sites.
At Bear Creek shelter on nearby Lake Whitney (Murry 1978), white-tailed deer
comprise the single most numerous identified species throughout most of the
cultural strata, ranging between a low of 1.4 percent in the Middle Archaic
levels and 6.9 percent in the Austin phase materials. Deer are underrepresented
in the Late Archaic (where specimens ofSigmodon hispidus are more numerous)
and particularly in the Middle Archaic (where at least 10 species are more
numerous), but the addition of fragmentary material identified only as large
artiodactyls increases these totals dramatically. Combined deer and large artiodactyl percentages (which presumably do not include bison, generally rare at
the site) range between a low of 13.1 percent for the Middle Archaic and a high
of 37.3 percent for the Austin phase. It is not clear whether the low frequencies
of deer in Late and Middle Archaic levels are a function of the low sample size
in these two strata or actually represent lower utilization during these periods.
White-tailed deer are also the most numerous single identified species
throughout the various strata at the Kyle site (Lundelius 1962). Other Lake
Whitney sites show similar figures (Stephenson 1970). Farther to the south,
white-tailed deer are the most numerous species represented at both the Baylor
and Britton sites at Lake Waco, although the total sample is relatively small in
both cases (Story and Shafer 1965). The pronghorn is also represented by a few
bones at both the Baylor and Britton sites and at the Kyle site.
For sites with a sample size of more than 100 bones at the North Fork and
Granger reservoirs on the San Gabriel River (Yates 1982), white-tailed deer
ranged from a low of 4 percent in the Clear Fork horizon at 41WM73 up to 46
percent in the San Marcos component at 41WM124. White-tailed deer are the
most numerous single species present at nine of the 15 sites with larger
sample sizes.
The importance of white-tailed deer at the McDonald site cannot be overstated. As noted above, deer comprised both the greatest number of individuals
captured and the probable largest animal caloric addition to the diet. However it

220

Texas Archeological Society

is indeed possible that animal resources that are not represented by large numbers of bones were exploited at the site. Such unrecorded contributions could
have come from the use of dried meats or from butchering larger animals where
they were killed, with only the meat being brought to camp. Although almost
any animal might have been butchered away from the camp, the most important
single resource, in addition to deer, that presents a transportation problem is
bison. Bison bones are present in small quantity at the McDonald site, but, for a
number of reasons, bison are thought to have made only a minimal contribution
to the overall subsistence at the site.
Although it is not possible to quantify readily the actual caloric intake from
deer meat, the 66.2 percent figure estimated by SMU may be nearly correct. This
brings up two important points. One, the prehistoric population at the McDonald
site, and perhaps throughout the Aquilla Lake area, appears to have been highly
dependent upon deer as a food source. Too, an aboriginal population of any size
might well have placed some stress upon the reproductive potential of the deer
population, an important point because, although the enormous reproductive
potential of deer populations is well known (see Smith 1975:24-26 and McCullough 1979:44-46), deer populations tend to be controlled, by exogenous factors,
primarily available subsistence base and predators. Fluctuating deer populations, caused either by excess predation from increased human population density or reduced subsistence resources from drought or extreme cold, may have,
in turn, placed some stress upon the aboriginal population.
The dangers of specialization in a single resource are clear, particularly if
that resource has any hint of instability. The percentage of deer in the diet
suggests such extreme specialization, but it must be remembered that only the
caloric intake from animals is considered here, since no botanical information
has been preserved that might give an indication of the contribution made by
plant foods to the diet. In fact, many ethnographically documented groups find a
significant portion of their subsistence in plant foods.
Turtles
Since it is almost impossible to calculate accurately the number of individuals represented from a sample of turtle carapace and plastron fragments, it is
difficult to estimate the proportion of the McDonald site inhabitants’ diet that
was made up of turtle meat. The issue is further complicated by the fact that
turtle shell has a unique structure and may deteriorate somewhat differently
from other bone. Nonetheless, it is clear that turtles, not considered a major food
source in the SMU catchment analysis, were an important source of food
throughout most of the occupation of the McDonald site.
The figures of 4.6 percent for pond sliders and 13.7 percent for all turtles are
of little value except perhaps for comparison to percentages of turtle shell flagments from other sites. The 2,799 shell fragments from the McDonald site could
represent as few as 20 or 25 individuals or perhaps many more. Estimating meat

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

221

yield is also difficult when the age, size, and species of most of the specimens is
not known (most of the shell fragments could not be identified as to species).
Seven turtle species have been identified in the McDonald site fauna,
including include two species of the genus Chrysemys---Chrysemys scripta, the
pond slider, and C. concinna, the cooter--which comprise the largest portion of
the sample. Shell fragments from Terrapene ornata, the western box turtle, are a
little more than a fifth as numerous as the Chrysemys specimens. Three species,
Chelydra serpentina (snapping turtle), Trionyx cf. spiniferous (spiny softshell
turtle), and Graptemys sp., (map turtle), are represented by only a few
specimens each.
At Bear Creek shelter (Murry 1978), turtles are also an important resource,
ranging between 9.9 percent in the Middle Archaic zone and 28.0 percent in the
Austin phase stratum. T. spiniferous comprises nearly all of the identified
sample (Murry 1978:56). At the nearby Kyle shelter (Lundelius 1962), turtles,
listed as softshell and miscellaneous, comprised only a small portion of the total
sample.
Turtle shell is found throughout most of the units at the Baylor site in
McClennan County, comprising nearly 30 percent of the identified bone elements (Story and Shafer 1965:132-133). It is somewhat less common at the
nearby Britton site, where it comprises less than 10 percent of the elements
identified. Only one individual genus was identified, Trionyx sp., from a single
element in each of the two sites.
Still further to the south in the North Fork and Granger reservoirs, turtle
elements ranged between barely half a percent of the total in the Late Prehistoric
cultural strata at 41WM230 and more than 20 percent at the Clear Fork component at 41WM56 and the mixed Clear Fork and Round Rock component in Area
B of 41WM73. The pond slider appears to be the most frequently exploited
species by a slight margin, but softshell (Trionyx sp.), yellow mud (Kinosternon
flavescens), and other kinosterninae (musk and mud turtles) are strongly represented among water turtles, and box turtles (Terrapene ornata) are also quite
common.
The recovery of various turtle elements from a riverine site that has also
yielded fish and pelycypod remains is not surprising. However, land turtles were
also used, and, after the pond slider, the box turtle is the most common identified
genus. Various species of turtles are found in all cultural levels at the site, but
they are generally most common in the Late Prehistoric levels, where they
account for nearly a third of all elements recorded (31.0 percent in levels 8-13).
They are also most common in the Late Prehistoric levels at Bear Creek shelter
(Murry 1978), but this trend does not extend to the Late Prehistoric sites in the
North Fork and Granger Lake areas (Yates 1982).
Little has been written about the aboriginal exploitation of freshwater turtles,
but Smith (1975:10-14,100-102) specifically lists snapping turtles (Chelydrinae) as a secondary food resource of the Middle Mississippi groups, ranking

222

Texas Archeological Society

ninth overall in total projected meat yield at the sites in his study.
speculates that

He

it is entirely possible, of course, that snapping turtles, and other species of
aquatic turtles, were never deliberately hunted, but rather were collected along
with fish during the continual summer harvest from ever-diminishing shallow
backwater lake areas [Smith 1975:102].

Such a possibility seems remote at many Central Texas sites where turtle
carapace fragments greatly outnumber fish bones and scales, but this difference
may be a function of the poor preservation of fish bone and the relatively
excellent preservation of carapace and plastron. In any case, turtles may never
have been actively hunted, but only gathered when observed basking on shoals
or foraging on banks.
Ubelaker and Hall (1972:248-249) report eleven different species of turtles
in the modem Aquilla Lake project area, but Slack and Marcy (1983) were able
to document only five species in their more recent study. The aboriginal remains
include at least six species (note: Chrysemys includes two species, scripta, the
pond slider, and concinna, the river cooter, both of which were recorded in the
sample but were combined in Table 5). The aboriginal specimens represent all of
the groups that have been reported in the area, except for the family Kinosternidae and one genus in the family Emydidae, suggesting that the aboriginal
population was not highly selective in its choices.
Small Mammals
No other single resource approaches deer or turtle in the total number of
elements identified in the sample, with the exception of shellfish, which, though
numerous, may not have been as important as small mammals to the McDonald
site diet. Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978), in their catchment
analysis of the Aquilla Lake area, projected five small mammals--racoon,
opossum, cottontail, fox squirrel, and blacktailed jackrabbit--as significant
secondary resources (after white-tailed deer) for the aboriginal population. In
their projections, the greatest total caloric contribution was made by the fox
squirrel; racoon and then opossum, both with fewer individuals captured but
greater body weights, each contributed a little less than three-fourths of the
squirrel total. Next in order of importance were the cottontail, which contributed
less than a third of the squirrel total, and the blacktailed jackrabbit, which
contributed slightly more than a fourth of the squirrel total.
All of the projected species are found at the McDonald site, though clearly
none of them contribute the estimated amounts. Bones of the cottontail, Sylvilagus
sp., the most numerous, are more than twice as common as the other four
purportedly major small mammals combined. The ratio of identified deer bone
to cottontail bone is about 37:1. Based on the meat yield estimates of 45 kg (100
pounds) for deer and 79 kg (1.75 pounds) for rabbit, the meat yield ratio is
2,100:1. This calculation assumes, albeit somewhat tenuously, that the number

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

223

of individuals consumed is directly proportional to the number of identifiable
bone elements at the site. Although there are certain problems with this assumption, notably potentially different preservation and differential breakage for
marrow consumption (i.e., the larger deer bones probably would have been
broken more frequently for marrow), the ratio is still vastly greater than the 67:1
ratio predicted by the SMU catchment model. This suggests that rabbit and the
other small mammals were less heavily exploited than was predicted. Using the
same calculating procedure, a total deer-to-small-mammal meat yield ratio (using weight estimates from Skinner et al. 1978) at the McDonald site is 1,072:1,
which compares quite unfavorably to the meat yield ratio of 9:1 predicted from
the SMU model.
Except for rodents, which form a comparatively small portion of the
McDonald site fauna, some of which may be recent, only two other small mammals are recorded--beaver and wolf (as well as other unidentified canid remains). At the McDonald site a wolf, found in the upper levels of Area A, is a
nearly complete skeleton and apparently postdates the aboriginal occupation at
the site. The other canid remains, all from Area B, are probably from at least
three individuals and may be dog or coyote. Beaver is represented by eight
elements, including several teeth and a mandible fragment, from both areas at
the site.
Small mammals are a somewhat more prominent part of the faunal assemblage at the nearby Bear Creek shelter at Lake Whitney (Lynott 1978). Cottontail is by far the most common, with an elemental ratio of identified deer bone to
rabbit bone of less than 3:1. Using the SMU meat weight figures, this would
yield a meat weight ratio of 458:1, showing a much greater proportion of rabbit
than at the McDonald site. The range of small mammals represented at the Bear
Creek shelter site is about the same as at the McDonald site, without any
specimens of opossum, but with skunk (Mephitis mephitis) and bobcat (Lynx
rufus) represented by a few elements each.
At the North Fork and Granger Lake areas, cottontail percentages (in sites
with larger samples) are from less than 1 percent to nearly 15 percent of all
bones, with the lowest percentages apparently occurring in Late Archaic (Twin
Sisters phase) and Late Prehistoric sites (Yates 1982). Blacktailed jackrabbit is
the second most important small mammal in most of the larger sites, with beaver
a distant third. Fox squirrels are found at many sites in very low percentages,
and opossum and racoon are found sporadically in variable percentages. Badger
(Taxidea taxa), not noted in any of the Hill County sites (except for a few
elements recorded at the Kyle site (Lundelius 1962)), is found in several North
Fork and Granger sites.
Although the five small mammals predicted to be secondary food resources
after deer in the Aquilla Lake aboriginal diet are present in the faunal remains
from the McDonald site, it is clear that they do not comprise the proportion
anticipated in the catchment analysis. How much of this reduced proportion is
due to differential preservation or treatment of the bone and how much is due to

224

Texas Archeological Society

actual underutilization of these resources is uncertain, but it is suggested that the
figures represent an overall emphasis of larger mammals, particularly deer.
Despite its small size, the cottontail appears to be the most important small
mammal, both numerically and in total meat yield, at the McDonald site, just as
in many other Central Texas sites. Fox squirrel, predicted to be the second
greatest contributor to the animal portion of the diet, is barely present, as are the
other larger members of this group (racoon and opossum, and the other leporid,
theblacktailed jackrabbit). The samples of each of these other small mammals
are so small that it is difficult to determine whether any one made a larger
contribution than the others. It is interesting to note that all of the projected
secondar¢ small mammals besides cottontails were recovered from Late Prehistoric parts of the site. Although it is tempting to suggest a dependence on a wider
variety of resources during the Late Prehistoric, the large Late Prehistoric
sample and the low overall sample size suggest that such differences might well
be attributed to sampling methods.
The reason for the predominance of the cottontail in this sample may lie in
their overall density or in the relative ease with which rabbits can be caught. Fox
squirrels, since they are arboreal and perhaps slightly more difficult to snare,
and provide only a small meat yield, might be expected to be exploited only
minimally. Racoon and opossum, although larger than the rabbit and providing
more meat, are nocturnal animals and may occur at lower density levels than the
rabbit. Further, although the Hill County area appears to be within the range of
the blacktailed jackrabbit (Hulbert 1984), the cottontail is much more common.

Mussels
Shellfish are clearly one of the most important supplementary resources at
the McDonald site, possibly far surpassing the minor role assigned to them in the
SMU catchment analysis model (Brown et al. 1987, Neck 1987). Although the
evidence is difficult to assess, mussel might well be the most important dietary
element after white-tailed deer at the site (Table 6).
A calculation of the approximate meat weight (using approximations from
Brown 1987b:Table 39.3) of the minimum number of individuals from identified specimens (about half of the total sample) at the site gives a total meat
weight of 27.5 kg, equal to the weight of about 22 cottontails or more than half a
single deer. Mussels, however, have only slightly more than half the calories and
protein per gram that deer or rabbit meat have, so the numbers must be adjusted
accordingly to account for the nutritional properties of mussel.
Obviously, like other secondary resources at the site, mussels are only a
fraction of the white-tailed deer totals. They do, however, compare quite favorably with other minor resources at the site, such as rabbit and turtle. Although
turtle cannot be quantified accurately, the comparison between mussel and
rabbit suggests that mussel may have been a more important contributor to the
diet, since the total MNI for rabbits (although not formally calculated) probably
lies at about 10 individuals. If the unsampled mussel is estimated and the caloric

Brown m Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas
o.

~~~0~~

o
o

,.S

0~~~~

o~

~D

~O~O000000~C

o.

~

¢q

m

~D

,q.

~dd~dddd4ddC

oo
¢xl

0

[...,

Z

¯= _~
0

00
L,%

,d
~0~0~0~00~
.......°0...,

¢q

~o~z~~oo-

o

¯~

~

s~ ~-~u ~ ~-~

"~ ~ e~a~

o

225

226

Texas Archeological Society

calculations are made, it would leave the mussel at just under twice the caloric
potential of the 10 rabbits. Preservation factors must be taken into account,
however, as well as the differences in methods of counting minimum number of
individuals. With the small sample size, it is difficult to evaluate accurately the
dietary contribution of any one species, but, at the McDonald site,.mussel may
equal the contribution of all small mammals, in bulk weight if not in caloric
importance.
It is not easy to compare molluscan fauna between sites because of widely
differing collection techniques. At the McKenzie site, the other major mussel
consumption site at Aquilla Lake, the order of prominence of the species collected is nearly identical to that at the McDonald site. At both sites, Amblema
plicata is the most important species, with Lampsilis hydiana the most important
secondary species. Quadrula apiculata comprises a substantial percentage of
the assemblage from both sites; L. teres makes up a large portion of the McDonald
site pelycypod fauna. At Bear Creek shelter (Lynott 1978:71), A. plicata is a
relatively minor species, falling fourth after Obovaria olivaria, Cyrtonaias
tampicoensis, and Potamilus purpuratus. O. olivaria was not recorded from the
Aquilla Lake sites (nor, as Lynott [1978:72] notes, had it been previously
recorded anywhere in Texas), and the latter two were very minor components.
Both L. hydiana and L. teres are only minor species at Bear Creek shelter. The
similarity among the Aquilla Creek mussel assemblages and the differences
between these and the Bear Creek shelter faunas probably parallels the differences that different flow regimes and different sedimentary contexts produce in
the indigenous assemblages that existed between these two streams
Bison (Bison bison)
The contribution of bison to the diet of the inhabitants of the McDonald site
is not entirely clear. Numerically, skeletal elements of bison comprise the
second largest identified mammal species at the site, accounting for almost three
times the cottontail total Since a full-grown bison may yield as many as 500
times as much meat as a rabbit; (see Roe 1970:57-61 for bison size ranges), the
potential contribution of bison at the site is significant.
Despite the enormous potential significance of bison as a food resource, its
overall contribution to the inhabitants of the McDonald site may have been
negligible through time. In the first place, bison has a restricted distribution at
the site, generally occurring only in the uppermost (Late Prehistoric) cultural
levels. No bison bone was recovered below level 8 in Area B or below the top
cultural level in Area A (Table 5). Secondly, perhaps only two individuals are
represented by the large number of bones---one in Area A and one in Area B.
The specimen in Area B, a juvenile only tentatively identified as a bison, was
found stratigraphically above the Late Prehistoric cultural layers in a stratum
that yielded a few other bones and very few tiny flakes. Cut marks on the
specimen suggest that it was butchered, but the absence of tools or significant
quantities of debitage in the layer with the bones suggests that the bones

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

227

represent a single individual that was killed and butchered on the spot after the
last major campsite occupation in Area B. Finally, because of its size, bison is
identifiable (in prehistoric contexts) from only small fragments of bone, thus
skewing upward its potential contribution.
Other Faunal Resources
One other animal, the turkey (Meleagris galopavo), was listed separately by
SMU in its secondary faunal resources from the Aquilla Lake area (Skinner et al.
1978); 29 other species or animal groups are included in the additional potential
game resources category. Of these other species, turtles and shellfish have been
described above as important secondary resources, and beaver has been included
with the small mammal group. Many of the remaining additional potential game
resources are absent, or they are found in such small numbers that they would
have been of questionable value as food resources.
In addition to turtles and shellfish, fish were probably of some importance
at the site, adding to the inhabitants’ full exploitation of the available resources
of the site’s riverine setting. However, fish remains are not found in great
quantity, and it is not clear whether this is due to only minimal use of fish, the
poor preservation of fish bones, or perhaps a special method of disposal. The
most common single item is gar scales (Lepisosteus sp.), which survive well and
are found in some quantity in Area A and throughout the Late Prehistoric levels
in Area B (Table 5). However, the total number of scales found is small, much
less than the total on a single fish. Bones from the bass family (Centrarchidae)
and catfish (Ictalurus sp.) were also identified No fish remains were recovered
from the Archaic levels at the site.
In the faunal sample from the site are several different species of birds, not
all of which may have been consumed by the inhabitants. Turkey bones are the
most common, primarily from Area A, but five other species are present as well.
Crow (Corvus brachyus) was represented by three bones in Area A. The remaining specimens, all represented by single elements, include an unidentified duck
or teal (Anas sp.), a hawk (Buteo sp.), a member of the finch or sparrow family
(Fringillidae), and a bobwhite quail (Colinus virginianus). The hawk bone is the
only identified bird bone from the Archaic levels at the site.
Rodents are fairly common at the site, but much less common than at Bear
Creek shelter on Lake Whitney (Lynott 1978). Beaver, which may have contributed a small amount to the subsistence of the site’s inhabitants, has been
mentioned above. Most of the remaining rodents are smaller, and, although their
bones outnumber those of many other species, it is not at all clear that they
contributed much, if anything, to the diet at the site. Some of the rodent bones
appear to be more recent; some individuals may have died in burrows after the
occupation of the site. Only a few, if any, of the bones can be convincingly noted
as burned or broken by human agency.
The relatively small size of the faunal sample from the site and the predominance of deer make any comparative study of these minor food resources

228

Texas Archeological Society

statistically meaningless. Many of the species included here, the bones of some
of which were burned or spirally fractured, were obviously utilized by the
inhabitants, but some of the species may have been incidental to the site. In a
study of the burned and spirally fractured bones from the 1980 excavation
season at the McDonald site, in addition to many specimens from turtle, deer,
and various other mammals, only one blackened turkey bone, and slightly
charred single specimens from an indeterminate fish and a crotalid snake were
found (Brown et al. 1987). In contrast, more than 6 percent of all identifiable
deer bones were burned (and a much greater percentage of indeterminate large
mammal bone fragments). With the exception of a single turkey bone, spiral or
green bone fractures occurred only on mammal bones.
Interpretations
As noted above, white-tailed deer remains comprise the largest sample from
the site. Adding to their number the indeterminate large mammal remains,
which, as previously noted, should consist primarily of white-tailed deer, yields
a proportion that is close to the SMU estimate of deer as providing about twothirds of the available animal calories. This comes as no surprise, since deer,
which are large and not difficult to catch, are certainly an attractive resource.
Deer are the predominant species in almost all faunal samples from Central or
East Texas sites. Their bones are found in the largest numbers at both open sites
and rockshelters along the Balcones Escarpment, as seen at the North Fork and
Granger Lake areas and at Lake Whitney, further to the north. They are also the
most important faunal resource by meat yield at many East Texas sites such as
the George C. Davis site (41CE19) in Cherokee County (Keller 1974:158) and
the Tadlock site (x41WD39) on Lake Fork Creek in Wood County (Perttula and
Bruseth 1983).
For these reasons, the high percentage of deer has very little significance for
specialized adaptations at the site, since most sites (except for short-term special
activity sites such as the McKenzie site at Aquilla Lake reported by Brown
1987b) will have such assemblages. On the other hand, the high percentage of
deer suggests a clear, but not exclusive, dependence on this resource.
Some attempts to model prehistoric resource utilization in other parts of the
country have indicated that deer might not be the primary resource (at least not
throughout the entire year) in a least-cost-resource-procurement solution.
Reidhead (1980) predicted that deer would rank fourth in Late Woodland animal
utilization at the Leonard Haag site in Illinois, with fish, mussel, and turtle
ranking higher in a four seasonal aggregate model. However, examination of
faunal remains from the sites showed that deer ranked first, with fish, mussel,
and turtle falling way behind, ranked tenth, eleventh and ninth respectively.
In attempting to explain the differences between the model and the actual
recovered animal remains, Reidhead notes that mussels and turtles were included in the model because they are rich sources of calcium. If the calcium
needs of the population were satisfied in some other way, for instance, from the

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

229

calcium-rich water in the limestone bedrock area, then mussels and turtles
would drop out of the optimal solution altogether, moving the hypothetical
ranking of deer second only to fish. Jochim (1983), however, argues that the
nutritional model offered by Reidhead is needlessly complex and that a simple
model based on animal size and abundance more closely approximates the
actual ranking found at the site.
The SMU catchment analysis is essentially a size-abundance model like the
one Jochim feels might be more suited to the Leonard Haag data than to
Reidhead’s model, which uses not only size and abundance but nutritional data
and a measure of procurement costs as well. Yet the lack of fit for the SMU
model, except for deer and, perhaps, cottontail, is striking. Two factors may
account for this lack of fit. One, incorrect data on species abundance for the
Aquilla Lake area may have altered the model. Two, other factors such as
nonfood resource values, nutritional deficiencies, unusually high procurement
costs, and socio-cultural factors such as prestige and taboos may alter the
equation. In fact, all of these factors are possible contributors to the inaccuracies
in the solution.
In the first place, although there is little hard data, the exclusion of turtles
and mussels from the primary resources may be a mistake based on underestimation of abundance. Unfortunately, no quantitative data are available for the
occurrence of either resource in the Aquilla Lake or southern Cross Timbers
area. Both reproduce themselves rather slowly, however, and, in view of the
relatively small area of aquatic habitat in the catchment area, it is unlikely that
they would rival the cottontail in total annual harvestable yield. On the other
hand, they may be numerically more important than many of the other small
mammals or bird species.
The lack of adequate quantification makes further speculation difficult, but
one point is important. It was noted above that a possible reason for the apparent
underrepresentation of the fox squirrel in faunal collections is the presumed high
procurement cost relative to the size of meat yield. Procurement costs may be a
factor in the exploitation of turtles and mussel. Mussels, whose search-time
costs vary with the level of knowledge of the area and the preferred habitat
types, have essentially no pursuit costs and may require only minimal preparation. Turtles, which can be caught easily as they bask in the sun, are perhaps
easier to cook than many small mammals.
It could, of course, be speculated, as maintained by Reidhead, that turtles
and mussels were important to the aboriginal Aquilla Lake population for their
calcium content. The absence of extensive limestone deposits in the Aquilla
Lake area might have made the acquisition of calcium a resource procurement
behavior selected for through time. If aquatic resources were important as
providers of calcium, it might also indicate that the local groups did not spend
much time in the west along the limestone bluffs and calcium-rich waters of the
Brazos River.
As predicted by the SMU catchment analysis model, data from the McDonald
site indicate that deer were a primary food resource. This was the case at the

230

Texas Archeological Society

Leonard Haag site (Reidhead 1980), the Tadlock site (Perttula and Bruseth
1983), and in the two faunal exploitation models that served as primary inspirations for the SMU model--the Middle Mississippi study of Smith (1975) and the
Davis site Caddo study of Keller (1974). At the McDonald site, however, deer
appear to make an even more important contribution to the animal diet than
predicted by the model. The underrepresentation of lesser-ranked species in the
diet may be an indication that there was no stress on the total resources of the
area, so that only the most highly prized resources needed be taken. Such a
condition could come about if plant foods contributed heavily to the diet and
meat was only a supplement, perhaps as important to prestige as to nutrition.
The other major possible causal factor might be a human population density well
below the predicted carrying capacity.
It would be no surprise to find that plant foods did not contribute greatly to
the Aquilla Lake diet, nor would it be surprising to find that the population was
maintained well below the theoretical carrying capacity. Such conditions are not
unknown in ethnographically documented hunter and gatherer populations.
However, it would be difficult, if not impossible, to evaluate these possibilities
in the light of the available data. Even data from pollen or plant macrofossils
would not provide estimates of the true dietary mix. Although unlikely, it is
possible that the dietary mix could be detected from coprolites that might be
recovered from cave sites in the region, since some remarkably preserved
coprolites were recovered from the Kyle site at Lake Whitney (Jelks 1962)
RETHINKING THE MODEL
Aquilla Lake Subsistence Economy
Even without evidence for the actual diet of the aboriginal inhabitants of
Aquilla Lake, it is reasonable to speculate on the overall exploitation of resources in the study area. Two important conclusions are clear. First, whitetailed deer, almost to the exclusion of all other species, were a source of animal
protein. If the number of bones can be taken as an indication, then as much as 90
percent of all faunal kilocalories were provided by deer. In fact, the 90 percent
figure may be an underestimation of the importance of deer. Second, the enormous
amount of plant food resources that were available provided a relatively stable,
if somewhat cyclic, diet with a potential caloric yield as much as a hundred
times greater than the yield from faunal resources in the Aquilla Lake area.
The emphasis on deer among faunal resources may be an indication, as
noted above, of the absence of resource scarcity in the local population and the
concentration on the primary resource. It should be remembered, however, that
the extreme emphasis on deer at the McDonald site is not necessarily the rule at
other Central Texas sites. Deer are frequently the single most important species,
but they are not always as dominant as they are at the McDonald site, and the
data from a single campsite at Aquilla Lake are not an adequate basis for making
an unqualified extrapolation to the rest of Aquilla Lake or to the central Brazos
region.

Brown m Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

231

The estimated amount of available floral resources at Aquilla Lake totals
10,909,800,000 kilocalories, in contrast to the 137,051,207 kilocalories projected by SMU for the faunal resources. Obviously, such a figure would provide
food for a relatively large population, but several adjustments must be made.
First, the apparent importance of deer is corrected for, and the importance of
animals such as fox squirrels, not clearly represented in the faunal remains, is
heavily modified or they are dropped from the original SMU model. The modified estimates for deer, mollusca, turtle, rabbit, other small mammals, and other
resources (including fish, birds, and, at times, bison) total less than the SMU
total (Table 7). This is intended to reflect the complete dominance of deer and
the apparent absence of stresses that might have forced partial dependence on
lesser resources. It might also have been useful to drop the total figure for deer
exploitation in order to reflect further the absence of resource stress, but such a
reduction could be little more than arbitrary. Therefore, as a comparative baseline
to the SMU study, the deer exploitation figure has remained unchanged.
If the total estimated food resources available to the aboriginal inhabitants
of Aquilla Lake were used, the faunal total from Table 7 would be less than 1
percent of the total subsistence, well below the 20 percent minimum found in
nearly all ethnographic sources (Lee 1968:42). It is therefore reasonable to
suggest that the Aquilla Lake peoples, like many ethnographically documented
groups, were probably somewhat selective in their use of plant resources, harvesting far less than the maximum available. Lee (1968:33) also points out that
after the harvest of tens of thousands of pounds of mongongo nuts, the primary
Bushman subsistence item, thousands more rot on the ground each year.
Obviously, all of the available plant foods cannot be harvested for one
reason or another. Animal competition is a major factor; birds, arboreal mammals, and small ground-dwelling animals consume a portion, and the major
Table 7.

Modified Estimates of Faunal Resource Yields

Animal
White-tailed deer
Turtle
Mollusca
Cottontail
Other small mammalsd
Other resourcese
TOTAL

SMUa Estimate (Kcalb)
90,687,240
e
e
1,458,000
10,560,700
34.345.267
137,051,207

New Estimate (Kcal)
90,687,240
729,000
729,000
364,500
182,250
2.308.010
95,000,000

aSouthern Methodist University.
bKilocalories
cOdginally included in the Other Resources total.
dIncludes racoon, opossum, fox squirrel, and blact-tailed jackrabbit.
encludes additional resources listed in Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsh
(1978) in addition to turkey. See Table 4.

232

Texas Archeological Society

competitor for the resources, particularly for hardwood nuts, may be the principal faunal resource, the white-tailed deer. In addition, some fruits or nuts never
ripen properly or rot on the trees, and finally, perfect harvest scheduling is
probably impossible, particularly for some fruits that may mature and rot quickly
if the trees are not visited at precisely the right time.
In his study of the ecology of the Caddo, Keller (1974:144) accepts a figure
of 30 percent for all such losses, but this figure may be too low for the
maintenance of an animal population and to account for potential losses as well.
Keller himself lists a potential 34 percent in losses from arboreal mammals and
defective nuts alone. A figure of 50 percent is used here to account for the total
of such losses, leaving the resources of the 10-km-radius area at 5,454,900,000
kilocalories.
In order to calculate the extent of utilization possible for this resource
potential, a few diets can be hypothesized with meat percentages within typical
ranges for hunter-gatherers. Lee (1968:43) notes that, except in the highest
latitudes, hunted foods generally constitute from 20 to 45 percent of the diet. If
the percentage of meat at Aquilla Lake were near the minimum, at 20 percent,
then only 380 million calories of plant foods would be consumed in the remaining 80 percent, or only about 7 percent of the adjusted total of available floral
resources. With meat consumption at 35 percent, a figure Lee cites as the
apparent median (the Bushman meat intake is 37 percent), about 176.4 million
calories of plant food would supplement the diet, and, for a maximum meat
consumption figure of 50 percent, only 95 million calories of plant food would
be consumed.
If it were assumed that gatherers foraged over smaller areas than hunters,
foraging areas could be calculated for each of these percentages. If the 20
percent of meat in the diet were recovered from the entire 10-km catchment area,
the plant food foragers would have to cover an area with a radius of only about
2.6 km in order to gather the estimated 380 million kilocalories available after a
50 percent reduction from losses. Correspondingly, at the 35 percent level,
foragers would need a plant food catchment area with a radius of only 1.8 km,
and, at the 50 percent level, an area with a radius of only 1.3 km.
Another approach to the use of these potential yield figures is to calculate
various potential population sizes. The following calculations use a rounded
figure of 2000 calories per day per person, essentially the same as that computed
for the Aquilla Lake population (Skinner et al. 1978) and those found by Lee
(1968) for the Bushman population. Using the 50 percent plant food figure and
the full animal resource figure, a total of 5,549.9 million calories, supports 7,602
persons, an obviously high figure for a prehistoric hunter-gatherer population.
Another approach is to use Zubrow’s (1971:132) 5 percent human resource
exploitation figure as Keller (1974:156) did in the Caddo region. Five percent of
the total available resources (eliminating the 50 percent plant food reduction in
this case, since it is redundant) of 11,059.8 million calories would support a
population of 758 persons, a much more reasonable figure. Yet another ap-

Brown -- Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

233

proach is to use the 35 percent meat utilization figure calculated above; the
271.4 million calories available would support 372 people in the area.
None of the figures can be verified, but some population density parameters
can be calculated. For 758 persons, the population density would be .024
persons per ha (2.41 persons per km2), and, for a population of 372 persons, the
density would be .012 persons per ha (1.18 persons per km2) .
To put it differently, a band of 25 persons in the Aquilla Lake catchment
area with an annual requirement of 18.25 million calories, would be utilizing the
area only to less than two-tenths of 1 percent efficiency, an extremely low
figure. Operating at a 5 percent efficiency ratio, the same band would need to
exploit a territory of only 10.4 km2, an area with a radius of only 1.8 km.
With a subsistence territory of this size, the establishment of permanent
settlements might be expected. The archeological evidence does not clearly
support any trend toward a sedentary lifeway. Rather, figures such as these
suggest either a gross overestimation of the available resources or populations
that may have existed well below the carrying capacity of the land. Some
overestimation of resources is probable. The amount of forested area in the
Cross Timbers biotic zone is hardly clear, and the estimation of the original
resource potential using the modern oak forest, with its generally small post oak
specimens, may be a serious error. Modern yield figures may also be highly
inaccurate. Nonetheless, it seems that there is at least some evidence to suggest
that the Aquilla Lake and, perhaps, the central Brazos populations also may have
functioned at well below the carrying capacity of the land. More precise quantification might be helpful in ascertaining the degree to which such underutilization of the resources occurred, but appropriate figures for the reconstruction of
the paleofauna and paleoflora never may be available.
Broader Adaptive Strategies
Considering the model developed above, what is the evidence for particular
adaptive strategies in the Aquilla Lake area? Was there a specialized adaptation
localized along the Aquilla Creek drainage? Or was there a broader, less specialized adaptation throughout the central Brazos or even all of northern Central
Texas? Or, if such adaptations cannot be clearly isolated, what are some of the
environmental parameters that might have defined such an adaptation.
Shafer and Bryant (1976) have proposed two adaptive strategies for the
North Fork and Granger reservoirs on the San Gabriel River in Williamson
County. Wllliamson County and the San Gabriel River are many miles to the
south, but they share with Aquilla Lake and Hill County the role of transitional
area between the Edwards Plateau and the Blackland Prairie. In other words,
both archeological project areas are on the extreme eastern edge of the Central
Texas culture area.
The first of these adaptive strategies is termed the Prairie Centered Adaptation. This model proposes an adaptation centered upon the gallery forests along
the major streams of the Blackland Prairie in which prehistoric groups ranged

234

Texas Archeological Society

east and west to exploit the resources of the Post Oak Savannah and the Edwards
Plateau. Moore, Shafer, and Weed (1978:72-77) point out that the model implies
that none of these zones could support populations throughout the annual subsistence cycle, but Peter and Hays (1982:19-5) suggest that this assumption may
not be valid and that the resources of the prairie alone could have supported a
group throughout the year.
The second model, considered the least likely of the two alternatives (Moore,
Shafer, and Weed 1978:75), is termed the Prairie Ecotone Adaptation. In this
model, the Blackland Prairie is seen as the boundary or ecotone between adaptations centered in the Edwards Plateau and the Post Oak Savannah. Although
they find some evidence for contact with culture areas to the south and east on
the East Texas Coastal Plain (as indicated by the presence of coastal shells and
sandy paste ceramics after 1750 B.P.), Peter and Hays (1982:19-8) suggest that
what little is known about specific Post Oak Savannah adaptations (e.g., Mallouf
1979) does not strongly support this model.
The different nature of the biotic zones of the Aquilla Lake area precludes
the exact correspondence of Aquilla Lake to these models, they can be translated
into parallel forms that may serve to explain locally successful adaptations. S uch
a translation generates two basic forms: (1) an adaptation centered on the Cross
Timbers region, dividing resource procurement time between the bottomland
hardwood forests and the upland oak savannah areas, and (2) adaptations to the
east and west that jointly exploit the resources of the Cross Timbers area. This
latter model implies that the resources of the Cross Timbers region might
become a zone of contention between groups, as those of the Blackland Prairie
would in the Granger region (Peter and Hays 1982:19-4). There is no clear
evidence for such contention, and there is little to suggest that the available
resources of the Cross Timbers region would have been worth fighting over.
Although Lynott’s (1977) characterization of the Blackland Prairie uplands
as a "sea of inedible grasses" may be an overstatement, it does seem quite
unlikely that the resources of the prairie uplands were sufficient by themselves
to support a prehistoric group of any size throughout its annual cycle. A group
determined to remain in the prairie ecozone would have had to have been
"tethered" to one of the larger floodplain-riparian forests that cross the prairie.
Streams of sufficient size to maintain even small groups are widely spread to the
east of the Aquilla Lake area, and, although the Blackland Prairie area adjacent
to Aquilla Lake may be somewhat wider than that found in the Granger Lake
area, it seems less likely that a true Prairie-Centered Adaptation would be a
successful alternative in the Aquilla region.
On the other hand, a localized adaptation between the Edwards Plateau and
the Post Oak Savannah may well have centered upon the Cross Timbers and the
southward-flowing Aquilla Creek with its substantial gallery forest and floodplain.
Aside from the presence of the Cross Timbers biotic zone (which also runs
north-south), one of the major differences between the Granger-North Fork area
and the Aquilla Lake area is the east to southeasterly flow of the major streams
in the Granger-North Fork area and the southward flow in the Aquilla Lake area.

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

235

Therefore the model replacing the Prairie-Centered Adaptation in the Aquilla
Lake area is one centered on the Cross Timbers and Aquilla Creek. There are
two possible versions of this adaptive model. In the first, the adaptation is
centered on Aquilla Creek, ranging westward to the Brazos River and eastward
through the Blackland Prairie to the Post Oak Savannah region. This model,
adapted to a basically east-west seasonal subsistence territory, is termed the
Stream Centered Model. A second model is proposed that ranges the length of
Aquilla Creek, foraging in the immediately adjacent upland areas but only rarely
venturing to the Brazos or very far east into the Blackland Prairie area. This
model is tentatively termed the Stream-Oriented Model.
.It is possible to envision a Prairie Ecotone Adaptation occurring within the
Aquilla Lake region. Certainly, if the prairie were not the center of a particular
adaptation, it would hardly have been left unexploited. The model defined above
as Stream Centered is in reality a version of this ecotonal model. Another
possibility considered here is the Cross Timbers and Aquilla Creek as a cultural
ecotone between prehistoric groups adapted to the Brazos River on the west and
to either the Blackland Prairie or Post Oak Savannah on the east. As already
mentioned, a specific Blackland Prairie adaptation seems unlikely except along
major east-west prairie tributaries such as Richland-Chambers Creek to the
northeast of the project area. Additionally, it is not altogether clear whether the
resources would have been sufficiently different or plentiful to draw groups
from the Post Oak Savannah across the Blackland Prairie.
A similar argument could be made for the Brazos River adapted groups.
There is little if any evidence that any single resource was plentiful enough or
scheduled differently enough in the Cross Timbers area or the Aquilla Creek
drainage to be attractive to people who lived in a zone of plentiful resources.
Skinner and Henderson (1972) had originally proposed that the prehistoric
inhabitants of Aquilla Lake were based along the Brazos River and foraged
seasonally into the Aquilla drainage area. However, upon examination of the
data regarding base camps versus seasonal foraging stations, Lynott and Peter
(1977) suggested that the converse could be possible, since the largest sites
along Aquilla and Hackberry creeks were larger than the sites nearer the Brazos.
In any case, the argument for a localized Aquilla Creek or Cross Timbers
adaptation has been opened.
It has been determined above that the resources available in the Aquilla
Lake catchment area could support a fairly large population, with estimates
ranging between 372 and 7,602 persons. The estimated resource potential of the
Cross Timbers, which includes 1,640 ha. of bottomland, is 10,438.7 million
kilocalories; the resource potential of the Blackland Prairie zone, tallied exclusively from bottomland riparian forest, is estimated at only 471.1 million kilocalories. The differences in productivity are immediately obvious; the 15,200 ha
of Cross Timbers land in the Aquilla Lake catchment area have an average
production potential of .69 kilocalories per ha, whereas the 15,840 ha of Blackland Prairie are projected to yield only .03 kilocalories per ha. So the ratio of
Cross Timbers to Blackland Prairie production is 23:1, making it clear that the
Blackland Prairie is less attractive in terms of resource potential.

236

Texas Archeological Society

Another way of looking at the differences above is to examine them in terms
of the adaptation models. The Aquilla Lake catchment area, with a total area of
314.16 kmz, produces 10,909.8 million kilocalories annually. An equivalent area
contained totally within the Cross Timbers biotic province would produce about
twice that, or 21,576.5 million kilocalories. A corresponding area of Blackland
Prairie would produce only 933.1 million kilocalories. Obviously, the survival
of a population in the pure Blackland Prairie would require a larger subsistence
range, i.e., to support a population equal to carrying capacity in the Aquilla Lake
catchment area would require in the Blackland Prairie an area 23 times greater,
or 7,225.68 km2, a catchment circle with a radius of 48.0 km. However, this
calculation is somewhat misleading, for whereas the Cross Timbers resources
are spread across the landscape, the Blackland Prairie resources are confined
primarily to riparian forests along stream drainages. To equal the Aquilla Lake
catchment area’s potential annual resources, some 974.1 km of stream drainage
would be needed. This strongly suggests that a true Prairie-Centered Adaptation,
relying totally on riparian resources within the prairie zone, is not possible in the
Aquilla-Central Brazos area, but the data analyzed have yet to provide a clear
choice between the two versions of the model that center on the Aquilla Creek
drainage.
Considering the apparent surplus available in the Cross Timbers area, the
potential differential may be of less importance than is apparent. It seems
unlikely that the population of the Aquilla Lake catchment area ever exceeded a
thousand, much less seven thousand, at any one time. Even the lower estimate of
372 persons given above may be high for a permanent population confined to
this area. It is possible that the area may have been inhabited at well below its
carrying capacity by only a few small bands. Further quantitative analysis of
food remains from sites in the area will be necessary to reduce the speculative
nature of the population estimates given here.
The adaptive models discussed here, however valid they may be, are primarily static models. Peter and Hays (1982), in their discussion of the adaptations through time in the North Fork and Granger Lake areas, suggest that it is
unrealistic to expect a single model to remain valid throughout the entire prehistoric period, for with at least minor climatic changes throughout the prehistoric
period, some changes should be expected. There is at least some evidence in the
Aquilla Lake area for shifting spheres of cultural influence through time (Brown
1987c), for the most part apparently indicating very early and very late participation in the broad cultural traditions of Central and East Texas, with some
degree of independence throughout the Middle and during parts of the Late
Archaic. It may well be that home ranges of prehistoric groups narrowed considerably during these latter periods. Although no major adaptive changes are
documented during the prehistoric period of Central Texas, such range shifts
may indicate subtle changes in adaptive strategies.
It is all but impossible for archeologists to track the remains of single bands.
As Weissner (1983) has pointed out, study of material culture alone may not be

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

237

sufficient to provide distinctions among separate bands. Only broader adaptations can be distinguished to any degree, but even these may provide clues to the
maximum limits of band territories within regions.
Gunn and Prewitt (n.d.), in their broad ecotone model, have discussed the
possible changing patterns of Central Texas cultures This model views the
Central Texas culture area as having a changing environment that tends to
promote alterations to adaptive strategies, and it views the broad ecotone of
Central Texas as a climatically unstable area that, unlike the narrow ecotone that
promotes the development of complex cultures, tends to inhibit long-term cultural development.
Gunn and Prewitt’s model is tied to both the Primary Forest Efficiency
model of Caldwell (1958) and the Focal-Diffuse adaptive model of Cleland
(1976), as well as to the model of tethered nomadism proposed by Taylor
(1964). They propose a series of maximum ranges for each of the phases of
Prewitt’s (1981) cultural chronology of Central Texas and the correlation between each of these and interpreted climatic changes is examined.
Gunn and Prewitt (n.d.) describe the climate of the Late Prehistoric as
primarily cool and dry, with a warm, moist spike during the late Austin phase.
The estimated mean northern hemisphere temperatures during the mid-Toyah
phase are at their coolest since the Pleistocene. Ranges during the Late Prehistoric are at their maximum to the north, east, and south. The early Late Archaic
(San Marcos and early Uvalde) is warm and moist, with a cool, dry interval
peaking at the beginning of the Twin Sisters phase and becoming hot and dry
during the Driftwood phase. Cultural ranges of the Late Archaic phases are
average during the middle phases and constricted during the Driftwood and San
Marcos phases. The Middle Archaic begins with a cool, dry interval that peaks
in the late Clear Fork; a major hot and dry interval peaks at the transitional
between the Marshall Ford and Round Rock phases. Ranges of the later phases
are moderate, but the early Clear Fork phase is constricted. Climates during the
Early Archaic vary from warm and moist to hot and dry, with the warmest
average temperature of the entire Archaic period falling at the beginning of the
Jarrell phase. Another warm peak, at the end of a long late Pleistocene warming
trend, occurs at the beginning of the Circleville phase. Ranges are narrowly
constricted during the later part of the Early Archaic, but the Circleville phase
range expands to nearly the extreme width of the Late Prehistoric.
These Central Texas ranges can be examined from the perspective of the
presence of Central Texas materials in the Aquilla Lake area. Gunn and Prewitt’s
(n.d.:Figure 9) summary of the ranges of Central Texas groups during the
Archaic and post-Archaic suggests the following predictions. The Central Texas
phases least likely to be heavily represented in the Aquilla area are, in the
approximate order of distance, Oakalla, Jarrell, San Marcos, Driftwood, and
Clear Fork. After the Late Prehistoric phases and the San Geronimo and Circleville phases, those predicted as most likely to be represented are Round Rock,
Marshall Ford, and Uvalde.

238

Texas Archeological Society

Examination of the sample of projectile points from the Aquilla Lake area
(see Brown 1987c for discussion) shows that there is no evidence of the diagnostic artifacts of the OakaUa or Clear Fork phases and only minimal evidence of
any from the San Marcos phase. Projectile points linked to the Driftwood and
Jarrell phases are present, though not in great numbers. Round Rock and Marshall
Ford and, to a lesser degree, Uvalde phase projectile points apparently are more
prominent in the Aquilla Lake area, but the overall numbers are still small. The
presence of Central Texas projectile points from both the early part of the Early
Archaic (San Geronimo and Circleville) and the Late Prehistoric (both Austin
and Toyah phases) is well documented in and around the project area (Brown
1987c).
The projectile point sample seems to indicate that, except for the Late
Prehistoric, extension of Central Texas cultures into the Aquilla Lake area was
at its maximum during hot and dry intervals such as the Early Archaic and midMiddle Archaic. The smallest amount of northward extension from Central
Texas came during both warm-moist and cool-dry intervals, so it is possible that
the resources of the Cross Timbers may have drawn groups from other areas in
hot, dry times when, away from the major drainages, much of Central Texas
may have consisted of relatively unproductive grasslands.
It is easy to envision different adaptive strategies, strongly linked to varying
population densities and resource depletion pressures, emerging during different
climates. During cool or moist periods, population densities may have been
lowered, resulting in less pressure on the resources from marginal groups. A true
Cross Timbers-Centered Adaptation may have arisen during these periods. It
may have been during the cool, dry interval of the mid-Late Archaic that the apparently locally centered Godley projectile points and the people who used them
first appeared. During warmer and drier periods, adaptations may have ranged
farther along the peripheral drainages of the Blackland Prairie, not only to
maximize the exploitation of resources in hard times, but to increase spacing
between band territory centers in the face of increased population density. The
resources of the uplands of the Cross Timbers would be shared, but from home
range territories that extended out across the prairie.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper includes revised parts of Chapters 43 and 48 of the report of
excavations during the 1978-1982 seasons at Aquilla Lake (Brown 1987a),
written while the author was field director and project archeologist there; thanks
are due to Robert Burton and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for permission
to publish them. During the original preparation of those chapters, the author
received much needed editorial help from Solveig Turpin, Abby Treece, and
Deborah Smith, of the Texas Archeological Survey at the University of Texas at
Austin, and Dee Ann Story and several unidentified reviewers made many
helpful comments on the final draft. Alicia Nelson helped type parts of the
manuscript and provided some necessary encouragement during the final
preparation.

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

239

REFERENCES CITED
Binford, L. R.
1978
Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology. Academic Press, New York.
Brown, D. O. (editor)
1987a
Archeology at Aquilla Lake: 1978-1982 Investigations. Texas Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at Austin. Research Report 81.
Brown, D. O.
1987b
The McKenzie Site - 41HI115. In: Archeology at Aquilla Lake: 1978-1982
Investigations, Volume II, edited by David O. Brown. Texas Archeological
Survey. The University of Texas at Austin. Research Report 81.
1987c

Aquilla Lake: A Culture History Perspective. In: Archeology at Aquilla
Lake: 1978-1982 Investigations, edited by David O. Brown. TexasArcheological Survey. The University of Texas at Austin. Research Report 81.

Brown, D. O., R. P. Watson, D. E. Peter, and V. Rawn-Schatzinger
1987
The McDonald Site - 41HI105. In: Archeology at Aquilla Lake: 1978-1982
Investigations, Volume H, edited by David O. Brown. Texas Archeological
Survey. The University of Texas at Austin. Research Report 81.
Burt, W. H., and R. P. Grossenheider
1964
A Field Guide to the Mammals. Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston.
Caldwell, J. R.
1958
Trend and Tradition in the Prehistory of the Eastern United States. American Anthropological Association Memoir 88.
Cleland, C. E.
1976
The Focal-Diffuse Model: An Evolutionary Perspective on the Prehistoric
Cultural Adaptations of the Eastern United States. Mid-Contintent Journal
of Archaeology 1(1):59-76.
Davidson, I.
Les Mallaetes and Mondfiver: The Economy of a Human Group in Prehis1976
toric Spain. In: Problems in Economic and SocialArchaeology, edited by G.
de G. Sieveking, I. H. Longworth and K. E. Wilson, pp. 483-499. Westview
Press, Boulder, Colorado.
Davis, W. B.
1974
The Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Bulletin 41. Austin.
Den.nell, Robin
1980
The Use, Abuse and Potential of Site Catchment Analysis. In: Catchment
Analysis: Essays on Prehistoric Resource Space, edited by Frank J. Findlow
and Jonathon E. Ericson, pp. 1-20. Anthropology UCLA. 10(1-2). Department of Anthropology, University of California, Los Angeles.

240

Texas Archeological Society

Findlow, F. J., and J. E. Ericson.
1980
Catchment Analysis: Essays on Prehistoric Resource Space. Anthropology
UCLA. 10(1-2). Department of Anthropology, University of California, Los
Angeles.
Flannery, K. V.
Empirical Determination of Site Catchments in Oaxaca and Tehuacan. In:
1976
The Early Mesoamerican Village, edited by K. V. Flannery, pp. 91-95.
Academic Press, New York.
Flook, J. M.
Aqui!la Lake Botanical Survey. In: The Natural and Cultural Environmental
1972
Resources of the Aquilla Creek Watershed, Hill County, Texas. S. Alan
Skinner, compiler. Southern Methodist University. Archaeo!ogy Research
Program Research Report 17.
Gunn, J., and E. R. Prewitt
n.d.
Theory of Culture Change on Broad Ecotones. Unpublished MS.
Higgs, E. S., C. Vita-Finzi, D. R. Harris, and A. E. Fagg
The Climate, Environment, and Industries of Stone Age Greece: Part III.
1967
Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 33:1-29.
Hulbert, R. C., Jr.
1984
Latest Pleistocene and Holocene Leporid Fauna from Texas: Their Composition, Distribution and Climatic Implication. The Southwestern Naturalist
29(2):197-210.
Jackson, J. M.
1981
Floral and Faunal Remains. In Archeological Investigations at the George
C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas: Summers of 1979 and 1980. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory. The University of Texas at Austin.
Occasional Papers 1.
Jelks, E. B.
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill Count,,,, Texas.
1962
The University of Texas at Austin. Department ofAnthropology. Archeology
Series 5.
Jochim, M.A.
1983
Optimal Models in Context. In: Archaeological Hammers and Theories,
edited by J. A. Moore and A. S. Keene, pp. 157-172. Academic Press, New
York.
Keller, J. E.
The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches Region of Eastern
1974
Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Anthropology Department, University of Texas at Austin.

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

241

What Hunters Do for a Living, or, How to Make Out on Scarce Resources.
In: Man the Hunter, edited by R. B. Lee and I. DeVore, pp. 30-48. Aldine,
Chicago.
1979

The !Kung San. Cambridge University Press, London.

Lundelius, E.L., Jr.
1962
Nonhuman Skeletal Material from the Kyle Site. Appendix to The Kyle
Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas. by E. B.
Jelks. The University of Texas at Austin. Department of Anthropology.
Archeology Series 5.
Lynott, M. J.
1977
A Regional Model for Archaeological Research in North Central Texas.
Unpublished PhD. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University. Dallas.
1978

An Archaeological Assessment of the Bear Creek Shelter, Lake Whitney,
Texas. Southern Methodist University Research Report 115. Dallas.

Lynott, M. J., and D. E. Peter
1977
1975 Archaeological Investigations at Aquilla Lake, Texas. Southern Methodist University. Archaeology Research Program. Research Report 100.
Dallas.
McCormick, O. F., III
1973
The Archaeological Resources in the Lake Monticello Area of Tiros County,
Texas. Southern Methodist University. Contributions in Anthropology 8.
Dallas.
McCullough, D. R.
1979
The George Reserve Deer tlerd._ University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Mallouf, M. G.
1979
Archeological Investigations at Lake Limestone. Texas Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at Austin. Research Report 71.
Moore, G. L., H. J. Shafer, and C. S. Weed
1978
Archeological Surveys of Granger and North Fork Reservoirs. Volume 1,
The Granger Report. Texas A &M University. Anthropology Research Laboratory Report 38a. College Station.
Murry, P. A.
1978
Vertebrate Faunal Remains. An Archaeological Assessment of the Bear
Creek Shelter, Lake Whitney, Texas. Southern Methodist University, Research Report 115. Dallas.
Neck, Raymond
1987
Analysis of 1982 Molluscan Fauna. In: Archeology at Aquilla Lake: 19781982 Investigations, Volume III, edited by David O. Brown. Texas Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at A ustin. Research Report 81.

242

Texas Archeological Society

Peebles, C. S.
1978
Determinants of Settlement Size and Location in the Moundville Phase. In:
Mississippian Settlement Patterns, edited by Bruce D. Smith, pp. 369-416.
Academic Press, New York.
Perttula, T. K., and J. E. Bruseth
1983
Early Caddoan Subsistence Strategies, Sabine River Basin, East Texas.
Plains Anthropologist. 28(99):9-19.
Peter, D. E., D. O. Brown, and J. M. Jackson
1987
The Brazil Site - 41HI75. In: Archeology at Aquilla Lake: 1978-1982
Investigations, Volume II, edited by David O. Brown. Texas Archeological
Survey. The University of Texas at Austb~. Research Report 81.
Peter, D. E., and S. Hays
1982
Models of Prehistoric Adaptation in the San Gabriel River Valley. In:
Archeological Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central
Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences. North Texas State University. Denton.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Centra! Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 56:65-89.
Reidhead, V. A.
1979
Linear Progranuning Models in Archaeology. Annual Review ofAnthropology 8:543-578.
1980

Roe, F. G.
1970

The Economics of Subsistence Change: a Test of the Optimization Model.
In: Modeling Change in Prehistoric Economies, edited by T. K. Earle and
A. L. Christenson, pp. 141-186. Academic Press, New York.

The North American Buffalo: A Critical Study of the Species. University of
Toronto Press, Toronto.

Roper, D. C.
1979
The method and theory of site catchment analysis: a review. In Advances in
Archaeological Method and Theory. Volume 2, edited by Michael B. Schiffer. Academic Press, New York.
Shafer, H. J,. and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1976
A Prelminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources in the North Fork and
Granger Reservoir, Williamson County, Texas. A Supplemental Report to
An Archaeological Survey of Granger and North Fork Reservoir, Preliminary Report. Texas A&M University. Anthropology Research Laboratory.
College Station.
Skinner, S. A. (editor)
1972
The Natural and Cultural Environmental Resources of the Aquilla Creek
Watershed, Hill County, Texas. Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program, Research Report 17.

243
Skinner, S. A., and M. L. Henderson
1972
Archaeological Resources of the Aquilla Watershed. In: The Natural and
Cultural Environmental Resources of the Aquilla Creek Watershed, Hill
County, Texas, edited by S. Alan Skinner. Southern Methodist University.
Archaeology Research Program. Research Report 17.
Skinner, S. A., C. Shaw, K. Huckabay, and M. L. Bartsch.
1978
An Evaluation of Archaeological Resources at Aquilla Lake. Southern
Methodist University. Archaeology Research Program. Research Report.
Dallas.
Skinner, S. A., T. S. Turner, D. E. McGregor, and J. H. Richards.
Prehistoric Settlement at Aquilla Lake, Texas. Unpublished MS. Southern
1979
Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program.
Slack, R. D., and L. E. Marcy
Pre-Impoundment Environmental Study of Aquilla Lake. U.S. Army Corps
1983
of Engineers. Supplement to Design Memorandum 9. Fort Worth.
Smith, B. D.
1975
Middle Mississippi Exploitation of Animal Populations. University of Michigan, Museum of Anthropology, Anthropological Papers 57. Ann Arbor.
Stephenson, R. L.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir area, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:32-257.
Story, D. A., and H. J. Shafer
1965
1964 Excavations at Waco Reservoir, McLennan County, Texas: The Baylor and Britton Sites. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University
of Texas at Austin, Miscellaneous Papers 6.
Taylor, W. W.
1964
Tethered Nomadism and Water Territoriality: an Hypothesis. In: Actas y
Memorias del XXV Congreso lnternacional de Americanistas 1962, pp.
197-203.
Ubelaker, J. E., and N. M. Hall
Zoological Resources of the Aquilla Lake Watershed. In: The Natural and
1972
Cultural Environmental Resources of the Aquilla Creek Watershed, Hill
County, Texas, edited by S. Alan Skinner. Southern Methodist University,
Archaeology Research Program, Research Report 17.
Vita-Finzi, C., and E. S. Higgs
Prehistoric Economy in the Mount Carmel area of Palestine: Site Catchment
1970
Analysis. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 36: !-37.
Watson, R. P.
1982
The Archeology of Aquilla Creek Reservoir: Implications for a Regional
Research Design from the Central Brazos River Basin, Texas. Unpublished
PhD. Dissertation, Anthropology Department, The University of Texas at
Austin.

244

Texas Archeological Society

Webley, D.
Soils and Site Location in Prehistoric Palestine. In: Papers in Economic
1972
Prehistory, edited by E. S. Higgs, pp.169-180. Cambridge University Press,
London.
Weissner, Polly
Style and Social Information in Kalahari San Projectile Points. American
1983
Antiquity 48(2):253-276.
Winkler, B. A.
1982
Wild Plant Foods of the Desert Gatherers of West Texas, New Mexico and
Northern Mexico: Some Nutritional Values. Unpublished M.A. Thesis,
Anthropology Department, The University of Texas at Austin.
Yates, B.
1982

Zarky, A.
1976

Vertebrate Faunal Remains. In: Archeological Investigations at the San
Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Institute of Applied Sciences,
North Texas State University, Denton.

Statistical Analysis of Catchments at Ocos, Guatemala. In: The Early
Mesoamerican Village, edited by K.V. Flarmery, pp. 117-128. Academic
Press, New York.

Zubrow, E. B.
1971
Carrying Capacity and Dynamic Equilibrium in the Prehistoric Southwest.
American Antiquity 36:127-138.
Zvelebil, Marek
1983
Site Catchment Analysis and Hunter-Gatherer Resource Use. In: Ecological
Models in Economic Prehistory, edited by Gordon Bronitsky, pp. 73-114.
Arizona State University, Anthropological Research Papers No. 29.

245

A Comparison of the Ceramic Assemblages
of Five Nineteenth Century Texas Sites
Using Classification by Decoration
Joan Few
ABSTRACT
A revolution took place in the English ceramics industry in the latter part
of the eighteenth century. New ceramic technology and mass production
brought uniformity in ware manufacturing, making eighteenth centruy ware
type classifications of paste and glaze impractical for nineteenth century ceramics. This revolution led to the nineteenth century practice of describing and
marketing ceramics by type of decoration. The ceramic assemblages of five
nineteenth century historic sites in Texas, selected for the amount of excavation
and documented time of nineteenth century occupation, have been divided
according to decoration for site comparisons. All but 18 of the 2,769 sherds
from these five sites could be classified by decoration. The seven decorative
categories proposed herein are a valid taxonomic system for nineteenth century
ceramics. Classification of nineteenth century ceramics by decoration makes
identification easier than by the ware type method. It encourages site and
assemblage comparisons and may prove also to be an indicator of economic
status.
INTRODUCTION

George L. Miller (1980) has proposed that ceramics from nineteenth
century sites should be compared by the characteristics that were primary for the
people who used them--by decoration rather than ware types. The most obvious advantage of this method is that it provides a more consistent system than
one based on ware types, where there may be considerable variation in nomenclature. Classification by decoration facilitates the correlation of historical data
with archeological data. This paper compares the ceramic assemblages of five
nineteenth century Texas home sites by the decoration system. It is hoped that
such a system will encourage questions about such traits as behavior, behavioral
patterns, cultural process, economic status, ethnic identification, ceramic availability, site dating, and trade patterns in order to give direction to site comparisons and maximum use of ceramics in the study of historic sites.
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
The first step in ceramic analysis is classification. The question being
addressed here is which taxonomic system to use for classifying nineteenth
century ceramics. The system called ware types that has been used by historical
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (for 1988)

246

Texas Archeological Society

archeologists is based on classification by paste and glaze, which, for ceramics
made before the nineteenth century were easily identifiable. There was some
confusion in nomenclature and classification of ware types, but it was adequate
until a revolution took place in the English ceramics industry in the later part of
the eighteenth century, making classification of ware types impractical for
nineteenth century ceramics.
The technological changes in the ceramics industry in England that brought
about ceramic uniformity have been described by George L. Miller (1980:1).
In the second half of the 18th century, a revolution took place in the
English ceramic industry. This period saw the introduction of transfer
printing, calcinated flint, liquid glazes, Cornish clays, calcinated bone, canals
for transporting raw materials and finished products into and out of the potteries, steam power for working clay and pottery, tariffs against Chinese porcelain, favorable trade treaties with the Continent, and astute marketing of creamware which culminated in English domination of the world ceramic tableware
trade by the 1790s.

Creamware displaced the ware types that were distinguishable by their
unique pastes and glazes and was the forerunner of the nineteenth century
pearlwares, stone chinas, ironstones, and whitewares. Miller contends that the
table-, tea-, and toiletware assemblages from the nineteenth century consist
almost entirely of these nineteenth century types, which are difficult to distinguish by paste and glaze. This led to the nineteenth century practice of describing and marketing ceramics by their type of decoration, and ware types became
less important (Miller 1980:1-3).
Archeologists who attempt to classify nineteenth century ceramics by eighteenth century ware types run into problems of nomenclature, identification,
chronological sequence, integration with historical documents, and correlation
with social status information. In "An Analysis of Historical Ceramics from the
Central Salt River Valley of Northeast Missouri," Teresita Majewski and
Michael J. O’Brien discuss the problems faced in trying to use a ware type
classification system for nineteenth century ceramics. They urge the adoption
of a classification system based on decoration as more reflective of historical
reality (Majewski and O’Brien 1984:19-25).
In an effort to solve this nineteenth century classification problem, George
Miller (1980) has proposed a system for looking at ceramics by decoration and
cost. Miller states that the social status of any commodity is related to how
much the object costs, and prices for pottery were determined by how they were
decorated. The Staffordshire potters had a series of price-fixing agreements in
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and from these documents Miller has
culled the classifications and prices set by the potters for their products. Miller
has classified nineteenth century ceramics into four groups based on decoration
and cost.
Category one consists of the cheapest undecorated white ceramics. Sometimes referred to as CC ware, common wares, white earthen ware, earthen ware,

Few ~ Comparisons of Ceramic Assemblages

247

and stone china, these wares mostly chamber pots, plates, bowls, and items
related to kitchen use. Category two includes those wares with minimal decoration, such as shell edges, sponge-decorated, banded, mocha, and common cable
(finger-trailed slip). These decorations were applied by workers of little skill
and were priced only slightly higher than the undecorated wares. Category three
is made up of painted wares with motifs such as flowers, leaves, stylized
Chinese landscapes, and geometric patterns. A worker needed enough skill to
duplicate apattern well enough to make a set. According to Miller (1980), most
of the painted wares found in North American sites bear simple stylized motifs
that required minimal artistic skills and were almost always cheaper than transfer-printed vessels. Category four consists of transfer prints, one of the great
English innovations in decorated ceramics. Underglazed transfer printing was a
common method of decorating ceramics by the 1790s. When first introduced,
transfer prints brought as much as five times the price of undecorated wares, but
dropped to about double the price of undecorated wares by the middle of the
nineteenth century; the willow pattern was the cheapest transfer printed pattern.
In the early nineteenth century, a flow-blue pattern of transfer-printed wares was
introduced that sold for a higher price than the regular transfer prints. Miller
intentionally left porcelain out of this classification because of a lack of pricing
information (Miller 1980:2-4).
Miller’s four-category system is not adequate for the study of ceramics in
nineteenth century sites in Texas. In order to use Miller’s system as an indicator
of economic status based on price, one must assume that the consumer had
access to ceramic wares in all price ranges and selected according to his economic capability. Texans in the nineteenth century were limited in their selection of ceramics by patterns of commercial distribution and availability in the
frontier and rural regions. Miller’s classification is not directed toward function,
behavior, or process, and it does not include all ceramic types found in Texas. It
works as a cost indicator only until 1850, for in the 1850s a white granite, or
undecorated white ironstone, flooded the market, and this new type of undecorated ware was priced the same as the transfer printed wares (Miller 1980:4).
This new undecorated ware seems to have replaced the transfer prints in the
markets, weakening the cost-to-decoration relationship. In view of these problems there is reason to question the use of Miller’s system. However, he
contends that his four categories account for most of the table-, kitchen-, and
toiletwares recovered from North American sites during the nineteenth century
(Miller 1980:4), and his categories divide ceramics into distinctive groups based
on design, decoration, skill, and technology. By adding three more categories-porcelain, colored wares (colored glaze over surface), and stoneware--we have
a valid system for classification of most of the nineteenth century ceramic types
found in Texas.
Comparisons of Ceramic Assemblages in Texas
The ceramic assemblages of five historic sites in Texas have been subdivided according to decoration for the purpose of site comparisons. The sites

248

Texas Archeological Society

(see Figure 1) were selected for this comparison based on the amount of excavation accomplished at each site and the length of time they were occupied during
the nineteenth century. At all five sites, enough excavations had been accomplished to assure a representative sampling of the various types of ceramics used
at each site.

T

, Adoiph S2 ;e Home
N.%

Richard Carter Ranche
41BZ74

eGIorlanna Homestead
41JP94

"~
"~

~

Post West Bernarde

~

~
~"

41WH1~ Eagle Isla71;~qt~;on, Site B

Figure 1. Map of Texas showing locations of the five historic sites used for comparisons
in this report.
The Adolphus Sterne home in Nacogdoches (41NA144), was excavated by
a crew from Stephen F. Austin State University under the direction of James E.
Corbin, with the assistance of Deborah C. Kisling. This ceramic count is from
the excavation report published in 1983 and does not include work done at the
site during the TAS Field School in the summer of 1985. Sterne built his home in
1828 at the age of 27. He was a prosperous merchant, planter, postmaster, and
land agent. "The Sterne home also was a focal point in the social, political, and
economic life of Nacogdoches" (Corbin and Kisling 1983:51). Sterne should be
ranked in an upper economic bracket with the ability to purchase available
material goods.
Post West Bernard (41WH16) was occupied between 1837 and 1839. This
site was a storage depot for artillery and heavy camp equipment of The Army of
The Republic of Texas. Situated in northeastern Wharton County on the west
bank of the West Bernard River, the site was found during a survey for aboriginal sites by Joe D. Hudgins and excavated by the Houston Archeological Society
(Hudgins 1987). Analysis by Alton Briggs (1983) showed that the ceramics-remnants of cups, bowls, and plates--appear to be British in origin.
The Eagle Island Plantation Site B in Lake Jackson, Texas was excavated
by the Brazosport Archeological Society under the direction of Johnney Pollan

Few ~ Comparisons of Ceramic Assemblages

249

The Eagle Island Plantation Site B in Lake Jackson, Texas was excavated
by the Brazosport Archeological Society under the direction of Johnney Pollan
and James Smith. The site report has not been published, but Pollan and Smith
have graciously allowed the use of their ceramic counts in this paper. The site
comprises a structure on a major nineteenth century road that may have been the
home of the plantation overseer. The main house of the plantation has been
identified and is about half a mile from Site B. The house foundation at Site B is
of mortared brick, capable of supporting two stories. This structure, together
with artifacts, was destroyed by a storm in 1900. The ceramics were identified
by Anne Fox and Johnney Pollan.
The Richard Carter site (41BZ74) was excavated by the Archeological
Research Laboratory at Texas A&M University, under the direction of Shawn
Carlson. Archeological and historic investigations suggest that Carter, who had
a land grant of one league in the Stephen F. Austin colony, was in the upper
economic bracket in Brazos County. Carter’s wealth appears to have been in
land, slaves, and in a cattle herd of 1,000 in 1860. Carter built a one room log
cabin in 1841; the lack of architectural artifacts at the site suggests that a more
modern structure never was built on the site (Carlson 1983).
The Glorianna plantation (41JP94) in Jasper County was excavated by
members of the Houston Archeological Society and The Texas Archeological
Society. Historic records indicate that the plantation was established in the
1850s and, after the civil war, was occupied as a homestead until the 1880s. In
the 1860 census, William Norsworthy is listed with his wife, seven children, and
thirty slaves. He claimed land valued at $17,000. and personal assets of $6,000.
The average value of land owned in Jasper County in 1860 was $2,700., and the
average personal wealth was $4,555. These figures indicate that the Norsworthys were in an upper economic bracket (Few 1986).
The ceramic assemblages (including surface collections) from these sites
should reflect ceramic stylistic changes that took place in the nineteenth century.
Sites occupied before 1850 should have higher percentages of transfer-printed
wares than those occupied after 1850. Sites settled after 1850 should have high
percentages of white undecorated wares. The categories suggested here for use
on nineteenth century historic sites in Texas are (1) Uncolored whitewares, (2)
Minimally decorated, usually around the edge, (3) Hand painted, (4) Transferprinted, (5) Porcelain, translucent glaze, (6) Colored ceramics, colored glaze,
and (7) Stonewares, highly fired earthenwares that hold water without glazing
(Figure 2). (See Appendix for more complete descriptions of these categories.)
DISCUSSION
Since all but 18 of the 2,769 ceramic sherds in this comparative study could
be classified by decoration, the seven decorative categories proposed here are a
valid system for classification of nineteenth century ceramics (see Figure 2).
Comparisons of these sites (Table 1) show that the difference between sites
occupied before and after 1850 reflects the changes in ceramic technology that

250

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Photograph of sherds illustrating the seven proposed ceramic categories. Category 1, Uncolored Whitewares: a, b: Category 2, Minimal Decoration; banded, c, d;
shell edge, e-g; sponge-decorated, h: Category 3, Hand Painted Wares, i-m: Category
4, Transfer Painted, n-p: Category 5, Porcelain, q-s: Category 6, Colored Ceramics;
Rockingham slip-glaze, t; English Majolica, u: Category 7, Stoneware, v-x.

took place around 1850. There is a definite change in the proportions of decorated wares (with applied color) to undecorated wares (white, devoid of color).
Classification by decoration does make identification easier. It should encourage comparisons among sites and assemblages, and it may prove to be an
indicator of economic status and period. High economic status in nineteenth
century Texas probably will be reflected in complete sets of dishes and other
expensive items such as transfer-printed soup tureens and porcelain tea sets.
Establishment of a ceramic classification system based on decoration is
only the first step toward complete ceramic analysis. Total analysis should
include both the functional analysis of ceramic sherds (Few 1987) and analysis
of spatial relationships between ceramics and other artifacts denoting behavior
and process, the inter- and intraregional comparisons of ceramics, the analysis
of behavioral processes, and trade throughout the state. Sites must be excavated
in such a manner that assemblages accurately reflect all types of ceramics used
and in their proper proportions to other artifacts. Ceramic functions correlated
with the overall patterns of sites will identify human behavior and cultural
process. "Once pattern is abstracted and synthesized with other patterns, these
demonstrated regularities are often expressed as empirical laws. The explanation of why these lawlike regularities exist is the goal of archeology" (South
1977:xiii).

Few m Comparisons of Ceramic Assemblages

251

Table 1. A Comparison of Ceramics From Five Nineteenth
Century Texas Sites Using Seven Decorative Categories

SITE
GLORIANNA
1858-1880
CARTER
1831-1876
EAGLE ISL
1840-1900

Decoration Categories
3
4
5
6
Hard
Trans- Porce- Color
Painted
fer
lain
Glaze

1
White

2
Minimal

72%
244

2%

2%

5%

8
10%
28

6
2%
7
1%
22

16
4%

81%
229
81%
1405

1.7%
30

11
6%
112

15%
49

1%
4

7
Stoneware

Un
classi- TOTAL
fled

3%
11

338
2%

8%
142

7

282

1.6%
29

-

1740

18%
34

5.5%
11

191

POST WEST

BERNARD
1837-1839
STERNE

23%
43
44.5%
1828-1850
97

12.5%
24
5%
11

14%
27
8%
17

27%
52
33%
73

8.7%
19

0.4%
1

-

218

APPENDIX
Seven Decorative Classifications for Nineteenth Century Ceramics
1. Uncolored Whitewares (Figure 2, a, b)

Description: Vessels are white, devoid of color; may have raised designs
or scalloped edges; were commonly tablewares, chamber pots, and items related
to kitchen use.
Common Names: Creamwear, "CC", Common, White Earthenware, Earthenware, Ironstone, Stone China, White Granite, etc. (Miller 1980:3).
2. Minimal decoration (Figure 2, d-h)

Description: White vessels with color usually found on the rim; may have
stripes or color along the edge; sponges sometimes used to apply color around
the rim or covering the plate; designs required minimal artistic skills.
Common Names: Shell Edge, Sponge-Decorated, Banded (Figure 2, c, d),
Mocha, Common Cable, etc. (Miller 1980:4).
Shell Edge (Figure 2, e-g) involved a series of short brush strokes along the
rim. In the 1840s and 1850s molding was added to the shell edge design and
color was applied parallel to the rim, the molding lending an effect to the edge
(Miller 1980:4). Shell edge colors were usually blue or green (Majewski 1984:
33).
Sponge or Spatter decoration (Figure 2, h) was applied to the border,
center, or entire vessel. The spatter effect was produced by tapping a brush full
of paint against the vessel being decorated. The sponge process was achieved
when a color-filled sponge was pressed on the vessel. Cut-sponges resembled
stars, flowers, angels, eagles and other forms (Majewski 1984:44).

252

Texas Archeological Society

Dating Information:
Shell Edge Pearlware (blue)
1780-1830
Shell Edge Pearlware (green)
1800-1830
1800-1830
Embossed Edge Pearlware (blue & green)
Shell Edge and Embossed Edge Whiteware (blue)
1830-1860
(Majewski 1984:38)
Randall W. Moir has serrated shell-edged wares
1775-1900
Asymmetrically Cockled Edge (Large Shell)
1775-1790
Cockled Edge (Small Shell)
1785-1800
Cockled Edge (Small Shell w/Feather Motif)
1795-1825
Non-Cockled Edge (Fish Scales, Crows’ Feet and
1820-1845
other Geometric Variants)
1840-1860
Non-Cockled Edge (Lightly Incised Trident)
Non-Cockled Edge Unpainted or Red Painted (Poorly
1850-1865
Incised)
Non-Cockled Edge (No Incising, Shell is Brush
1870-1890
Stroked) (Moir 1987:3)
3. Hand Painted Wares (Figure 2, i-m)
Description: Vessels were hand painted with decorations of flowers, leaves,
stylized Chinese landscapes, or geometric patterns; transfer prints sometimes
used to outline the colored areas (Miller 1980:4); colors used included blue,
brownish green, tan, orange, yellow, black, red, pink, and rust. A typical design
included leaves, stylized red and blue flowers, or berries (Majewski 1984:41).
Dating Information:
Popular between 1810 and 1860 (Majewski 1984:41).
4. Transfer Printing (Figure 2, n-p)
Description: A method of decorating ceramics where a design is engraved
on a copper plate and transferred by way of tissue paper onto the vessel before
glazing (Gaston 1983:158); blue was the first color used in this process; flow
Blue is a process by which the color of the printing was allowed to flow into the
glaze creating a blurred or misty look; deep blue was the most popular, but
mulberry, black, yellow, brown, and green were also used (Majewski 1984:33).
The Blue Willow pattern has many variations, but three major components-the willow tree, the orange tree, and the tea house, all of which relate to
Oriental culture (Gaston 1983:6).
Dating Information:
Transfer printing developed in 1750 (Majewski 1984:33).
Common by 1790 (Miller 1980).
Blue Willow Pattern:1780 (Majewski 1984:33 and Gaston 1983:7).
Multicolor transfer prints by 1840 (Majewski 1984:33).
Colors: 1750s- blue; 1828- green, yellow, red, black; 1830- brown,
pink, lavender, orange, grey, and light blue.

Few m Comparisons of Ceramic Assemblages

253

Color Pooularitv: 1828-1850, red, brown, and green; 1830-1850, black;
1830-1860, purple (lavender); 1840-1860, flow transfer prints (Majewski 1984:33-34).
5. Porcelain (Figure 2, q-s)

Porcelain paste is a combination of kaolin clay, ball clay, feldspar and flint.
The glaze combines kaolin, flint, feldspar, and limestone. Porcelains are fired at
temperatures of as much as 2670° F, much higher than other ceramics (Nelson
1960). Porcelains are translucent as opposed to earthenwares, which are opaque
(Godden 1964:739). Porcelain rarely occurs undecorated (Miller 1980:4).
Tips for identification: Porcelain, compared to a white stoneware, usually
will be whiter, thinner, and lighter, and have a harder glaze that will be less
likely to crack. If broken, 1 or 2 mm of the edge will be translucent.
6. Colored Ceramics (Figure 2, t-x)
Description: Vessels are completely, or almost completely, covered with a
colored glaze; vessels may be tablewares, vases, doorstops, and candlesticks.
Rockingham slip-glaze (Figure 2, t) is achieved by spattering or dripping a
rich tan or dark brown color over a white, buff, or yellow paste ware. Rockingham was produced throughout the nineteenth century (Majewski 1984:45).
Fiesta-like wares should be included in this category.
English Majolica (an imitation of Italian Majolica, Figure 2, u), developed
about 1850 and decorated with a wide range of semitranslucent colored glazes;
made in a variety of shapes, it was often decorated with plant or tree motifs
(Lewis 1981:135).
7. Stoneware (Figure 2, v-x)

Description: "A hard, highly fired variety of earthenware, normally holding water without the need for glazing" (Godden 1964:739). Sometimes referred to as crockery (for a complete description, see Greer 1981); generally
used in food preserving and processing; preserve jars, lard jars, chums, milk
bowls, butter pots, etc. Colors are grays, tans, and browns.
REFERENCES CITED
Briggs, Alton
1983
Cultural Property Assessment of West Bernard Station. tlouston Archeological Society Journal 75:5-10.
Carlson, S. B.
1983
Archeological and Historical Investigations at the Richard Carter Site
(41BZ74), Brazos County, Texas. Texas A&M University, Archeological
Research Laboratory Reports of lnvestigations 2.

254

Texas Archeological Society

Corbin, J. E, and Kisling, D. C.
1983
The Adolphus Sterne Home, Preliminary Archaeological Investigations of a
Mid-Nineteenth Century Plantation in Nacogdoches County, Texas. Stephen
F. Austin State University, Papers in Anthropology No. 4, Nacogdoches,
Texas.
Few, Joan

1986

Glorianna Homestead, 41JP94: An Archaeological and Historical Explanation of a Nineteenth Century East Texas Piney Woods Agricultural Adaptation. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Anthropology, University of Houston.

1987

Functional Determination and Spatial Analysis of Ceramic Shards From
41JP94, Jasper County, Texas; a Nineteenth Century Plantation Site. Houston Archeological Society Journal No. 88, August, 1987.

Gaston, M. F.
1983
Blue Willow. Collector Books, Paducah, Kentucky.
Godden, G. A.
1964
Encyclopaedia ofBritish Pottery andPorcelainMarks. Schiffer Publishing,
Pennsylvania.
Greer, G. H.
American Stonewares, Schiffer Publishing, Pennsylvania.
1981
Hudgins, J. D.
1987
Post West Bernard (41WH16)--Republic of Texas Armory, 1837-1839,
Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:143163 (for 1986).
Lewis, K., and Haskell, Helen
1981
The Middleton Privy: Discard Behavior in: The Archaeological Record. Institute of Anthropology and Archaeology, University of South Carolina,
Columbia.
Majewski, Teresita and O’Brian, M. J.
1984
An Analysis of Historical Ceramics from the Central Salt River Valley of
Northeast Missouri. Cannon Reservoir Human Ecology Project, American
Archaeology Division, Department of Anthropology, University of Missouri-Columbia, No. 3.
Miller, G. L.
1980

Classification and Economic Scaling of 19th Century Ceramics. Historical
Archaeology 14: 1-39.

Moir, R. W.
Nineteenth Century Ceramic Traditions in North Central Texas: Examples
1987
and Interpretations. Paper presented at the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Texas Archeological Society, Waco, October 31,1987.

Few m Comparisons of Ceramic Assemblages

255

Nelson, G. C.
1960
Ceramics. Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New York.
South, Stanley
1977
Method and Theory in Historical Archeology. Academic Press, New York.

257

A Key to Eleven Common Genera
of Carbonized Wood
Using Scanning Electron Microscope Photographs
Michael W. Pendleton
ABSTRACT
Eleven genera of carbonized wood conunonly found in the southern United
States are keyed, using characteristics that can be observed using darkfield light
microscopy. Scanning electron photomicrographs (SEM) are used to demonstrate these characteristics, since SEM photos have much greater depth of field
than do light photomicrographs.

INTRODUCTION
With increasing interest in prehistoric environment and diet, archeologists
have developed techniques (Struever 1968; Pendleton 1979) that efficiently
recover great quantities of botanical material from archeological sites. Much of
this plant material consists of carbonized wood, since this material does not
readily decay in soil contexts in sites (Western 1963). Carbonized wood fragments commonly retain considerable morphological detail (despite occasional
heat cracking), which allows identification to genus level in many cases (Maby
1932). However, many of the techniques for examining such wood charcoal
characteristics are laborious (Leney and Casteel 1975) because they can involve
the production of thin sections embedded in paraffin and synthetic resins. Such
techniques may not be available to archeologists in on-site situations where
identification of large numbers of charcoal samples may be required (Dimbleby
1967).
Leney and Casteel (1975) have developed a simplified procedure for preparing charcoal specimens for identification. Instead of embedding and thinsectioning the sample (Carlquist 1975), Leney and Casteel (1975) suggest that
the transverse (Figure 1, area A), tangential (Figure 1, area B), and radial (Figure
¯ 1, area C) planes of section for each unknown charcoal fragment be produced
first by breaking the specimen along the appropriate planes. Leney and Casteel
(1975) note that the identification of a charcoal fragment prepared in this way is
facilitated by the use of dark field incident light microscopy (Burrells 1961) in
conjunction with keys such as those written by Panshin and DeZeeuw (1970).
However, a dark field light microscope has a very limited depth of field in a
single focus plane, whereas images of charcoal obtained by scanning electron
microscopy have much greater depth of field than those obtained by light
microscopy. Although scanning electron micrographs of charcoal specimens
have great depth of field, a dark field light microscope can be focused through
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (for 1988)

258

Texas Archeological Society

several focus planes and serially show much of the detail obtained using an
electron microscope. Scanning electron photomicrographs (Figures 1-35) of 11
common charcoal genera are provided, together with a taxonomic key incorporating characteristics that can be observed using a light microscope.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
All 11 genera of charcoal used in this study were obtained from the Texas
A&M Ethnobotany Laboratory. They included hickory, Carya sp. (Figures 1,
12, 13, 14), willow, Salix goodingii (Figures 2, 3, 4, 5), elm, Ulmus capestris
(Figures 6, 7, 8), oak, Quercus marilandica (Figures 9, 10, 11), ash, Fraxinus sp.
(Figures 15, 16, 17), walnut, Juglans cinerea (Figures 18, 19, 20), cottonwood,
Populus deltoides (Figures 21, 22, 23), birch, Betula sp. (Figures 24, 25, 26),
beech, Fagus sylvalica (Figures 27, 28, 29), sycamore, Platanus occidentalis
(Figures 30, 31, 32), and pine, Pinus stobus (Figures 33, 34, 35). These specimens were taken from living trees, identified to the lowest taxaonomic level
possible, then carbonized in a kiln for 30 minutes at 350°F. Each uncoated
charcoal specimen is a 1-cm cube mounted on aluminum scanning electron
microscope stubs with liquid colloidal silver manufacted by Ted Pella, Inc., of
Tustin, California. A Jeol JSM-25SII scanning electron microscope was used to
produce Figures 1 through 35. The operating conditions of the microscope were:
condenser setting at 12, tilt from 0 to 50°, 5 KeV, 15 to 700 magnification,
contrast from 4.4 to 5.4, aperture 3, and a working distance of 48 mm. For each
charcoal taxa, one tangential and two transverse sectional photomicrographs
were made with the scanning electron microscope using Kodak Tri-X Pan
Professional Film 4164 (ISO 320). Figures 33 through 35 are SEM photos
provided by Kathy Cushman.
RESULTS

The following definitions will make the key to carbonized wood genera
easier to use. A transverse section is produced by breaking the carbonized
specimen across the longitudinal axis of a branch; the tangential section is
produced by breaking a section of the specimen parallel to the growth (or
cambial) layer and perpendicular to the parenchymous ray cells (Leney and
Casteel 1975).
A tree cambium produces xylem cells (as well as fiber cells and thin-walled
parenchymous cells) in annual increments that usually form growth rings that
are visible in transverse section. Trees growing outside the temperate zone will
not always show growth rings because there are no definite periods of growth
and dormancy influenced by climatic changes over single seasons (Western
1963). The annual growth increment pattern for many wood species is for early
wood (tissue produced in the spring) to have xylem cells that are larger in
diameter and thinner walled (Figure 2, area D) than the late wood (produced in
the summer and fall) (Figure 2, area E).

Pendleton ~ Key to Eleven Common Genera

259

Growth increments in angiosperms (hardwoods like Salix) may have ring
porous wood with a definite band of large early wood pores and a band of
smaller late wood pores in transverse section (Figure 2). These pores are the
vessel elements that are present in most of the angiosperms but not in the
gymnosperms, except for the order Gnetales. Gymnosperms use tracheids rather
than the vessels for water transport through tissues and are termed nonporous
woods. If pores in a growth increment of an angiosperm appear to be the same
size, the wood is termed diffuse-porous (Barefoot and Hankins 1982). Tyloses
are thin walls of tissue that divide larger pores into separate compartments in
transverse section.
Although most gymnosperms do not have vessels, their tracheid cells (which
serve as the conductive ceils in xylem much like vessels in the angiosperms)
may change in diameter gradually or abruptly, depending on the tree’s growth
pattern (Figures 33-35).
The lines of cells that radiate from the center of a tree through both xylem
and phloem in a transverse section of wood are the ray cells. Ray width and
height are best observed in tangential section. Rays can be one cell wide
(uniserate) in tangential section, two cells wide (biserate), or more than two cells
wide (multiserate).
DISCUSSION

This key (Table 1) is based on ones developed by Volman (1981) and
Panshin and DeZeeuw (1970). The charcoal taxa keyed in this study are all from
common tree types that grow in the southern United States so this key should be
useful to archeologists working there.
Although Leney and Casteel (1981) advocate the use of three sectional
views of a carbonized wood fragment for positive identification, Panshin and
DeZeeuw (1970) note that the transverse and tangential sections provide the
most important information for identification for most wood taxa. Ray width
cannot be determined by observation of a radial section. Therefore this key does
not require the examination of the radial section, and radial views are not
included in the illustrations. The transverse sectional views shown in the illustrations have important aids to identification, such as the depiction of scalariform perforation plates (Barefoot and Hankins 1982) in the transverse section of
Betula (Figure 26).
Because scanning electron photomicrographs have great depth of field
(Goldstein, et al. 1984), they provide more information for use in conjunction
with a charcoal identification key than would either thin section or dark field
light photomicrographs alone.

260

Texas Archeological Society

o

©
v
!
¢Q

F~
~mN~

iv
©
o

o
L)

0

o

"~ oc~ ~
0 0~,--~

rJ3

oo

~

.,-~

~

~o
0

0~
0,~,-~ ¯

~

r~

o
v

~m

~

PendleWn ~ Key to Eleven Common Genera

0
~

U

~

o

o

0~’~°~"’I~’~

b.,

0

.~o~

o

8

o~-,,I

,rl
~1~o

o

~

t13

m

~

0

0

0
~ °t~

0 °~

o

o
©

r~

i

,.a

!

i

I

~,.o~

~4

o6

!

,.a

d

261

262

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Carya, hickory; A, transverse section; B, tangential section; C, radial section;
14 x.

Figure 2. Salix goodingii, willow, transverse section. Growth increment between D and
E; 28 x.

Pendleton m Key to Eleven Common Genera

263

Figure 3. Salix goodingii,, willow, transverse section; 70 x.

Figure 4. Salix goodingii,, willow, transverse section; 150 x.

Figure 5. Salix goodingii, willow, tangential section; 335 x.

Figure 6. Ulmus capestris, elm, transverse
section; 50 x.

264

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7. Ulmus capestris, elm, transverse
section; 225 x.

Figure 8. Ulmus capestris, elm, tangential
section; 150 x.

Figure 9. Quercus marilandica, oak, transverse section; 75 x.

Figure 10. Quercus marilandica, oak,
transverse section; 225 x.

Pendleton ~ Key to Eleven Common Genera

265

Figure 11. Quercus marilandica, oak tangential section; 75 x.

Figure 12. Carya, hickory, transverse section; 35 x.

Figure 13. Carya, hickory, transverse section; 175 x.

Figure 14. Carya, hickory, tangential section; 50 x.

266

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 15. Fraxinus, ash, transverse section; 50 x.

Figure 16. Fraxinus, ash, transverse section; 175 x.

Figure 17. Fraxinus, ash, tangential section; 525 x.

Figure 18. Juglans cincerea, walnut, transverse section; 110 x.

Pendleton ~ Key to Eleven Common Genera

267

Figure 19. Juglans cincerea, walnut, transverse section; 225 x.

Figure 20. Juglans cincerea, walnut, tangential section; 150 x.

Figure 21. Populus deltoides, cottonwood,
transverse section; 50 x.

Figure 22. Populus deltoides, cottonwood,
transverse section; 225 x.

268

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 23. Populus deltoides, cottonwood,
tangential section; 225 x.

Figure 24. Betula, birch, transverse section; 50 x.

Figure 25. Betula, birch, transverse section; 150 x.

Figure 26. Betula, birch, tangential section; 150 x.

Pendleton m Key to Eleven Common Genera

269

Figure 27. Fagus sylvalica, beech, transverse section; 15 x.

Figure 28. Fagus sylvalica, beech, transverse section; 225 x.

Figure 29. Fagus sylvalica, beech, tangential section; 150 x.

Figure 30. Platanus occidental&, sycamore, transverse section; 58 x.

270

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 31. Platanus occidentalis, sycamore, transverse section; 170 x.

Figure 32. Platanus occidentalis, sycamore, tangential section; 85 x.

Figure 33. Pinus strobus, pine, transverse
section; 35 x.

Figure 34. Pinus strobus, pine, transverse
section; 85 x.

Pendleton ~ Key to Eleven Common Genera

271

Figure 35. Pinus strobus, pine, tangential
section; 100 x.

REFERENCES CITED
Barefoot, A. C., and F. W. Hankins
Identification of Modern and Tertiary Woods. Clarendon Press, Oxford. pp.
1982
14-15.
Burrells, W.
bzdustrial Microscopy in Practice. Fountain Press, London. pp. 45-52.
1961
Carlquist, S.
Wood Anatomy of Onagraceae With Notes on Alternative Modes of Photo1975
synthetic Movement in Dicotyledon Woods. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 62:286-424.
Dimbleby, G. W.
1967
Plants and Archaeology. Baker Press, London. pp. 128-143.
Goldstein, J. I., D. E. Newbury, P. Echlin, D. C. Joy, C. Fiori, and E. Lifshin.
1984
Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-ray Microanalysis: A Text for Biologists, Materials Scientists, and Geologists. Plenum Press, New York. pp.,
29-35.

272

Texas Archeological Society

Leney, L., and R. W. Casteel
1975
Simplified Procedure for Examining Charcoal Specimens for Identification.
Journal of Archaeological Science 2:153-159.
Maby, J. C.
1932
The Identification of Wood and Wood Charcoal Fragments. Analyst 57:2-8.
Panshin, A. J., and C. DeZeeuw
1970
Textbook of Wood Technology. McGraw-Hill, New York. pp. 451-567.
Pendleton, M. W.
1979
A Flotation Apparatus for Archaeological Sites. Kiva 44:89-93.
Struever, S.
1968
Flotation Techniques for the Recovery of Small Scale Archaeological
Remains. American Antiquity 33:353-362.
Volman, K. C.
1981
Paleoenvironmental Implications of Botanical Data from Meadowcroft
Rockshelter. Thesis, Texas A&M University, Department of Anthropology.
College Station, Texas.
Western, C. A.
1963
Wood and Charcoal in Archaeology. In: Science and Archaeology. Brothwell and Higgs, eds. Basic Books, Inc., New York. pp. 245-261.

273

Book Review
COLUMBIAN CONSEQUENCES, Volume I: Archaeological and
Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West. Edited
by David Hurst Thomas. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C. 503 pp, 58 maps and illustrations. 1989. $49.95 cloth.
This book is the first of a three-volume series that "addresses the social,
demographic, ecological, ideological, and human repercussions of Columbus’s
arrival in 1492. These volumes are derived from a series of symposia at Society
for American Archaeology annual meetings. Deliberately timed to precede the
Columbian Quincentenary observances of 1992, this series explores the nature
of early European-Native American interactions across the Spanish Borderlands, which run from San Francisco, California to St. Augustine, Florida." This
first volume involves the western half of the Spanish Borderlands, including the
southwestern United States and northwestern Mexico, Texas, and California.
Of particular interest to Texas archeologists is the middle section of the
volume, "Texas and Northeastern Mexico," which includes an overview and a
chapter on the material cultures of the mission Indians by Thomas R. Hester, a
section on the Indians of Mission Rosario by Kathleen Gilmore, and chapters on
the Guerrero missions of northern Mexico by Jack D. Eaton, Rancho de las
Cabras by Anne A. Fox, the East Texas missions by James E. Corbin, and
historic Lower Pecos rock art by Solveig A. Turpin. A tremendous amount of information is packed into the 108 pages of this section, and those interested in
Texas archeology will greatly enjoy this synthesis of the most recent information available. We have come a long way from the Spanish Borderlands symposium held in San Antonio in the early 1970s, where Dee Ann Story had to
characterize earlier researchers’ view of Southern Texas as a "cultural sink," and
Thomas N. Campbell encouraged us to get beyond the stereotypes of a general
Coahuilitecan culture and research the rich diversity of ethnic groups and languages that existed before and during the initial Spanish contact. Indeed, these
chapters are a concise report of the significant progress that has been made in the
region during the last 15 years. This volume is a must for anyone who wishes to
understand the archeology and ethnohistory of the early Historic Period in Texas
and northeastern Mexico.
There are, however, some shortcomings in the book. I, for one, would like
to have seen more focus on the early contact period and archeological complexes of northeastern Mexico. The Brownsville focus (phase) of the Rio Grande
Delta is largely ignored, although we know, from the finding of glass arrowpoints, that there was substantial early contact. Also ignored are the early
trading posts on the lower Texas coast and the expeditions up Padre Island.
Certainly, not everything can be included in such a comprehensive volume, but
the early contact period in the lower Rio Grande area is one of the greatest gaps
in our present understanding of the Spanish Borderlands.

274

Texas Archeological Society

One has to read intensively and digest thoroughly the chapters on northwestern Mexico and California in order to begin to understand the changes in
Spanish Law over time, the encomiendas grants of Indian labor, the labor drafts
or repartimientos (which were outlawed in 1670), and the tribute relationship or
corregimiento, system that replaced it (see McGuire and Villalpando, Chapter
10). This evolution of the Indian-Spanish relationships and royal law in northern
Mexico had a great impact on what the crown permitted to happen (and supported by funding from the royal treasury) later on in northeastern Mexico and
Texas. Perhaps due to some sensitivity on the part of the crown about Indian
rebellions in New Mexico and elsewhere, the Texas missions escaped the more
severe economic exploitation suffered in other areas; the Franciscans, Presidio
soldiers, and Canary Islanders came to stay, not to conquer, rape, and run.
Some editorial flaws in the volume detract from the immense value of the
work of more than a hundred eminent archeologists, historians, ethnohistorians,
geographers, and Native Americans. For example, it is not always clear who
inserted the endnotes in a chapter or what they mean (see Chapter 10). Some
endnotes seem to challenge or quibble with the assertions made by the chapter
author(s). Is this the junior author disagreeing with the senior author, or the
editor challenging the authors’ point? By reading the acknowledgements, it is
possible to deduce that some endnotes are the direct result of reviewer comments.
I have not been able to locate the Figure 24-1 referred to in Kathleen
Gilmore’s initial paragraph (Chapter 14, page 231). If it is Hester’s overview
map (Figure 12-1, page 192) that should have been referenced, then where are
the Cujanes, Coapites, and Cocos, which she was discussing? The maps, at least
in the Texas section, are small, half-page illustrations that are difficult to read
and comprehend. Corbin discusses seven missions and presidios in East Texas
and western Louisiana, and seven are shown on Hester’s map of Spanish missions and presidios (Figure 12-2, page 197), yet only six are identified on the
map. Las Cabras is shown on the south bank of what must be the Medina River
directly south of the San Antonio mission complex rather than on the San
Antonio River to the southeast. The short-lived San Xavier missions on the San
Gabriel River, barely mentioned in the text, are shown on this map, but the
Orcoquizac complex (mission and presidio) on the lower Trinity is not shown.
Mission Rosario is shown as just north of Fort. St. Louis in Figure 12-2, but the
Rosario excavated and discussed by Kathleen Gilmore was near Goliad, south of
the San Antonio River and Mission Espiritu Santo.
The editor of the volume was clearly impressed with Solvieg Turpin’s work
on the obviously historic rock art in the Lower Pecos region. She was permitted
more illustrations than other authors of the section, and one of her illustrations
(drawn by David G. Robinson) of rock art from the Hussie Miers site (41VV327)
was used as a frontispiece at the beginning of each section and on the book’s
dust cover (although David is not credited up front in the book for his work).
Again, unfortunately, there are problems with the map of Lower Pecos missions

Book Review

275

and presidios (Figure 18-1, page 280). This map has the headwaters of the San
Antonio River at a point due south of the San Saba mission. I recently visited the
Blue Hole on the campus of Incarnate Word College in the Olmos Basin in
northern San Antonio, which is the official headwaters of the river, and, although it is dry fight now, the Blue Hole is still there. A more significant error,
however, is a purported "Presidio San Felipe" shown as located in Del Rio,
Texas. I know of the San Felipe Springs there but have seen nothing in print that
proposes that a Spanish presidio was located there. This must be an editorial
elTOF.

Much more could have been done with illustrations in this section on Texas
and northeastern Mexico. Most are simply too small, and unecessarily so. Kathy
Roemer’s beautiful drawing of prehistoric and mission era lithic materials (Figure 13-1, page 216) and the photograph of arrowpoints from Mission Espiritu
Santo, 41GD1 (Figure 13-2, page 221), are reduced to half size when, with a
little bit of creative reformatting, these illustrations easily could have (and
certainly should have) been reproduced at scale without increasing the number
of pages.
I may seem overly critical, but I must also admit that there are some subtle
gems tucked away in the text that are significant statements of current archeological theory and beliefs, based on the tremendous amount of research conducted in the region over the last 15 years. I note, for example, that both Hester
and Gilmore dismiss Herman Smith’s hypothesis of a Late Prehistoric Carib
migration to account for the origin of the Karankawa along the Texas central
coast. Their statements represent a consensus of the majority of Texas archeologists and ethnohistorians on this issue. Hester also cites recent research by
Newcomb and Campbell to indicate that the Tonkawa, until recently believed to
be tied to the Late Prehistoric Toyah phase of Central Texas, actually entered
Texas from the Oklahoma region early in the seventeenth century, citing their
recent manuscript submitted for publication in the Smithsonian’s forthcoming
Plains volume of the Itandbook of North American Indians
Hester now dates the introduction of the bow and arrow to the TexasMexico borderlands as "after A.D. 500-700" (page 193) but still maintains a
fairly late date (A.D. 1200; page 215) for the start of Late Prehistoric times in the
southern Texas area. He does recognize two forms (triangular and lanceolate)
within the Guerrero arrowpoint type (pp 221-222 and Figure 13-1), which fully
satisfies our friendly private dispute (but I still believe there is a trend to more of
the lanceolate form nearer the coast, such as at Missions Rosario and Espiritu
Santo [Figure 13-2]).
Overall, Columbian Consequences, Volume I is clearly a superior effort. It
contains in one volume a tremendous amount of information about the western
Spanish Borderlands, which even the most widely read individual would have
difficulty synthesizing from extensive and extremely divergent sources. It is not
a work that can be absorbed in one sitting; rather, it will require rereading and
restudy over a considerable amount of time to be fully appreciated. Therefore,

276

Texas Archeological Society

this is not merely a commemorative volume; rather, it is a significant synthesis
of currently available information that should serve as a baseline for future research and rethinking of borderlands history, archeology, and anthropology. The
Editor and the Smithsonian are to be congratulated on this outstanding achievement.
Be sure to read David Hurst Thomas’s "Cubist Perspective" essay (pp 114). Cubism in this instance refers to a more comprehensive, multidimensional,
multivariate appproach to understanding and appreciating our rich and diverse
Indian and Spanish cultural heritages. One should be wary of overly simplistic,
unidimensional explanations of how the TexMex culture (and language) of
today’s borderlands came about, or what its evolution portends for the future of
this region of the North American continent.
I look forward with anticipation to the publication of Volume 2, which will
deal with the Eastern Borderlands. It will be particularly interesting to see how
the new volume will be integrated with the present one, perhaps through some
overlap in terms of the French-Spanish interaction in East Texas and Louisana,
or the first cattle drives from the ranches along the San Antonio River to New
Orleans during the American Revolution.

Jimmy L. Mitchell
Converse. Texas

277
AUTHORS

Leland C. Bement is a graduate student in the doctoral program at The University of Texas at Austin, where he is a staff archeologist with the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory. His special interests include Archaic
adaptations of hunters and gatherers in Texas. Address: Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, 10100 Burnet
Road, Austin, TX 78758.
David O. Brown received his M.A. degree from the Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin, and is a Ph.D. candidate in that
department. He is staff archeologist with Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. in Austin, Texas. He has conducted archeological field work in
Texas, Louisiana, and New Mexico and in Italy and Peru. His reseaarch
interests include modeling ecological interactions, hunter-gatherer foraging systems, chemical characterization studies, and developments along
the frontiers of complex cultures. Address: 1400 Crestwood, Austin, TX
78722.
Joan Few did her undergraduate work in history at Southwestern University in
Georgetown, Texas and received her M.A. degree in anthropology from
the University of Houston. A past president of the Houston Archeological
Society and a member of the Board of Directors of the Texas Archeological Society, she has focused her research and publications on the prehistoric and nineteenth century occupations of Texas. She is an adjunct
faculty member of the University of Houston/Clear Lake, School of
Human Sciences and Humanities, Houston, Texas 77058-1058.
Grant D. Hall is originally from Edinburg, Texa, and now lives in Houston with
his wife Shiela and their three children. He recently received his Ph.D. in
anthropology from Harvard University. From 1973 to 1984 he worked as
an archeologist for the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin, and for the Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio. Current address: 826 St. George,
Houston, Texas, 77079.

John A. (Jack) Hedrick is an avocational archeologist who has pursued his
interest in the archeology of Culberson County since childhood. He has
also studied ceramics of the Jornada Mogollon extensively. He is a
member of the Texas Archeological Society, the E1 Paso Archaeological
Society, and the Archaeological Society of New Mexico. The E1 Paso
Archaeological Society has honored him with its Award of Distinction,
and he received the Archaeological Society of New Mexico’s Amateur
Achievement Award in 1979. He served as Director and Regional VicePresident of the Texas Archeological Society, Vice-President of the Archaeological Society of New Mexico, President and Laboratory Director
of the E1 Paso Archaeological Society. His address is 9576 Pistachio, El
Paso, TX 79924.

278

Texas Archeologica! Society

Thomas R. Hester is professor of anthropology, the University of Texas at
Austin and director of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. He
received his PhD. in anthropology from the University of California at
Berkeley. For a number of years he taught at the University of Texas at
San Antonio where he founded the Center for Archeological Research.
He served for five years as co-editor (with Harry Shafer) of the Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society and is a fellow of the Society. Current
address: Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712.
Richard E. Hughes received his Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of
California, Davis in 1983. His research interests include North American
prehistory, archaeometry, geochemical analysis, and prehistoric exchange
systems studies. He has published more than 20 scientific papers dealing
with these topics, including a recent study (coauthored with James A.
Bennyhoff) of prehistoric trade in the Great Basin, which appeared in
1986 in the Smithsonian Institution’s Handbook of North American Indians (Volume 11, Great Basin). He is Senior Research Archaeologist at the
Anthropological Studies Center, Sonoma State University, and a Research Fellow at the Archaeological Research Facility, University of
California, Berkeley.
Joseph H. Labadie received his MA degree in 1987 from The University of
Texas at San Antonio. As a Research Associate there, he participated in
more than 25 archeological field projects that included work at prehistoric, Spanish Colonial, U.S. military forts, and other historic sites in
Texas and Louisiana. He has also participated in field projects in Mexico
and Belize. During the past six years he has written or contributed to more
than 20 monographs and journal articles. For the past two years, he has
been Park Archeologist at Amistad Recreation Area of the National Park
Service in Del Rio, Texas. Address: Box 825, Comstock, TX 78837.
Jimmy L. Mitchell is a behavioral scientist with McDonnell Douglas Missile
Systems Co., holds a Ph.D. in I/O Psychology from Purdue University,
and is a retired U.S. Air Force Lt. Colonel. He is the author af several
publications, including many on the archeology of South Texas and the
Texas Panhandle, the Editor of this volume, and a Steward for Bexar
County with the Office of the State Archeologist. Address: 926 Toepperwein Road, Converse, TX 78109.
Leland W. Patterson is an active avocational archeologist with major interests in
the southeastern and south-central regions of Texas. He has published
more than 200 papers and articles on archeological research, lithic technology, and cultural resources management. He is a member of the Texas
Archeological Society and the Houston Archeological Society. Address:
418 Wycliffe, Houston, TX 77079.

Authors

279

Michael Pendleton is a Ph.D. candidate in ethnobotany in the Texas A&M
University Department of Anthropology. He has published several papers
concerned with froth flotation and has completed entomological and
ethnobotanical research using scanning electron microscopy. He is currently investigating the ethnobotany of the Nan Ranch ruin, a multicomponent Mogollon site in south-central New Mexico. Address: Department
of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843.

Harry J. Shafer is a professor of anthropology at Texas A&M University and a
fellow of the Texas Archeological Society. He received his Ph.D. degree
from The University of Texas at Austin. Shafer has conducted archeological research in many parts of Texas and is involved in a long-term
research program in the Mimbres Mogollon area of New Mexico. He has
also been codirector of the Colha Project in Belize since 1979. Shafer has
many publications resulting from these research activities and is the
author of the book Ancient Texans. His address is Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843.
Kirstin D. Sobolik recently completed her MA degree in anthropology (1988)
and is presently a doctoral student at Texas A&M University where she is
specializing in the study of paleonutrition. She is interested in the integration of paleobotany and zooarcheology in the analysis of prehistoric diet
in the Lower Pecos area of southwestern Texas and northern Mexico.
Kirstin is a member of the Texas Archeological Society. Address: Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
77843.
J. B. Sollberger-- see article by Patterson on p. 19.

Ellen Sue Turner received her B.A. in anthropology from The University of
Texas at San Antonio. She has served as the editor of the Anthropology of
Work Newsletter, principal assistant to the social culture editor of American Anthropologist, associate editor of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Volume 56, 1985, and is the author of several publications, including, with Thomas R. Hester, Stone Artifacts of the Texas
Indians. She is a member of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association and the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain, and is
Regional Director, Region 12, of the Texas Archeological Society. Address: 123 Danville, San Antonio, TX 78201.
Solveig A. Turpin received her doctoral degree from The University of Texas at
Austin, where she is the Associate Director of the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory. Her special interests include hunter-gatherer adaptations to arid lands, the art of preliterate societies, and the archeology of
the Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and northern Mexico. Address:
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center,
10100 Burnet Road, Austin, TX 78758.

