VOLUME 47
Published by the Society
Austin,Texas t976

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous areas. The
Bulletin offers an outlet for the publication of serious research on history,
prehistory and archeological theory. In line with the goals of the society, it encourages scientific collection, study and publication of archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for the distribution to the members of the
Society. Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not
necessarily represent the views of the Society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society 1975-1976
President: DR. S. ALAN SKINNER (Dallas)
President-elect: W. L. FULLEN (Deer Park)
Secretary-Treasurer: HOWARD MUHM (Dallas)
Editors: DR. THOMAS R. HESTER (San Antonio)
DR. HARRY I. SHAFER (College Station)
Newsletter Editor: MRS. F. C. STICKNEY (Midland)
Immediate Past-President: FRANCIS C. STICKNEY (Midland)
Directors (in addition to the above): DR. R. K. HARRISON (Texarkana), PAUL
P. STEED (Dallas); JAMES H. WORD (Floydada), RICHARD B. GREEN (Waco),
PAUL LORRAIN (Dallas), JAMES E. WARREN (George West).
Regional Vice-Presidents: MRS. ROSS SPEER (Amarillo), CLAUDE BROWN
(Lubbock), TOMMY HICKS (Dublin), ROBERT D. VERNON (Sherman), JOHN
H. HERBERT (Houston), MARY FRANCES CHADDERDON (San Antonio),
JACK KLATT (Corpus Christi), T. C. HILL, JR. (Crystal City), W. L.
RICHMOND (Austin), MRS. F. C. STICKNEY (Midland), LESLIE DAVIS (El
Paso), DR. LORRAINE GREENE (Monroe, La.).

Membership and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year. Dues are as follows:
Regular--S7.50; Chartered Societies and Institutional--S10.00; Contributing--$25.00; Life--S150.00. All members of the Society receive the
Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter
that is mailed out about four times a year. A monograph series, Special
Publications, is also published by the Society. Back issues of the Bulletin, up to
and including Volume No. 39, that are still in print may be obtained for $5.00
per volume. Subsequent volumes are available at a cost of $7.50.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Southern Methodist University,
Box 165, Dallas, Texas 75275.
© Copyright by the Texas Archeological Society, ! 976.

Bulletin of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 47/1976

Thomas R. Hester, Senior Editor
Harry J. Sharer, Co-Editor

Nancy Reid, Cover Design

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT AUSTIN, TEXAS
1976

TABLE OF CONTENTS
La Venta: A Cradle of Mesoamerican Civilization
Robert F. Heizer .................................

Archeological Investigations at the Jetta Court
Site (41 TV 151) Travis County, Texas
A1B. Wesolowsky, Thomas R. Hester and Douglas R. Brown .........

25

Neo-American Occupation at the Wheatley Site,
Pedernales Falls State Park, Blanco County, Texas
John W. Greer ..................................

89

Technological Changes in Harris County, Texas
L. W. Patterson .................................

171

Fused Volcanic Class from the Manning Formation
K. M. Brown ...................................

189

Analysis of Matrix Samples from a Crockett
County Shelter: A Test for Seasonality
J. Phil Dering and Harry J. Shafer ........................

Ancient Fishing Technology on the Gulf Coast
of Yucatan, Mexico
Jack D. Eaton ...................................

The Sugar Industry at Mission San Jose
y San Miguel de Aguayo
John W. Clark, Jr .................................

209

231

245

NOTES

Bifacing Patterns on Prismatic Flakes
J. B. Sollberger ..................................

261

The Archeologist as Participant Observer
William J. Mayer-Oakes .............................

269

BOOK REVIEWS
The Presidio: Bastion of the Spanish
Borderlands, Max L. Moorhead
Kathteen Gilmore ................................

277

The Payaya Indians of Southern Texas, T. N. Campbell
Lawrence E. Aten ................................ 278
Southern Methodist University Contributions
in Anthropology: Archaeological Excavations
at Lake Lavon, 1974, Mark J. Lynott
D. Bruce Dickson .................................

280

THE AUTHORS ............................... 283

LA VENTA: A CRADLE OF MESOAMERICAN
CIVILIZATION*
ROBERT F. HEIZER
ABSTRACT
The site of La Venta, on the Gulf coast of Mexico, has yielded a wealth of
information on the Olmec, the earliest known manifestation of high culture
in Mesoamerica. The paper traces the history of archeological research at
this important site. Past and present interpretations of the site’s age,
function, and significance are reviewed.

Before Hernando Cortfs and his handful of fighting men equipped
with horses, guns and steel swords conquered the Aztec nation in
1519, there had developed, and then disappeared, a number of
civilizations in the culture sphere which anthropologists call
Mesoamerica. By the word "civilization" I am referring to a
qualitative level of cultural development which is difficult to define
strictly, but in general terms can be applied to societies with large
populations with a highly developed division of labor, a stratified or
hierarchial social structure with ranking ranging from low to high,
with some broad governmental apparatus, cities or large urban
communities, an organized religion, monumental architecture,
technically good sculpture or some other form of fine art, an economic
base resting on agriculture, a calendar, mathematics, and some kind
of writing. Not every one of these features must be present for a
culture to be classed as civilized, but most of them should occur.
There is no disagreement that the Maya of two thousand years ago,
the people who built the city of Teotihuacan in the valley of Mexico in
the first centuries of the Christian era, the Toltecs whose capital lay
at Tula, not far distant from Mexico City, and the Aztecs whose state
Cort6s destroyed were bearers of civilization. Where and when this
continuum of civilizations of Mesoalnerica began we cannot be
certain, but as of this moment, it appears to have generated among an
older people to whom the name Olmec has been given. By that I mean
to say that the search by archeologists for the earliest manifestation
of high culture in Mesoalnerica can take us back no further in time
than the great sites of the Ornecs which were founded on the Gulf

*Annual lecture given on October 30 to the Texas Archeological Society in San
Antonio.
EDITOR’S NOTE: The first scientific report of the major 1955 excavations at La Venta
was published by Professor Heizer in Vol. 28 (1957) of the Bulletin.

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Coast in the first few centuries before the beginning of the first
millennium B.C.--around 1100 or 1200 B.C.--some 3000 years ago.
Agriculture began around 5000 B.C. in Mesoamerica, and as the
plants were improved and increasing dependence was placed on
crops for basic subsistence, the populations practicing farming also
grew. Settled village life, trade, aesthetic expression in pottery and
stone sculpture develop as integral elements of the gathering
elaboration or enrichment of life. At some point in time, as all the
essential ingredients for what seems to be a kind of quantum jump are
assembled, there occurs a cultural revolution, presumably a peaceful
one, from which a new kind of society arises. An analogy would be an
explosive chemical reaction which is effected by adding a bit of this
compound and a little of that one until suddenly everything comes
together with a loud bang. It is supposed that the elements of the
civilizational explosion in Mesoamerica were developing over time
until they reached the proper mixture of population numbers, assured
food supply, level of social and political organization, technological
know-how, and many other features, and that about 3000 years ago in
the lowland area of the Gulf of Mexico the break-through occurred.
The Olmec culture is known to us from the substantial excavation
of two major sites: La Venta and San Lorenzo in southern Veracruz
and northern Tabasco, and two other equally large but less well
studied sites named Tres Zapotes and Laguna de los Cerros. Until 50
years ago this was a little known part of Mexico. There was no
industry, populations were not large, there were few roads, and as a
result scarcely nothing was known of the archeology there. In 1925
Oliver La Farge and Frans Blom made a trip through this country, and
hearing of sculptures on an island of dry ground rising above the
swampy lowland along the Tonala River, went there and were shown
a number of unusual stone carvings. Their visit to La Venta island
was brief and their study was necessarily superficial. The
monuments they saw they thought looked vaguely Mayan in type,
though later work showed this to be wrong. Not until 1939 was the site
next visited, this time by Matthew W. Stifling, now recently
deceased, who saw not only the sculptures earlier viewed by Blom
and La Farge, but found many others.* He recognized these as quite
different in style than anything known from the Maya area, but
resembling a limited number of others from the same general Gulf

*Stirling’s work in 1939 was the first of a long series of research expeditions financed
by the National Geographic Society to investigate the Olmec culture. Drucker and I were
supported by the NGS in 1955, and on several subsequent occasions up to 1969.

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

3

lowland region. Here apparently was a different kind of culture, at
least as expressed in its art style, which was highly developed and
quite distinctive. Stirling thought, quite naturally, that the sculptured
art belonged to the Classic period which ran from the second or third
century A.D. to about A.D. 1000. In 1940 and 1942 some stratigraphic
excavations were carried out in the mounds at the La Venta site, and
various carved jade objects and pottery were recovered. All of this
was attributed to the Classic period. This was understandable
because these were the first collections of small Olmec material, and
there was little to compare them with. In the meanwhile Mexican
archeologists such as Miguel Covarrubias were saying that the
recently discovered Olmec materials from La Venta did not belong in
the Classic period, but rather in the Preclassic, but North American
archeologists gave this opinion little credence. The stage of cultural
development as expressed in the stone sculpture and the large size of
the site seemed to best correlate with the imposing Maya ruins and
sculptures in Guatemala and Yucatan as well as with the largest of
the Mesoamerican sites, Teotihuacan. In 1955 Philip Drucker and I
carried out a five months excavation at the La Venta site and found a
number of new sculptures, a literal treasure of jade objects, and
worked out the complicated stratigraphy from which we concluded
that the site had originally been laid out, and a patterned series of
earth mounds built, which were then enlarged on three occasions,
apparently at more or less regular intervals. We could not even guess
whether the interval between the rebuildings was to be measured in
decades or centuries. Among other things we did was to make careful
collections of wood charcoal from layers of earth fill assignable to the
first, second, third, or fourth building period, and in 1957 these were
dated by the radiocarbon method at the University of Michigan. Much
to our surprise, and even to the disbelief of a number of our American
colleagues, but not to our Mexican colleagues such as Covarrubias,
the radiocarbon dates told us that the site had been first built about
800 B.C. The site was 1000 years older than nearly everyone had
assumed it was. La Venta was a Preclassic site, as Covarrubias had
long maintained, and not a Classic period site as most people,
ourselves included, had wrongly assumed. At La Venta, it seems, we
had excavated a very large site with big mounds and monumental
sculpture which appeared to be of Classic type, but which
chronologically fell comfortably in the preceding period of the
Preclassic where sites of this size and degree of development were,
by definition, not supposed to exist.
The La Venta site is nearly a mile long, oriented north and south,
and about a third of a mile wide. In this rectangle are a large number

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of earth mounds, an earth pyramid which dominates the scene
measuring 420 feet in diameter and rising 110 feet into the air and
with a cubic mass of about 4 million cubic feet. That mound of clay
impressed us as having represented a great deal of human labor to
carry and pile up the earth, but in 1968 we were really surprised to
learn that a large rectangular fiat-topped elevation (now known as
the Stifling Acropolis) lying southeast of the pyramid which we
assumed was a natural hillock which had been levelled off was
entirely man-made and contains about 17 million cubic feet of earth.
These immense shaped piles of clay--one can scarcely dignify them
as architecture--clearly point to an enormous expenditure of human
labor to procure and pile up. Over a hundred stone sculptures, of
which dozens weigh over ten tons and a few approach 50 tons in
weight also imply a sizeable labor force to move them--all the more
so when it is known that the source of the stone lies some 80 miles
away on the southern slope of the Tuxtla Mountains (Velson and
Clark 1975). It is obvious that a lot of people did a lot of work at the La
Venta site, and that this work was not directly connected with maize
farming or the daily living routine. If there had been a large urban
population at La Venta, you might suppose that there was some form
of public levy on the labor of the inhabitants to do so many days of
work per week, or month, or year. But, since the small island of La
Venta which has a surface area of only two square miles and which
will support not more than 150 persons by the tropical slash-and-burn
farming system, shows no evidence of having held a large population,
we must conclude that the site was an isolated center whose support
came from people living some distance away (Heizer 1960; Drucker
and Heizer 1960; Drucker 1961). That the La Venta site was a
ceremonial or religious center and not a city is made certain by the
way it is laid out, the nature of the mounds, the abundance of
precisely and ritually placed buried offerings of jade objects of great
value, the positioned stone sculptures, and the persons portrayed on
those stone monuments. La Venta, in short, was a religious capital of
the people we call the Olmecs. The elaborately costumed persons
shown on the monuments can be taken either as priests or secular
rulers, but more probably religious heads not only by reason of their
elaborate costumes, but also because these monuments dominate the
site. We can see in these sculptures, if we assume them to be
portraits, the very persons who were the chief officers of the religious
precinct. Perhaps also similarly important persons are represented in
the colossal stone heads that occur at La Venta and other Olmec sites
in Veracruz and Tabasco. In short, if the site itself was built to serve
for ritual activities, the immense labor required for mound

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

FIGURE 1. Reconstructed Low Relief Scene on Stela 3, La Venta Site.

FIGURE 2. Low Relief Sculpture on Stela 2, La Venta Site.

5

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

construction and moving the great stones from the Tuxtla Mountains
to embellish the site must have been done at the order of the people in
charge of the site--that is, the priests. So from all this comes the
clear suggestion that the La Venta priesthood was vested with great
power and authority over a large general population whose time and
energy it could call on when desired. The picture we get of La Venta
society is that of a theocracy or rule by the priesthood (of. Heizer
1961). The site, we think, was the nerve center of a society whose
main efforts were directed toward the maintenance and benefits of a
religious cult--in other words, the capital of a theocratic society,
analogous to western Europe in the time before the Reformation when
the popes ruled both politically and religiously from the Vatican.

FIGURE 3. Colossal Head No. 1, La Venta Site. 2.41 m. high; weight 24
tons.

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

7

We know nothing certain about the origin of the Olmec culture
itself, but we are in possession of some facts which allow us to
speculate about this. I have devised a theory of how Olmec
civilization came into being. I do not know whether that theory is
correct, and I know of no way to prove it. And I know of no hard
evidence which makes my theory invalid. Yet, it may be incorrect.
When one formulates a theory of this sort he is rather like the judge
who said that while he was often wrong he was seldom in doubt.
There were people in the Olmec area before the great religious
centers such as San Lorenzo and La Venta were founded. In these
earlier archeological deposits we see Preclassic farmers living out
their lives without any religious architecture or stone monuments.
Whoever the mound-building, jade-carving and stone sculpturing
people were who conceived of and built such centers as La Venta or
San Lorenzo, it appears that they must have moved to these spots
from some other locality. The most likely source area may be the
Tuxtla Mountains which lie about 80 miles to the west, where stone is
abundant, and the volcanic soils are very favorable to maize
agriculture. The main purpose of the La Venta site and its activities I
think, without going into the details of the proposition, was to carry
out ritual activities directed toward agricultural fertility. We may
suppose that in the Middle Preclassic period, between 1500 and 1000
B.C., the village farmers, perhaps those living in the Tuxtla
Mountains, got talked into supporting an emerging religious elite, a
body of people who were calendrical and weather experts, and who
promised, in return for labor and goods, to exercise control of the
weather through intercession with the deities of the sky and earth,
and to guide the farmers in the yearly round of activities connected
with farming--to tell them when to clear the forest for new fields,
when to burn the dry slash at the very end of the dry season, when to
plant the new fields just before the onset of the rainy season, and
when to harvest the crops. Any miscalculation of these necessary
elements of the agricultural cycle in this area, even today, may mean
that the farmer will not succeed in growing an adequate crop. If the
farmer is over-anxious and fires the dry field cuttings too soon he
does not get a good clean burn, and in the interval before the rains
start weeds and suckers from the field cleared from the forest may
sprout so rapidly that the crop yield will be reduced. Planting too
early can be a costly error since the seed may be eaten by insects,
and planting too late after the rains have begun may discourage
germination of the seed. The uncertainties of producing a crop large
enough to feed your family are many, and it seems possible that an
informed group of people who had studied the weather and knew how

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

to correlate seasonal changes with an exact calendar might offer to
the farmers a most attractive bargain of crop management in return
for their support in building the sacred center where the necessary
rituals could be carried out. Both parties got something out of such a
social contract--the farmers were spared the uncertainties of
producing the crop which was necessary for their survival, and the
priesthood got their temple center and a pretty good living on the side.
Once this contract was entered into between the religious elite and
peasant farmers, larger and larger mounds and ceremonial precincts
could be made, and if the system really worked the corps of
specialists at the sacred centers could be expanded to include stone
sculptors, engineers and architects to lay out new plans and
supervise the considerable work of bringing the multi-ton stones to
the centers to be carved. All of this formative process which I am
suggesting did take place may have occurred
Mountains. Then perhaps around 1200 or ii00 B.C.
some major event, perhaps a devastating volcanic
Tuxtla Mountains--a volcanic cataclysm such as we

in the Tuxtla
there occurred
eruption in the
know happened

in 1793 in the Tuxtlas (Mozino 1913) when the earth shook, the San
Martfn volcano spewed out lava, and great clouds of hot cinders and
ash were ejected so that the whole area was buried under many feet
of cinders. All of the fields were buried, roofs were crushed by the
ash, and some parts of the zone became no longer liveable. If one of
these events had occurred not long before I000 B.C., the population
may have had to clear out in order to survive, and it may be that the
population, already operating under a theocratic system, moved out
into the coastal plain and established a new series of settlement
zones, each with its ceremonial center or capital which was in time
equipped with mounds, temples, sculptures of colossal heads, and the
like. It is almost certain that the unusual form of the La Venta
pyramid can be traced back to a prototype which exists in the Tuxtla
Mountains, but more about this later.
In any case, whether or not you subscribe to the hypothesis of how
the Olmec theocracy was born, where it spent its infancy, and how it
happened to be transferred to the major sites of Tres Zapotes, Laguna
de los Cerros, San Lorenzo and La Venta, at least we know these
several major sites were established at about the same time and that
they were all participating in the same distinctive style of sculptured
art. After about 500 years the whole operation came to an end at
these great sites--they were abandoned and never again used for the
same purposes. Why the system failed we do not know--it is one of
those genuine mysteries of archeology which archeologists cannot
yet, and perhaps never can, answer. Possibly the lowland zone was

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

9

invaded by another people who killed off the priesthood and thus
deprived the large mass of simple farmers of leadership and
direction. Perhaps there happened a series of bad weather years with
too short or too long dry seasons, or unseasonably early rains, or
plagues of pests which attacked the crops, and since these events
could not be controlled or anticipated, the reputation of the
priesthood declined to the point where they no longer commanded the
support of the larger population for whom they worked in return for
other services. Natural disasters, in brief, may have been the cause
of disrupting what I earlier called the social contract between the
priests and the farmers.
Why the Olmec culture developed its distinctive art style; why the
rituals which we can get hints of in the great pits with their stone
offerings at the La Venta site took the form they did; what was the
inspiration for the distinctive art style which we label Olmec, and a
half-hundred other questions that can be asked, are ones for which
we have no answers. Olmec culture in its material expression of
architecture, art and ritual, and in its more dimly perceived
sociological aspects, is one which seems not to have been copied from,
modelled after, or adapted from some other and earlier known
culture; rather it is one which is rich in originality and inventiveness.
What may be the explanation of Olmec culture in its developed form
as seen at La Venta is as the climax of an essentially self-contained
experiment in cultural creativity, one led by a newly organized
religious elite which was endowed with great energy and innovative
genius. Perhaps that dynastic group died out after five or six
centuries and their successors were unable to maintain the formula
which had for so long worked effectively. Or, perhaps the
persuasions of political power and its application were so great that
the temptations of the excessive use of that power came to be seen as
a misuse of authority. Something very like that happened in the
United States in the last few years with Watergate. But whatever the
course of events was, and the reasons for these, the scene of
creativity shifted away from the Gulf Coast Olmec area to other
regions, and to other people, in Mesoamerica. But at this moment the
complex continuum of Mesoamerican civilization, shifting from time
to time with geography and the human bearers, seems to first come
into sharp focus in the lowland Gulf region of southeastern Mexico
around or just before 1000 B.C.
In 1959 we published our full report on the 1955 excavations and in
1963, with funds provided by the National Science Foundation, made
a 30-minute movie from live footage and still pictures of the
excavation and interpretation of the La Venta site. We now know that

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

some of what we said in 1959 and put on film in 1963 is wrong because
we have learned more. Here is some of the newer information.
The radiocarbon dates we secured in 1957 from the University of
Michigan showed that the site was established about 800 B.C. and
abandoned about 400 B.C. {Drucker, Heizer and Squier 1957). In 1964
William R. Coe and R. Stuckenrath of the University of Pennsylvania
who were then engaged in the excavation of the lowland Maya site of
Tikal in the Peten District of Guatemala read the report which
Drucker and I had published in 1959 on our 1955 excavation of La
Venta. When I say that Coe and Stuckenrath read our report, I mean
they really read it, and after doing so sat do,ore and wrote a 44 page
review (Coe and Stuckenrath 1964} in which they stated that our work
was not only badly done as far as excavation went, but also that we
were guilty of misinterpreting a lot of evidence, and furthermore our
radiocarbon dates were not to be trusted. In 1967, stimulated in part
by Coe and Stuckenrath’s challenge of our abilities as stratigraphers
and of the radiocarbon datings we had secured ten years earlier, we
made a short return trip to La Venta, hired a few of our old crew who
were able to locate, dug some new trenches to expose the
construction layers, got arrested and put for a few hours in the worst
jail I was ever in, and made new collections of wood charcoal from
the deposits we could identify as having been laid down in building
phases 1, 2, 3, and 4 (Heizer, Drucker and Graham 1968). In the
meanwhile we learned that the Michigan laboratory had not used up
all the charcoal we collected in 1955 and which it had dated in 1957,
and we were able to secure the remainder of this original material
from Professor lames B. Griffin. The UCLA radiocarbon laboratory in
1967 provided us with several dozen radiocarbon dates which were
much more accurately dated than it was possible to do in 1957 as a
result of more precise instrumentation. It turned out that while the
Michigan dates were accurate enough in terms of the limitations of
the radiocarbon dating method in 1957, much more precise or
accurate dates could be secured ten years later. By the usual
methods of interpreting what such dates mean, we concluded in 1967
that La Venta was established about 1000 B.C., perhaps as early as
1100 B.C. and abandoned about 600 B.C. (Berger, Graham and Heizer
1967}. Those two hundred years of extra age do not mean very much
as such, and in speaking of that I am reminded of what Agatha
Christie, the wife of Max Mallowan, the Near Eastern archeologist
said. She said, "It is wonderful to be married to an archeologist--the
older it is the more interested he becomes."
The extra 2 centuries of La Venta’s age seem to make the Olmec
cultural florescence on the Gulf Coast even more removed in time

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

11

(:33

03
(D

b.0

,..o

.,--4
v~Jm-v~m
<1

-4,.<I

6zg-M

<I

~3
z~e~a

ha
Ik

r..r3

~D

r.D

0~SS’{/70 3"d
X7~V3

]]AI.L~/I~}30:I

3A[±Xt~EIO.~

31V7

37001~

3AI&VB~O.~

X’lh]’~3

4’--’
O

[""

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

from that of the Maya further south, and they also indicate that San
Lorenzo and La Venta were both occupied at the same time, thus
allowing the correction in 1967 of a view which was then gaining
currency that San Lorenzo had been built and abandoned before La
Venta and that many of the La Venta sculptures had been moved
there from San Lorenzo.
A second correction I have already briefly mentioned. That is the
form of the big earth mound which is referred to as the La Venta
pyramid. In 1955 we did not clear the heavy jungle growth from this
man-made mountain because we had no intention to try to excavate it
since it would have strained our funds and manpower to have done
so. Our surveyor was busy recording the excavations, and when he
found time to make the map of the site as a whole it proved to be a
difficult job because of the heavy tree growth over the entire area. He
did correctly determine the position of the base of the pyramid, and
when he drew its form he assumed, along with us, that it had a
rectangular base plan and four fiat sloping sides rising to the
truncated top--the form that any proper Mesoamerican pyramid
could be assumed to have. But in making that apparently simple
assumption we could not have been more in error. In 1967 when
Drucker and I spent two weeks excavating for additional charcoal,
we noted that most of the large trees covering the pyramid had been
cut off, and while casually looking at it one day while walking past we
saw a sizeable depression or valley on the north slope running from

FIGURE 5. The La Venta Pyramid as Imagined to be in 1955.

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

13

the top to the base. Drucker’s first answer to my question about what
that meant was to say that it must have been where some treasure
hunter had gouged into the side of the hill, but he did agree with my
observation that it was a mighty big and long trench that someone had
dug into the slope, and even if they had, where was the dirt pile, of
which there was no sign, which must have resulted? Something was
apparently going on with that pyramid which we had not noticed 12
years earlier, so we went over to look at it more carefully. Then we
saw to our surprise that not only were the sides of the pyramid not
flat at all, but were distinctly convex or outward curving, and also
that the slopes of the mound consisted of an alternating series of ten
long valleys with ten ridges separating one from the other. In short,
and quite by accident, we discovered that the La Venta pyramid was
a round cone, and that its sides were fluted like a cupcake mold. No

FIGURE 6. The La Venta "Pyramid" Photographed from the Air in
1968.

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

pyramid like it was known from any part of Mexico, or anywhere else,
for that matter. Dr. Ignacio Bernal of the Institute of Anthropology
and History in Mexico still refers to this anomalous structure as the
"monster" which Drucker and I brought to light. There were several
things about our surprising discovery of the form of the pyramid. One
was its uniqueness which may be connected with the fact that it is the
oldest pyramid (if that term can be correctly used) known from Mesoamerica. Second, Drucker and I were very pleased to have been able
to correct our own error.
In 1968 we returned to La Venta once more (Heizer, Graham and
Napton 1968), got arrested again, cut off all the growth on the
pyramid, made a contour map, borrowed a helicopter from Petrdleos
Mexicanos, and photographed the pyramid from the air.
Diagrammatically the pyramid looks like this. In 1969 a magnetometer survey was made of La Venta pyramid with interesting results
(Morrison, Clewlow and Heizer 1970). One, probably two, sizeable
stone constructions exist within the pyramid near its peak. These
have not been excavated. While the pyramid itself has not been
removed, the site area is now covered by the town of 5000 people who
work in the major oilfield of La Venta which has over i00 producing
wells.
On the point of the local civil officials being somewhat less than
cooperative, one might even say they acted downright unfriendly. In
1968 the local mayor took one look at our official permit to excavate
and declared that all of the signatures on it were false. The Minister
of Education of the Republic of Mexico and President Hitch of the
University of California were not there, unfortunately, in our hour of
need, to swear that their signatures were genuine, and so the mayor
had us dead to rights. He ordered us not to dig. We obeyed for a while
but finally decided to take the plunge. That was an error--our error.
He showed up with a bunch of deputies, each armed with a .45
automatic, and announced he was confiscating all the sculptures,
some 20 in all, we had dug up. I said that we had an agreement with
the Mexican federal government to turn over everything we found to
the museum in Villahermosa and that if he seized them we would need
a list signed by him. So he said, "Not only am I taking these, and not
signing anything, but what is more, you are going to haul them to the
jail in your truck." So I said we would not do that, but he was so
persuasive that in the end we, of course, bowed to his wishes. Now,
eight years later, it sounds amusing, but at the moment it seemed like
a Mexican version of "Gunsmoke"--with real guns.
I have already suggested that the Tuxtla Mountains may have been
the earlier homeland of the Olmec populations who seem to make

!

....................................................

15

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

FIGURE 7. Helicopter of Petroleos Mexicanos in 1968 at La Venta.
Left to right: John A. Graham, Patrick S. Hallinan, helicopter pilot, R.
F. Heizer.

,

I
FIGURE 8. Schematic plan of the La Venta pyramid abstracted from
the contour map made in 1968 by Lewis K. Napton and his aides. V
stands for valley; R for ridge. Compare with photograph in Fig. 6.

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SAy OF CAMPECHE

J
<~3 Modern se]llement
Over 600 ft. elevation

50kin

The Olrnec

N

Region

(After Berne]

1969 : 16

FIGURE 9. Southern Veracruz Gulf Coast Showing the Tuxtla
Mountains Area and the Four Major Olmec Sites. The relatively
regular geographical distance of each site encourages the hypothesis
that these are district "capitols" or administrative-religious centers
of a single society. The Tuxtlas have not been "apportioned" because
we know so little of Olmec occupation of this highland zone.
their presence known at the same time out on the Gulf coast plain in
such sites as Tres Zapotes, Laguna de los Cerros, San Lorenzo and La
Venta. Perhaps these were district capitals, each distant about 50
miles from its neighbor, founded by a population forced out of the
Tuxtla Mountains by some event such as a major volcanic eruption
with a heavy fall of ash. Each of these four sites is somewhat different
from the others, but there are also some features of similarity. Unique
to the La Venta site, so far as we know, is the great conical pyramid
with its ridged and valleyed exterior. What could be the model for
such a structure? The answer is that a very good model is the cinder
cones which are abundantly present in the Tuxtla Mountains, and
which not only exhibit the same kind of erosional channels and ridges,
but also the precise slope angle which we see on the La Venta
pyramid (Mayer Per6z Rul 1962}. The model, therefore, may have
been a natural cinder cone somewhere in the Tuxtla Mountains
which was of ritual significance to the people who founded La Venta,
and when they established this retreat they laid out the series of
mounds on the plan of the ritual center which they had lately
abandoned, and, lacking their sacred mountain, they built an
imitation one of earth and clay. It is a pretty theory which fits some of

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

17

FIGURE 10. Cinder Cone near Lake Catemaco in the Tuxtla
Mountains. Compare erosional valleys and angle of slope with the La
Venta pyramid shown in Fig. 6.

the things we know, but it is the purest speculation. But like Mark
Twain, who said, "I do not vouch for the truth of that statement; I
merely believe it," I like my theory of why La Venta appears where
and when it did. The alignment of the centerline of the La Venta site
has recently been investigated by Hatch (1971) who has provided
powerful arguments in support of her conclusion that the La Venta
Olmecs were expert astronomers who used the La Venta pyramid as
an observation platform or observatory and as a means of gaining
sufficient height above the tropical forest to see the true horizon to
the north on the water of the Gulf of Mexico. Some of the decorative
designs or symbols which occur in Olmec art at La Venta and
elsewhere, she interprets as glyphs or signs which symbolized certain
aspects of ritual, heavenly bodies, and the like, and which in a special
sense can be considered a kind of writing. There are no actual
hieroglyphic texts from La Venta in the form of a consecutive series of
these symbolic designs which form a record of some celestial
occurrences. In a sense these could be called texts--even
hieroglyphic texts--but they are a long way from constituting the
complex texts which appear about seven centuries later on Maya
monuments.

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The oldest known lowland Maya hieroglyphic date is on Stela 29
from Tikal. It is equivalent to A.D. 292. Other early stelae, though
engraved in something other than pure Maya form are Stela 2 from
Chiapa de Corso and Stela C from Tres Zapotes which bear the
equivalent of B.C. dates. Another early Maya text is the Leyden Plate,
a green jade piece engraved with Maya hieroglyphs and dating from
about A.D. 320. There are somewhat similar Olmec engraved axes
(Hatch 1971), presumably of earlier date, and they may represent the
oldest known Mesoamerican evidence of the beginning of writing.
So, while we now know a good deal about the Olmecs there remains
a good deal we do not know, and much which we can probably never
hope to learn or recover about these people who, some 3000 years
ago, suddenly appear into view with a knowledge of how to keep track
of time by studying the heavens, who were perhaps making fumbling
attempts at writing, whose society was divided into an upper class of
priests and rulers, or perhaps priest-kings, whose religion was surely
a complex one and probably concentrated on insuring agricultural
fertility, and whose jade carving and monumental stone sculpture
was technically and aesthetically equal to anything produced in
Mesoamerica in the centuries and millennia following the Olmec
disappearance.
In October, 1492, when Columbus discovered the New World, the
inevitable day when Old and New World civilization would come into
contact did occur. And when Cortds in Mexico, imbued with the less
refined aspects of medieval chivalry and equipped with steelarmored horsemen and guns which gave his fighting men an
overwhelming advantage, brought down the Aztec state, not only
were a lot of cultured Native Americans killed off, but there also
came to a sudden end the greatest American achievement of all times,
namely the invention and development of true civilization, an
achievement which in the end came to naught because it was
overwhelmed and destroyed by the bearers of a superior technology
in the form of better military tactics, better transport in the form of
the horse, and better offensive and defensive weapons in the form of
steel armor, steel swords, and guns. In earlier times similar
disappearances or cultural extinctions on a smaller scale must have
occurred, as we know by the examples of the once-vigorous Olmecs of
the Mexican Gulf lowland who suffered a decline about 600 B.C., or
the Maya of Guatemala and Yucatan whose Classic Period heyday
had passed by A.D. 1000, but whatever the cause or causes of the
passing of these people from the scene, their decline or even
disappearance did not affect the general continuation of the Native
American style of civilization since no single society anciently

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

19

became, as did that of the Spaniards in the sixteenth century, so
overwhelmingly effective as a destructive force. To what heights
Native American civilization might have developed we can never
know because this process was suddenly truncated with the Spanish
conquest. It is only through archeology that culture historians in the
form of archeologists can hope to learn how, and where, and when,
the civilizational level of New World culture emerged, and that is the
principal reason, in my opinion, why there is something important in
the study of the site of La Venta.
Neither the La Venta nor San Lorenzo sites are the probable spots
where Olmec civilization first came into focus. The Tuxtla Mountains
strike me as a good place to look for the birthplace of this society, but
thus far we know of no pre-La Venta, pre-San Lorenzo sites there.
Perhaps if these exist they are hidden under a mantle of volcanic ash
which has been laid down in the last 3000years.
Meggers (1975) has recently proposed that the Shang culture of
China may have, after being carried in some fashion across the
Pacific, sparked the origin of Olmec culture. The Phoenecians have
also been proposed as the stimulators of this early and unusual
Mesoamerican culture. So there is no lack of parental candidates
from other continents. It is much more probable, I think, that Olmec is
merely an early, perhaps the earliest, Mesoamerican high culture. It
is conceivable that the little-explored south coast of Guatemala may
have been the Olmec nursery. Some Olmec sculpture occurs there,
not the least interesting of these pieces being a remarkable low-relief
sculpture shown here (Fig. 11) and which comes from the Pacific

FIGURE 11. Olmec Style Low Relief Sculpture from the South (Pacific)
Coast of Guatemala. Diameter, 81 cm. Photograph courtesy of E. M.
Shook.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

coast zone. Either some Tabascan Olmec sculptor got a long way from
home or there were things going on in that area some 400 kilometers
(240 miles) to the southeast of La Venta that we do not yet know
about.* So, we have to admit that we do not really know where the
Olmecs appear first. It is possible that some clue as to origins lies in
the stone drains which occur both at the La Venta site (Fig. 12) and
the San Lorenzo site.
I do not know whether we can shape our future from the lessons of
the past. Probably not, because there are certain forces built into any
system which tend to inhibit deviation, even though these seem to take
a counter-productive direction. In this country we are preparing to
celebrate the bicentennial of American independence. We are still
strong, but also in a state of disarray. There was Watergate, and
more recently two attempts to take the life of still another President.
And there was Vietnam--a war we clearly lost and at great cost in
treasure and human life. Three thousand years ago the Olmec at La
Venta may have celebrated their centennial, or their bicentennial
founding. And they were to last for about 400 more years before they
disappeared from view. One wonders whether the United States will
be a recognizable entity four centuries from now. I hope it will, but
since I am not a fortune-teller, I do not even have an opinion on this.
So, while I know nothing about how to predict the future, I have spent
a lot of time studying the past. And I think there are some lessons to
be learned here. Perhaps it would be important to us today if we could
learn how Maya society operated, and how it managed to keep going
for eight centuries; or how the Olmec civilization succeeded for four
to six centuries; or how the Teotihuacanos of the Valley of Mexico
managed to keep it together for seven or eight centuries. Those are
respectably long cultural lifetimes, it seems to me, and it would be
comforting to be able to make an informed guess that the USA was
still going to be around and in reasonably good shape in, say four or
five centuries from now. Is it possible that we might learn something
of the art of national survival by studying these defunct
Mesoamerican civilizations? I think it is probable that when the
Europeans came to the New World and destroyed some twenty million
people with disease and guns that they may have, however

*Since writing this the author and John Graham have conducted preliminary
excavations in the site of Abaj Takalik, Depto. Retalhuleu, on the south (Pacific) coast of
Guatemala. There we have at least six pure Olmec sculptures and a large number of
proto-Classic or Early Classic Maya stelae and altars, some of which are older than any
other Maya sculptures with hieroglyphic dates. Abaj Takalik is the only site known to
date where a substantial corpus of Olmec and Maya sculpture occur together.

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

21

FIGURE 12. Trough-shaped Stone Block Drain Discovered in 1968 in
the Stifling Acropolis at the La Venta Site.
unwittingly, erased some very important persons who knew a lot
about how to keep cultures going for an extended period of time. In
the end (and I remind you that I am no soothsayer) the New World
that Columbus discovered may have really been the Old World.
If we do not yet know the answers to such questions as where, and
in what manner Olmec culture began we will keep looking for the
evidence of that spot and the process. In the meanwhile we devise
theories which are based on facts at present known. Such theories
are always short-lived because new facts invalidate them, either
wholly or in part. That is how we learn. Mark Twain understood that,
and he summed it all up when he wrote: "There is something
fascinating about science. One gets such wholesale returns of
conjecture out of such a trifling investment of fact."

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Berger, R., J. A. Graham and R. F. Heizer
1967 A Reconsideration of the Age of the La Venta Site. Contributions of
the University of California Archeological Research Facility, No. 3:
pp. 1-24.
Coe, W. R. and R. Stuckenrath
1964 A Review of La Venta, Tabasco, and its Relevance to the Olmec
Problem. Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers, No. 31: pp. 1-44.
Drucker, P.
1961 The La Venta Support Area. Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers,
No. 25: pp. 59-72.
Drucker, P. and R. F. Heizer
1960 A Study of the Milpa System of La Venta Island and Its Archeological
Implications. Southwestern Iournal of Anthropology, Vol. 16: 36-45.
Drucker, P., R. F. Heizer and R. Squier
1957 Radiocarbon Dates from La Venta, Tabasco. Science, Vol. 126: pp. 7273.
Hatch, M. P.
1971 An Hypothesis on Olmec Astronomy, with Special Reference to the La
Venta Site. Contributions of the University of California Archeological
Research Facility, No. 13: pp. 1-64.
Heizer, R. F.
1961 Inferences on the Native Olmec Society Based Upon Data from the La
Venta Site. Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers, No. 25: 43-57.
1960 Agriculture and the Theocratic State in Lowland Southeastern
Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 26: pp. 215-222.
Heizer, R. F., P. Drucker and J. A. Graham
1968 Investigations at La Venta, 1967. Contributions of the University of
California Archeological Research Facility, No. 5: pp. 1-34.
Heizer, R. F., J. A. Graham and L. Napton
1968 The 1968 Investigations at La Venta. Contributions of the University
of California Archeological Research Facility, No. 5: pp. 125-154.
Mayer Perez Rul, F.
1962 Estudio Vulcanol~gico de la Regi6n de los Tuxtlas, Ver. Facultad de
Ingineria, U.N.A.M., Mexico.
Meggers, B. J.
1975 The Transpacific Origin of Mesoamerican Civilization: a Preliminary
Review of the Evidence and Its Theoretical Implications. American
Anthropologist, Vol. 77: pp. 1-27.
Morrison, F., C. W. Clewlow and R. Heizer
1970 Magnetometer Survey of the La Venta Pyramid, 1969. Contributions
of the University of California Archaeological Research Facility, No.
8: pp. 1-20.
Mozino Suarez de Figueroa, J. M.
1913 Noticias de Nutka, diccionario de la lingua de los Nutkeses, y
descripcign del volc~n de Tuxtla. Sociedad M6xicana de Geograffa y
Estadistica, Mexico.

LA VENTA: MESO AMERICAN CIVILIZATION

23

Velson, J. S. and T. C. Clark
1975 Transport of Stone Monuments to the La Venta and San Lorenzo
sites. Contributions of the University of Ca!ifornia Archaeological
Research Facility, No. 24: pp. 1-39.

ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT THE
]ETTA COURT SITE (41 TV 151)
TRAVIS COUNTY, TEXAS
AL B. WESOLOWSKY, THOMAS R. HESTER AND DOUGLAS R. BROWN

ABSTRACT
During the course of several weekends in 1968 and 1969, students from
The University of Texas at Austin carried out test excavations at the Jetta
Court site in Travis County, central Texas. These investigations
constituted a salvage effort designed to obtain information on this site
before it was destroyed by construction activities in a housing development. The terrace deposits at Ietta Court yielded a long Archaic
sequence, including a deeply buried occupation which occurred stratigraphically below Early Archaic materials. The results of the excavations
are described, and detailed analyses of the lithic debris and faunal remains are presented.

INTRODUCTION
The Jetta Court site (41 TV 151) is located within the city limits of
Austin, Texas, buried in terrace deposits on the west side of Walnut
Creek (Figs. 1-3). The site was brought to the attention of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) of The University of
Texas at Austin in the fall of 1968 by reports of pothunting in an
area slated for a housing subdivision. Inspection of the site by TARL
personnel indicated that it should be tested before the planned construction activities were begun.
Excavations, directed by graduate students in anthropology at The
University of Texas at Austin, were carried out with volunteer help.
Work was done on weekends during a period from December, 1968,
to February, 1969. Since the site was unprotected during the week,
numerous instances of vandalism occurred. One unit of excavation
was eventually ruined, but the others were not seriously damaged.
This combination of weekend excavation and weekday vandalism
limited effective investigation to stratigraphic testing and backhoe
trenching. Exposures of horizontal tracts were not done partly because of fear that it would lead to more extensive depredations on
the part of the pothunters, and partly because the site was considerably deeper than was anticipated.
The writers would like to acknowledge the assistance and understanding of Mr. Cecil Lamour, representing Conann Construction,
Inc., in permitting the excavations. His patience with our backhoe
operations, in particular, was most helpful. We would also like to
thank the volunteer crew for their industry and enthusiasm; the

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A 41TVi51 ,~,4 )

FIGURE 1. Location of the Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151), Travis County, Texas.

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory and the Texas Archeological Salvage Project for equipment, vehicles, laboratory facilities,
and artifact processing; and, Dee Ann Story, Elton Prewitt, and
Harry J. Shafer for advice, criticism and help.
NATURAL SETTING
The Jetta Court site is located at N30°23’15’’, W97°40’40’’, in the
eastern part of the Balconian biotic province defined by Blair
(1950:112). The topography of the area is rugged, and most of the
Balconian lies on Cretaceous limestone which has been much dissected by several river systems. The reader is referred to Blair’s

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

to Walnut Creek

27

o

/
/

/

/

SCALE
m=2m

FIGURE 2. Map of the Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). One-meter contour intervals are indicated within the site area. The dotted line represents the known extent of aboriginal occupation.

work for details of physiography, flora, and fauna within this
province.
The site is located on a terrace situated on the inside of a bend in
Walnut Creek. The slope from the site to the creek is gentle, with a
much steeper slope found on the opposite side of the creek. A short
distance downstream there is a deep, entrenched gully cutting back
into the limestone outcrop that forms the bedrock of the immediate
area.
It has been traditional in central Texas archeology to treat the
ecology of prehistoric sites by a reference to whatever biotic provinces they belong, supplemented by a list of plants and animals that

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

are to be found in the area. Thorough and detailed ecological surveys designed to illuminate archeological questions are sadly lacking
(the work of Witter, 1971, in the Robert Lee Reservoir of west central Texas is an exception; cf. also Eddy 1974). The relation of man
to his environment, and changes in settlement and subsistence patterns through time, should be of continuing interest to archeologists
in the region. At an informal level, the types of studies we envision
are directed at asking, and perhaps eventually answering, the questions "Why did the Indians camp here?" and "Why did they move
elsewhere at various times of the year?". The answers of availability of local subsistence resources at certain times of the year is
simply not adequate. Specific information is needed to explain patterns in settlement archeology, which has not, as of yet, been attempted in central Texas (el. Skinner 1971:256-260).
The following commentary on the vegetation and topography of
the Jetta Court site is based on notes taken by Dan Witter while excavations were in progress.
Four zones of vegetation were observed during a brief inspection
in January, 1969, of the site area:
a. flood plain woodland
b. alluvial slope woodland
c. alluvial slope shrubland
d. limestone bluff shrubland
The floodplain is a woodland of small-sized trees approximately
50-60 feet high with a fairly continuous canopy. Sycamores (Platanus
occidentalis) were occasionally seen along the stream bank itself,
while elms (Ulmus spp.), hackberry (Celtis spp.), pecans (Carya i11inoensis), sumac (Rhus spp.) and Baccharis sp. were observed among
the plants on the flood plain. The elms and hackberries formed the
main portions of the canopy with the pecans usually occurring in
groves. Sumac and Baccharis were understory shrubs.
The site itself is in a localized woodland that has developed on
slope wash from a nearby bluff located to the south of the site. The
alluvial slope woodland is a stand of small trees usually 40-50 feet
high and is composed primarily of two species of oak; elms, pecans,
and hackberries are also present. The oaks are identified as
Quercus stellata vat. (a local variant of post oak) and Q. schumardii
var. texana (the Shumard oak). B~ckeye (Aesculus sp.) and juniper
(luniperus ashei) were also noted.
To the north of the site, where the slope was exposed and the
ground rocky, a juniper shrubland prevailed.
Above the site was an exposed limestone bluff which displayed
juniper shrubland as the main form of vegetation. Prickly pear
(Opuntia spp.) was also common.

29

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

¢/3
0~

©

O0

©

o

.+,.a
°,.-I
rd3

©

;>
,--4
tt~

b,

¢..1
.I.,,a
CD
CD

~s
O0

rD

.S°

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In general, the vegetation is typical of the Balcones Escarpment,
having two broad types of environments:
I) Limestone outcrops and rocky slopes with shrubland vegetation.
2a) Little enclaves of hardwood woodlands where the trees
are given some protection from the wind and sun and
2b) Woodlands on the floodplains of streams and canyons
which have cut into the Cretaceous limestone of the Edwards Plateau.
We suggest that the aboriginal occupation was located on the alluvial slope for several reasons: water is available and there is some
protection from the wind afforded by the bluff; the trees also serve
as wind breaks as well as giving some relief from the sun. The
actual flood plain presently has few trees on the site side of the
creek, whereas the other side has numerous trees but is on quite a
steep slope.

EXCAVATION PROCEDURES
For all practical purposes, controlled excavations consisted of
three two-meter square units. In addition, a one-meter by two-meter
unit was begun, and two backhoe trenches and a small shovel test
were made (see Fig. 2). A north-south base line, originating at the
arbitrary point North 200/West 200 (N200/~V200) was extended
north and the two-meter square units were placed along its east side
at two meter intervals. These three units are referred to as Units A,
C, and E (from north to south), and their grid designations are
N200/W200, N196/W200 and N192/W200 respectively. A one-meter
by two-meter test pit, labeled in the field as Unit X, was begun to the
southeast at approximately N165/W200, but was destroyed by vandals after a day of excavation. It was then abandoned, and consequently its contribution to our knowledge of the site is negligible.
Shovel Test 1 (a one-meter square) was performed at approximately
N192/W170. Two backhoe trenches (see Fig. 2), dug very near the
completion of controlled excavations, gave us an extensive view of
the internal structure of the site before its ultimate destruction.
A large nail driven into a telephone pole served as a horizontal
datum point, arbitrarily designated as 100 meters. Controlled excavations were carried out in arbitrary 20 centimeter levels. Units A,
C, and E had their levels measured from the northwest corner stake.
After the excavations were finished, the arbitrary levels could, with
a reasonable degree of certainty, be correlated with the natural
strata that were recognized.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

31

The site area appeared quite featureless on the surface. The
decision on where to locate the excavation units was based on avoiding (1) a disturbed area in the northeast portion of the site, (2) the
trees which dotted the terrace, and (3) the sloping ground to the
east.
The two topmost levels (0-40 centimeters) were passed through
1/4" mesh hardware cloth. The lower levels were screened through
1/2" mesh because of the necessity to accelerate the salvage activities due to continuing vandalism of the units. Digging was done primarily with pick and shovel, and recognized features were exposed
with trowels and smaller tools. Soil samples were taken.
The decision to limit excavations to stratigraphic tests involved
several considerations: (1) the vertical extent of the site was unknown; (2) it was not known how long the site would be accessible
before house construction began, leading to the destruction of the
site; (3) wider horizontal exposures would slow work with respect to
(1) and (2) above, and might have been more of an invitation to pothunters and vandals during the week.
In summary, the excavations at the ]etta Court site consisted of a
salvage effort. Three two-meter squares were dug to at least 2.602.80 meters below the surface. They were intended to give information on the stratigraphic distribution of archeological materials with
only incidental disclosures of horizontal associations. In retrospect,
we suspect that this was not the best way to sample the site, but
recalling our limited resources and time deadlines, we are
convinced that these excavations have recovered worthwhile information which would have otherwise been lost.
STRATIFICATION AND INTERNAL STRUCTURE
Broadly speaking, the internal structure of the site consists of a
basal clayey alluvium, with a similar deposition separating a higher
and lower zone of dark soil and burned rock. In the lower reaches of
the deposit the basal soil became more calcareous, but there were
no layers of gravel or other recognized changes to indicate a complicated depositional history of the terrace for its topmost 4.5 meters.
To be sure, some three meters of fill have been deposited since the
beginning of aboriginal occupation, but no radical natural depositional changes seem to be involved for this time span. The T-shaped
backhoe trench revealed that the deposits slope down to the east
and north, toward the edge of the terrace. The terrace edge is not
sharply defined, but slopes over some 20 meters to the floodplain of
Walnut Creek.

32

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Five stratigraphic zones ("A" to "E", from bottom to top) were
recognized on the basis of changes in color and matrix, including
alterations resulting from human activity (see Figs. 4,5). Although
we are not entirely certain that the maximum depth of cultural
debris was reached, the paucity of cultural materials from the
bottom 40 centimeters of each unit suggest that deeper excavation
would have only defined the lowest elevations of occupation more
precisely without appreciably increasing our understanding of the
earliest occupations. An auger test in Unit C reached 95.5 meters
below datum, and no significant soil change was noted.
Description of the Zones
Zone A: Zone A was the deepest zone investigated during excavation,
but its lowest depth was not reached at any point during the work. It may
continue down to meet bedrock (most likely a limestone formation that
outcrops in the vicinity} at some presently unknown depth; or there may
be other zones intervening between Zone A and bedrock. Should the
latter by the case, we do not think that it would change our current
understanding of the human occupation of the site.
Zone A is a light brown mixture of sand and clay, with calicbe nodules
increasing in frequency lower down in the exposed sections. Cultural remains are sparse, as compared to upper levels of the site, and consist of
lithic debris, a few animal bone fragments, and a small amount of burned
rock. In unit A, this zone seems to extend from about 98.75 meters to the
floor of the excavation at 97.20 meters without interruption except for a
concentration (lens?} of snarl shells (see Fig. 4). This concentration may
correspond to Zone B in Units C and E, but this is not at all certain. In
Units C and E, Zone A extends from the floor of the units to approximately 98.20 meters, where it contacts Zone B.
In Unit C, an auger test was made to a depth of 95.5 meters below
datum (4.5 meters below the surface) and revealed no recognized important change in composition (Fig. 5). It should be noted that there
seemed to be a band of slightly higher clay content from approximately
96.50 meters to 96.30 meters. At some time during the deposition of Zone
A, the earliest human occupation of the Jetta Court site occurred.
Zone B. Zone B, also referred to in this report as the "Lower Midden",
is definitely recognized in Units C and E. It is a midden deposit composed
of dark gray to black soil with numerous burned limestone rocks, snail
shells, and cultural debris. Approximately 40 centimeters thick, it extends
across all profiles of Unit E between ca. 98.0 meters to 98.40 meters
below the datum. To the north, in Unit C, it is clearly evident only to about
the North 194.80 line on the east profile. Only some 25 centimeters thick
at the North 194 line, it pinches out to the north and past the North 194.80
line it is visible only as a sparse scattering of burned rocks. The south
profile of Unit C shows that Zone B thins out also towards the east and
west. In Unit A there are two lenses of snail shells, the lower of which
contains a few burned rocks. The lower lens may correspond to Zone B
by virtue of its elevation, and by the amount of cultural debris recovered
from it and adjacent levels.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

[

0

II
#1
t~
tl
I

\

/

33

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

N 196 " W 198

0

E
0

~o

~0

D

C
B

A

41 TV 151
Jetta [ourt Site
Unit C
SOUTH PROFILE

"Clayey"zone

FIGURE 5. South Profile of Unit C, Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151).

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

35

Zone B is of particular interest since it is a buried midden deposit
separated from Zone E (also referred to as the "Upper Midden"} by a
very different soil. The Lower Midden may represent either a fairly intensive human occupation or a stable surface early in the human history of
the site.
Zone C: The certain presence of Zone C is identified only in Units C and
E, since there is no sure evidence of the Lower Midden in the section of
Unit A. With this lack of evidence, there is no way to assess a contact
between Zones A and C in Unit A. In appearance, Zone C is quite similar
to Zone A: light brown to tan sandy clay with snail shells and a few
burned rocks. However, there was a greater abundance of cultural materials in Zone C than in Zone A.
Zone D: The boundaries of this zone are indistinct, but it would seem to
represent a transition between Zones C and E. Zone D consists of tan and
gray sand-clay mixture with a few burned rocks and occasional concentrations of black midden soil. This zone varies in thickness from about 35
centimeters to 75 centimeters.
Zone E: Zone E, also referred to as the "Upper IvIidden", is quite
similar to Zone B (the Lower Midden}. It is composed of a dark gray to
black soil with considerable quantities of burned rocks, snail shells, and
other cultural debris. It is evident in all three units, and extends up to the
grass roots.

It should be mentioned that the notes for the abortive Unit X record a matrix similar to Zone E for the extent of that unit’s excavation. It may be assumed that Zone E extends over most of the site
and that the materials from Unit X correlate with Zone E (as
exposed in Units A, C, and E) although we cannot demonstrate an
observed stratigraphic link.
In Fig. 4 we have illustrated the stratification exposed in the north
wall of the east-west backhoe cut. In Fig. 4, stratum i is a humusstained topsoil, stratum 2 correlates with Zone E, stratum 3 appears
to equate with Zone D, and stratum 4 apparently correlates with
Zones A-C as defined for Units A, C and E.
Stratification: The Characteristics of the Two Middens
The stratification of the ]etta Court site is marked by the presence
of two zones of "intensive" occupation. The profiles of Units C and E
(Figs. 4-6) show two dark midden accumulations separated by intervening light-colored soil. In Unit A, the Upper Midden is evident
enough in the wall of the excavation, but there is no dark Lower
Midden deposit. However, the Lower Midden is present to the extent
of sharp peaks in the percentages of flint flakes and animal bones at
an elevation comparable to that of the Lower Midden in the other

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

<

37

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

,--%
tO

b,
,~ c0
~--, n::J
°,-t

¢J
~o,-,

CD

©

©

~ca

38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

two units. In all three units there is a marked relative scarcity of
animal bones and flint flakes in the levels immediately above the
Lower Midden.
The midden zones proper are characterized by the type of
contents seen at so many other central Texas sites: dark-brown,
gray and black soil with considerable quantities of angular burned
limestone rock, lithics, and other occupational refuse. The artificial
levels used during excavation concided with the natural borders of
the middens reasonably well.
The Lower Midden. The Lower Midden is of particular interest to
central Texas archeologists since it seems to indicate an occupation
which is similar in projectile point styles and stratigraphic position
(relative to the rest of the site) to the occupational phases III and IV
(and perhaps II) at the Landslide site (Sorrow, Sharer and Ross
1967), as well as the earlier levels of the Youngsport site (Shafer
I963), the La Jita site (Hester 1971), Granburg II (Hester 1975;
Hester and Kohnitz 1975), and several other central Texas sites (cf.
Sollberger and Hester 1972). We refer specifically to the presence of
Bell and Gower points, plus our Miscellaneous I (corner notched)
and Miscellaneous II (triangular) forms in the Lower Midden or immediately below it. The early occupations at Jetta Court stratigraphically predate the previously defined "Early Archaic" of central
Texas (cf. Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962). The diagnostic point
styles of the "Early Archaic", particularly Balverde and Nolan, all
occur higher in the site deposits. None of these early occupations,
incidentally, have the characteristic artifacts assigned to the earliest known occupation of central Texas during Paleo-Indian times.
These artifactual remains found between Paleo-indian and Early
Archaic at Jetta Court and several other central and Trans-Pecos
Texas sites have been attributed to a transitional "Pre-Archaic"
phase by Sollberger and Hester (1971; the "Transitional Early Archaic" of Prewitt 1974: Fig. 7).
Diagnostic artifact forms from within the Lower Midden, as mentioned above, are Gower and Bell, and two stemmed points similar to
Bell (these from the area of contact between Zones B and C). From
below the Lower Midden, in Zone A, a single Gower point was recovered. In addition, a number of untyped dart points (Miscellaneous I and II, and specimens a-g in Fig. 15) are from the Lower
Midden.
Absolute sample size of diagnostic artifacts within the Lower
Midden is not particularly impressive. However, the stratigraphic
discreteness of certain projectile point styles, we feel, provide good
evidence for this stratum representing an occupation stratigraph-

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

39

ically, and therefore chronologically, older than the previously defined central Texas "Early Archaic". As we view it, the Lower Midden of the Jetta Court site parallels and replicates to some degree
the early occupations at Landslide, Youngsport, La Jita and other
sites, in a morphological and stratigraphic sense. We have no reason to suspect that this early occupation at Jetta Court was substantially different in subsistence patterns as compared to the later Archaic occupations. Certainly there is a change in the artifacts (else
how could we recognize it), but no data were recovered that showed
any changes in economy or deposition of materials. We are able to
see changes in the lithic technology as reflected in the relative proportions of flake categories, but remain uncertain as to the cultural
significance of such changes.

The Upper Midden
The Upper Midden, which can be traced with certainty in all
three units, represents nothing greatly out of the ordinary for the
later occupation of Central Texas. The observation that several
specimens of projectile points are "out of place" stratigraphically
may indicate some instability of the soils and consequent mixing of
deposits. The two specimens of Travis in Level 3 and the two EnsorFairlands in Level 3 are the cases in point.
Although Zone D is a "transitional zone" of dark soil lacking the
burned rocks of Zone E (the Upper Midden), it has some artifactual
continuity with the Upper Midden. For this reason it will be included
in our discussion of the Upper Midden. The diagnostic materials
from Zone D include Bulverde, Nolan, and Pedernales. Both Bulverde
and Pedernales continue up into Zone E. In the contact zone between
zones D and E were one specimen each of Darl and Montell, as well
as Pedernales and Bulverde.
Recovered from Zone E were Pedernales, Montell, Darl, Travis,
Castroville, "Ensor-Fairland", Lange, Scallorn, and Perdiz. In addition, there were Untyped dart points 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 16, 18, 21, 22,
and an Untyped arrow point 17.
The diagnostic projectile point sequence from the Upper Midden is
in general agreement with data from Stillhouse Hollow and Canyon
Reservoirs. The proverbial "thin veneer" of Neo-American occupation is present in Level 1 in all three units: five Scallorn points which
are considered diagnostic of the Austin phase; and one Perdiz point
which is associated with the Toyah phase (Shafer 1971). Another
major trait of the Toyah phase, bone-tempered pottery, was not
found at Jetta Court.

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Since only 43 diagnostic projectile points were recovered in the
Upper Midden, and these are distributed among II types, it seems
remarkable that the sequence should be as consistent as it is, within
itself and with reference to other sites.
The value of the stratigraphic data from the Jetta Court site is not
for new information on the relative placement of various point styles
in the later Archaic, but in the presence of a "pre-Archaic" phase
as a viable stratigraphic entity in its own right.

FEATURES
Of the seven intrasite structures, or features, recognized at Jetta
Court, only one is from the Upper Midden (Zone E) and none were
recorded for the Lower Midden (Zone B), although one may have
been on the upper surface of the latter.
All are concentrations of burned rock that are traditionally referred to as "hearths" in central Texas archeology. It is difficult to
say whether any features could have been recognized in the dense
concentrations of burned rock in the Upper and Lower Middens, but
the techniques of salvage excavation employed were not particularly
sensitive to features likely to be encountered in burned rock midden
deposits. Excavations directed at revealing features of occupation
would have been primarily horizontal exposures, while the excavations at Jetta Court were more concerned with vertical, stratigraphic cuts. This is not to say that the two different techniques are mutually exclusive for the information they recover, but vertical tests
are less sensitive than other techniques. Ideally, once the two midden zones were identified, there should have been a sizable horizontal tract cleared and the two studied as lateral collections of
associations. Because of the conditions under which we operated,
this could not be done. Consequently, we have only a partial record
of the occupational features at the site.
Feature 1 (Unit C, Level 5, Zone D)
This feature was a small concentration of burned limestone rocks
resting on an essentially flat surface. Most of the rocks were about fistsized, and the exposed portion of the feature was ca. 25 centimeters
thick. This concentration extended into the south and east walls of the
unit. A few charcoal flecks were noted among the rocks but were too few
for a radiocarbon sample. Except for two flint flakes, no artifactual associations were observed.
Features 2 and 4 (Unit C, Levels 7 and 8, Zone C)
These features (Fig. 7) were identified in the field as parts of the same
concentration of burned rock, while the arbitrary level technique of exca-

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

41

Jetta I~ourt Site
4llVl51
Features 2,4
H196-W’200

Horth

biface

0
I

50cm
I

Burned Limestone

FIGURE 7. Features 2 and 4, letta Court Site (41 TV 151). See description in text.

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
vation inadvertently resulted in two separate feature designations being
assigned. This feature was a semi-circular concentration of burned rocks
in the southern portion of the unit, and it appeared to continue into the
south face of the unit. Several additional rocks were scattered across the
northern half of the unit and were not definitely linked to the feature.
With the exception of a single piece of sandstone, the burned rocks were
limestone. A biface and a single flint flake were thought to be in association. Only a few bone fragments were found in Level 7, apparently not
associated with the feature, and no bone was found in Level 8. At its
thickest point, the rock concentration measured only 16 centimeters, with
the components appearing to rest on a fairly flat surface.

Feature 3 (Unit X, Levels 1 and 2, probably Zone E)
This feature was a concentration of burned, and possibly some unburned, limestone rocks at 14-21 centimeters below the surface (Fig. 8).
Although no certain stratigraphic link can be demonstrated between
Units A, C, E and the ill-fated Unit X, Zone E (the Upper Midden) surely
extends across most of the site, and we therefore think that this feature
can be assigned to it.
The portion exposed was a semi-circular cluster of limestone rocks and
two associated deer metapodial fragments. The feature was approximately 75 centimeters in maximum diameter and was primarily one layer
of rocks thick (some of the rocks were up to 30 centimeters in length). A
large triangular biface was found in Level 2, but was at the opposite end
of the unit and probably not in association with the feature.

Feature 5 (Unit A, Level 6, at the contact between Zones C and D)
Feature 5 was a small accumulation of burned rocks, among which
several flint flakes were recovered. Measuring approximately 50 centimeters in maximum horizontal dimension, there is no conventional geometric shape that can be used to describe it. The concentration was only
8 centimeters thick. Most of the stones were slightly tilted in various
directions, but all appeared to be resting on a fiat surface.

Feature 6 (Unit E, Level 7, the contact between Zones C and D)
Feature 6 consisted of several small concentrations of burned limestone
rocks strewn between 120-129 centimeters below the surface (Fig. 9). This
elevation is approximately the contact between Zones C and D. Many of
the rocks overlapped one another and the flatter ones were tilted in
various directions. There was no discernable structure to these accumulations and they may very well have been fire-cracked rocks scattered
about on a living surface. A few animal bones were recorded from this
level, but none appear to have been in definite association with the rock
clusters. However, two flint flakes and a rnano fragment were found
among the rocks.
Feature 7 (Unit A, Level 11, Zone A)
Feature 7 was an elongated, loose accumulation of burned limestone
rocks possibly representing a hearth (Fig. 10). The rocks were on a sur-

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

43

E
tt~

E

°~

,=,,=1

t-,.
ea

x
0D

, _a

©

cD
’x2
o
¢.t3
,-&
L--

o
Z

" -’4

t_~

x--4

U3

am

¢3
03
x__

O

¢D

¢6

V--4

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Jetta Court Site
41TVI51
Feature 6

A
north

~50cm~

~Burnt Limestone

’~Flint Flake

FIGURE 9. Feature 6, Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). In the northwest
corner, Q indicates a quartzite cobble, and SS, a piece of sandstone.
See description in text.

Jetta Court Site
41TVI51
Feature7

north

~50cm~

Burnt Limestone

,~Flint Flake

FIGURE 10. Feature 7, Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). See description in
text.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

45

face ranging from 203-210 centimeters below the present surface. The only
associated object was a large, unretouched flint flake.

DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS
With the exception of one polished bone, all artifacts found at the
Jetta Court site were lithic. What little shell was found was extremely friable, as was a large portion of the recovered bone. Both bone
and shell were carefully examined in the laboratory, but no other
artifacts other than the previously mentioned bone specimen were
recognized.
The following artifact descriptions are highly abbreviated because of space limitations. The projectile point typology used is
largely that of Suhrn, Krieger and Jelks (1954). Since most of the artifacts are illustrated, we have omitted data on their dimensions. This
information is on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (Austin) and at the Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio. Similarly, detailed provenience
data have been placed on file at these two institutions, and only
general comments regarding provenience are provided in the artifact descriptions.

PROJECTILE POINTS
The section describing projectile points is divided into two groups
based on the stratigraphic location of the specimens in reference to
the two midden zones. The Lower Midden points will be described
first, followed by a discription of the specimens from the Upper
Midden.
LOWER MIDDEN
Bell (2 specimens; Fig. 11, a,b)
This type was originally defined by Sorrow, Shafer and Ross (1967:12).
The stems of the two specimens expand slightly. The lateral edges of one
specimen (Fig. 11, a) are straight, while the other (Fig. 11, b) has more
jagged edges. Three barbs have been broken off of the two specimens, but
one (Fig. 11,a) has a large barb characteristic of this type.

Bell-like (2 specimens; Fig. 11,c,d)
The stem of one of these specimens (Fig. 11,c) is slightly expanding,
while the other (Fig. 11,d) is straight. Specimen 11,c has a straight base
and 2,d has a slightly concave base. Both examples have thin stems,
which are broken off, and straight lateral edges. One specimen is missing
the distal tip.
We have classified these as Bell-like as it is highly likely that they are
simply variants of the Bell type.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

46

b

g

5C \I J(

,’m

k

FIGURE 11. Artifacts from the letta Court Site (41 TV 151). a, b, Bell;
c, d, Bell-like; e, f, Gower; g-i, Miscellaneous I; j, k, Miscellaneous II.
M1 specimens are from the Lower Midden.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Cower (2 specimens; Fig. ii, e,f)
The type was originally described by Shafer (1963). Both of these specimens have expanding stems with indented bases and rounded shoulders.
One specimen (Fig. 11,e) has about one-half of its distal end broken off.
The other specimen (ll,f) has lost a small portion of its tip.
Miscellaneous I (3 specimens; Fig. 11,g,h,i)
All three specimens are corner-notched and have pronounced concavity in the base. Only one seems to be the original length (Fig. 11,g), and
it has one convex and one straight lateral edge. The others are fragmented. They are morphologically similar to the Early Corner Notched
point form found in a stratigraphically equivalent situation at the La Jita
site {Hester 1971).

Miscellaneous II (2 specimens; Fig. 11, j,k)
These specimens are large triangular bifaces. They are very similar to
the Tortugas, except for the lack of beveled lateral edges. Hester (1971)
has termed similar specimens Early Triangular at the La Jita site; other
such triangular points have been found in early contexts at Granburg II in
Bexar County (Hester and Kohnitz 1975; Hester 1975).

UPPER MIDDEN
Bulverde (3 specimens; Fig. 12,a-c)
The stems of two of these specimens are slightly contracting and flat
across the base (Fig. 12,b,c). On the third specimen (Fig. 12,a) the stem is
straight and the base is slightly concave. All three have squared shoulders. Two of them (Fig. 12,a,b) are complete, and display convex lateral
edges. The third (Fig. 12,c) lacks about one-third of the distal tip.

Castroville (3 specimens; Fig. 12, d,f)
All three specimens have expanding stems with straight bases. One
specimen (Fig. 12,d) seems exceptionally long (10 cm); it has convex
lateral edges. The other two specimens have relatively straight lateral
edges. All three are barbed.

Darl (4 specimens; Fig. 12,g-j)
Two of the specimens (Fig. 12,g,h) have concave edges on their stems.
Of the others, one (Fig. 125) has a straight stem, and an other (Fig. 12,j) a
slightly convex stem. Specimens h and j have concave bases with the base
of i being straight, and the base of g slightly convex. The lateral edges of
all the bodies are straight to slightly convex. One specimen (Fig. 12,h) is
badly thermal fractured.

Ensor-Fairland (3 specimens; Fig. 12,k-m)
The stems of all three specimens expand greatly. The bases are slightly
concave. On two the lateral body edges are slightly convex. One specimen
(Fig. 12,m) has been reworked in such a manner as to give a short, squat
appearance.

47

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

!

h
f

g

i

m

FIGURE 12. Artifacts from the Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). a-c, Bulverde; d-f, Castroville; g-j, Darl; k-m, Ensor-Fairland; n-p, Lange. All
specimens are from the Upper Midden.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Lange (3 specimens; Fig. 12,n-p)
The stem of each specimen is expanding with a straight base. The
lateral edges of the bodies are straight to slightly convex. Only one specimen (Fig. 12,n) is complete.

Montell (2 specimens; Fig. 13,a,b)
The stems of these specimens are expanding and are notched near the
middle of the basal edge. The distal tips of both specimens are broken off;
however, enough can be seen of the lateral edges to indicate that they
were straight.
Nolan (1 specimen; Fig. 13,c)
This specimen has a straight or slightly contracting stem with a mildly
convex base. The shoulders are sloping. The lateral body edges are convex and the distal tip is broken.

Pedernales (15 specimens; Figs. 13, 14,d-m)
The stems of the specimens vary considerably as can be seen in Fig. 13.
All have the characteristic notch or concavity in the base. One specimen
consists only of a stem (Fig. 13,m). The bodies are roughly triangular with
the lateral edges varying from concave to straight to convex. Only three
specimens were complete enough to get both length and width measurements.

Travis (2 specimens; Fig. 14,1,m)
The stems of these specimens are different. One (Fig. 14,1) has a
slightly contracting stem to a convex base. The other (Fig. 14,m) has an
almost parallel stem with a straight base. The complete specimen has
lateral edges that are convex, coming to a sharp point.

Perdiz (1 specimen; Fig. 14,e)
This specimen has a contracting stem with a rounded base. The lateral
edges are slightly convex and the shoulders are barbed.
Scallorn (6 specimens; Fig. 14,f-k)
These specimens are easily identified by their corner-notched stems
and long narrow bodies. The bases are straight or slightly concave. None
of the recovered specimens is complete.

Untyped Individual Projectile Points
The specimens in this category are individual projectile points that do
not fit into any of the previous categories. All but one of the specimens (a
fragmentary contracting stem dart point) are illustrated in Figures 15 and
16. Specimens in Fig. 15, a-g, are from the Lower Midden; those in Fig. 15,
h-o, and in Fig. 16, are from the Upper Midden.

49

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

@ :if::¸~ ii~

in

FIGURE 13. Artifacts from the letta Court Site (41 TV 151). a-b, Montell; c, Nolan; d-m, Pedernales. All specimens are from the Upper
Midden.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

51

d

in

FIGURE 14. Artifacts from the Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). a-d,
Pedernales; e, Perdiz; f-k, Scallorn; 1, m, Travis. All specimens are
from the Upper Midden.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

52

o

CD

2
o

.fi

d

~m

O

z
N

.<

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

5C \1 I
Ill

n

53

o

FIGURE 15. Artifacts from the Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). Untyped
projectile points, a-g, Lower Midden; h-o, Upper Midden.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

54

c

b

d

f

e

FIGURE 16. Artifacts from the letta Court Site (41 TV 151). a-f, Upper Midden.

Probable Dart Point Fragments
Because of their workmanship (thinned and retouched), 36 specimens
are believed to be distal fragments of projectile points. Six are from the
Lower Midden, and the remainder, from the Upper Midden.

OTHER BIFACES (FIGS. 17, 18)
A number of other, non-projectile point bifaces were recovered. These
include two thinned bifaces (Fig. 17,a, Upper Midden; Fig. 17,b, Lower
Midden) which may be either preforms or knives.
Thirty-nine percussion-flaked bifaces, mostly fragments, were also
found, 28 in the Upper Midden and 11 in the Lower Midden. These
specimens are of varying shapes and sizes. Many have been totally bifaced
and perhaps were preforms or knives. Others are only partially worked
and appear to have been broken during the bifacing process. No
technological differences were apparent in the samples from the two
midden zones.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

55

Perforators (Fig. 17,,c,d)
Both specimens have long, narrow bits. The base of one is similar to a
Costroville point (Fig. 17,c), while the base on the other specimen is
rectangular (Fig, 17,d). Both specimens are from the Upper Midden.

a

c

b

d

FIGURE 17. Artifacts from the Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). a, b, bifaces; c, d, perforators.

GROUND AND PECKED STONE ARTIFACTS
Gorget (1 specimen; Fig. 19,a}
This specimen was found in the Upper Midden and appears to be a
fragment of an ovate gorget. Along the broken edge is a smoothed notch
which is suspected to be the first of a line of perhaps three holes. The
gorget is made of a reddish stone. Gorgers of this form are known from
other Archaic sites in central Texas (cf. Sharer and Corbin 1965: Fig. 12,c;
Hester 1971: Fig. 22,g).

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

’~l \1 I

FIGURE 18. Artifacts from the Ietta Court Site (41 TV 151). a-g, bifaces and biface fragments; a-c, Upper Midden; d-g, Lower Midden.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

57

Manos (16 specimens; Fig. 19,c,d)
All of these specimens show grinding wear on at least one face.
Most are fragmentary; none of the complete ones are larger than 10.5
centimeters in length and none are more than 7 centimeters in width.
Only two of the specimens are from the Lower Midden; the remaining
14 are from the Upper Midden.

FIGURE 19. Artifacts from the Ietta Court Site (41 TV 151). a, gorget;
b, bone artifact; c, d, manos.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

58

Metates (15 specimens; Fig. 20,a,b)
All of the metates or grinding slabs were broken. The fragments
showed signs of a smooth grinding basin characteristic of this artifact
form. Of the 15 specimens 12 were from the Upper Midden, and the others,
from the Lower Midden.

Hammerstones (not illustrated)
Two hammerstones were found in the Upper Midden. Both are approximately 8 centimeters long and roughly 5 centimeters in diameter.

FIGURE 20. Artifacts from the letta Court Site (41 TV 151). a, b,
metate fragments.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

59

Hematite (not illustrated)
One small piece of hematite, possibly used as a source of pigment, was
found in the Upper Midden. It was less than 1.5 centimeters square.

ARTIFACT OF BONE
Awl or Pin (1 specimen; Fig. 19,b)
The only non-lithic artifact found at Jetta Court was a small bone
specimen from the Lower Midden. It is a highly polished, rod-shaped bone
that could be a fragment of an awl or pin. It is 4 centimeters long, and has a
diameter of .5 centimeters tapering slightly to .4 centimeters at the other
end.

ARTIFACTS FROM AREAS OF LIMITED CONTROL
There were areas at the site where artifacts were collected
without complete control and therefore the information received from
these artifacts was not included in the main body of artifact descriptions. The limited control areas were surface collections, backhoe
trenches, Unit X (destroyed by pothunters), and a one meter by one
meter test pit (called Shovel Test 1) which was also aborted. The artifacts from these various proveniences are listed and briefly
described below; some are illustrated in Fig. 21.
Surface

Thirteen specimens are from surface contexts (Fig. 21,a,b). There
were four bifacially worked fragments, three fragmentary unifaces(these were the only unifacial implements found at the site) and three
possible core or chopper fragments. In addition, there were two projectile points, one Nolan-like and the other, non-diagnostic (Fig. 21,a,b).

Backhoe Trenches
Seventeen artifacts were collected during the digging of the
backhoe trenches (Fig. 21,c). These include 10 bifacially chipped pieces,
four chopper-hke implements, and three projectile points. The
points are: a Travis specimen (Fig. 21,c), found at a depth of 74 centimeters; a Scallorn arrow point (not illustrated) found at 16 centimeters; and, a possible Angastura (not illustrated) from an undetermined depth.

Unit X
Before Unit X was destroyed, eight artifacts were found. These
materials consist of three biface fragments, four projectile points, and
one knife-hke biface (Fib. 21,h). One specimen is a portion of a corner-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

60

notched point (Fig. 21,d), another is a probable Langtry (Fig. 21,e), and two
are Bulverde points (Fig. 21,f,g).

Shovel Test 1
There were five specimens. Four are biface fragments, and the fifth, a
rectangular stemmed dart point (Fig. 21,i).

ANALYSIS OF LITHIC DEBRIS
Lithic debris, a category which here includes retouched flakes,
was recovered mainly during the screening of the soil from excavations. The use of 1/4" mesh screen for the two levels of Units
A, C, and E (0-40 cm below the surface) and 1/2" mesh for the
remainder of the excavations surely had some effect on sampling for
smaller flakes. The top two levels produced the following
percentages of the entire sample of flakes from each unit: Unit A
(19o/o), Unit C (27%), Unit E (36%). Such high percentages could be
a function of more intensive occupational deposition rather than
differential sampling procedures, but we suspect that the smaller
mesh of the screen was probably a contributing factor.
The following categories, drawn from Shafer (1969: 3-5), were
used in sorting the flakes and to investigate any changes in the
relative frequencies of flake categories through time. We also noted
whether or not retouch was present, hoping to get an idea of the
amount of "waste" flakes as compared to those which were
retouched and presumable utilized.

flake: A chip or spall removed from a nodule (the parent stone) by force.
initial (primary) cortex flake: A flake with cortex covering the dorsal
surface.
secondary cortex flake: Cortex is retained somewhere on the dorsal
surface of the flake, but the amount may vary greatly. At least one flake
facet must be present on the dorsal surface.
interior flake: No cortex is retained on the dorsal surface, but the striking
platform may retain cortex.
lipped flake: Typically, these flakes have multifaceted, lenticular-shaped
striking platforms and a characteristic lip or ridge which is at right angles
to the axle of removal on the ventral side. The striking platforms are
bifacially prepared and multifaceted. The dorsal side of the flake is
multifaceted
and
rarely
exhibits
cortes.
Lipped
flakes
are
characteristically thin and arched. Similar flakes have been referred to as
"billet flakes" (Epstein 1963:29) or flakes of bifacial retouch (Frison 1968:
149,150). Lipped flakes do occur in retouch of unifacials (cf. Shafer 1970)
but these specimens reveal remnants of the fiat ventral surface of the
uniface on one side of the platform angles.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

61

¸;¸¸¸¸%¸ i:~iiiii:~i

t

g
F(I \LI
0

5t)

h

FIGURE 21. Artifacts from Areas of Limited Control, Jetta Court Site
(41 TV 151). a, b, surface; c, backhoe trench; d-h, Unit X; i, Shovel
Test 1.

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
retouched flakes: Those flakes which display "nibbling" (small flake scars)
along one or more edges. These are also known as "utilized flakes", but we
prefer to keep the designation of a technological rather than a functional
basis.

Other terms employed in the analysis are as follows:
striking platform: A surface (surfaces) on a core from which flakes are
removed. A remnant of this striking platform is also detached when the
flake is removed and is retained on the bulbar end of the flake.
natural striking platform: The cortex (patinated) surface of a core used
without modification as the striking platform.
dorsal surface: That surface of a flake opposite the bulb of percussion.
ventral surface: That side possessing the bulb of percussion.
proximal end: The bulbar end.
distal end: That end opposite the bulbar end.
chunk: Simply a piece of flint that cannot be fitted into any of the other
categories, but which is apparently derived from the lithic process (of.
Deacon 1969).

Five categories and a number of sub-categories were used in the
sorting. A number of categories were set up to assist in computation
and illustrations.
1A:
1B:
1C:
1D:

Primary cortex
Primary cortex
Primary cortex
Primary cortex

flake
flake
flake
flake

2A:
2B:
2C:
2D:

Secondary
Secondary
Secondary
Secondary

3A:
3B:
3C:
3D:

Interior
Interior
interior
Interior

4A:
4B:
4C:
4D:

Lipped flake
Lipped flake
Lipped flake
Lipped flake

5A:
5B:

Chunk -- unretouched.
Chunk -- retouched.

cortex
cortex
cortex
cortex

flake
flake
flake
flake

-----

-----

-----

flake
flake
flake
flake

bulb present -- unretouched.
bulb not present -- unretouched.
bulb present -- retouched.
bulb not present -- retouched.
-----

bulb present -- unretouched.
bulb not present -- unretouched.
bulb present -- retouched.
bulb not present -- retouched.

buld present -- unretouched.
bulb not present -- unretouched.
bulb present -- retouched.
bulb not present -- retouched.

bulb present -- unretouched.
bulb not present -- unretouched.
bulb present -- retouched.
bulb not present -- retouched.

Figure 22 shows the distribution of all flakes by level from each of
the Unites A, C, and E. Of interest is the coincidence of "peaks" in the

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

63

percentages at the elevations of the Upper and Lower Middens.
Although the dark staining and burned rock of the Lower Midden was
not apparent in Unit A, there is a peak comprising some 30% of the
sample from that Unit in Levels 8, 9, and 10. This suggests that the
cultural activities associated with the characteristic configuration of
the Lower Midden in Units C and E extended into Unit A.
The jump in level 9 of Unit C is attributed to the Lower Midden, but
the slightness of the peak in levels 9 and 10 of Unit E is puzzling. The
Lower Midden peak in Unit A and the apparent lack of one in Unit E is
replicated in the faunal collections. The scarcity of faunal remains in
the lower levels of Jetta Court was initially thought to be a function of
differential preservation. The testimony of relatively imperishable
flint flakes suggests that the scarcity of animal bone in the lower
levels may not be so simply explained away.
It could be that the materials from the Lower Midden in Units A and
C represent activity areas, and the relative lack of such materials
from Unit E might be explained by the absence of any activity area at
this spot in the site. We certainly cannot assume, as the analysis of
the distribution of the chipping debris will show, that three units of
excavation can sample as large a site as Jetta Court adequately. To
summarize, the picture presented by Units A and C is one of two
peaks in the distribution of flakes (corresponding to the Upper and
Lower Middens). Unit E shows a more-or-less gradual increasing percentage of flakes as the present is approached.
Several worksheets were prepared to organize the raw data
dealing with the distribution of the various categories as well as percentages for each level. These are too lengthy for inclusion here, but
are on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
Below level 10 in each unit, each level contributes only .01 to .02 to the
unit. These lower levels (11-14) yielded between 3 and 43 flakes
apiece, with a mean of 21.75 flakes per level. The following illustrates
the proportion of flakes in these lower levels to the flakes from the
remainder of the levels:

levels in all below level 10 produced a total of 210
flakes.
x = 21.75 flakes, range 3-43 flakes.
261 flakes = .0457 of 5707 flakes (total for all 3 units)
3 flakes = .0005 of 5707 flakes
43 flakes = .0075 of 5707 flakes

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Il
I

I

I

I

l

I

i

I

I

½

!G~I
i

~
I

1

o

L~

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

65

The foregoing should serve to illustrate that the levels below level 10
are contributing very little to the total assemblage. The fluctuations
in relative proportions of flake categories in the levels 11-14 as compared to those fluctuations in levels 1-10 may be a product of small
sample sizes, and therefore, sampling error. However, the apparent
stability of the proportions in the lower levels is surprising.
The relative proportions of the various flake categories through
time were tabulated for each unit (on file, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory). Figure 23 shows the relative frequencies of
flakes in the combined Units, A, C, and E. Categories 1 and 5 [primary
cortex flakes and chunk, respectively) are so rare as to be virtually
negligible. Category 2 flakes appear to change little through time,
while Categories 3 and 4 show an inverse relationship in their relative
proportions through time.
There are two explanations which may be presented to account for
the scarcity of initial cortex flakes:

2)

Perhaps very little initial working of flint cobbles was done at the
site.
A)
Flint cobbles were collected from spots some distance from
the site and initial flaking took place at some other point than
the site.
Perhaps very little flint was available in cobble form at all.
B)
Rather, flint in ledge outcrops was used. Since ledge flint has
no cortex, obviously no cortex flakes could be produced. Such
an explanation may also account for the apparent scarcity of
Category 2 flakes (Secondary Cortex Flakes).
Initial working of flint cobbles was done at the site, but the initial
cortex flakes were only rarely discarded. Rather, they were worked
into other forms. It does not seem likely that only 28 flakes out of
5707 could have escaped alteration.

At the La Jita site in Uvalde County (Hester 1971), one of the few
central Texas sites at which extensive debitage analysis has been
conducted, there was a similar rarity of initial cortex (Category i)
flakes throughout the site’s history. We suspect that the lack of
Category i flakes at Jetta Court (as at La Jita) indicates that the initial
phases of lithic reduction were carried out at quarry-workshops
away from the occupation site.
For analyzing the changes in the relative proportions of Categories
2, 3 and 4, statistical techniques were used to test the significance of
some of the differences suggested by simple inspection.

Tests of Homogeneity
A series of x2 tests were performed to examine various aspects of
homogeneity of the lithic debris sample. These tests were mainly

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

.o

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

67

directed at observing the statistical difference between the Upper
and Lower Middens with respect to relative proportions of flake
categories 2, 3, and 4. In addition, Spearman rank correlation coefficients were run to see if the observed "trends" in category 3 and 4
flakes (3 becoming more common in the later levels at the expense of
4) had any statistical significance (see below: Tests of Correlation).

The Upper Midden Versus the Lower Midden
In the study of the lithic debris comparing the two main occupational deposits recognized, several questions were asked:
1)
Are there differences between the two middens if the
flake counts from all three units are combined?
If there should be significant differences under 1
2)
above, is it possible that one or more of these
categories is not statistically different between the
two middens? In other words, could category 2 be
contributing no significant difference while 3 and 4 do
contribute?
CATEGORY

2

3

4

Total

Upper Midden

481

1757

703

2941

Lower Midden

205

588

392

1185

Totals

686

2345

1095

4126

With 2 degrees of freedom, a x2 value of 5.99 was needed to indicate that the proportions are dependent of provenience, and that
the lithic debris assemblages from the two middens were "different"
in a statistical sense. A value of 42.47 was obtained, indicating that
there is considerably less than a chance in a thousand that the observed proportions are the result of chance. Simply stated, the assemblages from the two middens are different with respect to relative
frequencies of flake categories.
The next question was "Do all flake categories contribute to the differences between the two middens, or might one or more categories
be distributed with insignificant differences between the middens?"
Accordingly, x2 tests were run comparing the Upper Midden to the
Lower Midden on the basis of proportions of Category x flakes versus
non-Category X flakes. The results were as follows:

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Flake Category

2

3

4

x2

3.539

35.269

36.485

(
= x2 significant at 3.84 at .05 level of
significance with i degree of freedom)

Choosing the .05 level of significance, we see that Categories 3 and
4 are different, but not Category 2. This suggests that changes in lithic
technology -- if such changes can be measured by the changing
relative frequencies of the flake categories recognized -- are confined to Categories 3 and 4. Category 2 flakes appear to have a more
constant relative frequency.
A functional approach might suggest that the origin of the Secondary Cortex Flakes remained constant through time and that there
was no "need" for the lithic assemblages to respond to any postulated
environmental or cultural changes as far as Category 2 flakes were
concerned. This does not say, however, that the lithic technology
remained undifferentiated through time with respect to other kinds of
flakes. Indeed, it appears that there are certain trends through time
in the relative frequencies of Categories 3 and 4, which are considered below ("Tests of Correlation").
Since it appears that there are differences of statistical significance between the Upper and Lower Middens for the site as a whole
(read "for Units A, C, and E"), tests were made to see if these differences existed at the level of the Unit. In other words, is the sample
from each unit consistent with the total assemblage? Can we talk
about changes in lithic technology in a statistical sense for the sample
from one unit of excavation; or are the units inconsistent, and must
they be totaled in order to speak of changes in flake category frequencies?
x2 tests were made for each unit comparing Categories 2, 3, and 4
in their Upper and Lower Middens:

Unit

A

C

E

x2

51.47

10.40

36.85

(
= x2 significant at 5.99 at .05 level of
significance with 2 degrees of freedom)

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

69

All are significantly different, indicating that the differences noted
when Units A, C, and E were combined are not the product of
differences in only one unit.
In addition, we tested the notion that one or more categories of
flakes may be contributing little to the differences as Category 2 was
seen to do earlier in this paper, x’ tests were made comparing
Category x in the Upper and Lower Middens versus non-Category
x in the Upper and Lower Middens for each unit. The x2 values are
presented below:
Unit
Category

A

C

E

2 vs n/2

1.59

2.98

2.21

3 vs n/3

43.32

1.03

36.09

4 vs n/4

42.83

9.21

25.35

(-

=

x2 significant at 6.64 at .01 level of

significance with one degree of freedom)

With one exception, Category 3 in Unit C, Categories 3 and 4 show
considerable degrees of difference while Category 2 appears to be
quite stable from unit to unit. The next logical step would be to test for
differences comparing one unit to the others.
Interunit comparisons were performed to see if the lithic debris
assemblage from the Upper Midden was consistent in its proportions
from unit to unit. The same was tested for the Lower Midden. A sample table is given below for the Upper Midden:
Category
Unit

2

A

151

640

169

960

B

175

578

137

890

C

155

539

397

1091

Totals

481

1757

703

2941

3

4

Total

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

70

The resulting x2 scores were as follows:
Upper Midden

154.557

Lower Midden

84.592

(both of these are significant at the .001 level of significance (x2 = 18.46).
Clearly, in the above cases, the distribution of flakes within a midden zone is dependent upon the unit, but we also tested to see if only
one unit was contributing most of the difference. The x? values are
presented below:
AvsC

AvsE

CvsE

Upper Midden

5.626

92.559

109.898

LowerMidden

17.588

35.592

83.226

= x2 significant at 5.99 at .05 level of
(.
significance with 2 degrees of freedom)
All the differences are highly significant at the .05 level except the
Upper Midden of A versus that of C, which lacks 0.374 of being
significant. In all except one instance, then, the individual units are
contributing considerable amounts of difference. By the same token,
the units are inconsistent in the evidence each presents of the lithic
debris of this site.
As we have seen, the middens are different from one unit to the
next, indicating that proportions of flakes is not independent of unit.
We tried two tests for levels within the Upper Midden, with the null
hypothesis that midden levels within a unit show no significant
change. For each unit we tested level 1 against level 4 (the topmost
and bottommost levels of the Upper Midden) and level 3 against level
4.
Units
E
C
Levels
A
i vs 4

48.22

8.75

4.126

3vs4

2.536

0.061

8.441

(.
significance)

= x2 significant at 5.99 at .05 level of

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

71

The results of these and other x2 tests performed on the flake
distribution from individual levels are not clear-cut. Reduced sample
size is certainly a potential source of error, and using two contiguous
levels (or levels within the same recognized stratigraphic unit) may
very well be violating independence of samples.
Summary of Tests of Homogeneity
In summary, it appears that there is considerable diversity between the two middens with reference to Category 3 and 4 flakes. The
same type of test also shows that there is a considerable amount of
variation among the three units with respect to the same
stratigraphic entity, the middens.

Tests of Correlation
If we accept (1) the premise that the two middens are significantly
different in their proportion of flakes and (2) that this difference is a
function of changing patterns of lithic technology through time, what
can we say about the existence of any statistically significant trends?
Since we have two ordinal scales -- the percentage of any category in
a level, and a time scale from level I through level 10 -- the Spearman
Rank Correlation Coefficient_r was applied.
Ideally, the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient r
would give us the clearest indication of the correlation between
changing flake proportions and time. But the Pearson test is a
parametric test and requires a fixed-interval scale and certain
assumptions about the population from which the sample was drawn.
The archeologist’s task would be simplified considerably if we could
assume a constant rate of deposition of soil. Then we could say, for instance, that the time span represented by level 3 is equal to that
represented by level 4 or level 10, and that changes in lithic
technology could be correlated to the time scale with more precision
than we can here.
However, we must regard our relative dates (our arbitrary levels
and our recognized strata) as an ordinal scale. The null hypothesis is
that there is no association between the two variables of level number
and percentage of a given flake category. That is, there is no
statistically :significant trend in increasing or decreasing proportions of any flake category through time. From simple inspection of
the percentages, it appears that category 2 shows no obvious trend,
but category 3 appears to increase in proportion as we come nearer
the present in time, while category 4 decreases.

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Levels 1 through 10 were tested in each of the units A, C, and E. In
addition, the flake counts were totaled up for the three units, percentages calculated anew, and these total percentages were tested.

6~. d2
n [n2- 11

_rs=l-

where:
differences between ranks
6= a constant
n~ number of ranks (for these calculations, there
always are 10 ranks and 10 relative percentages}
d

The equation used in the calculation of _r_s (rank correlation coefficient) is taken from Snedecor and Cochran (1967:195).
Categories
3
Unit A

-0.151

0.903

0.721

Unit C

-0.100

0.369

0.791

Unit E

0.394

0.430

0.357

Total ACE

0.046

0.713

0.921

(
significance.

=
=

significant at 0.683 at

.05 level of

significant at 0.833 at

.01

level of

significance).
Category 2, in all cases, is seen to have values so low as to indicate
that their relative frequencies are scattered almost randomly through
time (a value of 0.000 would indicate complete independence of
relative frequency and level; -i.000 would indicate a perfect negative
association). Categories 3 and 4 are significant 3 out of 9 times when
considered by unit. Both are significant when all three units are
grouped. Accordingly, we can say that the shifts seen in the relative
frequencies of Categories 3 and 4 are statistically significant when all
three units are combined.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

73

Distribution of Retouched Flakes
The lithic debris was examined on the basis of retouched flakes
versus unretouched flakes to see if this particular category of
artifacts was consistent in its distribution throughout the occupation
of the Jetta Court site. First, the individual levels from the Units were
totaled and we compared the Upper Midden versus the Lower Midden
on the basis of retouched flakes versus unretouched flakes for all
three units. This produced a x 2 value of 7.3252, which is significant at
the .01 level of significance.
The individual categories of flakes produced the following x2
values for the two middens:
Category
3

4

Combined A,C, and
E

0.1365

11.3904

2.3831

Un~ A

0.1032

16.9036

9.4435

Unit C

0.2501

3.0248

1.3598

Un~ E

0.1027

3.0849

0.0025

(.
significance)

=

x2 significant at 3.84 at .05 level of

For the combined assemblage from all three units, only Category 3 is
significantly different in its proportions between the two middens.
When we examine the individual units, Categories 3 and 4 in Unit A
show significant differences.
Spearman rank correlation coefficients were determined for each
occasion that the x2 value was significant in the above table. The
results were not significant in any test:

~s

Category 3 from Units A, C, E
Category 3 from Unit A (levels 1-10)
Category 4 from Unit A (levels 1-10)

-0.2212
-0.4667
-0.1125

In conclusion, there are some differences in the distribution of
retouched flakes versus unretouched ones, but there appears to be no
discernable pattern in their occurrence.

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Summary and Conclusions to the Analysis of the Lithic Debris
The statistical analysis of the lithic debris from the Jetta Court Site
has produced the following observations:
la.

lb.
2.
3.
4.

There is a statistical difference between the proportions of flakes
for the Upper Midden versus the Lower Midden for the total flakes
from the Upper Midden and the Lower Midden (combined totals
from Unit A, C, and E.)
The difference in proportions under la remains present if we
examine the collections from each individual unit.
There are statistically significant differences for the proportions
when one unit is compared with another.
x, values for category 2 are generally low, suggesting that proportion of category 2 flakes is independent of provenience.
Proportion of category 2 flakes is not correlated with provenience to
a significant degree. Categories 3 and 4, however, show correlations
with provenience only part of the time when studied by individual
units. When the total flake counts for the units are combined and
percentages recalculated, the proportions of categories 3 and 4
flakes are significantly correlated with provenience. Category 3
flakes (interior flakes) become more common from the bottom levels
to the top levels of the site at the expense of category 4 flakes (lipped
flakes).

The observations listed above are still at the descriptive level of
scientific investigation and have no explanatory value. Referring to
the study of the European Paleolithic, Binford (1968:49-50) comments
The most impressive schemes for the description of differences and
similarities in flint assemblages have developed in Old World prehistory
... Problems arise, however, in the explanation of differences and
similarities and in understanding changes through time. All too often
prehistorians view flint industries "evolving" through time, as though they
contained genetic materials and were capable of mutation. It is on the explanatory level that anthropological concepts are particularly valuable.
Our basic concept is culture, and it is to the understanding of functional
variability and change within culture systems that we wish to direct attention.., the description, however detailed, of assemblages does not constitute an explanation of differences and similarities.

The paper by Binford quoted above deals with changes in tool
categories rather than chipping debris, but the same logical
processes of explanation are involved. The present study, because of
a number of difficulties (not the least of which is the lack of sufficient
comparative data) was unable to generate any testable hypotheses
about the cultural of functional importance of the observed changes
in flake categories. Partly this study was attempted in the hope of
stimulating other work with similar data to see if any patterns of flake

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

75

proportions can be determined for Central Texas. If it should result
that the pattern of flakes at the Jetta Court site is consistent with the
pattern for Central Texas sites, then we may be dealing with a very
stable set of functions for lithic materials over a considerable
geographic area and through several millenia. If, however, various
patterns should be identified for various sites, we might attempt to
postulate reasons for these differences:
1)
2)

Different cultural traditions in various parts of the same currently
-- recognized "culture area" (in the sense of Willey and Phillips
1958:20, 47-48}.
Differences in the seasons of occupation of various sites. Different
sites could have been occupied at various times of the year in order
to exploit the sources of food or raw materials that were ripening at
the time. Different subsistence activities may have required different tool kits. In order to investigate this possibility, a very extensive survey of tools from various sites would have to be examined
and tabulated to see if there might be differences from one area to
another. In addition, ecological surveys of the areas of the sites
would have to be carried out (see "Natural Setting" section of this
paper).

At any rate, several comments may be offered on the study of the
chipping debris from the letta Court Site:
1)

2}

3}

The fact that differences between middens do exist is of interest since it appears to reflect changes in lithic technology other than
stylistic changes in projectile points.
The observed differences among the Units is not altogether unexpected since one would not expect the site to be homogeneous
throughout. Activity areas are certainly present, although they may
have been scattered to the point that we were unable to recognize
them during excavation. However, they were not scattered enough
to create homogeneity in the site. As a unit is excavated, one level
may intersect several such activity areas and acquire uneven samples from each. A solution to such a problem as this would be
careful horizontal excavation of sites, which might give the excavators better control over sampling techniques.
Finally, we submit that the differences between the Upper and
Lower Middens are "real" in the sense that they are not products of
the analysis, partly because of the demonstrated trends for
Categories 3 and 4. This does not say, however, that the differences
are not the results of a very small sample from a large site.

FAUNAL REMAINS
Sampling procedures for the faunal remains consisted of collecting
all bones and mussel shells that appeared on the screen or the few

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fragments that were collected in situ. For snail shells, collection consisted of gathering about 250 milliliters from each level. Since screen
sizes of 1/2" and 1/4" were used {mainly the former} larger mammals
are surely over-represented by virtue of the size of their bones and
bone fragments. Although animal bones decreased in lower levels of
the site {partly as a factor of preservation, we think}, we are confident that had more refined collection techniques been employed we
would have a more representative sample of the faunal assemblage.
Dan Witter, formerly of the Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory at
Balcones Research Center, graciously identified the faunal remains
and suggested the following categories for analysis of the mammalian
remains:
Category A: mammals of 200 pounds or more {horse, bison, cow}
Category B: mammals within the range of 20 pounds to 200 pounds
{deer, beaver, coyote, dog, etc.}
Category C: mammals weighing between 2 ounces and 20 pounds
{rabbit, mice, opossum, etc.}
Since the faunal remains from Unit X were only from the top 80 centimeters of a one by two meter square, and since they were consistent
with those from Units A, C, and E and produced no new taxa, this
analysis will consider in detail only the remains from Unit A, C, and E.
The faunal remains from the backhoe trenches are without
provenience and produced no species not present in Units A, C, or E.
From Units A, C, and E a total of 868 bone fragments was
recovered. The upper one meter of the excavations produced 81% of
the remains, and the frequency of the remains tends to decrease with
depth. Although more intensive collecting of animals during the later
occupations is a possibility, we feel that poorer preservation in the
older deposits is also operating. The individual specimens from the
lower deposits are more friable, are more pitted and corroded, and
their edges are rounded. An exception to the decreasing frequencies
in the lower levels is somewhat greater frequencies between approximately 150 to 210 centimeters below the surface, roughly
corresponding to the Lower Midden {Zone B}. This might suggest
either more stable surfaces or more frequent occupations at these
levels, resulting in a more intensive deposition of debris.
In the main, the animal bones were quite fragmented and difficult
to assign to definite taxonomic categories. In addition, not a single articulation was recognized in the field. Consequently, only 66 fragments, mostly deer, could be identified.
Since only 7.5% of the animal bones could be assigned to some
taxonomic category, it is necessary to use the "size of animal"

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

77

categories to achieve some meaningful picture of the faunal remains.
Figure 24 indicates the relative percentages of mammal bone
fragments (by size category), and unidentified fragments. Category B
mammals contribute 56% of the total amount of animal bone,
category A some 17%, and category C contributes only 5%.
At best, these frequencies are only very rough approximations of
the economic importance of these groups because: a) these percentages are partly a function of bone breakage; and, b) small mammals, because of sampling techniques and the possibility of differential preservation, are surely under-represented. Accepting
Figure 25 at face value would support the notion that category B mammals constituted a very important source of food.
Skeletal elements present for category A and B mammals were
mostly portions of the appendicular skeleton. Of the 89 category B
bone fragments that could be identified as to anatomical position,
27% were of the axial skeleton (skull, teeth, mandible, scapulae, and
vertebrae) while the remaining 73% were of the appendicular
skeleton. Again, such distributions are partly a function of bone
breakage and are only rough estimates of the relative percentages of
axial versus appendicular elements. It does suggest, however, that
the meat associated with the appendicular skeleton was more likely to
be brought back to the site while the remainder of the bones were left
at the place of killing or dressing out.
The relative percentages of size categories by levels were
calculated for only the top meter of Units A, C and E. This accounted
for 81% of the total faunal assemblage. The rapid decrease in the occurrence of animal bones below the top one meter made the sample
size for calculation of relative frequencies rather small.
Category B mammal bone fragments vary between 77% and 45% of
the total for each level. Excepting unidentified bone fragments, the
most striking change is the 42% of category A mammals in level 2.
This is caused by a concentration of 85 category A bone fragments,
mainly small rib fragments, in Level 2 of Unit A (incidentally, these 85
fragments represent 63% of all category A bone fragments from the
upper meter of Units A, C, and E). Fifty-seven of these fragments were
burned, indicating that human activity was involved, but we are
unable to identify the animal involved.
Examination of the percentages of the faunal assemblage in each
level reveals several items of interest (Fig. 25). First, approximately
68% of all animal bone fragments are from the top 80 centimeters, for
the most part from the Upper Midden. There is a consistent low
frequency for the lower levels except for the levels that correspond to

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

~d
"o

J

¯ .~

~.

¢o

c~
~_~

o

"N"

ca

"r.

¢,q

79

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

- .~ - -

I

r .~- - 7
I
I

"’4

1
I

1
1

""4

I
I
1
I

7=

~7
""4

C’q
¢",1

¢NI

¢’q

;,,.3

.e,1

¢’,1

¢"1

~

.e’-I

©

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Lower Midden. There is a slight but perceptible increase at that
zone.
Since the Lower Midden was not apparent in the section of Unit A,
the distribution of faunal remains in each unit was calculated to see if
the increase in bone fragments between Levels 8 and 11 was restricted to Units C and E. The results were not entirely as expected. All
three units had between 62% and 72% of their animal bones in the
top four levels, corresponding to the Upper Midden. Unit A had an increase at the general Lower Midden levels, but this increase was
duplicated at even lower depths. Unit C performed as expected,
showing a considerable increase at the Lower Midden levels; but Unit
E showed no really significant increase at a similar elevation.
Assuming relatively consistent preservation across any given
elevation in the site, such differences as mentioned above indicate
that the three units are not similar to the point of homogeneity. Such
dissimilar distributions from nnit to unit are characteristic also of the
flint flakes. For the Jetta Court site, then, we cannot assume that each
unit will give us an identical picture of the contents of the site, despite
similarities in observed stratification. In summary, the vertebrate
remains from Units A, C, and E are characterized as the following:
1) They are highly fragmented and, accordingly, are quite difficult
to identify.
2) Approximately 81% of the faunal assemblage was from the top
one meter of the site, and frequency decreased with depth. Differential preservation is surely a factor here, but "intensity of occupation" may well be involved also.
3) Category B mammal bone fragments are the most common, but
Category C mammals are surely under-represented because of sampling procedures.
4) Skeletal remains that could be identified anatomically for the
Category 2 mammals indicated that fragments of the appendicular
skeleton were the more common. This suggests that the bones of the
axial skeleton were more commonly left at the site of the kill or butchering.

MOLLUSCAN REMAINS
Snail shells collected at letta Court have not yet been subjected to
analysis. Of the many thousands occurring in the deposits, most are
land snails of the Rabdotus (formerly Bulimulus) family. The presence
of snails in such great numbers, as well as in lenses or concentrations
(see Fig. 4), suggest that the gathering of snails was part of the

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

81

TABLE 2. IDENTIFIED FAUNA AT JETTA COURT (41 TV 151)

Number of
fragments
identified
CLASS: REPTILIA
ORDER: Chelonia
FAMILY: Testudinidae (turtle)

CLASS: MAMMALIA
ORDER: Marsupilia
FAMILY: Didelphiidae
Didelphis virginiana (Virginia oppossurn)
ORDER: Rodentia
FAMILY: Cricetidae
Neotoma sp. (wood rat)
Sigmodon hispidus (hispid cotton rat)
FAMILY: Geomyidae
Geomys bursarius (Plains pocket gopher)
ORDER: Lagomorpha
FAMILY: Leporidae
Lepus californicus (black-tailed jackrabbit)

Provenience*

A2(1) 3 frags.
A9(10) 1 frag.
C2(4) 2 frags.
E2 (27) 2 frags.

1

E5(90)

1

A7(17)

1

E5(90)

1

E5(90)

2

c12(88)

1

A6(7)

1

E4(36)

1

A9(72)

A13(86)
Sylvilagus cf. floridana (cottontail rabbit)
ORDER: Carnivora
FAMILY: Procyonidae
Procyon lotor (raccoon)
FAMILY: Canidae
Canis familiaris or latrans (dog or coyote)
ORDER: Artiodactyla
FAMILY: Cervidae
Odocoileus virginianus (white-tailed deer)

FAMILY: Anfilocapridae
Antilocapra americana (pronghorn)
FAMILY: Bovidae
Bos taurus (teeth only) (cow)

93

See Table 3
for distribution
of Odocoileus
fragments

1

E5(90)

3

E1(2)
E2(27)
C2(4)

Bison bison (identification supported by
stratigraphic location)

A12(37)
A4(8)
E5(90)
E7(12)

*Provenience is indicated by the unit designation (A,C,E), followed by the level (10,11,
12...), and, in parentheses, the lot number assigned during cataloging.

82

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 3.
UNIT
LEVEL

C
1

1

2

3

5

3

12

3

4

4

2

5

3

6

4

7

E
7
9
7
10
9
2
2

8
9
10

1

11
12

1

13

Total

29

16

48

Table 3. Distribution by level of deer bone fragments. The provenience of 93 fragments is indicated. All are definitely identified as
Odocoileus virginianus.
food-collecting regime (Hester and Hill 1975 have noted ethnohistoric
evidence for the eating of land snails by southern Texas Indian
groups).
Mussel shells occurred infrequently, and were usually highly
fragmented. Only in eight instances could the fragments be assigned
to the family level (Lampsilis spp. or Proptera spp.) and for only two
examples could a species be identified (Lampsilis tampicoensis).
Mussel shells were found in all levels in Units A, C, E, except for
levels 8 and 11. The two Lampsilis tampicoensis specimens were in
levels i and 2.

CONCLUDING COMMENTS
Finally, we must assess the contributions of the Jetta Court site to
the archeology of central Texas, and suggest some directions for
future research. We have to first point out that "future research" at
the Jetta Court site is impossible; houses are now constructed over the
area of the prehistoric occupation. Thus, the opportunity of obtaining
any additional information from this important locality has been lost
to central Texas archeologists. Our hurried excavations in 1968-1969
were salvage tests of a site that was of unknown age and unknown
horizontal or vertical extent. Within the limited time constraints under which we worked, the excavation goals were quite restricted. The

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

83

best we could hope to achieve was the examination of the contents,
depth, and cultural sequence of the site before it was rendered inaccessible by construction activities.
With these caveats in mind, what can we say that the Jetta Court
excavations have added to the understanding of central Texas
prehistory? We were able to establish the depth of human
habitational refuse in the terrace deposit, and it was possible to
determine the age and relative sequence of diagnostic artifacts conforms tolerably well to the defined central Texas chronology (Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962; Sorrow, Shafer and Ross 1967; Prewitt
1974). It has been argued by some that the cultural chronology of central Texas is so well-known that further concern with the succession
of diagnostic artifacts is not a viable research goal. While we realize
that there is a lot more to archeology than culture history, it is
becoming increasingly apparent that as the number of excavated
sites in the region increases, the more our chronological framework
has to be modified and adjusted. The refinement of temporal control
is, to our way of thinking, essential to the pursuit of more
sophisticated problems in archeology, including studies of site function and seasonality, settlement and subsistence, aboriginal
technology, paleoenvironmental reconstruction and so forth. One
example of the continuing adjustments and correlations necessary in
the central Texas chronological framework is presented by Prewitt
(1974: Figure 7). Another area in which refinement is required is
exemplified by the discoveries at Jetta Court. At this site, in the Lower
Midden, we have a discrete horizon representing a very early phase
of human occupation in central Texas. These materials are
stratigraphically below the diagnostics of the presently defined
"Early Archaic" of the region (see Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962).
The "Early Archaic" is represented by such horizon-markers as
Bulverde, Nolan and Travis dart points. Bulverde and Nolan are
present in the Jetta Court sequence, as indicated in Table 1. However,
occurring below them, in the Lower Midden, are distinctly different
forms,
includin~
Bell,
Bell-like,
Cower,
corner
notched
(Miscellaneous I) and triangular (Miscellaneous II) dart points.
The presence of this horizon pre-dating the "Early Archaic" is not
unique at Jetta Court. In fact, a considerable literature already exists
which notes its occurrence at other central and Trans-Pecos Texas
sites (Sharer 1963; Sorrow, Shafer and Ross 1967; Word and Douglas
1970; Hester 1971; Sollberger and Hester 1972; Prewitt 1974). A
review of the various sites in Texas in which the "pre-Archaic"
horizon is found has been published by Sollberger and Hester (1972).

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Since their compilation of data on these sites is published in a readily
available major journal, we will not re-examine it here. Suffice it to
say that the existence of a "very Early Archaic", or "pre-Archaic",
"Transitional Archaic", or whatever appellation one chooses to use,
is firmly established. Lithic traits include triangular, corner-notched,
Gower, and Bell dart points, along with Guadalupe and unifacial
Clear Fork tools in some areas, such as south-central Texas (Hester
and Kohnitz 1975).
No one has yet determined, through chronometric means, the temporal boundaries of this early cultural unit. As work continues and
more components are discovered, we may find that there will be
problems of internal sequence which will further modify our present
concepts of this horizon (cf. Sorrow, Shafer and Ross 1967; Prewitt
1974: Figure 7).
The extensive analysis of Jetta Court lithic debris produced some
interesting results, described in detail earlier in the paper. There appear to be changes in relative proportions of various flake categories
through time. The changes in the frequencies of interior flakes versus
lipped flakes (biface thinning flakes) can be correlated with level to
some degree. It is impossible to evaluate these recognized changes in
the lithic debris due to the lack of comparable analyses in the central
Texas area; the presently published flake analysis data comes from a
variety of far-flung sites.
In addition, the analysis of lithic debris at Jetta Court reveals considerable diversity from unit to unit, even though the same
stratigraphic entities are being examined. Several possible explanations for this come to mind: (1) small sample sizes from large
sites are unreliable in presenting the range of lithic debris from the
entire site; (2) the same stratigraphic unit (the Lower Midden, for
example) is not homogenous throughout its extent; rather, there may
be certain activity areas located here and there in the midden, and a
square unit of excavation has a good chance of intersecting (or even
missing) several of them in any one level. Therefore, there may be little value in horizontal comparisons of flake samples from scattered
units in a large site. Vertical comparisons, aimed at elucidating certain changes in lithic technology through time, may be more useful in
such circumstances but even here there are obvious limitations.
Although we believe that the occupants of Jetta Court were mobile
hunters and gatherers, presumably with some regularly-replicated
yearly round of subsistence activities, we see no evidence for
establishing the position of this site in their subsistence regime. Such
knowledge would have to be obtained from a thorough analysis of sur-

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

85

viving faunal and organic remains, and from a detailed acquaintance
with the prehistoric settlement pattern of Walnut Creek and surrounding areas. We have meager data for the first, and almost no information on the latter. The problem of settlement pattern data can
be solved through the use of a regional approach to archeological
inquiry (cf. Hester, Heizer and Graham 1975:15), rather than with an
over-concern with specific, productive sites. As far as the analysis of
organic debris, it is apparent that such materials are very poorly
preserved in most of the terrace and burned rock midden sites of central Texas. Further, the interpretation of the faunal and organic
evidence will never reach sophisticated levels if we continue to extract it from the ground with traditional techniques, such as those employed in our salvage work at Jetta Court. The recovery of significant
data on artifact distributions, associations of materials with functionally-specific activity areas, and the relationships of functional
units within a site, call for different kinds of excavation technologies.
Open-area, or horizontal, excavations are one such approach (cf.
Sharer 1971: Figure 18,a). Furthermore, it might be more useful to
concentrate such investigations in small, easily delineated sites
where behavioral patterns may be better preserved than in thick,
repeatedly-occupied localities like Jetta Court.
In closing, we would like to suggest that the techniques we used in
"salvaging" Jetta Court not be implemented in similar situations in
the future. We did obtain, perhaps mostly through luck, some
significant information. But, might not we have done better by
grouping our units in a block excavation, thereby getting a good sample from a particular area, an area in which at least some minor
spatial analyses could have been accomplished? As a bit of further
retrospection, could we have learned more by having the backhoe
remove the overburden from a sizeable portion the Lower Midden,
thus allowing us to examine its horizontal composition more fully? We
do not wish to engage in an extensive exercise in "hindsight archeology", as we still believe that we did the best we could, given the
available time, funds and manpower, and the state of our own archeological training at that period. We would recommend, however,
that future student archeologists, when faced with a similar
challenge, try to assess and determine certain regional problems of
prehistory that could be attacked through rapid salvage work, and
then devise the appropriate strategies for the investigation.

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED

Binford, S. R.
1968 Variability and Change in the Near Eastern Mousterian of Levallois
Facies. In: New Perspectives in Archeology (S. and L. Binford, eds.),
pp. 49-60. Aldine, Chicago.
Deacon, H. I.
1969 Melkhoutboom Cave, Alexandria District, Cape Province: a report
on the 1967 investigation. Annals of the Cape Provincial Museum,
Natura! History, Vol. 6, No. 13. Grahamstown, South Africa.
Eddy, F. W.
1974 Resource Management and Locational Strategies of Certain
Prehistoric Sites in Central Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 19,
No. 64, pp. 99-106.
Epstein, J. F.
1963 Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County,
Texas, 1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for
1962), pp. 1-129.
Frison, G. C.
1968 A Functional Analysis of Certain Chipped Stone Tools. American
Antiquity, Vol. 33, pp. 149-155.
Hester, T. R.
1971 Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42, pp. 51148.
1975 A Chronological Overview of Prehistoric Southern and SouthCentral Texas. Paper presented at the conference "The Prehistory
of Northeastern Mexico and Texas", Monterrey, Mexico, April.
Hester, T. R., R. F. Heizer and J. A. Graham
1975 Field Methods in Archaeology. 6th revised edition. Mayfield
Publishing Company, Pato Alto.
Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1975 Eating Land Snails in Prehistoric Southern Texas: Ethnohistoric and
Experimental Data. The Nautilus, Vol. 89, No. 2, pp. 37-38.
Hester, T. R. and H. Kohnitz
1975 The Chronological Placement of Guadalupe Tools. La Tierra, Vol. 2,
No. 2, pp. 22-25.
Johnson, L., Jr., D. A. Suhm, and C. D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich,
Footbridge and Oblate Sites. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No.
5.
Prewitt, E. R.

1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report, No.
49.
Sharer, H. J.
1963 Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site A Stratified Terrace Site in
Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
34, pp. 57-81.
1969 Archeological Investigations at Robert Lee Reservoir, West Central
Texas. Papers, Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 17.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

87

1970 Notes on Uniface Retouch Technology. American Antiquity, Vol. 35,
pp. 480-487.
1971 Late Prehistory of Central Texas: 500 B.C. to A.D. 1700. Paper
presented at annual meeting, Texas Academy of Science,
Nacogdoches.
Sharer, H. J. and J. E. Corbin
1965 An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of the North Fork,
South Fork, and Laneport Reservoirs, Williamson County, Texas.
Report submitted to the National Park Service. Austin.
Skinner, S. A.
1971 Prehistoric Settlement of the DeCordova Bend Reservoir, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42, pp. 149270.
Snedecor, G. W. and W. G. Cochran
1967 Statistical Methods. Iowa State University Press, Ames.
Sollberger, J. B. and T. R. Hester
1972 The Strohacker Site: A Review of Pre-Archaic Manifestations in
Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 17, No. 58, Pt. 1: 326-344.
Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer and R. E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers, Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 18.
Suhm, D.A., A. D. Krieger and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Witter, D.
1971 Environment and Vegetation of the Robert Lee Reservoir Basin. In:
Investigations into South Plains Prehistory (by H. J. Sharer), pp. 145163. Papers, Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 20.
Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips
1958 Method and Theory in American Archaeology. Phoenix Books,
Chicago.
Word, J. H. and C. Douglas
1970 Excavations at Baker Cave. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No.
16.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT
THE WHEATLEY SITE,
PEDERNALES FALLS STATE PARK,
BLANCO COUNTY, TEXAS*
JOHN W. GREER

ABSTRACT
Scallorn and Perdiz arrowpoints and pottery were found in discrete
c]usterings of cultural debris interpreted as single occupation activity
areas. The site probably dates about A.D. 1150-i 300, the suggested overlap
period for the Austin and Toyah foci.

INTRODUCTION
The Wheatley site was initially discovered in 1962 by members of
the Travis County Archeologicat Society of Austin and was found to
contain artifacts of Neo-American age. It was named after C. A.
Wheatley, the landowner, and designated 41 BC 114. Intensive
surface collection and surface stripping were conducted in 1971 in
order to verify observations made during the original survey
concerning the presence of Scallorn and Perdiz arrowpoints and
pottery in discrete areas. Work was carried out under a Permit to
Conduct Archeological Investigations, No. 8, issued by the Antiquities
Committee of the State of Texas, and funds were provided by the
State Archeologist’s Office of the Texas State Historical Survey
Committee (now the Texas Historical Commission).

THE SITE
Pedernales Falls State Park is on the Pedernales River in eastern
Blanco County, 30 miles west of Austin and 10 miles east of Johnson
City (Fig. 1). The park is typical of the hilly regions near major rivers
in central Texas. Small dry, perennial and intermittent creeks begin
as low valleys winding between eroded Cretaceous hills, becoming
slightly steeper as they approach the river. Then, typical for most of
the Pedernales River east of Johnson City, the creeks plunge suddenly
into rather impressive, though not exceptionally large, steep-walled
limestone canyons. These contain springs, flowing water, and an
abundance of vegetation (including cyprus trees and ferns) and small

*This is a revised version of the manuscript, "Archeological Investigations at the
Wheatley Site, Blanco County, Texas" (J. W. Greer, 1974), on file with the Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

90

Llano

Burnet

o

Austin
Fredericksbur(
o

City

Dripping
Springs
oSan

Narcos

WHEA TL E

oNew
Braunfels

SITE
San

Antonio

FIGURE 1. The location of the Wheatley site, Blanco County, Texas.

animals. Entry into these canyons often is somewhat limited, though
not prohibitive. Flats (erosional areas physiographically similar to
terraces) above the canyons are covered mainly with small oaks,
various grasses, and juniper.
The rate of juniper spread in the area is astonishing and has
ramifications for modern archeological interpretation. Much of the
area which was sparsely covered or clear of juniper during the 1962
survey today supports very thick growth. Few places remain, aside
from the canyon rimrock area, where one can see any appreciable
distance, and in many places even foot passage is seriously
hampered.
The Wheatley site is on the second large flat above and 500 yards
west of the Pedernales River canyon rimrock, and between the
canyons of Bee Creek and Mescal Creek (Fig. 2). At the eastern edge
of the site is a steep clay drop-off of about 20 feet, while low limestone
hills rise slowly from the site’s western edge (Fig. 3). The relatively
level and featureless surface is a windblown and slightly washed
reddish to beige sand, which overlies a compact red clay containing a
fine rolled quartz and chert sand. This is at an elevation sufficiently
above the Pedernales River and tributary canyons to prohibit the

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

91

jlO00
feet

WHEA TLE Y
SITE

canyon wall

FIGURE 2. The Wheatley site relative to geographic features.

WHEATLEY SITE

"I0
"Io
o
O)

FIGURE 3. Sketch profile looking northeast across the Pedernales
River, showing location of the Wheatley site.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

92

possibility of creek-generated alluvium. The deposition on this
basically windblown sand is presumed to be very slow, and the
present surface is probably much the same as it was 800 years ago.
Occupational debris, consisting mainly of Neo-American artifacts
and small flint flakes, is scattered Over an area about 150 x 550 feet,
with a few isolated clusterings of Archaic debris outside the main
limits of the site. Within the site, occupational materials occur on the
surface and in the surface sand and are concentrated in relatively
isolated clusters (Fig. 4). Although areas between the clusters of
_

I

I
,’

WHEATLEY SITE

,//’-~’\

iD

41BC114

Blonco
J

t.--~.

\

-..... .

County,

Texas

,;

I
L

!

,"’"

N

B

--N,0

E,©

Ggn

8o

o

I

I

~

D

I

feet

F(’.?

o

FIGURE 4. Site map of the Wheatley site, showing position of activity
areas. Area F is considered outside the Wheatley site limits.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

93

surface chipping debris were not tested, it seems unlikely that
subsurface concentrations of detritus exist where surface indications
are absent. Crass cover was minimal, and the surface in all areas
was visible.
THE INVESTIGATIONS
A North-West grid system measured in feet was employed; lines
were set up on magnetic north with N O/W O in the center of the site
and N 100/W 100 in Area A, a pottery-producing area. South and East
grid extensions were employed. Collection units generally were fivefoot squares (or portions thereof) numbered by the southeast corner.
Attention was directed toward a total collection of materials, and
artifact locations were recorded as precisely as practicable. Pottery
areas A and E were stripped for as near a total collection as possible.
A limestone cobble hearth in Area G was totally excavated. All
recognized artifacts were collected, and total flake collections were
made from the surface of most areas. Areas between recognizable
artifact clusterings were essentially void of occupational debris (e.g.,
flakes} and therefore were not excavated. The lack of materials on
the surface at this site seemed to preclude any major unrecognizable
subsurface concentrations, since wash sand or other post-occupation
depositing is minimal.
Stripping involved careful removal by trowel of the upper surface
sand (usually 2 cm thick} and the upper part of the underlying, very
compact reddish clay, to a total depth of 1.5-6 cm. Occasional artifact
intrusions into the clay layer appear to be due to burrowing by small
animals, vertical dessication cracks formed during dry periods, or
animals or people walking across the site when it was wet. Excavated
matrix was placed in burlap bags and water-screened in the
laboratory through ¼-inch mesh hardware cloth. Selected samples
were additionally passed through fine window screen. Although time
and labor did not permit all materials to be passed through window
screen, thereby undoubtedly losing such small arrowpoint fragments
as Perdiz stems, the recovered sample should adequately reflect the
distribution of artifacts.
Approximately half the sherds and flint flakes recovered from
carefully troweled areas were found during water-screening (Table
1). Sherds found during troweling total 47% of the total excavated
sherds in Area A (range 30-60% of the total excavated sherds for
samples of ten sherds or more} and 67% in Area E (range 30-72%).
Flint flakes, grouped according to size, show comparable results.
From stripped squares in Areas A and E, only 35% of the flakes less

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

than 25 mm in maximum dimension were found during troweling (31%
in Area A, 40% in Area E), as were 65% of the larger flakes over 25
mm in maximum dimension (60% in Area A, 69% in Area E). The
percentage variation by size is as would be expected. Of the total
flakes recovered from stripped squares, however, only 38% were
found during careful troweling. In general, it was very surprising to
find such a large proportion of sherds and flakes being missed,
although the specimens usually were very small and the soil very
compact. This demonstrates the need for screens during the most
careful excavation as a check or control device.

TABLE 1
TROWELING: %

Area A

Area E

Total

Sherds

47%

67%

55%

Flakes, d < 25mm

31%

40%

35%

Flakes, d

60%

69%

65%

> 25mm

Table 1. Sherd and flake recovery from squares troweled and the
deposit wash-screened. Entries indicate the percent recovered
during troweling, of the total excavated sample from the area.
Surface material is excluded.

DESCRIPTIONS OF ACTIVITY AREAS
The following individual activity or collection areas were
recognized by occupational debris lying on the surface. All flint
materials were collected from each area. Brief descriptions of the
areas are given here; evaluations are given in the Discussion section.
AREA A (Fig. 5)
This somewhat circular area contained abundant flake debris, chipped
stone artifacts, and plainware potsherds. It was probably the main activity
area in the northern part of the site. A hearth in the southeast part of the
area is indicated by thermally fractured gravel and flint flakes and a few
well-burned limestone pebbles 2-3 in. in diameter. A few mussel shell
fragments were around the burned area. Dug into the clay on the west side
of the hearth was a very shallow, circular, sand-filled depression 17 in. in
diameter and 2 in. deep. It contained most of the flint and all of the cores
from this part of the stripping. A total area of 287.5 square feet was
stripped, and all surface materials were collected.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

95

N

FIGURE 5. Distribution of artifacts in Area A, showing extent of
stripped area. Composite graph of materials recorded in situ and
those from screened debris (exact locations of screened materials
estimated from in situ distribution).
AREA B
A diffuse scattering of considerable debris was just south of Area A.
This includes mainly Neo-American artifacts (e.g. two arrowpoint
fragments, two sherds}, although a Pedernales dart point, a large scraper,
and a mane fragment, all found within a three-foot area, may date to
Archaic times. All tools and a sample of flakes were collected.

AREA C
Chipping debris was found just west of Area B on a very small eroded
and partially burned (grayed and fractured into gravel} limestone outcrop.
This was only about 10 feet across and barely higher than the surrounding
soil. All flakes and tools were collected.

AREA D
An area of about 40 x 75 ft., north of Area A, contained diffusely
scattered flakes, but no tools were observed. A sample of flakes was
collected.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

96
AREA E (Figs. 6, 7, 8)

This small area contained numerous chipped stone artifacts and
plainware potsherds. No features or distributional differences in artifact
classes were recognized in the area. An area of 131 square feet was
stripped, and all surface materials were collected.

AREA E1 (Figs. 6 and 8)
Surface debris increased in an area about 12-15 feet in diameter just
north of the Area E concentration. All the sparsely scattered flakes and
artifacts were collected. Flakes were essentially absent outside this area.

AREAF
A relatively isolated dense concentration of chipping debris and chipped
stone artifacts was on a small rimrock erosional area in dense juniper
growth 150 feet south of Area E. Vegetation precluded definition of the
limits of the occupation, and an area only about 5 x 10 feet was clear. A
total collection of materials was made, including a few mussel shell
fragments, many flint flakes, and several artifacts, among which is the
only large Cliffton-like arrowpoint found at the site. The isolation and
impressionistic differences in the area’s chipping debris (size and color of
the flint flakes} and artifacts suggest that the area is the result of Neo-

FIGURE 6. View of Wheatley site. Area E stripped i~rea in foreground;
grid superimposed over Area El; Area I in background.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

97

q
N

I

-- s 190
o

.

£

¯ snerd
P petd, z ~p
s sc~ttor~ ~

x umd arrewpomt frag
o olh~r art~Iact
~t mu~se~ shet~ frag

FIGURE 7. Distribution of artifacts in Area E showing extent of
stripped area. Composite graph of materials recorded in situ and
those from screened debris (exact locations of screened materials
estimated from in situ distribution).

So’

AREA E,

"

. J ’o’2 ," ¯

C:
"’ " " c" " P¯ ’
, ""c.’;fl"
c,’"

FIGURE 8. Distribution of flint flakes in Areas E and E and artifacts in
Area E. Composite graph of materials recorded in sith and those from
screened debris (exact locations of screened materials estimated
from in situ distribution). P, Perdiz arrowpoint; S, Scallorn
arrowpoint; X, unidentified arrowpoint fragment; C, core; o, other
artifact; dots, flint flakes. See Fig. 7 for distribution of artifacts in
Area E.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

98

American activities distinct from the main part of the site. It is, therefore,
considered a separate site not related to the other activity areas discussed
here.

AREA G (Figs. 9 and i0)
A limestone hearth was 90 feet east of Area E and distinctly separated
from other activity areas. On the surface it appeared as a dense
concentration of angular fire-cracked limestone cobbles or slabs.
Excavation indicated that the burned deposit was 5 feet in diameter and 6
inches thick. The flat limestone bedrock in the center of the hearth was
covered with thin limestone slabs. Bedrock showed no signs of having been
burned, although the uppermost cobbles were burned nearly to the point of
disintegration. Construction apparently was mostly of limestone slabs 6-12
inches wide and about 1.5-2 inches thick, but at the time of excavation, all
except the bottom ones were broken, and the appearance was that of a
burned rock midden (a common site form in the area). Fractured limestone
was most concentrated in the center of the hearth, where the soil
contained tiny bits of charcoal and was black and very dense--the
"greasy" texture often used to describe a particular kind of burned rock
midden soil in central Texas. Excavation totaled 100 square feet. Charcoal
collection for radiocarbon dating was initiated but abandoned since the
sample was very small and full of rootlets.
On the surface of the hearth and next to it were thick sherds of a
brushed-ware jar (Fig. 14) and the stem of a Scallorn arrowpoint (Fig. 16
g). Large sherds from the same vessel, some of which were burned after
breakage, were also in the center of the hearth, resting directly on the
lower slab lining (one sherd presumably from this vessel was also found
170 feet northwest in Area H). Four small flakes (all less than 25 mm in
diameter) were scattered next to the hearth. No other occupational debris
was in the area.

AREA H (Fig. 11)
An area of sparsely scattered flakes and artifacts was in the center of
the site between Areas A and E. Among the artifacts were a few plainware
and brushed sherds similar to those of Areas A (one specimen), E (2), and
G (i), beveled biface fragments, and other tools. All debitage was
collected.

AREA I (Fig. 12)
A grid of 40 five-foot squares north of Area E was set up over an area of
scattered flakes as an exercise in studying debris distribution. All
materials were collected, but the sample was too small for conclusive
results. Two possible use areas seem to be represented by flake and
artifact distributions. The eastern area contained three small biface
fragments and one utilized flake, and the western area, one flake end
scraper and three utilized flakes. Almost no chipping debris was
immediately outside the grid area.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

99

FIGURE 9. Area G hearth during excavation.

0

un

m

u~

uJ

I

5
I

I
I
feet

I

I

O surface sherd
i~l exceveted sherd
s Sce!lorn stem
o
(~
.~

AREA S

flint

flQke

hearth
stripped

area

I

FIGURE 10. Area G, showing locations of artifacts, hearth boundary,
and limit of stripped area.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i00
o

o

g

z
I

z
I

z

--W30
. ¯

"~ "
o
.

o
¯

. .’....
--W50

o " ¯ o"

C
¯

¯

--W60
T.

"
’thick
o

-

X
.

.

.

.

--WTO

X

...... s,, I

AREA

H

FIGURE 11. Distribution of artifacts in Area H. °T, triangular
(unnotched) arrowpoint; X, unidentified arrowpoint fragment; C,
core; o, other artifact; dots, flint flakes; ®, sherd.
-- W30

o i . ::¯ii
o

¯

o

,

c

.~ : .. ¯....
,

¯

..

.

-- w ao

¯

. ¯- -¯..

.

o .o

.

-- w ?o
l

FIGURE 12. Distribution of artifacts in Area I, showing extent of
collected area (almost no materials were outside this boundary). C,
core; o, other artifact; dots, flint flakes.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

101

-- N.1/,O

X

X

\

-- N.130

?

P
--

AREA J

N.120

1

FIGURE 13. Distribution of artifacts in Area J. P, Perdiz arrowpoint; X,
arrowpoint blade fragment (probably part of the Perdiz point at
bottom of distribution); dots, flint flakes; ®, sherd.
AREA I (Fig. 13)
A small concentration of thinning flakes, arrowpoints, and a single sherd
just northeast of Area A may represent a separate activity area.
Arrowpoints include two Perdiz points, a Perdiz stem, and a distal
fragment. Two fragments appear to be from the same specimen.

AREA K
East of Area B is a small, isolated, partially buried limestone hearth
about five feet in diameter. Several very small fired clay lumps on the
surface of the hearth, and extending down into the burned rocks, appear to
be similar in composition to that of the pottery from the site. Some chipping
debris was scattered south of the hearth (Fig. 4). Time did not allow
additional investigations.

THE ARTIFACTS
Artifact descriptions are generally separated from their discussion
and evaluation, which are in the discussion section of the report.
Measurements are presented in tabular form as an appendix. The

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

102

8n[~#

s~v~o~

~ ~~ g ~ ~ g ~

D

m~

mm

m~
o

,.~ a:a

o~m ~ y ouam

~

N~a~a~°

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

103

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

104

distribution Table 2 gives the order of described artifact categories.
Type names are from Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) and Suhm and
Jelks (1962) unless otherwise specified. Projectile point names are
used here more as descriptive form designation, since cultural
affiliation is not entirely certain.

POTTERY
Sherds from three kinds of pottery were found within use areas at
the site. At least two plainware vessels are present; another single
sherd from Area J may be from a vessel or a pipe. Sherds from a
large brushed jar were also found. Sherds of the unreconstructible
plainware vessels average about 15 mm in diameter. The reconstructible portion of the brushed jar is about 170 x 105 ram.
Analysis was done with the aid of a 10-30x zoom binocular microscope and comparative laboratory materials.
PLAINWARE A
Location: Area A (418 sherds), Area E (708), Area B (2), Area ~I (3), Area J

(1).
Number of vessels: Uncertain, possibly two.
Paste:
Clay. Semi-compact, friable, fractures, easily, somewhat laminated.
Profusely impregnated with rounded quartz sand grains,
probably a natural component of the clay.

Temper. Exceedingly sparse finely ground white material, probably
bone--very soft, flakes off, color ranges to light gray mottling,
minor effervescence with HCI (identical to bone samples
tested under laboratory conditions), physical appearance and

warping identical to burned bone.
Hardness. On Moh’s scale, ca. 3.5
Color. Core probably naturally pink to orange;

central core usually

dark gray, probably reduced. Outer portions
light

gray to

orange-tan.

On many

of

core usually

sherds the core changes

from darkest just inside the interior surface (medium gray)

to

lightest (orange-tan) near the outer surface.
Form:
Overall shape. Uncertain, probably a wide-mouth globular jar with
a very slightly constricting neck, a wide mouth, and a rounded
base. The slightly everted rim tapers to a somewhat pinched,
barely flattened lip (Fig. 14).

Dimensions.
Height: Unknown, possibly about 15-30 cm.
Width: Unknown, possibly about 18-30 cm.
Wall thickness:
Area A (20 sherds measured). Range 3.7-4.9 ram, mean 4.1
mm.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

105

: Area G

Area E :

FIGURE 14. Rim profiles and hypothesized vessel reconstruction from
Area G, and rim profiles from Area E.
Area E (20 sherds). Range 4.0-5.3 mm, mean 4.5 ram.
Area B (2 sherds). 3.9 and 4.1 ram.
Area H (3 sherds). 3.7, 3.9-4.6, and 5.8 ram.
Area J (1 sherd). 5.8-6.0 ram.
Surface finish: Interior and exterior well smoothed. Interior retains a few
smoothing marks.
Remarks: Sherds from areas A, E, B, and H appear to be from the same
clay mixture and may even be from the same vessel. The three
sherds from Area H vary more in thickness than do the larger
samples from areas A and E, though possibly not beyond the normal
range within a single vessel. More than one vessel may be
represented in Area H, however.
The sherd from Area J is also probably from the same clay source,
but may be from a different vessel. Impressionistically it seems that
this tiny sherd (9 x 13 ram) may be from a pipe. It is slightly thicker
than the others, has a greater curvature (also different from the
Area E rimsherds), seems to have more fragments of a shiney black
material (limonite?) seemingly inherent in the clay (also present in
sherds from other areas), and the surface appears slightly different,
both macro- and microscopically.
PLAINWARE B

Location: Area E (86 sherds)
Number of vessels: One.
Paste:
Clay. Very fine-grained but noncohensive, soft. Looks almost like
coastal sand.
Temper. Very sparse finely ground white material, probably
shell--very soft, flakes off, profusely effervesces in HCI, but
seems to lack characteristic layering of shell.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

106

Hardness. On Moh’s scale, ca. 1.0-1.5.
Color. Dark gray to beige on interior surface, ranging to bright
orange to beige on the exterior surface.

Form:
Overall shape. Unknown. Presumably a small globular jar.
Dimensions.
Height: Unknown, possibly about 15-20 cm.
Width: Unknown, possibly about 15-20 cm.
Wall thickness (20 sherds measured}: Range 3.0-4.3 mm.,
mean 3.7 mm.
Surface Finish: Interior and exterior apparently moderately well
smoothed, but difficult to assess because material is so soft and
prone to weathering.
Remarks: Paste appears to be different from the other plainware sherds,
and the walls are thinner. It seems either insufficiently fired or the
clay is not condusive to the "normal" hardening when fired.
BRUSHED WARE (Fig.

12)

Location: Area G (15 sherds, all but one fit together), Area H (1}.
Number of vessels: One.
Paste:
Clay. A beige matrix impregnated with a very fine-grained streamrolled quartz sand. It is a little finer grained and has more
even grain size than the plainware sherds.
Temper. Uncertain, possibly grog. The reddish-orange clay
inclusions in the matrix may instead by from incomplete
mixture of two or more clays and not actually an intentionally
added tempering agent. At present no information is
available on clay mixing, and the identification of the clay
inclusions as grog is not definite.
Hardness. On Moh’s scale, ca. 3.9.
Color. The core is a discontinuous dark gray toward the interior
surface, lighter gray to orange-tan or buff toward the
exterior surface. Interior surface is a grayish buff, exterior
pinkish buff.

Form:
Overall shape. Apparently a globular, nearly spherical jar with a
wide mouth and no neck. Rim is direct-incurved; there is no
separable rim. The lip is an essentially unmodified, slightly
smoothed coil line, from which the succeeding coil was
removed during the plastic stage. This produced a slightly
rounded lip planar on the interior and a curved bevel to the
exterior. Basal form is unknown.
Dimensions.
Height. Probably about 31-33 cm.
Width. 26.5-28 cm.
Mouth diameter. 26-27 cm.
Wall thickness (20 measurements). Range 7.7-9.8 mm, mean
8.7 mm.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

107

Surface finish:
Interior. Well smoothed. Faint, nearly horizontal smoothing lines
remain.
Exterior. Well smoothed, then brushed with a fine brush, probably a
bundle of grass stems. Brushed with a slightly curved motion
(center of the curve downward} at a slight angle of about 5-10
degrees to the rim, in either direction (upper right-lower left,
or the reverse}. The resulting surface is fairly smooth, but
completely covered with brushing.
Remarks: The vessel conforms to the type Boothe Brushed (Suhm 1955: 1620; Sorrow 1970). The Area H sherd does not fit on the Area G
sherds, but it is likely from the same vessel. The brushed sherd is
flat and may be from the base; if so, the base was flat, brushed, and
8.9 mm. thick.

FIRED CLAY LUMPS (46 pieces)
Small rounded pieces of fired clay were found in the Area K hearth. All
are reddish-orange clay impregnated with rounded quartz sand and tiny
black limonite (?) grains. It appears identical to the plainware pottery from
the site, except for the exclusion of the white specks (presumably
tempering material}. The clay is most likely local. Most pieces are less than
10 mm in diameter; the largest is 25 x 20 x 15 ram.

ARROWPOINTS (89 specimens)
The descriptions of the arrowpoint sample provided methodological
problems. Since this was a manufacturing area in which other
processing activities were also performed using small flake tools, it
was often the case that arrowpoint fragments, unfinished
arrowpoints, edge-retouched flakes, and utilized flakes overlapped in
morphological characteristics. A categorization is here employed,
however, which describes in as much detail as possible the kind of
fragment involved and where that fragment likely falls within the
manufacturing process. The initial divisions essentially are finished
(contracting stem, expanding stem, parallel stem, and unnotched
forms, and barbed blade fragments); uncertain (distal blade
fragments, medial blade fragments); and presumably unfinished
(probably unfinished, medial fragments, and large unnotched). In
other words, medial fragments are presumably finished and possibly
unfinished. This gives the reader minimally an impression of the
degree of certainty he may place on the data. Likewise, unnotched
forms include probably finished, probably unfinished, and large
forms (possibly arrowpoint preforms or even small knives). As
confusing as this system may seen initially, it is hoped to prove more
useful in detailed comparative analysis or reevaluation than would a
"lumping" approach.

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Contracting stem (24 specimens; Fig. 15}
This is a heterogeneous grouping of points mainly comparable to Perdiz
forms. They generally have dully pointed bases (rarely sharply pointed or
straight}, nearly straight blade edges, and long flaring barbs. Most are
made on thin flakes with flake scars covering the entire dorsal surface and
only the ventral edges. Stems are equally flaked on both surfaces.
A relatively large, bifacially flaked Cliffton (Fig. 15 p) appears to be a
finished point and not a preform. It is from Area F and likely is unrelated to
materials on the main part of the site.
Expanding stem (13 specimens; Fig. 16 a-m)
This is a heterogenous grouping of points generally comparable to
Scallorn forms.
Parallel Stem (5 specimens; Fig. 16 n-r)
This is a heterogeneous grouping of points overlapping the descriptive
extremes of Perdiz, Scallorn, Cuney, and Bonham.

FIGURE 15. Contracting-stem arrowpoints (Perdiz, ClifftonJ.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

109

Unnotched (14 specimens)
Probably finished (one specimen; Fig. 16 s). This finely chipped basal
fragment is totally worked on the dorsal face and the margins of the
ventral face.
Probably unfinished (9 specimens; Fig. 17 a-f}. These are intentionally
shaped, but not to the extent of being stylistically classifiable as a formal
type. The flaking was stopped before the form became apparent. Although
they appear to have been abandoned during manufacture, they also could
have served on arrows.
Large (4 speciments; Fig. 17 g-j). These are larger than most other
arrowpoints from the site and generally appear to be finished products.
They are, however, likely arrowpoint preforms, or some might be very
small knives.

FIGURE 16. Arrowpoints. a-m, expanding-stem (Scallorn); n-r,
parallel-stem; s, unnotched probably finished.

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Fragments (33 specimens)
Barbed medial fragments (11 specimens; Fig. 17 k). These are fragments
retaining a portion of a barb or notch. They are presumably from
completed or nearly completed points.
Medial fragments, finished (5 specimens; Fig. 17 1). These are welt
worked and thin and are believed from complete or nearly complete
arrowpoints.
Medial fragments, unfinished (4 specimens). These are less well flaked
and appear to have been broken and/or abandoned somewhere during the
manufacturing process.

FIGURE 17. Arrowpoints. a-f, unnotched probably unfinished; g-j,
large unnotched; k, barbed medial fragment; 1, medial fragment; m-p,
distal fragments.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

111

Distal fragments (13 specimens; Fig. 17 m-q). These are well flaked, thin
tip fragments from presumably finished or nearly finished arrowpoints.

DART POINTS (6 specimens; Fig. 18)
The following points (one of each type-form) were collected from
the site, mainly during the initial survey (during which time exact
locations were not recorded). Most, if not all probably are the result
of adjacent Archaic occupations and are not part of the Neo-

FIGURE 18. Chipped stone artifacts, a-f, dart points; g-i, beveled
knives; j-p, thin bifaces.

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

American assemblage here. The small blue point from beside Area J is
the only point with known provenience and may belong to the main
assemblage at the site.
Ensor-Frio (Fig. 18a)
This seems to be a common form in central Texas and has been
described in detail by such workers as Tunnell (1962: 88-90). It is
essentially a wide side-notched Ensor with a notch in the center of the
base. Burin type facets have removed both barbs in a medial direction
(Form 5 facet of Greer 1965). This type of facet is common on points of this
general style and age in central and southwestern Texas.
Fairland (Fig, 18 b)
Marcos (Fig. 18 c)

Pedernales (Fig. 18 f)
This lightly patinated point was found near the south side of Area B.
Gower (Fig. 18 d)
This is probably related to the early Archaic forms named by Shafer
(1963: 64-65) and found in various sites in central and southwestern Texas.
It is heavily patinated, and the base and lateral stem edges have been
intentionally well smoothed.
Unidentified (Fig. 18 e)
This small point of nonpatinated blue flint is all that remains after the
blade was battered nearly down to the top of the stem. It was found
isolated 17 ft west of Area J at N 130/W 177.

BEVELED KNIVES (6 specimens; Fig. 18 g-i)
These fragments are alternately beveled along the distal portion of
the left blade edge. The proximal end (two specimens) is dully pointed
and not beveled. Estimated length is about 90-125 ram. Though these
specimens presumably are from beveled knives, the medial fragments
could be from beveled dart points (no beveled points are reported
from this or nearby sites). Beveled knives have been included as a
class separate from the descriptive grouping thin bifaces because the
beveled forms appear to be a culturally significant trait for the
Southern and Central Plains (Lehmer 1971: 108) and most Plainsinfluenced parts of Texas (Sollberger 1971).
THIN BIFACES (50 specimens; Fig. 18 j-p)
These are thin, usually pointed, well worked bifaces (i0 specimens)
estimated to have been less than 120 mm long. Use pattern studies
have not been done, but most are presumed to have served for cutting.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

113

Thin biface fragments (40 specimens) are presumed to be from
similar specimens and are thought to be mainly complete tools. Many,
however, were likely advanced preforms, or altered tools abandoned
well along the route of artifact alteration.
SCRAPERS (32 specimens)
These are characterized by unifacial, usually rather steeply
beveled retouched edges presumed to have been used or intended for
some scraping activity. Artifacts conventionally referred to as flake
scrapers are described mainly under the heading evenly edgeretouched flakes. Use studies have not been conducted to determine
how the specimens were used.
End scrapers {17 specimens; Fig. 19 a-h}
These all have convex to rounded scraping edges opposite the bulb of
percussion. The bulb on one specimen was removed by ventral thinning
from the striking platform. The distal retouched edged on one specimen is

FIGURE 19. Scrapers. a-h, end; i-j, circular; k, diagonal.

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ventrally or "reverse" flaked. Since these tools are formed on flakes
removed from the outside of pebbles or small cobbles (secondary cortex
flakes and large interior flakes), the ventral surface is longitudinally
slightly concave, thus producing better scraping characteristics than
would a flat ventral face (e.g. from tabular flint).
Side scrapers (7 specimens; Fig. 20)
These are generally larger than the end scrapers from this site and not
so well made. An edge essentially parallel to the largest dimension of the
flake is steeply retouched. These too are made on secondary cortex flakes
and large interior flakes.

cm

d
FIGURE 20. Side scrapers.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

115

Circular scrapers (?) (2 specimens; Fig. 19 i-j)
Discoidal artifacts about 30 mm in diameter seem quite distinctive. They
are generally unifacially flaked, but the cross section is barely planoconvex to very thinly bi-convex [at the edge). Their inclusion in a scraper
class is questionable, and their function is not known.
Diagonal scraper (1 specimen; Fig. 19 k)
The distal right diagonal edge is strongly unifacially retouched into a
slightly concave scraping edge 33 mm long. It is made on a secondary
cortex flake.
Scraper edge fragments (5 specimens)
These are curved edge fragments from fractured scrapers in the general
size range of the end scrapers. Edge orientation is net obvious.

FLAKE DRILLS (6 specimens; Fig. 21)
The thin, fine shafts are bifacially flaked and have biconvex cross
sections (one piano-convex). Bases are minimally altered.

BURINS (4 specimens; Fig. 22 a-b)
A small cortex flake of blue flint (Fig. 22a) has two chisel edges,
each produced by intersecting burin facets. The upper burin edge is
squared; the chisel edge has been used, and apparently also one corner of the chisel edge and one upper lateral edge. The lower burin
edge has become slightly rounded from use; use marks appear on the
chisel edge indicating a gouging motion.
Each of two small flakes (one blue, one gray) has a very narrow
chisel edge, possibly produced by a burin facet originating from a
natural break. The delicate chisel edge is slightly smoothed and bears
minute use scars.

FIGURE 21. Flake drills.

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

On a fourth specimen (Fig. 22 b} a chisel edge is again produced by
a burin facet originating at a natural break. Use marks occur in the
center of the chisel edge, which is larger than on the preceeding
specimens.
UTILIZED AND EDGE-RETOUCHED FLAKES (119 specimens)
Since various groups forming these two classes freely intergrade, it
was decided to describe them as arbitrary divisions within a
continuum of edge alteration from extremely minimal and due to use,
to fairly extensive, even, and intentional. Sortings and the following
descriptions are given as separate entities in order to attempt to
minimally quantify the degree of edge alteration.
Utilized flakes: minimal use (43 specimens)
The edge bears little evidence of use (smoothing, minute hinge fractures,
etc.}, probably from a single, very short, rapid cutting job. Scraping
undoubtedly was also done.

FIGURE 22. Chipped stone artifacts, a-b, burins; c-h, evenly edgeretouched flakes.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

117

Utilized flakes: extensive use (14 specimens)
The edges bear evidence of use (smoothing, minute hinge fractures,
areas of intensive and sometimes extensive edge retouch from use),
probably from a more intensive cutting or scraping job or multiple jobs.
Minimally edge-retouched flakes (31 specimens)
These seem to have been intentionally unifacially retouched and may be
fragments of either finished or unfinished flake knives, flake scrapers, or
arrowpoints. Many instead may be utilized flakes or flakes simply tested
for flaking characteristics and never intended as tools.
Evenly edge-retouched flakes (31 specimens; Fig. 22 c-h)
These obviously overlap with the above groups, but are intended to help
isolate more intensive and extensive retouch which produces a larger,
more even unifacial edge. Retouch still is very slight and is limited to the
edge--usually single, thin, and slightly convex. These would usually be
placed in a flake scraper category. Flakes more intensively edge-retouched
than these would be more steeply beveled; these have been described as a
separate scraper class.

CHOPPERS (6 specimens; Fig. 23)
These are mainly larger pebbles bifacially chipped to form strong
bi-convex chopping edges. One specimen is plano-convex; the lower
face is formed by two large concave flake scars, the upper face by
small short flakes. Use edges are dully pointed, convex, or nearly
straight. The degree of decortication is variable (20-100%).
UNFINISHED TOOLS (21 specimens)
Initial stage (13 specimens}
These are cores (S) and flakes (5} which show a minimal degree of initial
flaking or shaping. Manufacture was terminated before any distinguishing
shape was achieved.
Secondary stage (8 specimens; Fig. 24}
These are fairly thick, crude unfinished bifacial tool forms. They have
been shaped beyond the "initial" stage, and probably can be considered a
preform stage essentially intermediate between the unretouched core and
a finished tool.

CORES (32 specimens; Fig. 25)
Small cobbles to medium-size pebbles served as cores. The cortex
was removed to produce a platform for the removal of additional
flakes, which in turn produced platforms for the removal of
subsequent flakes from almost any available edge. These more or less
decorticated chunks do not appear to be unfinished core tools
although in many cases the removed flakes seem much too small to
have been planned for effective artifacts of the types found here. It

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

I

I
cm

FIGURE 23. Choppers.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

119

simply seems more effective to call these "cores" than anything else.
The materials appear to be mainly from local sources (cf. Ing and
Kegley 1971).
Blue (13 specimens; Fig. 25 a-c)
Medium-size pebbles ca. 30-60 mm in diameter vary in color from light to
dark blue. The fairly thick cortex is white with an orangish surface. All are
from Areas A and E.
Non-blue (19 specimens; Fig. 25 d-f)
These are mainly medium to large pebbles with a large range of colors in
browns and grays. Most are from Areas A and E, although nearly all areas
are represented.

SINGLE- AND DOUBLE-FLAKE CORES (4 specimens)
These are small chert pebbles covered with cortex. On one end one
or two flakes have been removed, forming an edge, either unifacially
(steeply beveled) or bifacially. None is obviously utilized as a tool,
and the initial cortex flakes thus removed probably were too small to
be of much use. Possibly the objects were simply rejected as unfit for
further consideration. If so, the reason for such a decision is not

FIGURE 24. Unfinished tools. Secondary stage (preforms).

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

apparent. Alternately, the pebbles could have served as chert
hammerstones, and the flakes could have been inadvertently removed
during flaking of other pebbles.
HAMMERSTONES (4 specimens)
Locally gathered medium-size quartz (3 specimens) and chert (one)
pebbles averaging 50 mm in diameter have been battered on one end.
These were probably used to remove flakes from cores, and reduce
crude preforms to shapes and sizes demanding smaller flaking tools.

FIGURE 25. Cores. a-c, blue flint; d-f, non-blue flint.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

121

The abundance of associated debitage indicates that such activities
were carried out at the site.
MANO (one specimen)
A circular bifacial mano has one flat and one slightly convex face
and steeply rounded sides. It has been completely, intentionally
shaped, but only the convex face was ground smooth; the upper face
is prepared but unused. The material is a pink granitic sandstone
from the Llano uplift area of Burnet or Llano counties.
SANDSTONE SLABS (2 specimens)
These fragments are from naturally eroded slabs of fine-grained
rust-colored sandstone fused into an elementary quartzite. The
surfaces, though presumably naturally smooth, would serve
admirably as grinding platforms (i.e., small milling slabs). Such
material was similarly used archeologically throughout central
Texas.
TABLE 3
d < 25ram

d > 25ram

Sample
Size

blue
non-blue
entire sample

94 %
91%
92 %

6%
9%
8%

509
2840
3349

Area C

blue
non-blue
entire sample

80%
82 %
82 %

20%
18 %
18 %

20
51
71

Area D

blue
non-blue
entire sample

100%
55 %
59%

45 %
41%

4
40
44

Area E

blue
non-blue
entire sample

98%
91%
92 %

2%
9%
8%

162
722
884

Area E,

blue
non-blue
entire sample

100%
64%o
67%

36%
33 %o

8
67
95

Area H

blue
non-blue
entire sample

90%
80 %
81%

10%
20 %
19 %

10
128
138

Area I

blue
non-blue
entire sample

89%
84 %
85 %

11%
16 %
15 %

54
146
200

Area

Color

Area A

Table 3. Percentage of flint flakes by size. The two size groups are
defined according to maximum dimension (d). Rows total 100o,4.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

122
UNALTERED FLAKES

Flint (4785 specimens)
Chipping debris was sorted according to size of the flakes (Table 3) and
color of the material (Table 4). An arbitrary division point of 25 mm in
maximum dimension was chosen for the size sorting: 90% of the total
flakes were less than or equal to 25 mm (d<25 mm) and 10%

were greater

than 25 mm in diameter (d > 25 mm}. Flakes of the distinctive blue color
totaled 16% of the sample, and 84% were non-blue. Most of the flakes
(3349} were from Area A.
Biface retouch flakes (17 specimens, partial sample)
This is a sampling of the most obvious edge retouch flakes produced
during the sharpening or edge alteration of thin to relatively thick bifaces.
Of the 17 sharpening flakes, five are from presumably edge-utilized bifaces
(as evidenced by edge smoothing, which also could have been intentionally
produced preparatory to flake removal), and 12 are from non-utilized
TABLE 4

d < 25ram

Entire Sample

d > 25ram

Area

Color

Area A

blue
non-blue
sample size

16%
84%
3068

11%
89%
281

15%
85%

blue
non-blue
sample size

28%
72%
58

31%
69%
13

28%
72%

blue
non-blue
sample size

15%
85%
26

100%
18

9%
91%

blue
non-blue
sample size

19%
81%
812

6%
94%
72

blue
non-blue
sample size

12%

-

88°/o
64

100%
31

Area C

Area D

Area E

Area E1

3349

71

44

18%
82%
884
8%
92%
95

25mm

Area G

one blue and three non-blue, all d

Area H

blue
non-blue
sample size

8%

4%

92°/o
112

96%
26

93%

blue
non-blue
sample size

28%
72%
170

20%
80%
30

27%
73%

Area I

7%
138

200

Table 4. Percentage of flint flakes by color. The two size groups
are defined according to maximum dimensions (d). Columns total
100%.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

12 3

bifaces or presumably non-utilized portions of bifaces. Many flakes are
lipped, and in most cases, the striking platform (i.e., the bifaee edge) is the
widest point.

Quartz (6 specimens)
Six small thin quartz flakes less than 25 mm in maximum dimension are
thought to be from quartz hammerstones, fractured during the removal of
flakes from cores. Quartz may at times have been intentionally selected for
small artifacts, although no retouch alteration is evident on these flakes.
UNALTERED CHERT COBBLE (1 specimen)
This is an unused, unaltered small cobble of fine-grained gray
chert. It is not native to the site and presumably was collected as
potential chipping material.

DISCUSSION
Previous to about 1950, Perdiz and Scallorn points generally were
thought to be contemporaneous and associated with ceramics--the
main difference being their overall geographic ranges. During the
1950’s, however, sites were excavated which indicated differences in
temporal ranges for Scallorn and Perdiz (Jelks 1953, 1962; Suhm
1957). Since that time there is a tendency to believe that Scallorn and
Perdiz forms never were contemporaneous, and that ceramics are not
culturally associated with Scallorn points in central Texas. Certainly
these beliefs seem to be supported by most excavations in the region.
A detailed review of the literature, however, leaves open an
alternate explanation--that although Scallorn forms were introduced
earlier than Perdiz, and Perdiz forms outlived Scallorn, there was a
temporal overlap between the two styles. In addition, there is a
likelihood that pottery first came into central Texas while Scallorn
points were still in use. These subjects will be reviewed later in the
discussion.
It was at that point in the archeological development that the
Wheatley site was located in 1962 and studied in 1970. The situation
here appears to be a short-term camp with well-defined activity areas
on a site cluttered with a minimum of extraneous debris. Scallorn and
Perdiz arrowpoint forms and potsherds were found together in small,
isolated use areas. Nearly all material lay relatively undisturbed on

or just under the surface. It appears then, that the VVheatley site was
occupied at a time when Scallorn and Perdiz forms and pottery were
in use together. This remains the present interpretation, and the
following discussion and evaluation revolve around this thesis.
Alternate hypotheses are considered but seem inconsistent with the
observed situation here.

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Camp Design

The site occupies a fairly large open flat area, probably essentially
clear of trees during the time of occupation, with only a few scattered
oaks. The juniper spread is demonstrably recent. Aside from
scattered cultural debris, the site is nearly featureless. The deposit
consists of dark red clay overlaid by a veneer of beige sand; these soil
characteristics usually designate a site in the area. The camp
overlooks steep-walled canyons to either side and is near the
Pedernales canyon rimrock, though not directly on it.
The nature of the site is such that occupational debris is mainly on
the surface and extends underground only into the thin layer of
surface sand. Debris also is concentrated in, and in most cases
limited to, relatively small, separate clusterings about 15-30 feet
across. The lack of complexity and the general rarity of flint debris
suggests that the occupation was a single one and that clusterings of
flint flakes and artifacts represent individual activity areas.
Fortunately, the site apparently was not collected from in the past
(according to the land owner), and it is not cluttered,by the abundant
Archaic debris so often present on central Texas sites. The exact
provenience of the few Archaic artifacts collected during the initial
survey is uncertain, though probably most came from near Area H.
Small scatterings of Archaic debris also occur off the site northeast
of Area D, northeast of Area K, and west of Area E. The degree to
which artifacts have become scattered since their initial deposition is
evident from the locations of reconstructable artifacts. Fragments
were mainly 0-10 feet apart; fragments of only one artifact were 15-18
feet apart. There is the possibility that artifacts were carried from
one activity area to another, but for the most part this seems unlikely.
Pottery likely presents a special case; sherds seemingly from the
same vessels appear in different areas (A and E, G and H).
It is therefore possible that small use areas could increase greatly
in size. If artifacts were to scatter to a maximum 10 feet distance, a
five-foot diameter hearth area might today be an area 25 feet in
diameter of scattered artifacts, presumably with artifact density
increasing toward the center. Likewise, a 30-foot scattering of flakes
might be the remains of a 10-foot chipping station. Two activity areas
originally less than 20 feet apart today could be overlapping and
appear as one large area, possibly, though certainly not necessarily,
with subareal distributional variation for different kinds of debris or
artifacts.
A few hypotheses can be made regarding size and use of activity
areas. Using the foregoing information on debris scattering at this

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

125

site, we can estimate the original sizes of the activity areas (see Fig.
26):
Areas

Present Size

A
B
C
D
E
E
G1
H
I

40 feet
20
10
40
30
12-15
5
40
15 (?)

1
K

Computed Original Size
20-40 feet
0-20
0-10
20-40
10-30
0-15
5 (hearth)
20-40
0-15

15 (?)

0-15

20
5

0.20
5 (hearth)

Additionally, artifactual debris suggests various activities, though
neither conclusive nor especially beyond the normal range of camp
activities. Following are hypothetical uses of the various activity
areas.
Area A was a living area, probably 25-35 feet in diameter, possibly with
a temporary structure. Plainware potsherds were scattered throughout

c
G
K

8

-

7

w

6

----"

,(5

-

t~

o)

El
I
I
o
,~ J
~- B

w

_-

N
H
H

-

I’
I

I
I

i

E

--

A

.1
I

I

z 2

D

I

I

1

H

I

I

5

10

15 20 25 30 35 t.0
feet

5

10

15 20 25 30 35 Z,0
feet

FIGURE 26. Graph of suggested initial sizes of activity areas before
artifact scattering. The five-foot extremes have been omitted from
each range to weight the central portions.

126

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
but were more concentrated in the western portion as if the broken pieces
had been pushed aside there, or a pot was broken there (Fig. 5). Flint cores,
flakes, and micro-flakes (1-5 mm long), representing final retouch as well
as initial flaking, were especially abundant in other parts of the area and
result from in-place chipping activities. Mussel shells and a small fragment
of burned bone (deer?) around the small fire presumably are food remains.
The use of the shallow basin in the clay beside the fire (if a result of the
occupation) is unknown, and the chipping debris contents therein are
inexplicable. The fire was on the southeast edge of the area, the sherd
concentration on the west edge, and the densest concentration of flakes
around the northeast edge. The center was cluttered mainly with
fragments of arrowpoints, utilized flakes, flake scrapers, and other small
flake tools.
Area B is near Area A and contains detritus, a few tools (e.g.,
arrowpoints and scrapers), and two sherds in an area probably originally
5-15 feet across. This may have been an outdoor activity area linked with
Area A.
Area C probably was a chipping station beside a small fire, judging from
the many small flakes found on an apparently burned limestone outcrop.
Its actual use and relationship to other areas are unknown.
Area D is a relatively large, featureless area, originally probably 25-35
feet across, of small scattered flakes. Although some flaking was done
here, the scarcity of micro-flakes suggests a minimum of final retouch. The
lack of utilized flakes limits an interpretation of a large processing area.
Area E, probably originally 15-25 feet in diameter, apparently was the
main activity area in the south part of the site and is the second area to
contain a substantial concentration of chipped stone artifacts and
plainware potsherds. Presumably it was a habitation area similar to Area
A, but less chipping debris and the rarity of micro-flakes suggest more
shaping of artifacts and less final retouch than in Area A.
Area E probably was an outdoor area next to the Area E habitation and
i
originally was about 5-10 feet across. Only a few artifacts and flakes were
found (Fig. 8), which seems to indicate a minimum of activity.
Area G was a hearth east of Area E (Fig. 10}. The fire was built on thin
slabs covering the bedrock, and slabs were used throughout. Other details
of its structure and use are unknown. The large brushed jar presumably
was used here during cooking, during which time it broke, and the broken
peices were left in the fire. Chipping was not done at this station, or was
extremely limited (e.g., minimal retouch). The horizontal relation of the
Area G hearth to occupation Area E seems comparable to that of the Area
K hearth to the Area A complex.
Area H is an area of sparsely scattered debris, with the main activity
probably originally in an area 25-35 feet across (Fig. 11). A few sherds
probably from Areas A, E, and G are scattered about as are arrowpoint
fragments, fragments of beveled knives and other thin bifaces, and flake
debris. There is no obvious center, and the appearance is totally different
from the concentrations in Areas A and E. The general inventory, however,
including the sherds presumably imported from other activity areas on the
site, together with its location in the center of the site suggest that a
dwelling or some other camp feature may have existed here. Some
chipping was done, but apparently very little final retouch.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

12 7

Area I was a large flat area containing possibly two groupings of
chipping debris and a few artifacts (Fig. 12). Originally the areas were
possibly about 5-10 feet in diameter, and both were used for some rough
shaping of tools but not for delicate retouch. Recognition of two semidistinct artifact-flake clusterings is impressionistic and may not be
significant.
Area J is next to Area A and had only two arrowpoints, a small sherd,
and a few flakes in an area originally probably 5-10 feet across (Fig. 13). Its
proximity to Area A suggests Area J was closely affiliated with Area A.
Area K is notable for its small, partially buried limestone hearth
containing many small fired clay lumps, probably residue from some
cooking technique. The hearth is small, five feet in diameter, and
presumably had some special purpose away from the habitation areas.
Although scattered flakes indicate minor resharpening, the near absence
of chipping debris seems to preclude its use as a living station or as an area
of intensive processing. This appears similar to the Area G hearth, but
details of its construction and associations are unknown because it was
found during a post-project trip to the site. It is, nonetheless, considered
one of the more important features here.

From the above evaluations of activity areas, a general camp
layout can be hypothesized. It would appear that at least three living
areas (Areas A, H, and E), possibly with temporary brush shelters,
occupied a somewhat north-south line parallel to the edge of the
terrace-like fiat. Chipping debris and tools were scattered on and
around these living areas. Nearby areas were used for various
activities, which often must have included flint flaking, presumably
percussion resharpening. Delicate secondary retouch was done
mainly in Area A. Small fireplaces were in the living areas, while
larger limestone hearths were some distance to the east. Plain and
brushed pottery vessels were used, broken, and discarded here.
Pieces of a small broken plainware jar (though possibly more) were
seemingly carried to various activity areas or living stations (Areas
A, B, E, and H; see pottery descriptions), and a sherd presumably
from the Area G brushed jar was found in Area H. Hypothesized area
interactions, based mainly on these interareal pottery distributions,
are suggested in Fig. 27. The amount of debris at the site suggests that
occupation was relatively brief, possibly for only a few weeks during
a collecting period for pecans or some other locally abundant
resource, or during an extended trip.

The Assemblage
Artifacts at this site appear to be almost entirely from the NeoAmerican period as defined for central Texas. The few Archaic
materials probably represent localized one-stop situations mainly
around the perimeter of what here is considered the site area.

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

observed~ ~G

\hypothesized
FIGL~E 27. Schematic view of area interaction. Solid lines supported
by ceramic distributions, dotted lines conjectural.

Archaic material is present all along this section of the Pedernales
River, and it is not surprising to find scattered amount’s here also.
Most Neo-American artifacts could be considered representative
of the Toyah focus (Jelks 1962): Perdiz point forms, pottery, beveled
knives, flake drills, and other fine flake tools. Scallorn forms
constitute the only artifacts found at Wheatley seemingly diagnostic
of the Austin focus. Pottery includes probably one or two small
undecorated brownware jars, and a large brushed jar of the type
Boothe Brushed (probably a local copy of Frankston focus forms).
Although several arrovrpoint forms are present, the morphological
characteristics seem similar. Heterogeneous groupings of expanding,
contracting, and parallel stem forms (descriptively referred to as
Scallorn or Perdiz forms) consist of small arrowpoints with usually
straight to very slightly convex blade edges, prominent barbs, narrow
stem "necks," plano-convex blade cross sections flaked mainly on the
dorsal face (the ventral face usually is minimally flaked around the
edges), and bifacially flaked stems. The distal end of the point was
usually formed at the proximal end of the flake, i.e., the bulb of
percussion. If nothing else, this should insure the thinnest possible
stem to go into the foreshaft notch.
Many, if not most, of the artifacts have been exposed to heat.
Detailed analysis has not been done to determine what percentage of
artifacts were intentionally heat-treated preparatory to flaking, and
which were presumably inadvertently burned. It is obvious, however,
that heat-treating at this site was a common practice. The small

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

129

depression filled with and surrounded by flakes and cores on the
south side of Area A could have served in such a practice.
Several artifacts were made from a distinctive bluish flint (Table
2). An inspection of available survey materials from the Pedernales
Falls State Park, collected both by the Travis County Archeological
Society in 1962 and later by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
in 1970 (Ing and Kegley 1971), indicates that blue flint was used
mainly during Neo-American times, possibly with large-scale
utilization beginning in the Transitional period, corresponding
roughly to the supposed beginning of intensive pressure flaking in the
area. Although this part of the artifact sample at Wheatley is too
small for more than simple observations, it is interesting that half the
expanding stem and parallel stem points and flake drills, and only two
contracting stem points were made from blue flint. Ignoring the small
sample size, 54O/o of the Scallorn points, 40O/o of the parallel stem
points, 40% of the flake drills, and only 8% of the Perdiz were made
from bluish flint. Possibly the difference is due only to the material a
person had on hand when making various tools. More likely, however,
this very fine-grained, somewhat glassy flint was selected when
pressure-flaked tools were needed. The small nodule size of the raw
material precludes its use for larger dart points and knives, but not
for the small pressure-flaked arrowpoints and delicate flake tools.
Chi-square tests on blue and non-blue flakes viewed according to
size indicate that the two classes differ significantly from chance. In
fact, nearly the entire deviation to less than a .001 level of
significance is accounted for by large blue flakes, the observed being
far less than would be expected by chance. There are also
significantly more small blue flakes than would be expected. There
are two possible explanations: (i) Blue flint was selected for the
purpose of producing smaller flakes, presumably for making smaller
artifacts, and (2) Blue flint comes from its source in forms (nodules,
chunks, etc.) too small to have produced many large flakes suitable
for fashioning into artifacts, and served instead to produce small core
tools. Gray flint, on the other hand, has many more large flakes than
would be expected, and, indeed, it appears that the cores are much
larger and were used for the removal of flakes to be fashioned into
tools. All larger tools, including both flake and core tools, are from
gray flint. Blue flint, then, was selected for small core tools and
delicate flake tools; gray flint was used for larger flake tools and
large core tools.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

130

MANUFACTURING PROCEDURE
A problem encountered during description of the, Wheatley
materials involves how to sort a sample when all levels of
manufacture are represented, and fragmentary tools often cannot be
distinguished from unfinished artifacts. The general conception of the
dynamic processes is as follows (see Fig. 28).
There are many possible avenues in the formation of chipped stone
tools. The basis for distinctions in the manufacturing procedure is the
presence or absence of alteration of various kinds at various levels.
One inevitably begins with a chunk of stone variously classified as
chert, flint, quartzite, quartz, dolomite, obsidian, agate, jasper,
basalt, rhyolite, felsite, hardened limestone, and more. At the
beginning of the process, the raw material may serve as a core,
intended either to be altered into a core tool, or for the removal of
flakes to be made into tools. The raw material may, however, be
minimally altered, such as the removal of one flake or singly
fractured to form an edge, and used as a tool. This, of course, could
be considered a core tool in its most primitive sense. The chunk of raw
material can also be used without alteration, for example, as a
hammerstone, a maul, or a chopper utilizing a natural edge. Once a
core exists, it can be used directly, spontaneously as a tool (e.g.,
a chopper), or it can be intentionally altered (through a possible
"preform" level) into an artifact with specific desired
characteristics. Likewise, a core may serve for the removal of flakes.
A flake can be removed without any sort of special preparation, or
the core can be specially prepared to produce a specific kind of flake,

RAW MA TERIAL

direct use

/
FIGURE 28. Suggested model for material manufacture and use.
Discard or storage can occur at any point. Solid lines indicate direct
use without alteration; dashed lines indicate alteration of some kind
to physically transform an object from one level to another.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

131

such as Levallois flakes, sequent or series flakes, or such blades as
come from carefully prepared obsidian polyhedral cores in central
Mexico. Such carefully produced flakes essentially serve as
preforms, which can be either altered into a desired form, or used
simply as is. The same is true for flakes removed from a core without
special preparation: They may be altered to produce particular
characteristics (possibly through a preform stage) or simply utilized
as they come from the core without additional retouch.
The preform stage mentioned here is simply a level within the
alteration of a core or flake into a desired tool form. For projectile
points and knives, the preform stage is usually considered an oval
biface form before final thinning, shaping, possible notching, and
edge retouch is done. In most cases, probably, the level is more or less
arbitrary and theoretical. It appears that sometimes, however,
preforms were specifically produced as unfinished artifacts to be
stored for later shaping, or for trade items to other groups needing
the raw material. These forms are occasionally found in supposed
storage contexts in piles suggesting mass manufacture of preforms.
Once a tool is formed, presumably it is used. Regardless of the class
of tool involved, some kind of wear is bound to be produced. Flakes
utilized as knives become dull. Bifaces become dull. Scraper edges
become rounded. Projectile points break. And so on. At this time, the
person using the tool may opt to rejuvenate it through additional
alteration, either edge retouch or more extensive shaping. This may
result in renewing the old tool form to its original condition, obviously
with some alteration of its original attributes, such as relative
thickness, edge angle, or overall dimensions (cf. Sollberger 1971). Or
it might result in the formation of a new tool form distinctly different
from the original. This might be the result of (1) the demand for a new
tool, or (2) attributes (such as size restrictions) of the original which
preclude its reformation into itself. In practice, probably, the
distinction between original and rejuvenated retouched tool forms
would be impossible, at least most of the time.
There are then the materials with which one works. Chunks of raw
material, cores, flakes, tools, rejuvenated tools, and preforms form an
interlocking system of chipped stone (and other manufactured stone
tools, for that matter). From the manufacturing standpoint, a
constant decision is available either to alter or prepare the piece at
hand, or to arrive at a new level of manufacture without alteration of
the piece. The exception, of course, is the rejuvenation procedure,
which precludes alteration.
At least as important as the materials and manufacturing
processes are the "non-manufacture" processes, discard, use, and

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

storage. Discard, including intentional discard, loss, and presumably
unintentional abandonment (e.g., utilitarian and nonutilitarian
objects found on excavated house floors, neither intentionally
discarded nor lost, but apparently abandoned) may occur at any time
for any reason. All objects recovered by the archeologist are byproducts of this process; otherwise they would not be found. Use
presumably would occur only at a tool level, since use would
distinguish raw material chunks, cores, and unaltered flakes as tools.
Likewise, tools may be thought of as utilized tools, and as potential or
nonutilized tools. The third process, storage, can occur at any point
within the scheme, including at a preform-unfinished level during an
alteration process.
A problem encountered during the Wheatley analysis was how to
distinguish between the various manufacturing levels while
producing some kind of understandable description of the artifacts in
a meaningful classification. For example, When does a core which is
to be fashioned into a core tool cease to be a core, and become a
preform? After how much flaking does a piece of worked flint become
a preform? What would be the possible distinction between an
arrowpoint preform and an unfinished arrowpoint? How does one
distinguish between a well-chipped preform and a finished tool
(especially relevant with thin bifaces or knives)?
It is apparent that arbitrary levels in artifact manufacture
intergrade to such an extent in the Wheatley sample that divisions
should be viewed only as a suggestion of classification units. They are
quite arbitrary. Such is also the case with minimally altered flakes,
utilized flakes, and arrowpoint fragments. Fragmentary specimens
cannot be adequately distinguished, and separation is quite
subjective.
Contemporaneity
The physical association of expanding-stem arrowpoint forms with
both contracting-stem forms and pottery is of particular interest at
this site. The association is believed to be valid, and the artifacts are
therefore considered both contemporaneous and culturally related.
There is considerable support for this explanation.
Nature of the Site
First, the nature of the site is conducive to such an interpretation.
The occupied area is large and relatively fiat and featureless. There
is, at least at present, no obvious reason to occupy one part of the site
in preference to another. Cultural materials are clearly visible on the

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

133

surface and extend into surface below and wash sand only about 5
cm. Debris occurs mostly in discrete clusterings of flake material and
artifacts, presumably constituting localized assemblages and not the
result of either random distributions nor the reoccupation of previously occupied areas. There also is no evidence for clustering due to
erosion or other natural processes.
The Artifacts
Physical attributes of the arrowpoints suggest that forms are
closely related. The heterogeneity within the types, however,
precludes detailed intertype cornparisions. Primarily, several
arrowpoints, flake drills, and other artifacts were made from a
distinctive dark variety of bluish flint, some possibly from flakes from
the same core and with nearly identical workmanship. This is
particularly suggestable with Sca!!orn and Perdiz points and a flake
drill found together in Area E. It is equally likely, however, that the
use of the blue flint simply corresponds with an intensified use of
pressure flaking.
Expectation Probabilities
Since Sca!!orn points, Perdiz points, and pottery occurred in
several activity areas, it was decided to use distributional data to
indicate the actual relationships in the form of probabilities or
expectation indices. These percentages describe the coexistence of
these artifacts and also predict what one would expect to find if new
activity areas were discovered in terms of combinations of artifact
groups.
In order to help explain the relationships between expanding-stem
(abbreviated E) and contracting-stem (C) arrowpoint forms and
pottery (P), areal locations are used without accounting for frequencies (see Fig. 29):
Perdiz
Pottery
Scallorn

K

C

E
E

i
1

J
J

A
A
A

E
E

G

E

G

B

H

Unidentifiable arrowpoint fragments also were found in pottery
Areas B and H, and in Area K with burned or fired clay. The three
classes were absent in Areas D and I.
The following symbols are used: A---~ B for "A implies B" or "If A,
then B"; and Pr(A--~B) for "What percent of the time does B occur
with A" or "If A is present, what is the probability that B also will be
present." This quantity is equal to the number of areas in which both

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

134

Perdiz
(n = 6)

t

Pottery
(n=6)

Scallorn

Scal lorn
(n =4)

(n =4)

FIGURE 29. Two ways to portray the codistributional relationship of
the three artifact groups Scallorn, Perdiz, and pottery in the nine
recognized activity areas containing at least one of these groups.
groups occur together ( ~ is the symbol for intersection) divided by
the number of areas containing group A. Thus,
Pr(A_..~B)
=

N(A ~ B)
N(A)

or the probability that C also will occur when A and B are found
together,
Pr(A ch B--~C) = N(A c~ B ~ C)
N(A ~ B)
These formulae describe how often two things occur together in
terms of one of the classes or class combinations. "Pottery implies
Scallorn, Pr (P
~E) 7.50" means that Sca!/orn occurs in 50% of
the areas containing pottery; or that if a new pottery area is found,
there is a 50% chance that Sca!!orn also will be found there,
according to the observed archeological trend at this site. This does
not take into account arrowpoint fragments in Areas B and H, which,
if Scallorn, would increase the probability of finding Scallorn in
entirely new pottery areas.
The probabilities consist of the following:
Pottery implies Scallorn, Pr(P---~E) = .50
Scallorn implies Pottery, Pr(E---’~P) = .75
Pottery implies Perdiz, Pr(P--~C) = .50
Perdiz implies Pottery, Pr(C--~P) = .50
Scallorn implies Perdiz, Pr (E--~ C) = .75

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

135

Perdiz implies Scallorn, Pr(C---~E) = .50
Pottery and Scallorn together imply Perdiz, Pr(P ~ E ---~C) = .67
Pottery and Perdiz together imply Scallorn, Pr(P ~ C----~E) = .67
Perdiz and Scallorn together imply Pottery, Pr(E ~ C--’~P) = .67
Pottery implies both Perdiz and Scallorn together, Pr(P---~C ~-~ E) =
.33
Thus, a third of the pottery is found with Perdiz and Scallorn
together (P---~C ~ E), and it occurs two-thirds of the time when
Perdiz and Scallorn are together (C ~ E--~p). This seems to indicate
an equal affiliation of pottery with Perdiz or with Scallorn: Perdiz
occurs in half the pottery areas (P---~-C) and occurs with pottery
(C--~P) half the time; while Scallorn also occurs with half the
pottery (P ~ E), and pottery is found in 75°/o of the areas containing
Scallorn (E --~P).

Theoretical Distributional Probabilities
Next an evalution of the coexistence of the three types is made from
the standpoint of theoretical distributional probabilities. In these
tests, the probabilities of chance co-occurrence are computed
following procedures outlined by Parzen (1960: 84). The null hypothesis that artifact classes (groups) are distributed randomly and
occur together only by chance is tested, and in all cases rejected.
The procedure involves determining (1) the probability that a class
would occur in any one part of the site, knowing in how many possible
areas the class would occur, then (2) the probability for classes
occurring together in one area, and finally (3) the probability that the
classes would occur together in the number of areas in which they
were actually found.
In order to make the Wheatley situation applicable to distributional
formulae, the site was theoretically partitioned into 50-foot squares,
each square large enough to include any use area determined by the
concentration and extent of cultural debris. The site "was assumed to
consist of 30 such grid units or cells. Each of the culturally defined
Areas A-K theoretically occupies a different cell.
Area F is excluded also from these computations. Inclusion of Area
F would increase the site boundaries to such an extent that
probabilities for chance codistributions would be so infinitesimally
small as to be nearly nonexistent. The area between Areas E and F
also was quite overgrown and precluded the certainty that additional
use areas were not present.
Parzen’s (1960: 84) general formula for the probability of an
artifact class to appear in one cell,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

136

can be simplified in cases of exclusion (the situation at Wheatley) to

Pr(A)l

-

n
M ’

or, the number of areas in which an artifact occurs divided by the
total number of areas for the entire site, simply the percentage which
a particular artifact class occupies of the total possible areas. The
probability that elements of two or more sets will occur in one
particular cell is equal to the product of the probabilities for each
separate set:
Pr(A ~ B~...)t = Pr(A)IPr(B)I’’"
The probability that an element or combination of elements would
occur by chance in a given number of cells (subscript; here the
number of actually occupied cells) is the above formula raised to the
power of the number of occupied cells. This is, for one class,
n

a

Pr(A)na = (-~)
for two classes,
n(A ~ B)
Pr(A~B)n(A~B)=[Pr(A~B)~ln(A~B)_ (nanb)
M2
or for three classes,

// nanbnc
)n(A ~ B ~ C)
Pr(A~B~C)n(A~B ~C) - \
M3

The general formula, then, is,

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

13 7

Pr(A~B~...X)n(A~ B~...X) =

where, A, B .... X
A~B~...X
n(A ~ B ~ ...X)
na, nb .... nx
M

n

of

classes

M(n of classes
( nanb~.., nx
);(A ~ B r-h" ’ "x)
= classes (here pottery, Perdiz, and Scallorn).
= the distributional intersection of
classes A, B .... X.
= the number of cells in which classes A,
B .... X intersect.
= the total number of cells occupied by
classes A, B .... X.
= number of possible cells in the grid; at
Wheatley the constant 30--the number
of 50-ft square grid units comprising
the site area.
= number of classes being considered in
the problem.
= symbolfor intersection.

The following indices were thereby calculated, describing the
probability that the observed codistributions would happen by
chance (figures are presented in this form for convenience only;
significance to the fifth decimal digit is not insinuated):
Pottery with Scallorn in three areas = .002 percent
Pottery with Perdiz in three areas = .006 percent
Scallorn with Perdiz in three areas = .002 percent
All three classes together in two areas = .003 percent.
These figures fall well below the arbitrary 5% minimum for
accepting the explanation of chance occurrence and strongly suggest
that the associations are valid. All indicate that the likelihood that the
observed event would happen by chance is extremely slight.
It must be stressed that this is an entirely theoretical construct.
The test can not be used as explicitly contributing data against the
hypothesis of chance coexistence, since the number of areas within
the site might be questioned; the total site was not excavated, and
unrecognized activity areas might be present which would
significantly alter the results. More important, the size of the areas
not only is arbitrary, but the occupation of a cell by an activity area is

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

theoretical and was chosen after the site was dug, and then only as an
informal part of the analysis. The results are interesting only in that
they may be used as a general guide to the chance probabilities.
Persons wishing to use this technique in future work should realize
the weaknesses in the Wheatley analysis and construct a stronger
research design and applicable statistical models anticipatory to
field work and data collection.
Actual Distribution Frequencies
The above theoretical chance figures can be compared with the actual distribution (still from a totally theoretical point of view because
of the post-collection selection of cells}, by viewing the percent of the
co-distributional relationships actually present in relation to the total
site (30 possible cells). These are,
Pottery with Scallorn in three areas, 10 percent
Pottery with Perdiz in three areas, 10 percent
Scallorn with Perdlz in three areas, 10 percent
All three together in two areas, 6.7 percent.
This means that binary relationships each occur on 10% of the site,
and all three occur together on nearly as much. Also viewing the site
as a whole, one or more of the chosen types is found in 30% of all
available cells, and all three types occur together in 18% of the
occupied portion of the site.

Summary
Briefly summarizing the supporting evidence for contemporaneity,
there are generally four areas. The nature of the site suggests
intentional groupings of artifacts--a nearly flat, featureless site with
materials limited to the surface in discrete clusterings interpreted as
activity areas within a camp. Erosional clustering seems impossible
here. The physical attributes of the arrowpoints--overall shape,
technology, and the use of the distinctive blue flint--suggest that they
are closely related. Actual relationship figures or expectation
probabilities, based on a theoretical construct, describe the
coexistence of types in the same areas as most common and show that
Scallorn points usually will be accompanied by Perdiz and/or pottery.
And finally, theoretical distribution probabilities indicate that the
types almost never would occur together by chance, and therefore
that their occurrence together is most likely intentional.
Age
The next problem is that of assigning an age to the occupation.
Certainly most of the assemblage conforms well to a full-fledged

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

139

Toyah focus. The Scallorn forms, however, may indicate some time
within early Toyah focus times and likely a time during the overlap of
the Austin and Toyah temporal ranges.
Unfortunately, the Wheatley site was not conducive to charcoal
collection for radiocarbon dating. The sample taken from the Area G
hearth--the only charcoal-bearing feature excavated at the
site--was both too small and too full of modern rootlets to produce a
reliable date.
Published radiocarbon dates, therefore, are used to help
approximate the age of the occupation. Although the designation of
the Wheatley occupation as Austin or Toyah is uncertain, a temporal
placement within the Central Texas aspect at the boundary of the
Austin and Toyah foci, at least as they have thus far been identified
on the basis of distinctive artifact styles, seems most reasonable, for
the most part, from a comparative-developmental standpoint. The
literature reveals Central Texas aspect dates from the following
sites:
Site

RADIOCARBON Listing

Excavation Report

Blum

Stipp et al. 1962:49
(TX 10)

lelks 1953

Punkinseed

Stipp et al. 1962:49
Tamers et al. 1964:151
(TX 8,75)

--

Permy
Winkle

Tamers et al. 1964:150-151
(TX 70-72]

Sharer et al. 1964:
78-85

Oblate

Tamers et al. 1964:149
(TX 29)

Tulmell 1962

Kyle

Tamers et al. 1964:145-156
(TX 98-99; CI-2,4-6,8)

Jelks 1962

Smith

Tamers et al. 1964:145-146
Valastro and Davis 1970a: 271-273
(TX 504-517, 21-26)

Suhm 1957

Pohl

Pearson et al. 1965:306
(TX 123)

--

Britton

Pearson et al. 1966:461
(TX 233-234)

Story and Shafer 1965

Barton
Springs
Road

Valastro et al. 1967
(TX 74)

Lundelius 1967

La Jita

Valastro and Davis 1970b: 633
(TX 664-665,681,684-685,687)

Hester 1971

Dobias-Vitek

Valastro and Davis 1970b: 633
(TX 804,806)

Eddy 1974, ms.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

140

First standard deviation ranges for dates from these sites were
combined so as to indicate the temporal range for each focus. Dates
were plotted on a scale of 25-year intervals, each multiple of 25 falling
within the range of a published date receiving one entry: 226 entries
from 31 published dates attributed to the Austin focus, and 90 entries
from 12 published dates attributed to the Toyah focus. The resulting
percentage graph showing the total ranges of the two loci was made
from the number of first standard deviation ranges within which a
particular date fell (Fig. 30). For example, A.D. 900 fell within 10 of
the 31 Austin focus dates and therefore was graphed as 32 percent.
Ranges were additionally computed from the central 66% of the total
entries of the analysis graph.
There seem to be three methods for viewing the ranges of the two
loci and the overlap period thus formed. These include the overall
range, the range of the central 66% of the individual date entries, and
the dates on which 20% (more or less arbitrarily chosen) or more of
the samples fall:
Range (A.D.):
Overall
Central 66%

of samples

Dates on which 20%
more of samples fall

or

Austin

Toyah

Overlap

425-1800

1125-1800

1125-1800

800-1375

1225-1700

1225-1375

800-1175

1150-1450

1150-1175

1575-1775

It would seem, therefore, that the Wheatley site probably was
occupied about A.D. 1150-1300 (Fig. 30). The dates obviously, from the

3530-

10-

FIGURE 30. Temporal ranges of the Austin and Toyah Foci taken from
published radiocarbon dates.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

141

very nature of their origin, are not restrictive, and the occupation
could have been either before or after this suggested period. The
main problem is that field investigations from which published dates
originated probably were oriented toward isolating components, and
mainly samples from as near a pure component as possible (i.e., one
arrowpoint type) were dated. This means that particular temporal
areas were tested at the expense of other parts of the total range.
This method of analysis, then, is meant only to arrive at a crude
simplifed approximation of the core range for the two foci, and their
most reasonable overlap period. A clear overlap for the two foci is
indeed indicated.

Extra-Site Comparisons
At this point a review of the archeological literature seems justified
for two problems at hand: (1) What is the evidence for an overlap
either temporally or culturally between the Austin and Toyah foci,
and (2) Is there evidence suggesting that pottery was introduced into
central Texas during Austin focus times? Neither question is
answered definitely in the negative, and the affirmative seems to be a
strong possibility. They will be taken in order, followed by some
comments on the use of focus and type names in central Texas.

Scallorn and Perdiz Contemporaneity
Before about 1950 Scallorn and Perdiz were thought to be
contemporaneous and attributable to different ethnic groups with
different geographical ranges, overlapping especially in central
Texas. It is probably safe to assume that hundreds of sites were
excavated, either well or poorly, by more than a handful of
experienced field archeologists. Yet apparently no one realized that
the two forms were not contemporaneous. Indeed, all evidence seems
to have indicated that they were. Had any of the sites been at all
sensitive to the temporal division of the two types, most likely
someone would have recognized this possibility. The older literature
is full of equivalent intuitive explanations in comparable situations.
There appears to be no evidence of unquestionable association of
the two types in a single feature. Miller and Jelks (1952: 198-201)
describe a burial excavated in Belton Reservoir in Coryell County
which contained five Perdiz points and five or six Scallorn. Although
the points were found in the fill of a single grave, the probability that
they were intentionally placed in the grave as actual grave goods is
very slight. D. B. Hill, who excavated the shelter, stated that the
points were randomly placed in the grave fill; and Harry Sharer, who

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

142

has also dug there, states that the extreme richness of the deposits
suggests that it would be impossible to dig in any part of the shelter
without finding a mixture of types (Harry J. Shafer, personal
communication 1970). No other similar features are known.
Evidence up to this time, then, consisted of the uniformity of the
assemblage and the near consistent occurrence together of Scallorn
and Perdiz points, the most diagnostic indicators for the two foci.
Miller and Jelks (1952: 202-205) best summarize the thinking:
"... there is nothing to suggest the presence of two different foci in the
Belton components of the Central Texas aspect, and since Scallorn, Perdiz,
and Cliffton are consistently associated with one another in these sites it
does not seem completely feasible to separate them on a focal basis. In
analyzing the Belton sites, then, Scallorn, Perdiz, and Cliffton, together
with the associated complex of other artifacts, are all considered traits of
the Austin Focus."

The first clear evidence that Perdiz tended stratigraphically to
overlie Scallorn was found during excavation of the Blum Rockshelter on the Brazos River northwest of Waco. Jelks (1953: 199) comments that "it was readily apparent--both in the field and in the
laboratory--that Perdiz occurred principally in the upper levels of
occupation while Scallorn was found, for the most part, at greater
depths." Unfortunately, distributional data are not completely clear.
Recovered during excavation were 69 Perdiz and Cliffton, 28 Scallorn,
and 6 Alba, distributed primarily in two cultural strata, i lower and 2
upper. Stratum 1 contained six Scallorn and no Perdiz. Five Alba
were recovered from Stratum 1-2 contact levels at the base of the
deposits. In Stratum 2 were 47 Perdiz, one Scallorn, and one Alba.
This means that no distributional data are presented for 32% of the
Perdiz and 75% of the Scallorn. Apparently, then, the principal
ranges of the two types were different, but there could have been a
temporal overlap. Pottery (possibly a Titus focus vessel, others
unknown) occurred only in Stratum 2 with Perdiz and Cliffton points,
although Alba and Yarbrough points in the lower levels indicate that
contacts have been directed eastward over a considerable length of
time (Jelks 1953: 206}.
The next site to provide information on the problem and the only
excavated site showing evidence for total distributional separation
between Scallorn and Perdiz, is the Smith Rockshelter (Suhm 1957) on
Onion Creek, a Colorado River tributary in Travis County, about 33
miles east of the Wheatley site. At Smith, several feet of Scallornbearing deposits were separated from the single, totally Perdiz zone
by a sterile layer (Zone X) about 9 inches thick. All Scallorn were

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

143

below Zone X, and all Perdiz and Cliffton above. A group of more or
less rectangular-stem points (4 Eddy, one Alba, 2 Cuney-like), both
distributionally and descriptively intermediate between Scallorn and
Perdiz, were found just below (2 specimens) and just above (3
specimens) the sterile zone and thus overlapped both major types.
Ceramics were found with Perdiz points entirely above the sterile
zone, and none with Scallorn.
The distributional data from the Smith Rockshelter do not indicate
contemporaneity for Scallorn and Perdiz. Two possible explanations
come to mind, however. First, the period of contemporaneity could
have been very short and the shelter was simply not occupied during
that period, when the sterile Layer X was perhaps deposited. A
second hypothesis is that post-Layer X occupations were by people
making only Perdiz points, but that groups making Scallorn points
were present, even if periodically, nearby. The absence of Scallorn in
the uppermost Layer XI could thus be explained as (1) Perdiz-using
people were not in contact with Scallorn-using groups, or (2) Perdizusing people were in contact with Scallorn-using groups but brought
neither the groups nor their Scallorn points to the shelter. Obviously
an unquestionable explanation for this site is impossible, but the
situation here should be regarded not only as unique, but as
incomplete in view of other investigated sites in central Texas.
The last of the three "classic" sites showing Scallorn-Perdiz
temporal separation is the Kyle Site (Jelks 1962), on the Brazos River
northwest of Waco, and in the same general area as the Blum
Rockshelter. Vertical distributional data for points of known
provenience indicate clearly that Scallorn initially appeared well
before Perdiz in Strata I and 2, and that Perdiz and Cliffton continued
in Stratum 5 after the discontinuation of Scallorn. Both Perdiz and
Scallorn, however, along with rectangular-stem forms Alba, Bonham,
and "Short Rectangular Stem," occurred together in Stratum 3 (the
Intermediate Zone) and Stratum 4 (the lowest stratum of the Toyah
focus zone and suggested by Jelks to be possibly "Toyah-Austin
transition") in a mixed context with pottery (Jelks 1962: 78-79, Table
1). These two strata combined account for 22% of the Scallorn points
of known provenience, 57% of the Perdiz/Cliffton, 98% of the sherds
(mainly in the Intermediate Zone, Stratum 3), and 80% of the flake
drills (included here because of their interesting distributional
correspondence). The Intermediate Zone is also interesting by itself,
since it is considered to be neither Austin nor Toyah focus, but
contained 16% of the Scallorn of known provenience, 12% of the
Perdiz, and 91% of the sherds.

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Thus it appears that at the Kyle Site, there are sufficient
distributional data to suggest a possible temporal overlap between
Scallorn and Perdiz, a period during which most of the pottery and
flake drills were left at the site. lelks alludes to such an explanation
several times (1962: 96, 97, 98) and seems to feel (p. 98) that the Toyah
focus somewhat gradually replaced the earlier Austin focus.
Following the excavations at Blum, Smith, and Kyle, archeologists
were keenly aware of the vertical separation which had eluded them
for so long and pushed ahead in their excavations with the knowledge
of this separation. The failure to demonstrate at new sites the
separation of the two types is important. The following sites (and
many more) were excavated and/or analyzed with that data
specifically at hand and considered in the analysis.
The Oblate Site (Tunnell 1962: 96, Table 4), a rockshelter in the
Guadalupe River hill country of Comal County about 27 miles south of
the "¢gheatley site, was carefully excavated with hopes of finding a
vertical separation between Scallorn and Perdiz distributions. Of the
excavated specimens of known provenience, 87% (34 specimens) of
the Scallorn points (39 points total) overlapped the entire Perdiz
sample (23 points). In a slightly more restrictive sense, 85% of the
Perdiz were in the uppermost excavated half-foot level, along with
36% of the Scallorn. Assuming that the deposits were not radically
mixed, this distribution suggests only that the beginning of Scallorn
occurred before the introduction of Perdiz, and that Perdiz was in use
after the discontinuation of Scallorn. It seems, however, that Oblate
does not suggest a total separation of the two arrowpoint styles, but
rather supports a period of overlap during which both types were in
use.

Very much the same situation exists at the Boy Scout Shelter
(Pollard et al. 1963) in the hill country of western Travis County on the
Colorado River about 27 miles east of the Wheatley Site. At that site

the most careful recording in the field of Scallorn and Perdiz locations
failed to even delicately suggest any sort of distributional separation,
either horizontal or vertical--most of the arrowpoint sample came
from a relatively isolated deposit 2.5 ft. thick in a limestone trough
(ibid p. 40, Fig. 5). During the excavation, the trough deposit appeared

to be undisturbed, and at least intuitively it appeared then, as now,
that all the excavated materials--Scallorn and Perdiz points, flake
drill, etc.--were contemporaneous and were deposited during a very
short period of time.
Excavations have been conducted at several sites in Belton
Reservoir in Bell County (Shafer et al. 1964). At the Garth Site, an

NE0-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

145

open terrace site, both Austin and Toyah focus artifacts were found
together with Caddoan pottery, although the authors intuitively feel
that the lack of separation was due to shallowness of the deposit (ibid:
p. 77). Caddoan sherds also occurred in the same zone and levels with
both Austin and Toyah focus materials at the Penny Winkle Site (ibid:
pp. 83-84).
Early excavations of rockshelters in the Whitney Reservoir on the
Brazos River northwest of Waco (the Blum and Kyle sites area) were
reported more recently by Stephenson (1970). Artifact distribution
tables clearly indicate overlapping distributions of Scallorn and
Perdiz points, although Stephenson interprets his data as indicating
that Perdiz is generally earlier and Scallorn generally later.
However, he feels that in Buzzard Shelter, the entire occupation is
attributable to "peoples of the same general cultural complex" and
that "The predominance of the Perdiz Points [256 points] through all
levels and the relatively rare appearance of Scal!orn Points [60
points] would indicate that this was the Toyah Focus" (ibid: p. 175).
He also describes Pictograph Cave as having "some blending of
Austin Focus traits into the occupations above," i.e., Toyah focus
(ibid: p. 157).
Hester, working in the lower Nueces River drainage of Zavala
County in south Texas, believes he has found evidence of
contemporaneous point styles. At the Tortuga Flat site, Scallorn,
Perdiz, and triangular arrowpoint forms have been found in "surface
manifestations," apparently interpreted as single component activity
areas (Hill and Hester 1973: 10-11). Points found together are thought
to be in direct association, not just fortuitous codistributions. Hester
(1974: 19-20) describes a similar situation at Chaparrosa Ranch,
where he notes the co-occurrence of Perdiz, Scallorn, triangular, and
other point forms. Again he feels this represents direct association.
In summary, various workers have expressed opinions regarding
the possibility that the two foci were ever contemporaneous. In her
review of central Texas archeology, Suhm (1960: 83) points out that at
Belton Reservoir, Miller and Jelks (1952) found that "Perdiz, Scallorn,
and Cliffton arrow point types were regularly associated with one
another." She mentions that at Belton (Miller and Jelks 1952) and at
the Collins site in Travis County (Suhm 1955) diagnostic arrowpoints
for each focus were apparently in direct association with one
another. The association would seem entirely reasonable if the Toyah
focus developed out of the Austin focus, and thereby a possible period
when Scallorn and Perdiz points were simultaneously in use by the
same group (Suhm 1960: 83). She is very reserved about the

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

possibility, and more recently has denied the likelihood that the two
loci were ever contemporaneous (Dee Ann Story, personal
communication 1970).
Stephenson (1970: 244-248) believes that at his Whitney Reservoir
rockshelters the two loci have different distributions, with Austin
early and Toyah later. His artifact distribution tables do not indicate
such an ordering. He views the change from Austin to Toyah as
evolutionary in theory, Toyah gradually replacing the Austin focus,
but probably also actually representing an influx of new and different
people. This is indicated by abrupt stylistic changes and the
introduction of new tool forms, such as the long-shafted flake drills,
four-edge beveled knives, small snub-nose end scrapers, and ovate
and bipointed knives. During this time there was greater contact with
east Texas, initially probably with the Alto and Sanders loci, as
indicated by Alba points, imported Caddoan pottery, and locallymade pottery probably influenced from the east.
Sharer (1971) has presented an excellent overview of the Central
Texas aspect, during which he discusses the Austin and Toyah units
as phases. He, like Stephenson (1970), seems to view the Austin focus
(phase) essentially as the indigenous late Archaic population with the
introduced bow and arrow and a more limited geographic range than
the later Toyah phase. The Toyah phase is marked by the introduction
of a Plains-like tool assemblage (end scrapers, four-edge beveled
knives, flake blades, flake drills, large bipointed thinned bifaces),
locally made pottery (brushed, plain, painted, polished, etc.), and
with economic emphasis on horticulture and bison hunting. Base
camps were fairly large semi-permanent villages with seasonal
dispersal to exploit the environment. He believes the orientation
toward bison hunting is responsible for the Toyah focus traits and
suggests that "The Plains-like assemblage is a likely expression of an
ecological adjustment by indigenous populations--not necessarily
genetically related to the Austin phase populations."
Shafer probably is correct in his assessment of the north-central
Texas area around Waco, but the picture farther south is not so
clear. In the south there are no kno,~m Alto focus sites like Chupek
and the east Texas trade wares are quite rare, the converse of the
Waco situation. The large wattle-and-daub villages and maize seem
to be absent in the south (Thomas R. Hester, personal communication
1975, reports the recent recovery of a corn cob from a rockshelter in
Hays County by members of the Southern Texas Archaeological
Association). The big stylistic and content schism between the Austin
and Toyah loci is not nearly so obvious in the southern and western
regions.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

147

Shafer seems to view the two foci as distinct and separated in time.
He suggests, however, that there could have been a very brief
transition, possibly during which people from both phases were living
in the same areas and presumably in contact with each other.
Actually he seems to view the Transitional period as one represented
by some sort of diagnostic artifacts and distinct from both Austin and
Toyah:
"The Toyah phase appears quite suddenly. If there is a transitional
period between the Austin and Toyah phases, it is not well accounted for
archeologically. Suhm (1957) gets a hint of a transition at Smith
Rockshelter, but this is the only stratified site where a transition might be
interpreted.
It is clearly possible that transitional sites have not been recognized
because they do not often occur in stratified context. Also, the temporal
span was obviously much shorter than the duration of either the Austin or
Toyah phases. Therefore, since most Toyah phase deposits are
archeologically represented merely as a thin veneer overlying those of the
Austin phase, a transitional period between the two would be even less
discrete. It could be that the duration was so short that it is archeologically
indistinct or inseparable."

In summary, then, there seems to be good evidence that Scallorn
and Perdiz did in fact overlap in central Texas. We know they did on
the coast (Corbin 1974: 43). Most excavations and detailed
interpretative discussions support the idea of co-occupation in time,
in space, and possibly even of the same sites by people of the two foci.
The evidence at Smith is believed incomplete and not representative
of the total occupation in the area. The separation of the two forms at
that site, however, should not be forgotten.
During this review of the literature, a possibility came to mind
which deserves further consideration. Most of the work on the
Central Texas aspect, principally the problem of the Austin and
Toyah foci, has been done in north-central or northeast-central
Texas. This is the area around Waco and Belton, principally the
Brazos River drainage and surrounding area, the region in which
Caddoan influences were the greatest, particularly from the Alto,
Sanders, and Frankston foci. This is the area in which the Toyah
focus appears most suddenly as a Plains trait-impregnated complex
probably economically oriented toward bison hunting. The focus
appears to come in around A.D. 1200 with a full array of new
assemblage traits, including intensified contacts with east Texas.
Dillehay (1974: 184-185) has pointed out the absence of bison remains
during Austin focus times and their sudden appearance around A.D.
1200. This date corresponds closely with Plains traits introduced not

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

only with the Toyah focus but also in its contact areas throughout the
Fulton aspect range and probably northward and westward as well
(see Dillehay for references and more complete discussion).
The point of interest is that if the Toyah focus represents an influx
of new people into the hill country and rolling grassland country
occupied by Austin focus groups, there was undoubtedly contact.
This, of course, assumes that Austin focus people did not mysteriously
die out or inexplicably vacate this choice area previously, and also
that the Austin focus did not simply change its material culture as
part of an economic adjustment toward bison hunting when
these animals moved back down into the area. The contact could
have been of a friendly nature in which the two groups persisted sideby-side, probably for a long time, and perhaps even lived together.
New groups moving into the area, however, would have increased the
population density, and would have created not just a population
pressure but also a directional flow--a convection-- for group
movement southward. An even stronger, more abrupt and drastic
impetus for movement would have been caused by incomparability
between the two peoples. If the Toyah focus groups were at all
warlike (of. Kelley 1955:989 on the Tonkawa; to my knowledge only
Perdiz, and not Scallorn, points have been the obvious cause of death
in Central Texas aspect burials indicating violent deaths) or for any
reason became enemies with the indigenous groups and were perhaps
stronger than they were, there likely would have been considerable movement of Austin focus groups southward, perhaps
southwestward, perhaps toward the coast. These migrating groups
could have settled unpopulated or minimally populated areas and/or
combined with other groups, i.e., become integral units of other
villages, bands, or even tribes. In such refuge situations, it is very
reasonable that material traditions in the culture would continue to
persist with minimal change, if any. Such being the case, it would be
entirely within reason to discover remains of remnant Austin focus
groups in south Texas or perhaps along the southern coast. Scallorn
points, along with other tools of the complex, could easily have been
used continuously into proto-historic or historic times. Contacts
between groups with stylistically different material assemblages,
such as during times of seasonal harvest like the big tuna gathering
festivities of south Texas (Newcomb 1960: 4), might easily result in
sites containing single component features (activity areas) with
different artifact styles.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

149

Pottery and the Austin Focus
Another related subject for review is the possibility of pottery
occurring in the Austin focus. As has been pointed out, the Austin
focus is believed, on the basis of radiocarbon dates, to occupy the
period from about A.D. 909 to at least 1300. During this time, pottery
was in use, and had been for some time, in more or less adjacent
areas, particularly to the northeast with the Alto focus (Gibson
aspect) and to the east in various coastal areas.
There seems to be evidence of influence from Alto focus groups into
central Texas, and for that reason the complex is singled out for
discussion here. Its choice, however, is by no means restrictive. It has
long been pointed out that Frankston focus pottery is widely
distributed across central Texas and occasionally farther west.
"Because of its position on the southwestern periphery of the
Caddoan area during Fulton Aspect times, Frankston Focus plainly
reveals more contact with the non-Caddoan people to the west than
any other Caddoan foci" (Suhm et al. 1954: 185; see also Krieger 1946:
166-167). The Frankston focus is characterized by Perdiz arrowpoints
and brushed pottery.
In general terms, the Alto focus is an agricultural and ceramic
complex with well-defined sedentary villages and a religious
component demonstrated in part by impressive earthworks
sometimes containing elaborate burials (Newell and Krieger 1949;
Suhm et al. 1954: 161-167; and recent excavations at the Davis Site by
D.A. Story, Texas Archeelogical Research Laboratory, Austin).
Ceramics include a variety of engraved, incised, and plainware forms
(brushed pottery is absent) with bone, clay-grit, or sand temper (no
shell). The predominant arrowpoint form is Alba, a small point
reminiscent of the central Texas form Eddy (Suhm 1955: 23-24; 1957:
36; 1959: 228) or Scallorn eddy (Jelks 1962: 28-30). Knives of the very
distinctive Copena type also are diagnostic of this complex.
Recent dates from Story’s work at the Davis Site indicate a
principal range from about A.D. 700 to sometime after 1209 (Valastro
and Davis 1970b: 629). This is remarkably close to the estimated
range of A.D. 900-1300 for the Austin focus. The possibility for
interaction between the two foci, then, is cornpatable with temporal
data.
From a material standpoint, evidence of direct contact is scarce
and usually questionable. Artifacts of seemingly Alto focus origin in
Central Texas aspect sites are found in contexts which in almost all
cases could be assigned to either the Austin or Toyah focus or to both
(either in naturally or mechanically mixed deposits or in occupational
debris of a culturally mixed complex).

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Most of the work on the Central Texas aspect has been in the
northern part of central Texas, or from Belton north. Early work in
the Belton Reservoir in Coryell County produced several sites with
evidence, albeit indirectly, of the Alto focus (Miller and Jelks 1952).
At the Urbankte Site, Alto focus sherds were found with both Scallorn
and Perdiz arrowpoints. At the Grimes-Houy Shelter, Scallorn and
Perdiz arrowpoints were found on sites with Copena knives. At the
Grimes-Houy Midden, Scallorn and Perdiz were found with Holly Fine
Engraved pottery (Alto focus} and Copena knives. At the Johnson Hole
Site, Scallorn and Perdiz were found with Ho!!y Fine Engraved,
Copena knives, and Alba points. At the Ament Shelter, Sca!!orn and
Perdiz points were found in deposits also yielding an unknown type of
Caddoan pottery, a Fulton aspect pipe, Copena knives, and obsidian
flakes.
Later work in Bell County produced additional correlations (Shafer
et al. 1964: 66). At the Penny Winkle Site, seven sherds seemed to be
associated with the Austin focus occupation. These were plainware
with clay-grit temper, and clay and bone temper. Six sherds from a
zone that yielded primarily (but not exclusively) Toyah focus material
are brushed, engraved, and plain. These include types Dunkin Incised
(Alto focus, Gibson to Fulton aspects) and Canton Incised (Sanders
focus, Gibson aspect}. One sherd from the Domino Site may be in
Austin focus context (Shafer et al. 1964: 66) although it is not
definitely assignable to either Austin or Toyah (ibid: p. 104). The
sherd appears to be Kiam Incised, an Alto focus (Gibson aspect) type
surviving with Dunkin Incised, a related type, into the Fulton aspect.
From his work in the Whitney Reservoir basin, Stephenson (1970:
246) believes that toward the end of Austin focus times there were
beginnings of intensified contact with east Texas, particularly the
introduction of Caddoan pottery. Pottery trade vessels are evidenced
in Austin focus zones at Pictograph Cave (/bid: p. 154).
Watt (1953) has indicated that in the central Brazos valley, near
Waco, there is abundant evidence of Caddoan contact in Central
Texas aspect sites. Pottery includes sherds and vessels from the Alto
and Sanders loci of the Gibson aspect, Frankston and Titus loci of the
Fulton aspect, shell-tempered plainware sherds possibly from the
Gulf Coast, and sherds of what may be Doss Red Ware, a presumably
indigenous pottery of the Toyah focus (see Kelley 1947: 123; Suhm et
al. 1954: 388). Following information supplied by Watt, Newell and
Krieger (1949: 195-196} believe that Alto focus people actually lived at
the Chupek site near Waco. This being the case, Alto focus influence
into adjacent areas, especially southward down the Balcones
escarpment, seems a reasonable possibility.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

151

Roberson (1971) also has studied sherds from the Waco area of
east-central Texas in the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
collections in Austin. His results compare favorably with those of
Watt (1953), although again, he does not discuss the association or cooccurrence of the pottery with other artifact types. His materials,
undoubtedly, were very limited and did not allow for strongly
supported conclusions of that sort. He sees the area being settled
during early Gibson aspect times, and the descendants persisting, at
least in small numbers, until the Historic period. From the beginning,
the people had a knowledge of pottery-making and continued the
tradition until the Historic period. This was a transitional area
between basically sedentary horticultural groups in eastern and
northeastern Texas and hunting peoples to the west in central Texas.
Contact with people to the south and southeast along the Gulf Coast
probably was slight until late proto-historic or historic times when
pressures from central Texas groups precipitated some migration
southeastward toward the coast (see Campbell 1960: 148).
Roberson also believes that the pottery from central Texas is not
just imported tradeware. He feels that it is very unlikely that all of the
types in the area were imported into a culture (or cultures) without
knowledge of pottery making. More likely, local residents also made
their own pottery and copied designs and techniques. The early
domestic pottery is very similar to Alto focus forms, but they are also
slightly different and are probably copies. Frankston focus vessels
also were undoubtedly imported and then copied locally. This, of
course, includes, among other forms, wide-mouth brushed jars.
Farther south, Sorrow (1970: 15)reports pottery from the Barker
Site on the North San Gabriel River in Williamson County. His Vessel
1 is very similar to some Alto focus jar forms. It is a reddish-brown
incised jar (29 sherds) of sandy paste, tempered with angular
quartzite sand and burned bone. Other pottery includes one brushed
vessel (2 sherds) and three plainware vessels (24 sherds), all bone
tempered. Arrowpoints (mostly surface collections) include 11 Perdiz
points, 3 C1iffton, 6 Young, 7 unclassified fragments, and one medial
section with part of the expanding stem (resembles Scallorn eddy of
Jelks 1962). Other artifacts include four dart points (1 Ensor, 2
Fairland, one miscellaneous form), 41 end scrapers, 17 side scrapers,
and one circular scraper. The assemblage argues closest for
affiliation with the Toyah focus. Alto focus influence may be the
expanding-stem arrowpoint form of a style similar to the Alto focus
Alba type and the incised jar. Later Frankston focus related elements
could be the single brushed vessel and the Perdiz arrowpoints. The

15 2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

expanding-stem point could be representative of terminal Austin
focus times, but its direct association with the pottery is uncertain.
In south Texas, as mentioned previously, Hester has found
evidence of plainware pottery directly associated with Scallorn,
Perdiz, and triangular arrowpoint forms in what he considers singleoccupation activity areas. This relationship has been reported from
the Tortuga Flat site (Hill and Hester 1973} and at Chaparrosa Ranch
(Hester 1974). The co-occurrence of Scallorn, Perdiz, and pottery has
been recorded for several additional sites (Hester and Hill 1971).
Corbin (1974: 45) points out that in sites on the Central Coast,
pottery has been found in good association with Scallorn, and
sometimes to the exclusion of Perdiz (Story 1968; Martin n.d.). He also
believes (Corbin 1974: 47) that pottery was introduced to the Texas
coastal areas during the period in which Scallorn and early Fresnolike arrowpoint forms were in use. Scallorn then continued in use in
the area well after the acceptance of Perdiz as the predominant form,
and the pottery went through a number of local changes.
In summary, the evidence is mostly suggestive. In central Texas
rockshelters where pottery is found in levels or zones containing
Scallorn points, the association might be accidental, that is, not direct
or intentional. Although ample evidence exists for pottery within
Central Texas aspect sites in the general Waco-Belton areas, there is
no unquestionable association of pottery with Scallorn points.
Evidence for an influx of Alto focus materials in undoubtedly present,
and on the basis of radiocarbon dates, we may propose that the influx
began during Austin focus times. The two loci are at least in part
contemporaneous. Frankston focus materials continued to come into
the area during Toyah focus times. In fact, it is possible (though
unlikely) that Toyah focus groups received all the contact with east
Texas, and that the Austin focus, although possibly present, did not
receive either contact or imported objects. The reported cooccurrence of Scallorn, Perdiz, and pottery in activity areas in south
Texas, and the association of Scallorn with pottery on the Central
Coast are perhaps the best evidence for Scallorn-pottery association.
The full acceptance and understanding of these data relative to the
core central Texas area, however, must await further study, suntheses, comparisons, and inter-regional summaries.
Foci and Types in Central Texas
The means of identification of the Austin and Toyah foci and
Sca!!orn and Perdiz arrowpoints is based on the interrelationship of
loci and types. It is a problem of seeming inconsistency between a
theoretical approach and an interpretation of observed findings.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

153

Traditionally, in central Texas, and indeed in most other parts of
the state, expanding-stem arrowpoints are called "Scallorn," and
contracting-stem points, "Perdiz". Thanks to an overwhelming
acceptance of projectile point type names, "Scallorn" points are
found and reported northward into Canada and southward well into
Mexico. "Perdiz" share a similar fate and occupy at least most of
Texas. Apparently type names are not always used in a purely
descriptive manner, which adds fuel to the fire for opponents of the
use of this typology. Although the types were originally defined on the
basis of cultural distinctiveness--e.g., being geographically and
temporally limited or restricted--their use in distant areas could be
condoned if specimens were described as being "Scallorn-like forms"
or "Scallorn forms" and not of the "Scallorn type". Such an approach
is intended in this report, since focal designations are uncertain.
Within Texas, the use or misuse of type names seems a little more
justifiable. It is assumed that expanding-stem points found in central
Texas belong to the Scallorn type because they are found in central
Texas; i.e., they conform generally to the type description and
suggested distribution. Perdiz share a similar fate, but their range is
extended at least to all the borders of the state. Likewise, Scallorn
points in central Texas designate the Austin focus, and Perdiz, the
Toyah focus.
One problem is, first, what are the boundaries of the Austin focus?
Certainly the answer cannot be "everywhere that expanding-stem
arrowpoints are found" (i.e., Scallorn), even if the presence of the
points in similar assemblages designates a similar time period and
similar level of organization and economy. Many workers have
reported Scallorn points all over south Texas and the Gulf coast [e.g.
Hester 1969; Hill and Hester 1971; Corbin 1974). Presumably these
are not representatives of the Austin focus, and the Perdiz points
reported from the same areas not Toyah focus remnants. Such is
possible but seemingly unlikely. The areas and environments are just
too distant from those originally defined for the Central Texas aspect.
Perdiz points are diagnostic of several loci in Texas, including the
Livermore focus (and Bravo Valley aspect) of west Texas, the
Frankston focus of east Texas, and the Galveston Bay and Rockport
foci of the Gulf coast. Cultural affiliation, then, is somewhat
equatable with geographic area, and is at present very difficult. The
problem is compounded with the problem of trade and other types of
contact between areas or cultures with similar lithic assemblages. In
other words, Perdiz points on a central Texas site with beveled knives
of Alibates dolomite from the Amarillo area, Frankston focus pottery,
a few coastal sherds, a couple of pieces of obsidian, and perhaps an

154

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

expanding-stem arrowpoint, do not necessarily indicate a Toyah
focus occupation simply because the site is in central Texas. Perhaps
the best focus (or phase) designation for such a site at present would
be a simple "unknown".
A directly related facet to the problem is the decision of what
constitutes "central Texas" in a cultural sense. Certainly everyone
would agree that the occupational debris in which Scallorn points are
found near Dallas might very well be attributable to peoples (in the
cultural sense) distinct from those leaving Scallorn points south of
San Antonio, east of Smithville and LaGrange, or west of Kerrville or
Uvalde. The entire area is considered central Texas, but approaching
the total area and all the included sites as a single cultural unit
should be cautioned. Such a single-unit assumption is essentially the
basis for the investigations at the Wheatley site in the first place, the
evidence of Scallorn-Perdiz-pottery contemporaneity and use within a
single camp.
Thus, a problem seems to be what defines a type, and can types be
used to distinguish cultural units? Brew’s (1946: 44-66) conception of
a type being an artificial construct of the analyst is of little use if that
construct is defined in insufficient detail and distinctiveness to
distinguish it from other similar forms in other cultures. Krieger
(1944; Newell and Krieger 1949: 71-74; Suhm et al. 1954: 3-5) argues
for subtypes or varieties being newly defined or "discovered" as the
need arises and as new data become available to distinguish these
new constructs in time and space, and therefore have cultural
distinctiveness. At present, these two arrowpoint forms might be
thought of as essentially on the series level--equivalent to a ware in
pottery studies--a group of morphologically similar types which
occupy a particular time span (Nunley, Duffield, and Jelks 1965;
Parsons 1965; Ross 1965). In other words, there exists a Scallorn
series, a grouping of arrowpoint types of a somewhat limited
temporal range, probably about A.D. 900-1200, occupying some sort
of restricted, definable geographic area, and distinguishable
primarily on the basis of their stem shape (i.e., expanding). This is the
general approach to a series, a "super-type" which is useful to show
broad, general patterns, but not restricted enough to adequately
contribute to detailed comparative studies.
Alternately, the need could be stated as the ultimate definition of
formal varieties, such as the kinds attempted by Jelks (1962), which
should be studied the same as types. No matter on which level of
taxonomy these sub-Scallorn and sub-Perdiz forms are placed, the
obvious need for such a study exists. The artifact groups thus formed

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

155

will be usable in defining cultural units--the Austin and Toyah foci,
and any others in which these forms occur.
Cultural units, on the other hand, whether referred to as
complexes, loci, or phases, must be defined not just on the basis of a
single projectile point style or a couple of pottery types, but on the
basis of the total assemblage configuration (Suhm et al. 1954: 3, 10).
This assemblage may consist of several types of weapons, utensils,
skinning and sewing implements, a particular burial practice, special
pipe forms, ornaments, houses, village locations, and the like. Any
one of the components of the assemblage, any single type or a group of
diagnostic forms, will continue through geographic space in any
number of directions and for variable distances. In other words,
several different tribes living over a large area may have shared in
the manufacture of a particular type of artifact. The type could be
borrowed by one cultural group after another, having spread by
trade or any other kind of transmission. A valid identifiable complex,
then, is a particular configuration of recognizable and describable
traits, each of which may be distributed throughout an area
containing several culturally different groups. The cultural unit thus
defined is limited in time, and is distinct in some ways from the total
assemblage of traits of any other tribe or cultural group.
This concept of a cultural unit being defined in terms of a core area
of overlapping component distributions is excellently portrayed by
Clarke’s (1968: 246, 300) polythetic model of cultura! dispersion. It
is only when as assemblage of traits exists in its entirety, however,
or "enough" of its entirety as judged by the archeologist to be
representative, that the particular focus or phase can be thought of
as existing in its pure form, or at least as originally conceived. In
addition to Clarke (1968), Rowlett and Pollnac (1970) have also shown
the applicability of culture unit definition (more or less equivalent to
the "phase") based on core areas of attributes, the geographic
boundaries and degrees of directional influences arrived at by
computer-assisted studies. A similar study (Groube and Chappell
1973) was done using a great number of attributes of artifacts of a
single class, and plotting these attributes over a very wide area to
discern where attribute clustering would occur. The separated areas
of maximum overlap indicated culture areas.
It stands to reason that modes governing the production of material
aspects of a culture will not be so strong and so formal as to totally
repel all stylistic change through space as that culture comes in
direct contact with adjacent cultures. This, of course, is the basis for
the geographic "variants" of cultural phases on the Great Plains

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Krause 1969). These modes, however, would determine the
correctness or desirability for the cultural attributes, the tools of the
culture, to assure duplicability. And this duplicability of material
patterning is what becomes the bread and butter of archeological
interpretation and reconstruction through comparative studies. But
likewise, adequately detailed phase distinctions cannot be made if the
archeologist fails to distinguish between significantly different forms
or styles. Grouping distinct styles obscures these differences, and the
interpretations can do no more than suffer.
At present, the Central Texas aspect has been divided into two loci,
the Austin and the Toyah. Other complexes (Nueces, Tradinghouse,
and maybe others) have been suggested but have not been adequately
described and are not generally used (Suhm et al. 1954: 113). The
most complete published descriptions of the Austin and Toyah foci
are those of Jelks [1962}, based mainly on his 1959-60 excavations at
the Kyle rockshelter north of Waco. Geographical differences within
the two foci remain unknown, as is the adequacy of the descriptions
themselves. The areas from Austin southward, westward, and
eastward remain practically unknown. The Smith (Suhm 1957) and
Collins (Suhm 1955} sites are the main exceptions.
In practice, archeologists continue to identify any archeological
assemblage containing Scallorn points in central Texas as the Austin
focus [or phase), and one with Perdiz points as the Toyah focus [or
phase). Various problems inherent in such a practice--geographic
differences, cultural differences, unknown age, incompletely defined
assemblages, unrecognized distinctive artifact forms or styles, and
the need to consider total assemblages--have been discussed.
Probably enough information exists at this point that a large-scale
study of the Neo-American stage in most of Texas would be possible
and very rewarding. Until then, caution must be used in assigning
materials to presently existing cultural units, i.e., loci or phases. In
practice, due more to necessity than preference, the Wheatley report
continues to refer to Scallorn and Perdiz forms as types designating
the Austin and Toyah foci. The errors involved in such use of these
names is understood.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Previous to investigations at the Wheatley site, data were
accumulating stressing the temporal dichotomy between Scallorn and
Perdiz arrowpoints. At reported stratified sites in central Texas,
such as Smith and Kyle, Scallorn points were generally below both
Perdiz and pottery. To some workers, this suggested that ceramics

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

15 7

were introduced sometime within the Toyah focus after Scallorn
points had been discontinued. Since Scallorn and Perdiz arrowpoints
are the primary indicators of the Austin and Toyah foci, temporal
separation of the points meant that the foci did not exist at the same
time, at least not in central Texas. This can be compared to work in
south Texas by Hill and Hester (1973) and by Hester (1974) in which
Perdiz, Scallorn, and triangular arrowpoint forms are found together
and interpreted as culturally associated. Similar situations exist on
the coast (Corbin 1974).
Data from the Wheatley site indicate an overlap period for
Scallorn, Perdiz, and pottery in the Pedernales River area of central
Texas. The Wheatley artifacts appear to be culturally associated
with one another and form a single assemblage. Evidence for
contemporaneity issues from (1) the nearly flat, featureless nature of
the site with artifacts limited to the surface and grouped in discrete
clusters not attributable to erosion, (2) the similarity of physical
attributes of different types of arrowpoints, (3) the use of a distinctive
blue flint on different arrowpoint forms, (4) actual relationship
figures or expectancy probabilities, and (5) the rejection of chance
occurrence explanations from theoretical distributional probability
tests.
The overall appearance of the site is that of a medium-sized,
dispersed camp with at least three habitation areas (with or without
structures) surrounded by chipping stations and other activity areas.
Small fires were in the living places, while larger limestone hearths
were separate. Apparently there was considerable material
interaction between different activity areas, and artifacts
presumably were taken from one area to another (as in, presumably,
the case of broken pottery). It is assumed that the group was small,
probably three or four families or a fairly small group of men, and
that they occupied the site for a fairly short period of time, perhaps a
week or so. The site probably served as a temporary base camp from
which the occupants hunted and gathered foodstuffs. Hunting
activities are suggested by the many flint arrowpoints, which could
have been used either for mammals (deer, rabbits, raccoons, etc.) or
fish. The single bone fragment in Area A presumably represents the
remains of a butchered deer. No other bones were found, but their
absence is most likely due to preservation factors. In addition to the
bow-and-arrow oriented hunting techniques, small nocturnal animals
(ringtail, raccoon, fox, etc.) could have been taken with snares. Fish
were available in the river either in pool traps or by spear in the
deeper pools, as well as grappling catfish by hand under the dirt
banks. It is not certain whether beaver were present along the river

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in the past as they are today. Mussels were collected from the river,
as evidenced by the numerous shell fragments in the activity areas.
Mussels are still abundant directly below the site. Water for
drinking, cooking, and processing is readily available a short distance
to either side of the site without descending the canyons. Firewood is
abundant overall. Flint is available throughout the area, though not in
the immediate vicinity of the site. The source of blue flint is
undoubtedly local, but its exact source is unknown.
Most
artifacts
are
good
examples
of
a
Toyah
focus
assemblage--Perdiz arrowpoints, pottery, flake drills, beveled
knives, small scrapers (small "turtle-back" end scrapers are absent),
utilized flakes, etc. Most knives, scrapers, utilized flakes and other
tools appear to have been made or used for a variety of purposes,
rather than conforming to a recognizable typology as they
occasionally do in other sites. Expanding-stem arrowpoints are the
major exception to the Toyah focus traits, and these are believed to
be remnant forms from Austin focus groups. The obvious possibility
exists that these points are not tools from groups culturally the same
as those responsible for Austin focus materials at other excavated
sites in central Texas. The age of the site, therefore, is considered to
be within the overlap period of the Austin and Toyah foci, sometime
after the introduction of pottery. Previously published radiocarbon
dates indicate this overlap may be about A.D. 1150-1300.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The W. L. Richmond family deserves special recognition for their
continuous help in field work, artifact processing, analysis, and illustration
preparation. Funds and general advice were provided by Curtis Tunnell,
State Archeologist (Texas Historical Commission). Laboratory space was
provided by D. A. Story (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory), David
S. Dibble (Texas Archeological Salvage Project, now Texas Archeological
Survey), and the Department of Anthropology of the University of
Missouri-Columbia. Additional technical suggestions and moral assistance
were provided by H. J. Sharer (Texas A&M University), W.M. Sorrow
(Texas Historical Commission), Earl Green and J. D. Ing (Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department), B.J. Harrison (Panhandle Plains Historical
Museum, West Texas State University), R. A. Benfer, A. N. Benfer, Pat
Treat, and W. R. Wood (University of Missouri-Columbia), T. R. Hester
(University of Texas at San Antonio), Miguel Tarrab, F. A. Moseley, and
D. E. Lasher (Department of Mathematics, West Texas State University),
Barbara Wolf, and the very tolerant park personnel of Pedernales Falls
State Park.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

159

APPENDIX A. Artifact measurement and attribute tables
Abbreviations
L

Length. Measured in a proximal-distal direction when possible, otherwise the maximum dimension. Scrapers are measured along the flake axis when possible.

W

Width. Perpendicular to length.

T

Thickness. Maximum thickness, measured to two significant
digits.

SL

Stem length.

SW

Stem width.

BW

Basal width.

REL

Retouched edge length. Measured in a straight line.

SPW

Striking platform width.

MAT

Material. Mainly color.

FIG

Figure reference in the text.
Unknown.
Approximated measure.
Total measurement is unknown, but
measurement is given as a minimum figure..

fragmentary

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ARROWPOINTS,
AR~A
L
A
30*
A
32*
E
29
A
26
A
27*
A
35*
h
32*
A
27*
A
22*
C
20
El
26*
E
22*
J
36*
El
37*
A
31
F
45*
El
47
A
A
A
38*
E
J
38*
J
K
29*
ARROWPOINTS,
ARZA
L
E
20
E
16
A
15
E
18"
E
E
G
L
25
A
28*
A
27*
L

26*

E
34
A
37
ARROWPOINTS,
AR~A
L
A
41
A
23
A
27*
A
32*
A
27*
ARRoWPOINTS,
ARLA
L
A
27*
ARROWPOINTS,
AREA
L
A
32
J
23
A
30*
A
24
32+
C
A
28*
A
26
39*
A
A
18+
ARRUWPOINTS,
L
AREA
44

A
B

30
24+

CONTRACTING STEM
W
T
SL
2.1
26
9
17
2.1
7
15"
1.9
9
17
2.3
2.5
14
2.1
9*
16’
2.5
9
18"
3.1
10"
23
3.6
9*
12"
2.4
6
10
2.0
6
15
2.3
7
15
2.0
6
19"
3.9
14
23*
3.4
12
28
2.3
8
22
4.1
7
17
3.0
20
2.6
6
1.7+ 8
9+
2.6
9+
1.6
9+
16
3.3
11’
2.9
9
14
2.7
9*
EXPANDING STEH
W
T
SL
15
2.7
5
10+
3.0
5
4
10
1.7
1.7
9
5
2.8+ 8
2.8
6
3.4
7
16
3.7
5
16
2.0
5
13
2.2
8
16’

2.9

4’

18
6
5.5
15
2.3
6
PARALLEL STEM
W
T
SL
14’
2.4
6
15
3.4
3
16
2.4
6
16
2.2
7
13’
2.1
6

SW
6
6
5
4
6
6
6
7
5
5
5
6
6
8
7
9
8
5
5
5
6
6
5
5

MAT
G R-PJd D
GRAY
BLUE
TA~
PK-YEL
GRAY
BROWN
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GR-RED
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
TAN
BLUE
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

FIG
15A
15B
15C
15D
15E
15F
15G
15H
15I
15J
15K
15L
15M
15N
150
15P
I 5Q

FIG
16A
16B
16C
16D
16E
16F
16G
16H
16I
16J
16K
16L
16M
FIG
16N
160
16P
16Q
16R

SW
5
6
7
5
8
6
4
8
6
6

BW
16
10
8
8
16
13
9
12
9
9

6

-

11
5

12
9

MAT
BLUE
BLUE
GRAY
GRAY
BLOWN
BLUE
BLUE
GRAY
BLUE
BLUE
BLUE
GRAY
GRAY

SW
4
8
6
9
7

BW
5
8
6
9
7

MAT
BLUE
BLUE
GRAY
BLUE
GRAY

UNNOTCHED, PROBABLY FINISHED
MAT
W
T
BRN-PNK
12
1.8
UNNOTCIIED, PROBABLY UNFINISHED
MAT
W
T
17
PINK
2.0
14
BLUE
2. I
15
GRAY
2.3
14
BLUE
2.7
TAN
20*
2.7
GRAY
19
2.8
BLUE
21"
2.6
GRAY
4.9
25*
TAN
3.0
13+
LARGE
W
20
25
19+
18

ii
MA,40

27*

ARiIA

DIAMETER
93X118

UNNOTCHED
T
3.1
5.5
3.6

MAT
GRAY
BROWN
TAN
BLUE

3.7

THICKNESS
AT EDGE
38X61

THICKNESS
AT CENTER
62

REMARKS

STEM BROKEN
BW=3, STRAIGHT BASE
STEM MISSING
MARGINAL RETOUCH ONLY

CLIFFTON
STEM g BATTERED BLADE
STEM
STEM g DISTAL TIP
STEM
STEM
STEM MISSING

FIG
16S
FIG
17A
17B
17C
17D
17B
17F

FIG
17G
17H
17I
17J

REMARKS

STEM
STEM
STEM

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY
ARROWPOINTS, BARBED MEDIAL FRAGMENTS
AR~ L
W
T
SW
MAT
A
31
18"
GRAY-PINK
2.5
7
A
17"
30
2.6
GRAY-PINK
5
A
17"
14’
ORA~JGE
2.0
6
A
20*
15"
2.3
5
GRAY
A
13
2.2
GRAY
A
14"
2.4
GRAY
A
2.0+
PINK
A
21
14’
2.0
GRAY
6
E
14
20*
GRAY
2,2
25*
18"
2.8
TRANSLUSCENT
6"
E
24*
18"
2.5
GRAY
ARRONPOINTS, ~IEDIAL BLADE FRAGbi~NTS
(L, W, AND T OF FRAGMENT ONLY)
AREA L
W
T
MAT
E
26+
12
3.6
GRAY
A
11 +
6
1.8
BROWN
13+
I. 9
GRAY
L
GRAY
2.7
il
21+
18"
GRAY
2.5
ARROWPOINTS, MEDIAL FRAGMENTS, POSSIBLY UNFINISHED
AREA L
W
T
MAT
A
25+
12+
GRAY
2.2
A
10+
12+
1.6
GRAY
A
I. 9
GRAY
B
11+
2.9
11+
GRAY
ARRuWPOINTS, DISTAL BLADE FRAGMENTS
AIh~A L
W
T
MAT
2g+
ti
10+
2.8
WIIITE
A
24+
13+
1.9
GRAY
F
29+
16+
3.3
GRAY
F
21+
18+
3.6
GRAY
A
17+
11+
1.8
BLUE
A
22+
11+
1.8
TAH-PINK
A
24+
14+
2.6
GRAY
A
30+
14
2.1
BLUE
A
23+
16+
2.6
BLUE
A
19+
13+
2.0
BROWN
A
12+
1.3
6+
BLUE
A
18+
12+
2.0
GRAY
J
18+
14+
2.5
GRAY

FIG
17K

161

REMARKS
PERDIZ?
PERDIZ?
PERDIZ?

BARB
PERDIZ?

FIG
17L

FIG
17M
17N
170
17P

DART POINTS
AR~A L
W
T
SL
SW
BW
FIG
MAT
56*
30
5.2
8
19
GRAY
18A
29*
37
22
5.6
BROWN-GRAY
18B
9
15
17
64*
32
6.6
12
GRAY-PINK
18C
18
27
38*
20
6.6
13
17"
GRAY
18D
15
J
28
16
5.9
10
15
15
BLUE
18E
b
68
28
7.2
18F
14
12
16’
GRAY
SIFACE RETOUCH FLAKES FROM UTILIZED BIFACES
AR!/A L
W
T
SPW
MAT
A
23+
30+
6.2
22
GRAY
A
23+
28
5.3
12
GRAY
A
12
16
4.6
13
GRAY
A
29
18+
5.3
12+
GRAY
F
3.1
28+
25
11
GRAY
BIFACE RETOUCH FLAKES FROM NONUTILIZED OR UNKNOWN BIFACES
AREA L
W
SPW
MAT
T
A
19+
21
4.7
GRAY
17
BROWN
A
12
29
9.7
29
21
GRAY
A
15
3.6
21
Ig+
A
11
2.9
10
GRAY
A
13
16
6.1
GRAY
16
BROWN
A
12
12
2.2
6
14
A
2.2
11
GRAY
9
A
19
18
GRAY
3.5
15
A
24
23
GRAY
4.8
12
E
GRAY
9+
30
9+
30
E
26
6
7.5
26
GRAY
E
23+
34
11
34
BROWN

TYPE-FORM
ENSOR-FRIO
FAIRI~ND
MARCOS
GOWER
PEDERNALES

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

162
T}iI~4 BIFACE FRAGMENTS
ARSA L
W
T
5.2
A
4.6
A
A
3.8
3.4 +
A
I. 7+
A
4.8+
A
A
2.8
5.0
A
3.9
A
21+
6.2
A
6.4
A
25
7.2
A
A
6.5
4.8
A
20+
A
4. I
A
25+
6.I
5.7
A
23+
A
31+
8.0
A
32+
25
6.0
4.4
A
28+
9.5
E
24~
7.6
E
2.6
L
8.7
E
5.2
E
24+
8.7
28+
26
9.0
E
26+
9.0
6.4
3U+
EI
4.2
~/I
9.3
El
22+
7. I
EI
21
5.9
F
20+
5.7
F
32+
7.9
I
4.0
I
31+
13+
5.7
I
30+
9.8
51+
10
26
53+
50
6.0
END SCRAPERS
AR~A L
T
W
I
42
30
5.6
33
20
10
El
26
25
9.3
57
40~
10
15
A
65
38
70
45
11
54
55
9. 7
45
7.5
C
51
A
57
45~
8.3
63
51
13
B
51
7.0
50
C
34+
7.8+
40~
6.8+
E1
74
17
89
H
17
63
54
70.
55~
15
20
105
60
SID~ SCRAPERS
AREA L
T
W
23
A
165
65~
27
C
130. 65
7.1
El
93
55
7.5
35+
30
E
90~
60~
15
42
24
A
80
18
A
38
50
CIRCULAR SCRAPERS (?)
ARhA L
W
T
39
33
9.6
A
36
33
7.6

MAT
ORANGE
ORA~4GE
GRAY
TAN
BLUE
BROWN
BLACK
GRAY
GRAY
BLUE
GRAY
GRAY
WIIITE
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
PINK-GRAY
OR/hNGE
WIiITE
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
WIIITE
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
BLUE
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

BEVELED KNIVES
MAT
T
AREA L
W
GRAY
90~
26
5.1
A
GRAY
120~ 26
7.0
GRAY
7.6
23+
BROWN
125~ 30
6.6
H
GRAY
28+
7.2
E
PINK
6.7
li
25+
THIN BIFACES (IDENTIFIABLE)
MAT
AR~A L
W
T
A
F
B
A
E
E
El
A
E

71
61
110~
44
65~
39
50
-

26
31
54
24
27
43
33
21
29.

7.1
6.5
11
4.2
7.2
8.0
9.4
3.7
6.8

~I

15+

27~

5.3

MAT
GRAY
GRAY
BROWN
GRAY
BROWN
GRAY
BROW~
GRAY
BROWN
GRAY
TAN
WHITE
TAN
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

FIG
19A
19B
19C
19D
19E
19F
19G
19H

MAT
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
TAN
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

FIG
20A
20B
20C
20F
20D
20E

MAT
GRAY
BLUE

FIG
19I
19J

RESiARKS
REVERSED FLAKED

GRAY-PINK
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY-TAN
GRAY
BLUE
GRAY-PINK
GRAY-PINK
GRAY

FIG
18G
18H
18I
18J

FIG
18K
18L
18M
18N
180
18P
18Q

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY
DIAGONAL SCRAPER
~LA L
W
T
P~EL
B
42
45
11
25
SCI~PER EDGE FRAGMENTS
AREA
A
A
A
A
g
FLAKE DRILLS
...... SHAFT .......... BASE ......
AI~A L
W
T
L
W
T
E
11+
7
2.8
21
17
6.3
E
22
5
2.7
12
14
4.2
F
11+
6
3.0
17
25
6.8
A
28
7
3. 6
A
15+
5
3.0
E
13+
7
3.2
BURINS

AP.ZA

FIG
19K

MAT
BROWN
BROWN
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

MAT
BLUE
BLUE
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

FIG
21A
21B
21C

W

T

TECHNIQUE

MAT

FIG

57

20

12

BURIN
BURIN
UNCERTAIN
UNCERTAIN
UNCERTAIN

BLUE

22A

GRAY
BLUE
GRAY

22B

~I

70+

49

F
F
F
F
F
B
tl

8.3

31
10+
31+
43
65
32
20+
56
40+

GRAY

19
15
28
25
23
32
17+
31
34
30
43

2.8
2.5
12
8.1
11
4.0
3.4
11
6.7
8.2
12

GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

K

MAT
GRAY

L

BURIN FACET
WIDTH
3.8
5.7
I~
45
48
15
7.8
A
26
14
5.9
1.5
A
20
14
3.5
1.8
UTILIZLD FLAKES, MINIMAL USE
AR~A L
W
MAT
T
A
18+
11
3. I
BLUE
A
10+
10+
1.9
GRAY
A
19+
13+
GRAY
3. 8
A
29
23+
5.I
GRAY
A
16+
14
2.8
PINK
A
22+
26
4.3
TAN
A
28
18
2.8
PINK
A
17+
32
5.2
GRAY
A
35+
22
GRAY
5.2
A
32
20
4.7
BLUE
A
30
21
7.8
BLUE
A
28+
20
6. I
GRAY
A
19+
21
4.7
GRAY
A
22
20
4.0
GRAY
A
43
40
8.1
GRAY
A
30+
23
GRAY
5.3
A
24+
32+
1I
BROWN
A
45
24
8. I
TAN
A
32
21
TAN
3.0
A
30+
28
3.8
GRAY
A
60+
71
11
GRAY
A
44+
39+
3.9
GRAY
B
25+
15
4.7
TAN
B
25+
27
4.3
TAN-PINK
B
28+
23
7.5
GRAY
,{3
18+
23
2.7
GRAY
B
55
37
7.9
GRAY
B
65+
46
11
GRAY
C
19+
14
2.9
BLUE
E
11
10
4.0
GRAY
/:
35+
27+
6.8
GRAY-PINK

!t

163

45

46+

UTILIZED FLAKES, EXTENSIVE USE
AR~A L
W
T
MAT
A
PINK
31+
20
3.9
GRAY
A
20+
32
2.9
A
26+
25+
2.7
GRAY
BROWN
A
38
8.2
33
lq
BROWN
A
13+
5.0
GRAY
A
46
15
60
GRAY
A
55
41
12
B
32
8.0
GRAY
50+
F
GRAY
37+
25+
5.0
GRAY
H
50
47
8.7
GRAY
I
32
19
3.5
I
46
9.3
GRAY
66
I
14
GRAY
60
37

113

67

27

GRAY

(SERIES FL., AGATIZED PETRIFIED WOOD)

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

164

MINIMALLY EDGE-RETOUCHED FLAKES
T
MAT
ARuA L
W
5.5
GRAY
A
20+
2.6
GRAY
A
21+
0 . 9 + BLUE
A
TAN
2.2
16+
A
23+
GRAY
2.8
A
GRAY
2.6
A
BROWN
2.8
A
2.3+ GRAY
A
BROWN
3. 8
A
PINK
15+
7.3
21+
A
GRAY
2.2
A
GRAY
2.8
A
GRAY
5.4
7+
A
5+
TAN
I. 3
A
ORANGE
2.5
A
TRANSLUSCENT
AGATE
GRAY
I. 8
A
GRAY
7.8
24+
A
GRAY
2.1
15+
9+
A
BLUE
I. 2
A
TAN
6.8
A
GRAY
6.2
31
A
45+
BLUE
15+
3.6
B
19+
TAN
8.0
38
25
C
GRAY
14
4.6
E
20+
BROWN
13+
2.3
27+
E
GRAY
28+
9.7
28+
E
GRAY
42
18
100
PINK-GRAY
16
2.2
13+
EI
GRAY
11+
3.3
24+
i!
BROWN
3.1
h
GRAY
7. I
30+
35
I
EVENLY EDGE-RETOUCHED FLAKES
MATERIAL
W
T
AREA L
GRAY
5.3
A
GRAY
2.3
A
GRAY
19
4.8
A
22+
GRAY
22+
3.6
A
15+
GRAY
7.0
25
A
38+
TAH
4.2
17+
A
24+
GRAY
27+
3.6
A
GRAY
21
3. I
A
23+
8.4
GRAY
34
46
A
GRAY
40
11
A
75
GRAY
8.8
37
A
55+
GRAY
12
35+
S
35+
GRAY
15
40
D
69
GRAY
35
9.6
D
62
BLUE
3.0
E
TAI~
I. 6
E
TAN
7. I
37
22
L
GRAY
4.0
E
26
20
GRAY
7.0
EI
GRAY
11
40+
33
El
GRAY
6.0
15
F
22+
GRAY
3.5
23
F
29+
GRAY
36
9.2
F
58
GRAY
6.4
46+
li
30+
GRAY
5.7
28
tt
36+
GRAY
30
3.9
B
32+
it

27+

24

5.4

J
K
K
K
-

15+
33+
38+
38+
42+

23+
34
35
35
30+

4.3
6.4
5.I
5. I
6.0

EDGE RETOUCH
SIDE
SIDE
S IDE

-, CONCAVE (10 MM WIDE, 3 MM DEEP)
SIDE

2 SIDE
SIDE (BIFACIAL)
SIDE
2 SIDE
SIDE
2 SIDE (CONCAVITY 11 MM WIDE, 2 MM DEEP)
SIDE
SIDE (REVERSE)
2 SIDE
SIDE
SIDE
SIDE (BIFACIAL)
SIDE
SIDE-END
EDGE RETOUCH, REMARKS
SIDE
SIDE
SIDE
2 SIDE
SIDE, REVERSE
SIDE, PJ:VERSE
SIDE, SEQUENT FLAKE
SIDE, REVERSE
SIDE
SIDE
2 SIDE
SIDE?
S I DE
SIDE

SIDE
SIDE
2 SIDE
SIDE
2 SIDE, ALTEI~NATE
SIDE
2 SIDE
SIDE
S IDE-END
2 SIDE, END
2 SIDE, ALTERNATE
2 SIDE, ALTEP!~ATE
GRAY
SIDE, REVERSE
GRAY-P INK
SIDE, REVERSE; BULB REMOVED
GRAY
SIDE, END; REVERSE FLAKING
GRAY
SIDE, END
GRAY
SIDE; BULB REMOVED
TRANSLUSCENT
WHITE TO ORA~GE
AGATE

FIG

22F

22H

22G
22C

22D
22E

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY
CHOPPERS
AREA L
W
T
MAT
FIG
E
113
92
35
GRAY
23A
120
90
41
GRAY
23B
El
134
115
37
GRAY
23C
70
71
30
GRAY
23D
A
56
64
38
BROWN
23E
97
110
33
GRAY
UNFINISHED TOOLS, INITIAL STAGE (ON CORES)
AP,~A L
W
T
MAT
A
43
20
17
GRAY
A
65"
28
20
GRAY
L
27
18
12
BLUE
55
39
21
GRAY
4O
24
10
GRAY
,: 1
33+
40+
16
TAN
65
52
26
GRAY
58
50
27
GRAY
UNFINISdED TOOLS, INITIAL STAGE (ON FLAKES)
AREA L
W
T
MAT
A
50
39
18
TAN
A
44
22
I0
BLUE
E
51
5O
17
GRAY
L1
80
61
18
GRAY
54
50
12
GRAY
UNFINISHED TOOLS, SECONDARY STAGE (PREFORMS)
AR~A L
W
T
!,tAT
FIG
71
55
13
TAN
24A
65
53
14
GRAY
24B
C
37
25
9.9
TAN
24C
53
20
10
GRAY
24D
E
8O
65
26
GRAY
24E
66
48
27
GRAY
24F
48
27
7.0
GRAY
24G
A
39
27
8.8
GRAY
COPES
AR~A L
W
T
FIAT
FIG
A
39
28
15
BLUE
25A
L
32
34
18
BLUE
25B
A
42
29
14
BLUE
25C
A
5O
34
20
BLUE
A
40
37
22
BLUE
A
32
22
20
BLUE
A
32
25
21
BLUE
A
43
28
29
BLUE
E
44
26
24
BLUE
E
43
20
22
BLUE
66
30
25
BLUE
E
5O
26+
25
BLUE
E
28
19
18
BLUE
A
55
38
34
GRAY
A
48
43
31
GRAY
A
40
37
23
GRAY
A
38+
65
40
GRAY
A
70
70
35
GRAY
A
38
44
28
GRAY
A
3O
30
21
GRAY
B
39
37
21
GRAY
C
105
73+
35
GRAY
E
46
27
25
GRAY
E
44
39+
18
GRAY
El
53
42
23
GRAY
El
33
50
22
GRAY
H
77
43
36
GRAY
25D
H
70
34
31
GRAY
H
48
42
20
GRAY
I
8O
72
33
GRAY
25E
64
50
38
GRAY
53
55
44
GRAY
25F

SINGLE- OR DOUBLE-FLAKE
AREA L
W
T
A
55
47
26
E
56
37
33
E
75
32
30
qO
E
80
25
HAMMERS TONES
AREA L
W
T
A
53+
33
25
E
50+
45+
25+
E
36
48
32
E
44
57
36
SANDSTONE SLABS
AREA L
W
T
B
86+
55+
20
G
105
57+
20
UNALTERED CHERT COBBLE
AREA L
W
T
A
113
90
59

165

CORES
MAT
GRAY
TAH
GRAY
GRAY
MAT
QUARTZ
QUARTZ
QUARTZ
CHERT

MAT
GRAY

166

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES

CITED

Brew, J. O.
1946 Archaeology of Alkali Ridge, Southeastern Utah. Papers of the
Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, No. 21.
Harvard University.
Campbell, T. N.
1960 Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 145-175.
Clarke, D. L.
1968 Analytical Archaeology. Methuen and Co. Ltd. London.
Corbin, J. E.
1974 A Model for Cultural Succession for the Coastal Bend Area of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 45, pp. 29-54.
Dillehay, T. D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 19, No. 65, pp. 180-196.
Eddy, F. W.
1974Resource Management and Locational Strategies of Certain
Prehistoric Sites in Central Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 19, No.
64, pp. 99-106.
ms Salvage Archeology in the Laneport Reservoir District, Central
Texas. Unpublished manuscript on file at the Texas Memorial
Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.
Greet, J. W.
1965 A Typology of Burin Facets on Projectile Points. E1 Palacio, Vol. 72,
No. 2, pp. 34-37.
Groube, L. M. and J. Chappell
1973 Measuring the Difference between Archaeological Assemblages. In:
The Explanation of Culture Change, by C. Renfrew (ed.), pp. 167-184.
University of Pittsburgh Press.
Hester, T. R.
1969 Archeological Investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy Counties, Texas
in August, 1967. State Building Commission Archeological Program,
Report, No. 15.
1971 Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42: pp. 51-148.
1974 Some Observations on Archaeology at Chaparrosa Ranch, 1974. La
Tierra, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 19-22.
Hill, T. C., Jr., and T. R. Hester
1971 Isolated Archaic and Late Prehistoric Components at the Honeymoon
Site (41ZV34), Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 16, No. 51,
pp. 52-59.
1973 A Preliminary Report on the Tortuga Flat Site: A Protohistoric
Campsite in Southern Texas. Texas Archeology, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 1014.
Ing, J. D. and G. Kegley
1971 An Archeological Survey of Pedernales Falls State Park, Blanco
County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Interpretative
Planning Section. Austin.

NEe-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

167

Jelks, E. B.
1953 Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 24, pp. 189-207.
1962 The Kyle Site, A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin, Archaeology Series, No. 5.
Kelley, J. C.
1947 The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde,
and Round Rock Feel. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128.
1955Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas. American
Anthropologist, Vol. 57, No. 5, pp. 981-995.
Krause, R. A.
1969 Correlation of Phases in Central Plains Prehistory. In: Two House
Sites in the Central Plains: An Experiment in Archaeology, by W. R.
Wood (ed.). Plains Anthropologist, Memoir, No. 6, pp. 89-96.
Krieger, A. D.
1944 The Typological Concept. American Antiquity, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 271188.
1946Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The
University of Texas Publication 4640.
Lehmer, D.J.
1971 Introduction to Middle Missouri Archeology. Anthropological Papers,
No. 1. National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior.
Lundelius, E. L., Jr.
1967 Late-Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal History of Central Texas. In:
Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a Cause, by P. S. Martin and
H.E. Wright, Jr. (eds.}. Proceedings of the VII Congress of the
International Association for Quaternary Research, No. 6, pp. 287319. Yale University Press.
Martin, G. C.
n.d. Preliminary Archeological Survey of a Portion of the Texas Coast
Made by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1928-1929.
Privately printed.
Miller, E. O. and E. B. Jelks
1952 Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontologica!
Society, Vol. 23, pp. 168-217.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1960 Indian Tribes of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 29, pp. 1-34.
Newell, H. P. and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the
Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Nunley, J. P., L. F. Duffield, and E. B. Jelks
1965 Excavations at Amistad Reservoir, 1962 Season. Miscellaneous
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 3.
Parsons, M. L.
1965 1963 Test Excavations at Fate Bell Shelter, Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Miscellaneous Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 4.

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Parzen, E.
1960 Modern Probability Theory and Its Applications. John Wiley and
Sons, Inc. New York. (gth printing, 1967).
Pearson, F. J., Jr., E. M. Davis, and M. A. Tamers
1966 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates IV. Radiocarbon, Vol. 8, pp.
453-466.
Pearson, F. l., E. M. Davis, M. A. Tamers, and R. W. Johnstone
1965 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates III. Radiocarbon, Voh 7. pp.
296-314.
Pollard, J. C., J. W. Greer, and H. F. Sturgis
1963 Archeological Excavations at the Boy Scout Rockshelter (41TV69),
Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Voh 34, pp. 31-56.
Roberson, W. R.
1971 Surface Collected Sherds from East Central Texas (A Description
and Study of Sherds from the Counties of Navarre, Limestone, Leon,
Freestone, Madison, and Robertson). Typescript on file at the Texas
Archeotogical Research Laboratory, Austin.
Ross, R. E.
1965 The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, No. 7.
Rowlett, R. M. and R. B. Pollnac
1970 Multivariate Analysis of La Tene Cultural Groups. In: Mathematics in
the Archaeologica! and Historical Sciences, by F. R. Hodson, D. G.
Kendall, and A.P. Tautu (eds.), pp. 46-58. Edinburgh University
Press.
Shafer, H. J.
1963 Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in
Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
34, pp. 57-81.
1971 Late Prehistory of Central Texas: 500 B.C.-1700 A.D. Paper presented
at the 74th Annual Meeting of the Texas Academy of Science.
Nacogdoches. Typescript courtesy of the author.
Shafer, H. J., D. A. Suhm, and J. D. Scurlock
1964 An Investigation and Appraisal of Archeological Resources of Belton
Reservoir, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas: 1962. Miscellaneous
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 1.
Sollberger, J. B.
1971 A Technological Study of Beveled Knives. Plains Anthropologist, Vol.
16, No. 53, pp. 209-218.
Sorrow, W. M.
1970 Archeological Investigations at the Barker Site. Research Reports of
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 1.
Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer, and R. E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 11.
Stephenson, R. L.
1970 Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 41, pp. 37-286.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

169

Stipp, J. J., E. M. Davis, I. E. Noakes, and T. E. Hoover
1962 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates I. Radiocarbon, Vol. 4, pp. 4350.
Story, D. A.
1968 Archeological Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites.
State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report, No. 13.
Story, D. A. and H. J. Shafer
1965 1964 Excavations at Waco Reservoir, McLennan County, Texas: The
Baylor and Britton Sites. Miscellaneous Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 6.
Suhm, D. A.
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 7-54.
1957 Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 26-58.
1959 The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology. Texas Journal of
Science, Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 218-250.
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 63-108.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. lelks (eds.)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas
Archeological Society Special Publications, No. 1, Bulletin of the
Texas Memorial Museum, No. 4.
Tamers, M. A., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. M. Davis
1964 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates II. Radiocarbon, Vol. 6, pp.
138-159.
Tunnell, C. D.
1962 Oblate: A Rockshelter Site. In: Salvage Archeology of Canyon
Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites, by L.
Johnson, Jr., D. A. Suhm, and C.D. Tunnell. Bulletin of the Texas
Memorial Museum, No. 5.
Valastro, S., Jr., and E. M. Davis
1970a University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates VII. Radiocarbon,
Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 249-280.
1970b University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates VIII. Radiocarbon,
Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 617-639.
Valastro, S., Jr., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. M. Davis
1967 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates V. Radiocarbon, Vol. 9, pp.
439-453.
Watt, F. H.
1953 Pottery Diffusions of the Central Brazos Valley. Central Texas
Archeologist, Vol. 6, pp. 57-85.

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES IN
HARRIS COUNTY, TEXAS*
L. W. PATTERSON
ABSTRACT
Technological changes through time for prehistoric sites in Harris
County, Texas are reviewed, for a time interval from the Middle Archaic to
the late prehistoric. Significant changes occur in flake tool sizes, ceramic
usage, and the frequency and size of sites. A number of artifact types are
also considered where little change occurs with time. Information
presented is based on 26 sites, and demonstrates the value of intensive
surface survey work.

INTRODUCTION
This paper will review changes in technology among various Indian
populations occupying inland Harris County, Texas, from the Middle
Archaic period until late prehistoric time. There seems to be little
change in the general cultural pattern over this time interval, with a
hunting and gathering lifeway practiced, and no evidence of
agriculture. According to the account of Cabeza de Vaca (Covey
1972), a nomadic hunting and gathering pattern was still being
practiced in this area in early historic period. Since a nomadic way of
life is involved, the technology to be discussed probably reflects
seasonal use of campsites.
A survey by Wheat (1953) represents the most significant published
work done in this inland area of Harris County. McClure (1975) is
continuing to publish a series of site surveys along inland White Oak
Bayou in Harris County. The writer is also continuing to publish a
series of site surveys for Harris County (Patterson 1975d). Shafer
(1968) has published information on inland sites in nearby
Montgomery County and Aten (1967) has reported in Jamison site in
Liberty County. Most studies in the general area have concentrated
on littoral sites (cf. Aten 1971; O’Brien 1971). Littoral sites are rich in
shell, bone and ceramics, but relatively poor ia lithic materials,
except for a site reported by Duke (1970, 1971). In contrast, inland
sites have large quantities of lithic materials, smaller amounts of
pottery, poor bone preservation, and little shell. Some inland sites in
Harris County do have enough bone preservation, however, to give a
picture of which animals were utilized (Wheat 1953: Table 8; Smith
1975). No information is yet available on plant remains. Although
shell fish occur in fresh-water streams, there is little evidence to
indicate that they were an important food source. Seasonal

*Based on revision of paper given at annual meeting, Texas Archeological Society,
Dallas, November 1974.

17 2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

subsistence patterns and the relationship of inland to littoral sites
remain poorly known. Dillehay’s (1975) study on coastal subsistence
is practically the only problem-oriented work done to date. Shafer
(1974:2-3) has pointed out that most work in southeastern Texas has
been subject to the vagaries of salvage archeology, without a
designed research plan. This paper is a summary of a number of sites
of various dates, and demonstrates the value of intensive surface
survey work, especially when resources are not available for a large
excavation program.

CHRONOLOGY
In considering changes in material technology through time, it is
necessary to establish a basic chronology related to artifact types. A
synthesis of chronology for this specific area indicates three basic
periods, which will be called Archaic, Woodland (cf. Shafer 1975),
and late prehistoric. The Archaic is the earliest period considered
here and is preceramic, the Woodland period has ceramics and dart
points, but few bifacial arrow points, and the late prehistoric period
has predominantly bifacial arrow points and few dart points. It
should be made clear that names for these periods on the upper Texas
coast do not have the same cultural meaning as in other areas, since
the basic living pattern remained essentially in the Archaic tradition
until historic time.
The stratigraphy at the Doering site (Wheat 1953) has been used to
establish the relative chronology of artifact types, but Wheat
established no absolute dates. Aten (1971: Fig. 10) gives a date of 200
A.D. for the earliest ceramics in this area, and A.D. 600 for the start
of bifacial arrow points, which can be used to define the terminal
Archaic and Woodland dates. A starting date of about 3000 B.C. for
the earliest materials discussed here in the Archaic period is taken
from the estimates of Suhm and ]elks (1962: 1969,171) for the start of
Bulverde and Carrollton dart points. There is a Carrollton focus
radiocarbon date (Smith 1969: 5) related to these point types with
special note taken of ground bases on Carrollton and Trinity points
during this period.
It may be seen in Table 1 that a number of projectile point types are
found over long time periods. Several of Wheat’s provisional types
have been reclassified, using current terminology. Bulverde, Trinity,
Carrolltan, and Williams are among the earliest types of Archaic dart
points shown. Except for Perdiz points, Wheat shows a well defined
starting time for bifacial arrow points, including Catahoula, Fresno,
and Scallorn. The Perdiz point will be discussed further with the
chronology of the bow and arrow. Gary contracting stem dart points
are found throughout the entire time interval under discussion, of
perhaps 4,500 years, and are most numerous in the Woodland period.

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES IN HARRIS COUNTY

173

A number of dart points that Wheat illustrates as Gary (1953: P1.36)
should probably be classified as Kent type.
There are a number of dart point types that start in the middle to
late Archaic period, and continue into the Woodland period. These
include Ensor, Ellis, Elam, Pedernales, Palmillas, Yarbrough, Trinity,
and Wells. Since a number of dart point types seem to have long time
spans, they are not very useful as specific time markers, except to
note that they are earlier than the late prehistoric period. Carrolltonand Williams dart points may be specific to the Archaic period, as is
perhaps the practice of basal grinding. Various combinations of
arrow points, dart points and ceramics can be used to identify the
three broad time periods under discussion. Fig. 1 shows basally
ground Williams, Trinity, and Carrollton dart points from site 41 HR
206 in inland Harris County. Ground base dart points are
characteristic of the middle Archaic period, and are the earliest
artifacts found in this survey. Gary dart points tend to become
smaller in later time, as noted by Ford and Webb (1956) for Poverty
Point. This is true for Harris County sites, with Gary points generally
of 50 to 70 mm length in the Archaic period, and 30 to 45 mm length in
the Woodland period. Table 4 summarizes projectile points found in
this survey in relationship to time periods.

b

0

1

2

c

3

4

5

d

6

7cm

FIGURE 1. Dart Points from Site 41 HR 206. a-d, basally-ground points
of the Williams, Trinity, and Carrollton types.

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
SITE PATTERNS

Archeological materials from 48 sites in inland Harris County were
reviewed. There were 26 of these sites with projectile points, and
these were selected for this study. There are nine late prehistoric, six
mixed late prehistoric/Woodland, five Woodland, one mixed
Archaic/Woodland, one pure Archaic, and four mixed with all time
periods. The multi-component sites are predominantly mixed
Archaic/Woodland, and will be treated as such in the statistical
summaries. By time periods, then, there are 19 sites with late
prehistoric components, 16 Woodland, and six Archaic. As shwam in
Fig. 2, sites with only late components tend to have fewer lithic
artifacts. It is concluded that a larger number of small sites were
used in late time, with less use frequency, compared to a few large
sites in the Archaic and early Woodland.

ARCHAIC

.

(

)

WOODLAND LATE PREHISTORIC
~
(

,oooi
w

2
5ooj
>

01
3000 B,C,

!
2000 B.C.

I
1000 B,C,

I

TIME

FIGURE 2. Lithic Flake Distribution in Time.

0 A.D.

~000 A.D.

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES IN HARRIS COUNTY

175

If a time period of 4,500 years is used for the range of sites under
discussion, both Wheat’s work and more recent surveys by the writer
show that projectile point production was fairly constant with time.
This may be an indication of roughly constant population density over
long time periods, although population density could vary considerably at specific times. The period of A.D. 600 to 1500 for biracial arrow points is 20% of the total time interval considered.
Referring to Table 2, Wheat (1953: 198-199) showed that arrow points
were 16.5% of total projectile points, and recent work by the writer
gives 19.7% of total points as bifacial arrow points. If there is any
indication at all of a population maximum, it would be during the late
Archaic and Woodland periods.

CERAMICS
Wheat (1953) developed information on pottery for this area, and
Aten (1971: Fig. 10) has added further details and dating. Plain
ceramics start at about A.D. 200, there is also a stamped design type,
which is rare and probably has rather short duration. Then Goose
Creek sandy paste pottery starts and continues through late
prehistoric time. Both Wheat and Aten note some use of bone
tempering in late time, and this is confirmed on more recently found
sites, such as 41 HR 248. Because of its short duration, stamped
pottery in Harris County is a good time reference, and possibly
matches the starting times of sites 41 HR 6, 7, and 267. Incised pottery
has wide time distribution, but is fairly scarce, as noted by Wheat
(1953: Table 1), and this more recent survey. A summary of incised
patterns has been given by O’Brien (1971: 345), which possibly
applies to this area. The most common pattern found in recent survey
work is single line interior incising. Only 2.8% of all sherds examined
had any type of incising. O’Brien (1974: 57) has commented on the
possible significance in time of incised patterns and rim shapes. Few
rim sherds were found in survey work for this report.
Wheat (1953: 191) noted that there was a lower amount of pottery
in late strata, and recent survey sites seem to confirm lower amounts
in the late prehistoric period on inland sites. This could mean less use
of pottery and/or a lower frequency of site use. It is felt that less
pottery was used in the late prehistoric period because the ratio of
potsherds to flakes decreases then. Together with the information
that sites tended to be smaller and more numerous in late time, this
may indicate a shift in subsistence pattern after the Woodland
period. Fig. 3 is a plot of sherd-to-flake ratio versus time, and
definitely shows a peak at the end of the Woodland period. Potsherd
counts probably have value in a relative comparison of sites of
different ages, but on an absolute basis sherd counts are probably

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

low. Due to poor firing techniques used in the manufacture of local
pottery, there is some disintegration of potsherds. During wet
weather the author has observed potsherds in the process of total
disintegration on several sites, including 41 HR 215. As mentioned
previously, pottery on inland Harris County sites is not as plentiful as
on littoral sites.
There are no noticeable differences in ceramic thicknesses with
time. Sites in general have a range of thicknesses for potsherds from 4
to 9 ram. The average of 4 late prehistoric sites is 6.0 mm and the
average for Archaic/Woodland site 41 HR 206 is 6.3 mm.
THE BOW AND ARROW
In previous papers (Patterson 1973a,b), the writer has
hypothesized that the bow and arrow diffused to Texas from the far

0.25--

WOODLAND

LATE PREHISTORIC

) (

0.20 --

0.15-i-

0.10i--

0.051 -1-

ol
o

500

1000
TIME,

FIGURE 3. Pottery Distribution in Time.

A.D.

1500

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES IN HARRIS COUNTY

177

north during the Archaic period, together with small prismatic blade
technology, using the Mesolithic type compound point. The presence
of the compound point in Alaska has been demonstrated by Larsen
(1968: 54). Another example of early use of the bow and arrow, closer
to Texas, is the occurrence of crude unifacial arrow points at the
LoDaisKa site in Colorado (Irwin and Irwin 1959: 34-37), earlier than
bifacial arrow points. Possible elements for compound arrow points
occur throughout the various time periods being reviewed for Harris
County. The side blades are similar to Eurasian microliths, in that
they are unifacial segments of prismatic blades, have a straight edge
for hafting, and have the other lateral edge trimmed to a rough
geometrical shape. Unifacial end blades are both stemmed and
unstemmed (Patterson and Sollberger 1974}.
The writer has elsewhere speculated (Patterson 1973c) that the
Perdiz arrow point evolved from the Gary dart point, as there is a
roughly continuous grading in size from Gary dart points to Perdiz
arrow points. As shown in Table 1, Wheat found Perdiz points
starting much earlier than other biracial arrow points, but he tended
to dismiss this data. It is felt that this evidence should be considered
as an example of a development period for an arrow point form from
a dart point form, with the bow and arrow already in use with simpler
unifacial points. There are a number of other arrow point/dart point
similarities in this area, such as Almagre/Cliffton, Ellis/Scallorn, and
Matamoros/Fresno. Sollberger (1967, 1970) has noted similar
relationships.

TABLE 1
DOERING SITE PROJECTILE POINT DISTRIBUTION
(FROM WHEAT 1953, TABLE 5}
Period
Excavation Level (cm}

Late Prehistoric

Woodland

Archaic

0-15

15-30

30*45

45-00

60-75

x

×

x

75-90

90.105

105-120

Arrow Points
Perdiz

x

x
--

x
--

Cotahoulo

--

x

--

Fresno

--

x

--

Sca!lorn

Dart Points
Gory/Kent

x

x

x

x

x

x

--

x

--

--

x
--

x

Pedernales

x

--

--

Palmillas

--

x

x

x

x

x

x

--

Ensor

x

--

--

--

x

x

x

x

Yorbrough

--

--

--

x

x

x

x

--

Ellis

--

x

--

x

x

x

--

x

Trinity

--

--

x

--

x

x

x

--

Wells

---x
x
x
......

x

--

x

Willioms

.....

x

Elom.lihe
Refugio

--

Carrollton

Bulverde

x

--

--x
--x
-....
x
x
--.......

* possible lower level (Wheat 1953. Table 9}

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

178

Study of the weight distribution for contracting stem points in
Harris County also suggests evolution of arrow point forms from dart
point forms, as sho’cm in Fig. 4. Dart points weighing over 6.5 grams
are found in Archaic context, and smaller dart points weighing 3.5 to
6 grams are found in late Archaic and Woodland contexts. There is a
discrete group of points found only on Woodland and later sites,
weighing 2 to 3 grams, which suggest a multi-purpose use for both
dart and arrow points. Biracial arrow points found mainly on late
prehistoric sites form another discrete group under 2 grams in
weight.
Since possible unifacial elements for compound arrow points exist
even on later prehistoric sites, the compound arrow point or at least
unifacial end blades may have been in use concurrent with biracial
arrow points. This is not too surprising, when consideration is given
to some of the crude, almost unifacial Cliffton points found together
with well made Perdiz points. A possible example of transition to

N=41
SUGGESTED GROUPS:
0TO 2GRAMS

ARROW POINTS
ALL-PURPOSE

2 TO 3 GRAMS

SMALL DART

3 TO 6.5 GRAMS

MEDIUM DART

6.5 TO 8,5 GRAMS

LARGE DART

10 TO 12 GRAMS

TYPES:
PERDIZ, BASSETT, GARY, AI, MAGRE,
WELLS, KENT

a:
ul
a.

1

I

I

I

I

2

3

4

5

6

WEIGHT,

7

8

9

10

11

12

GRAMS

FIGURE 4. Distribution of Contracting Stem Points: Harris County.

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES IN HARRIS COUNTY

179

more refined arrow points is a tanged unifacial prismatic blade point
from site 41 HR 6, which is a mixed Woodland/late prehistoric site.
An enlarged drawing of a unifacial microlithic end blade, halted with
asphalt, has been shown for site 41 HR 210 (Patterson 1975c: Fig. 1).
TABLE II
Time Distribution of Projectile Points
Patterson *
Biracial Arrow Points
Dart Points

Wheat

No.

%

No.

%

39

19.7

210

16.5

159

80.3

1065

83.5

198

100.0

1275

100.0

Period

Years

Archaic/Woodland

3000 BC-AD 600

3600

Late Prehistoric

AD 600-AD 1500

900

20

450O

100

Time, %
80

* see Table 4

PRISMATIC BLADE TECHNOLOGY
Small prismatic blade technology in Harris County exists in fairly
constant quantities for all time periods under discussion. Blade cores,
blades, and retouched blade tools have also been found for all time
periods. Since blade technology is so generalized (Patterson 1973a,b),
with a variety of blade core types, it has not been possible to relate
blade core types to specific time intervals, possibly because small
blade technology diffused in a generalized form. Wedge-shaped and
semi-conical cores seem to start early, and conical cores have been
found in all time periods. A unique example of a discoidal blade core,
with four striking platforms, was found on a mixed Woodland/Late
Prehistoric site, 41 HR 248. This core is close to one illustrated by
Montet-White (1968: Fig. 6) for the late Archaic/early Woodland
period in Illinois.
Prismatic blades from Harris County are referred to as a "small
blade technology," distinct from larger Paleo-Indian blades. Most
Harris County blades are under 20 mm in width, while published
examples of Paleo-Indian blades generally average over 20 mm in
width (Converse 1973: 14; Hammatt 1969). A starting time of 3000 B.C.
for small blade technology in Texas would be consistent with
Borden’s chronology for southward diffusion of small blade
technology from Alaska, and the early Magic Mountain, Colorado
date of 3500 B.C. (Irwin-Williams and Irwin 1966: Fig. 59) for

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

microblades. Various prismatic blade traditions have been discussed
in a separate paper [Patterson 1975b).
Prismatic blade technology follows a general tendency of lithic
flakes to become smaller on late sites. Microblades of under 11 mm
width are found on even the earliest sites, however. Table 3 shows
that prismatic blades, and microlithic side and end blades occur
throughout the entire time interval under consideration. The
percentages of prismatic blades shown are higher than in a previous
report (Patterson 1973b), because more material has been found, and
small irregular flakes below 15 mm square are no longer counted.

FLAKE TOOLS
By far the most important artifacts in number on these sites are
utilized general-purpose flint flake tools. As Sollberger (1969) has
shown, sharp unretouched flake edge make excellent cutting tools. A
number of flakes and prismatic blades occur, without definite time
significance, with unifacial marginal retouch that could be classified
as side and end scrapers. Noticeable heavy retouch by pressure
flaking is not frequent. Most utilized flakes simply display use
retouch. Wheat’s collection of selected artifacts from this area at the
Smithsonian Institution was examined, with the same conclusion as
more recent finds.
What is really significant about flake tools is the tendency toward
smaller size in later time. As may be seen in Fig. 5, this becomes
pronounced in the Woodland period and later, after 200 A.D. Size
change appears to be evolutionary, rather than sudden. Through the
Archaic period, the three size ranges used for this study occur in
about equal proportions. After the start of the Woodland period,
there are increases in the percentage of smaller flakes of 15 to 20 mm
square, and decreases in the percentages of the two larger flake
categories, of 20 to 25 mm and over 25 mm. Sharer (1974: 14) has
noted the shift to smaller lithic tools in late prehistoric time in
southeastern Texas, and Dee Ann Story (personal communication)
notes this same tendency in other parts of Texas.
Flake size categories are arbitrary selections, and a rapid accurate
method was used to measure the large number of flakes. A size range
of 15 to 20 mm indicates that a flake is larger than a 15 by 15 mm
square and will fit inside of a 20 mm square. Other size ranges use
larger squares for measurement. No special flake orientation or
tedious use of calipers is required. A rapid method becomes a
necessity when large numbers of flakes are involved.
Harris County has what could be called a "thin flake industry,"
with most flakes ranging from 2 to 5 nun in thickness. Few thick flake
tools are present. Use of smaller flake tools in later time possibly
indicates a shift in technology, more efficient use of a scarce

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES IN HARRIS COUNTY

~ o ~ ~

181

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

182

resource, or possibly even increased mobility in lifestyle. If more
hafting was used with smaller flakes, it is not directly apparent, as no
special preparation for halting, such as notches, is generally present.

LITHIC MATERIALS
A previous paper [Patterson 1974} has commented on types of lithic
materials used in Harris County. In general, there does not appear to
be any time significance in materials used for lithic artifacts.
Assemblages reflect what would be expected of flint sources within
25 to 100 miles, with an occasional find of possibly more remote
origin. The uses of petrified wood and red jasper for projectile points
are exceptions. For dart points, petrified wood was over-utilized and
jasper was under-utilized, compared to the amounts of these
materials occurring on various sites. Harris County itself has no
significant lithic resources. For arrow points, the situation is
reversed. Petrified wood is practically never used, and red jasper
begins to be used with a frequency close to its general distribution on
sites. There is some use of jasper for small late dart points.

ARCHAIC

2

LATE PREHISTORIC
f

ook
5o~-

3oF-

u
a:
w

2ol

to

o
3000 B.C,

!

I
2000 0.0.

I

I

I
1000 0,C.

OA,D.

TIME

FIGURE 5. Lithic Flake Size Distribution in Time.

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES IN HARRIS COUNTY

183

CLAY BALLS
Roughly shaped clay balls or "blobs" are found on Archaic and
Woodland sites in Harris County. Smith (1969: 6) has noted the
presence of this type of material in the Archaic period of the Dallas
area. Late prehistoric sites in Harris County have few clay balls. Aten
(1967: 39), Ambler (1967: Table 3), Patterson (1975a: 13, 1975c: 18),
and Shafer (1968: 74) have made comments on the occurrence of clay
balls in this general area. The function of clay balls has not been fully
determined, although most appear to be fire-baked. Perhaps they
were used for cooking, as the more precisely shaped Poverty Point
examples, Huxtable, et al (1972) have dated clay balls in the
Mississippi Valley to both Archaic and Woodland periods. As with
clay balls, fire-cracked rock does not seem to occur on late sites.

BIFACIAL TOOLS
Bifacial non-projectile point tools are not time-diagnostic in Harris
County. This has been shown by Wheat (1953: Table 6) for a wide time
range. Contrary to Wheat’s information on the Doering site, bifacial
tools do not occur as high percentages of lithic assemblages on Harris
County sites. Wheat seems to have struck a cache of bifacial tools on
the Doering site, not duplicated by his other sites, or by the writer’s
later survey work. After examining Wheat’s collection at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, it is concluded that a number of
Wheat’s bifacial tools are actually projectile points or preforms,
resembling, in a morphological sense, the Lermo, Tortugas, and
Refugio types. Thus, Wheat’s count of bifacial tools is on the high side.
Finer pressure flaking is observed on what few bifacial tools occur on
late sites.

CONTINUITY
Most of this paper has been devoted to examining technological
changes. There are a number of traits that may demonstrate some
continuity of the Archaic lifeway, in contrast to changes being considered. For this specific area, over the approximately 4,500 years
under discussion, traits with more or less continuous time distribution
include: bifacial tools, bone tools, notched lithic tools, gravers, perforators, prismatic blades, blade cores, microliths, choppers, drills,
scrapers, and lithic heat treating. The persistence of traits over long
time periods has been noted by Lorrain (1968: Table i) for stone tools,
and by Preston (1969) for projectile points, in other areas of Texas.
The occasional finds of drilled stone pendants and incised bone on
Harris County sites has not been resolved in respect to time.
Some possible examples of burins have been found on Harris County sites, but are few in number, and without time significance. Bandi
(1969: 177) has noted that burins have only a subordinate role in

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

184

TABLE IV

PROJECTILE POINT DISTRIBUTION*
Grand
Total

Period
Late
Pre.
Arrow Points
Alba
Bassett
Catahoula
Cliffton
Fresno
Perdiz
Scallorn
Toyah
Unclassified
Subtotal
Dart Points
Abasolo
Almagre
Bulverde
Carrollton
Catan
Darl
Edgewood
Elam
Ellis
Ensor
Gary
Kent
Kinney
Matamoros
Meserve (?)
Palmillas
Pedernales
Refugio
Travis
Trinity
Wells
Williams
Yarbrough
Unclassified
Subtotal
Total

2
1

L.P./
Wood.

Woodland

Archaic/
Wood.

Archaic

All
Period
Sites

No.

%

....

3

1.5

.....

1

0.5

1

2

1

....

3

1.5

3

3

....

6

3.0

-1

2

....
---5

2

i0

16

1.0
8.2

1

1

--

1

3

1.5

-1

1
1

....
2
----

1

0.5

4

2.0

11

20

--

--

0

8

39

19.7

.....
-1
------1
----1
---1
----1
--.....
---1
--

1
1
1
1
2
1
1
--

1

2
2
2
3
2
1
1

0.5
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

--

5

8

.....

2

2

1.0

1

ii

19

9.7

--2
1
----1
-.....
.....
--2
-----I
-1
--1
-i
---1
1
---2
---1
-1
---1
.....

II
-i

14

7.2

1
1

0.5
0.5

1

1

0.5

2

4

2.0

1
2
--1
--

2
4
1
3
2
2

1.0
2.0
0.5
1.5
1.0
1.0

---

1
1

0

1
8

0

1
--

0.5
4.0

5

5

2.5

--

5

9

13

1

48

76

38.4

0

10

23

23

5

98

159

80.3

11

30

23

23

5

106

198

100.0

* L.W. Patterson Harris County survey to August 1974

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES IN HARRIS COUNTY

185

Alaskan microblade industries. It is suggested here that there is no
real need for burins in thin flake industries, as other tools are easier
to make from thin flakes that will function just as well for graving as
burins. Burin-like tools can be made very easily by simply snapping
thin lithic flakes or removing a few pressure flakes. In contrast, in
thick lithic flake industries, a burin blow is probably one of the
easiest methods of making a graving tool.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS
The major conclusions reached as a result of this research are
listed below:
1.

Sandy paste pottery was the principle type used over the entire
ceramic period, with some late use of bone tempering.
2. Late sites reveal less pottery than earlier ceramic sites.
3. Late sites are smaller, but more frequent.
4. Over the time interval considered, there was a trend toward
smaller lithic artifacts in later time.
5. Small prismatic blades were probably in use for the entire time
period of roughly 4,500 years.
6. The bow and arrow may have been in use for the entire time
period, with early use of unifacial point elements.
7. A number of artifact types do not have time-diagnostic value,
which may indicate continuity in some technology over long time
periods.
8. Taken together, the tendencies in later time to use smaller sites in
greater numbers, use smaller lithic tools, and use less pottery may
indicate a drift to a more mobile type of existence. However, these
changes could simply indicate technological changes together
with less use of specific campsites. Tom D. Dillehay (personal
communication) has suggested that a more mobile type of lifeway
may be associated with an increased ability to schedule use of a
wider variety of food resources. People would be moving more to
take advantage of greater subsistence opportunities.

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Ambler, J. R.
1967 Three Prehistoric Sites Near Cedar Bayou, Galveston Bay Area. State
Building Commission, Archeology Program, Report, No. 8.
Aten, L. E.
1967 Excavations at the Jameson Site. Houston Archeological Society,
Report, No. i.
Texas
1971 Archeological Excavations
at the
Dow-Cleaver
Site.
Archeological Salvage Project, Technical Bulletin, No. 1.
Bandi, H.
1969 Eskimo Prehistory. University of Alaska Press, Fairbanks.
Borden, C. E.
1969 Early Population Movement from Asia into Western North America,
Syesis, Vol. 2, Nos. 1-2, pp. 1-13.
Converse, R. N.
1973 Ohio Flint Types. Archaeological Society of Ohio, Special Publication.
Covey, C.
!972 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Uriknown Interior of America.
Collier Books, New York.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1975 Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower Trinity River Delta.
Texas, Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report No. 51.
Duke, A. R.
1970 Analysis of Ceramic and Bone Artifacts from 41 HR 73. Houston
Archeological Society Newsletter, No. 34, pp. 3-4.
1971 Analysis of Lithic Material from 41 HR 73. Houston Archeological
Society Newsletter, No. 36, pp. 3-6.
Ford, J. A. and C. H. Webb
1956 Poverty Point, American Museum of Natural History, Anthropological
Papers, Vol. 46, Part 1, pp. 1-136.
Hammatt, H. H.
1969 Paleo-lndian Blades from Western Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp. 193-198.
Huxtable, J., M. J. Aitken and J. C. Weber
1972 Thermoluminescent dating of Baked Clay Balls of the Poverty Point
Culture. Archaeometry, Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 269-275.
Irwin, H. J. and C. C. Irwin
1959 Excavations at the LoDaisKa
History, Proceedings, No. 8.

Site. Denver Museum of Natural

Irwin-Williams, C. and H. J. Irwin
1966 Excavations at Magic Mountain. Denver Museum of Natural History,
Proceedings, No. 12.
Larsen, H.
1968 Trail Creek. Acta Arctica, Fasc. 15. Copenhagen.
Lorrain, D.
1968 Archeological Excavations in Northwestern Crockett County, Texas.
State Building Commission Archeology Program, Report, No. 12.
Montet-White, A.
1968 The Lithic Industries of the Illinois Valley in the Early and Middle
Woodland Period. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan,
Anthropological Papers, No. 35.

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES IN HARRIS COUNTY

187

O’Brien, M. J.
1971 The Fullen Site, 41 HR 82. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 42, pp. 335-361.
1974The Armand Bayou Survey and Excavations, in Archeological
Investigations along Armand Bayou, Harris County, Texas. Edited by
Frank Hole, Houston Archeological Soceity, Report, No. 2, pp. 29-77.
Patterson, L. W.
1973a Far Northern Influences on the Upper Texas Coast. Paper presented
at the Texas Archeological Society annual meeting, Lubbock.
1973b Some Texas Blade Technology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 44, pp. 89-111.
1973c A Possible Arrow Point Development Example. Texas Archeology,
Vol. 17, No. 3, pp. 8-9.
1974 Harris County Flint Sources. Houston Archeological Society
Newsletter, No. 46, pp. 3-4.
1975a A Two Component Site, 41 HR 185. Houston Archeological Society
Newsletter, No. 48, pp. 13-14.
1975b Evidence of Prismatic Blade Technology in the Texas Archaic. In: The
Archaic of Texas (T. R. Hester, editor) University of Texas at San
Antonio, Center for Archaeological Research, Special Report, No. 2
(in press).
1975c 41 HR 210, A Multicomponent Site in Harris Co., Texas. La Tierra,
Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 17-22.
1975d Bibliography of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas Coast. Houston
Archeological Society, Special Publication.
Patterson, L. W. and J. B. Sollberger
1974 Lithic Shaping Retouch. Texas Archeology, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 13-16.
Preston, N. E,
1969 The McCann Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40,
pp. 167-192.
Sharer, Harry J.
1968Archeological Investigations in the San Jaeinto River Basin,
Montgomery Co., Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, No. 13.
1974Archeology and Indians of Southeast Texas. In: Participants
Handbook, The Big Thicket, Contemporary Science Seminar, University of Houston and Houston Museum of Natural Science.
1975 Comments on Woodland Cultures of East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vo!. 46, pp. 249-254.
Smith, B. W.
1975 An Analysis of Faunal Remains from 41 HR 210. La Tierra, Vo!. 2, No.
4, pp. 23-28.
Smith, C. A.
1969 Archeology of the Upper Trinity Watershed. The Record, Vol. 26, No.
1.
Sollberger, J. B.
1967 A New Type of Arrow Point with Speculations As to Its Origin, The
Record, Vo!. 23, No. 3, pp. 12-22.
1969 The Basic Tool Kit Required to Make and Notch Arrow Shafts for
Stone Points. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp.
231-240.

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1970Preforms Are Not Projectile Points. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. 19, pp. 151-154.
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. ]elks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas
Archeological Society Special Publication, No. 1, and Texas Memorial
Museum Bulletin, No. 4.
Wheat, J. B.
1953 An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin, No. 154.

FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS FROM
THE MANNING FORMATION
I(. M. BROWN

ABSTRACT
Fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation of southeast Texas
was formed when combustion of the underlying lignite beds in localized
areas melted the tuff deposits. This distinctive material was used as a
minor source of raw material for making chipped stone artifacts since the
Early Archaic and is found at various sites in the Gulf Coastal Plain.

INTRODUCTION
Virtually none of the raw materials used to manufacture chipped
stone artifacts in the Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas can be traced to a
specific outcrop. There are no beds of chert in east Texas sediments,
which consist of sandstones and poorly consolidated clays, shales,
sands, and tuff deposited during the Eocene and later. Most raw
material for chipping was obtained from relict sheets of stream
terrace gravels that were deposited high above the present river beds
during the Pleistocene and have since been extensively eroded. These
patchy gravel deposits can be found fringing east Texas river valleys
inland from the deltaic deposits of the coastal area. Chert, quartzite,
and petrified wood were selected as chipping material from these
gravels, but since essentially the same kinds of rock are found both
along and among different drainages, it is impossible to trace
artifacts to specific gravel deposits.
This paper will report one kind of raw material, fused volcanic
glass, which stands as an exception to the usual anonymity of chipped
stone resources in east Texas. Because this rock (1) is distinctive in
appearance, and (2) can be related to a known outcrop, it may be
possible eventually to define resource distribution patterns by
studying the occurrence of the material in archeolo’gical sites, even if
we cannot determine whether the material was acquired through
trade or through special extractive expeditions.

GEOLOGIC CONTEXT
Mode of formation
Near the end of the Eocene epoch, large amounts of volcanic ash
were ejected into the atmosphere by erupting volcanos that may have
been located in the Trans-Pecos area. Volcanic ash is a finely divided
chalky dust composed of microscopic, angular volcanic glass shards.
These dust showers settled down either in the contemporaneous

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

190

Eocene Gulf coastal region, or (more likely} in the headwaters of
streams draining into the coastal region, or both. As a result,
significant amounts of volcanic ash are present in the lignific sands
and clays of the Manning Formation. Some ash beds deposited in
aquatic environments have been altered to bentonite (Renick 1936:
42); elsewhere deposits with pyroclastic material vary from
tuffaceous sandstones, siltstones, and shales to massive tuff
(consolidated volcanic ash). Where relatively pure tuff beds overlie
relatively pure lignite beds, the appropriate conditions exist for
melting of the tuff by combustion of the lignite, and in fact King and
Rodda (1962) present evidence to support the hypothesis that fusion
of the tuff at various localities in the Manning Formation was caused
by the heat generated by burning of the underlying lignite beds
(perhaps due to spontaneous combustion) at some time during the
geologic past. The degree of fusion varies and where it was most
intense, actual melting of the microscopic glass shards has produced
small aggregates of brightly colored glassy material. King and Rodda
estimate that tempertatures of at least 1125°C were required for
melting (ibid: 269).
Fused tuff is, like obsidian, a volcanic glass and has a similar fracture, but the mode of formation of the two is considerably different.
Figures i and 2 contrast diagrammatically the mode of formation of
obsidian and fused tuff.
Location of outcrops
The Manning Formation crops out in a narrow band across the Gulf
Coastal Plain of southeast Texas, about 190 kin inland in Polk, Trinity,
Walker, Grimes, Brazos, Burleson, Washington, Lee, Fayette, and
Gonzales counties, and on into south Texas (Fig. 3). However, fused
volcanic glass is known only from eight localized exposures within the
outcrop: one each from Fayette, Washington, Brazos, and Grimes

.................... }

FIGURE

L,;UULIIVL3

1. Mode of formation of obsidian.

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

191

8
Q

LITHIFICATION

MAGMA

TUFF

Z--~MELTINGzZ/

FUSED
VOLCANIC
GLASS

HEAT FROM
BURNING LIGNITE

FIGURE 2. Mode of formation of fused volcanic glass.

counties, and two each from Walker and Trinity counties (one of the
Trinity County localities I recorded in 1970 and is not reported by
King and Rodda). These known exposures are indicated on Figure 3 by
crosses.
The best exposure of fused tuff in the Manning Formation is an
active quarry known as the "Chalk Pit" (Bur. Econ. Geol. sample
locality 235-T-2, Texas Arch. Res. Lab. rock sample locality
M41WAI), located between Dillard Creek and Chalk Creek in
northern Walker County. King and Rodda report the following
stratigraphic section as recorded in 1960:
Three units are exposed in the pit. The upper unit is a light colored tuff,
up to 4 feet thick, which overlies the middle unit with a marked erosional
unconformity .... Locally the upper tuff has been fused or partially fused,
but is otherwise unaltered. The middle unit is 10 to 12 feet thick, and
consists mostly of massive tuffaceous siltstone with a few sandstone beds
and channels up to 5 feet thick. A bentonite bed 1 to 2 inches thick is
present in the lower part of this unit, and is exposed along the base of the
north wall of the quarry. Fragments of silicified wood were found in the
lower part of the middle unit. Most of the tuff and tuffaceous siltstone has
been baked, hardened, partially fused, and colored shades of red, brown,
and orange. The lowest unit is a lignite of unknown thickness which is
exposed in the quarry floor (King and Rodda 1962: 266).

192

~XAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fused volcanic glass is so abundant in archeological sites
surrounding this locality as to suggest a surface exposure must have
existed prehistorically as well. Most of the other localities were
probably also exposed then, but whether they were known is
uncertain. There are also undoubtedly other as yet undiscovered
localities with fused rocks in the Manning Formation.
Baked and fused rocks in the Wilcox Group
Baked shales produced by lignite combustion are also known from
the Wilcox Group in Freestone County, near Donie (Lonsdale and
Crawford 1928; TARL rock locality M41FT1) and, apparently, in
Titus County near Winfield. Samples from the Titus County locality

FIGURE 3. Distribution of sites with fused volcanic glass from the
Manning Formation (except 41 LT 58, which has one baked shale
fragment only). Crosses represent localities with baked or fused
rocks. Open triangles are sites whose exact location is unknown. One
site at Martin Lake (41 PN 14) is not indicated.

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

193

were collected in 1971 by Olin McCormick and they appear nearly
identical to baked shales from the Chalk Pit quarry.
Rocks from the Freestone County locality tend to be either slaglike
or friable, porous, baked siltstones. Lonsdale and Crawford report
some glassy, porcelanite-like material, but since I was unable to visit
all of the exposures they recorded I have not seen it and cannot judge
how comparable it might be to the fused glass in the Manning
Formation. I doubt that it occurs in massive aggregates.
A large chunk of baked shale is present in a surface collection from
41 LT 58, west of the Freestone County locality, but it appears
identical to the Manning baked shales, and does not resemble those
from Freestone County.
Petrography of altered rocks from the Manning Formation
Rocks from the sample localities vary all the way from unaltered
tuff, tuffaceous sandstone, siltstone, and claystone or shale to
partially baked or fused examples of these rocks, to glassy,
completely fused tuff. The degree of fusion depends on two factors:
(1) the relative amounts of silica and clay minerals, carbon, or other
contaminants; (2) the temperature and duration of firing.
Fused tuff
Completely fused tuff has a vitreous luster similar to milk glass or
opal. At 30x magnification tiny gas bubbles (from gas produced
during lignite combustion) can be seen in the interior of some
specimens. On archeological specimens, gas bubbles that are
exposed on the surface may fill with soil; some artifacts from the
George C. Davis site are lightly speckled with red from being buried in
the red Amite fine sandy loam at the site. Small fault planes with
infiltrated iron oxide are frequently present, and aggregates of glass
often break along these faults, leaving a reddish-brown covering that
simulates weathering cortex but is very thin. Fused glass has an
excellent conchoidal fracture and would rival obsidian in terms of
chipping properties except for the fact that fault planes, voids, and
inclusions are common, making it difficult to manufacture anything
except small implements. Fused volcanic glass apparently patinates
rapidly since many archeological specimens are patinated, some
heavily, and could easily be mistaken for chert artifacts. Patination
produces a very dull, sometimes pitted luster and a surface color that
is generally lighter than the interior. The most common color of
geological specimens is a light blueish gray (Navy gray, Munsell
chroma 0, value 6 to 7), often with burnt sienna (5YR4.5/6) colored
streaks. Less common colors include charcoal gray (chroma 0, value

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

5), Indian red (3YR3.5/6), and sienna (5YR5.5/7). White and black
occur very rarely; black specimens could be mistaken for obsidian.
There are also one or two specimens, from the George C. Davis site,
with a flow structure that simulates petrified palm wood, but these
are also rare.
Thin sections of the fused tuff are homogeneous glass which encloses
rare grains of the same types of quartz, zircon, and plagioclase found in
the partially fused and unfused tuff and tuffaceous siltstone. Most shard
edges have fused together and the outlines of individual shards cannot be
seen. Vesicles are numerous and range in size up to 2 mm, but mostly are
less than 0.5 mm. The index of refraction of the glass varies from 1,486 to
1.501 in eight samples for which the index was measured, but mostly is
close to 1.490 (King and Rodda 1962: 268).

Distinguishing fused volcanic glass from chert
Fused volcanic glass can easily be mistaken for chert, especially if
it is patinated. The following guidelines may help in discriminating
between the two.
1. Luster. The most diagnostic macroscopic attribute is the luster, which
on a fresh break is much more glassy and bright than that of chert. The
contrast between fresh and patinated surfaces is also generally more
pronounced than for chert.
2. Isotropism. Fused volcanic glass is an isotropic or noncrystalline
substance, like obsidian, opal, or artificial glass, and a tiny chip of the
rock placed on the stage of a petrographic microscope will extinguish
under crossed nicols. Chert, a crystalline rock, will not behave this
way.

These are the simplest tests that can be applied to discriminate
between chert and fused volcanic glass, neither requiring extensive
damage to the specimen. More detailed studies might include
measuring the index of refraction and comparing it to the data given
by King and Rodda; or preparing thin sections, which would be
especially diagnostic for partially fused specimens, but would require
sacrificing the specimen.

Baked and partially fused rocks
Associated with the fused glass is baked, hardened, and partially
fused tuff and tuffaceous siltstone and baked claystone or shale. The
partially fused tuff has a chalky luster and occurs in pastel shades of
lavender, pink (10YR5.5/6-7), yellowish-orange (5YR7.5/7), yellowish
beige (7.5YR8/6) and gray. In thin section,
This rock is composed almost entirely of nearly uniform (about 2 to 4
microns} glass shards. Corners and edges of shards are fused together, but

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

195

the separate outline of each shard can be clearly distinguished. The few
vesicles range in size up to about 2 microns. There are rare grains of
quartz with beta quartz forms, euhedral to subhedral, pink to violet zircon
and euhedral plagioelase (King and Rodda 1962: 266}.

Siltstones and claystones, with a lower ash content, have been baked
and oxidized into a hard, bricklike yellowish beige (7.5YR8/6)
material. Volume reduction of the lignite beds due to combustion has
caused collapsing and extensive shattering of this rock (King and
Rodda 1962: 266). Chunks of this rock occur in collections from sites
that also have fused tuff chipping debris and artifacts. I suspect that
this material was not imported intentionally but was simply brought
in adhering to chunks of fused tuff as "cortex," although at the Davis
site the specimens indicated removal by percussion (Shafer 1973: 149-

15o}.
At some of the sites there are also soft, friable siltstones and tufts
that have been baked only enough to oxidize to shades of pink, beige,
and orange. These probably did not adhere to glass aggregates but
may have been collected as pigment sources; they resemble pigments
recovered from burials at various east Texas sites. They also
resemble baked siltstones from the Freestone County locality. Two
partially finished earspools recovered from the fill of feature 119, a
deep shaft grave in Mound C at the George C. Davis site, are made of
a similar siltstone (cf. Sharer 1973: 287-288), and two earspools worn
by the single individual buried in feature 118, another shaft grave,
are made of a white material resembling unfired or lightly fired tuff
from the Chalk Pit locality (cf. Shafer 1973: 283).
Other rock types
King and Rodda report two other kinds of rock that have not yet
turned up in archeological collections, but could conceivably be
found. These are a sandstone injected with fused tuff, resembling a
glass-cemented sandstone, and grayish black to olive-black, clinkerline pseudo-basalt. The latter is a crystalline (magnetite, plagioclase,
and pyroxene) rock with about 30% interstitial glass (King and Rodda
1962: 268).

ARCHEOLOGICALCONTEXT
The use of fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation began
as early as the Early Archaic period, for several San Patrice points
made of this rock are known to exist. One San Patrice st. johns point
from the C. W. Ellis site (41 PK 1) in Polk County is probably made of
Manning fused glass (Fig. 5, A). Another San Patrice st. johns point

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Fig. 5, B) of Manning fused glass was found by Jack Hughes in Rusk
County but it is not certain which of the sites in the area it came from
[the approximate location is indicated by the open triangle west of the
Martin Lake area, Fig. 3). Both points are heavily patinated, and the
one from Rusk County resembles the heavily patinated specimens
from Martin Lake. In addition to these two specimens in the TARL
collections, at least two more San Patrice points are believed to exist
in private collections (Harry Shafer, personal communication).
No further use of the material is demonstrable with the evidence at
hand until the early Caddoan period. Fused volcanic glass artifacts
and chipping debris appear at the George C. Davis site, in both
surface and excavated samples, and in surface collections from the
Westerman site (41 HO 15), which is undated but could be
contemporaneous with the Davis site. Both of these are major sites
with constructed mounds. Manning fused glass also occurs at other
possible early Caddoan sites for which we have only small surface or
test pit collections; these include 41 CE 49 and 41 CE 54 in the Davis
site vicinity, and some sites in the Martin Lake locality (41 RK 30, 32,
47, and possibly 23). These, however, are only tentatively recognized
as having early Caddoan components, and they may have earlier or
later components as well.
Archeological context at the Davis site
According to Shafer (1973: 55), fused volcanic glass from the
Manning Formation accounts for about 2.28% of the sample of about
6500 flakes and cores from the site. My survey of the collections lists
178 artifacts, flakes, and cores of fused glass, plus four fragments of
baked siltstone. In general, we can say that this material appears to
have been used as a minor lithic resource throughout the Caddoan
occupation of the site, and seems to occur in all parts of the site
except the special mortuary, Mound C. It is well represented in the
Early Village (800-1000 A.D.) and Middle Village (1000-1200 A.D.)
phases as defined by Story and Valastro (1975; dates based on
radiocarbon assays with Arizona dendrochronological correction).
One flake was recovered from a midden deposit underlying feature
108, an elongate late 11th or early 12th century structure underlying
Mound B (Tx 915, Tx 916, Valastro and Davis 1970: 627). Another
flake fragment came from the vicinity of feature 112, an adjacent
circular, late 11th or early 12th century structure (Tx 910, Tx 919, Tx
924, Valastro and Davis 1970: 628) also underlying Mound B.
Other artifacts and chipping debris are associated with dated
parts of the village, but not in contexts that can be related to single
depositional events. Many parts of the village seem to have been used

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

197

or reused over long periods. Fifty-three pieces of chipping debris and
one small eccentrically chipped object were recovered from the plow
zone in Unit 10, with four pieces of chipping debris in situ at the base
of the plow zone; this is the largest sample of Manning fused glass
from any excavation unit (probably mostly due to intensive screening
at this unit; Story, personal communication). It is therefore
associated in a general way with feature 125, a circular structure
probably dating from the 10th century (Tx 1201, Tx 1202, Tx 1204, Tx
1307, Tx 1308; Valastro, Davis, and Varela 1975: 72-73) although none
of the in situ flakes and cores were found inside the structure.
In addition to these items there are others from parts of the village
that have been dated, but where the association is so nonspecific as
to be uninformative. In view of this it is perhaps more pragmatic to
look at the entire Manning fused glass sample and the entire
radiocarbon series and to state simply that use of the material
occurred during all or part of the span from 800 to 1200 A.D. and
perhaps somewhat later.
In order to study the distribution within the site, Carolyn Spock and
I plotted all of the Manning fused glass artifacts and chipping debris
for which we have records. We were particularly interested in
testing the hypothesis that since the material had to be imported from
an outcrop about 75 km distant, it might have qualified as a "scarce
good" in the prehistoric economy of the Davis site and therefore might
have been distributed differentially among different social segments
(and different parts of the site). We were hampered in this
undertaking by our inability to evaluate the contribution of different
amounts of screening to the different unit frequencies, but we can say
that fused volcanic glass seems to occur in all parts of the site except
Mound C. Its absence from the special mortuary I suspect has to do
with the physical properties of the material itself rather than with the
economy of extraction and transport. I have tried informal chipping
experiments and have found that the material tends to fracture
unexpectedly along minute fissures where aggregates have not
completely fused, so that it would be difficult to produce the finely
chipped Alba points (all of which are chert or quartzite) deposited in
Mound C as grave goods.
Evidence for continued use of Manning fused glass after the 13th
century comes primarily from the Martin Lake locality in northern
Rusk and Panola counties, about 120 km from the Manning Formation.
None of these sites have been radiocarbon dated, but the decorated
pottery from some of them is similar to that from dated sites
excavated in the Lake O’ The Pines locality farther to the north, and
this probably furnishes a basis sufficient for at least an approximate

198

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cross-date. Two sites at Martin Lake, 41 RK 19 and 41 RK 21, have
components that can be guess-dated at about the 14th century A.D.,
and another site, 41 RK 39, has a component that may date from the
same period, as well as a probable Archaic component. The small
sample of Manning fused glass from 41 RK 19 consists of five flakes or
flake fragments, with two fragments of baked tuff or siltstone, most of
which were recovered from a midden deposit on the east side of the
excavated area. The samples from 41 RK 21 and 41 RK 39 are surface
and test pit collections and include chipping debris and arrow points,
none of which can be identified with established projectile point
types.
Petrography of specimens from the Martin Lake locality
The arrow points and chipping debris from Martin Lake are of
particular interest because they form a group that is petrographically
homogeneous and distinct from almost all of the other east Texas
archeological specimens. Almost all of the Martin Lake specimens are
very heavily patinated, to an extent that is duplicated only by the San
Patrice points mentioned earlier. The patina has formed over flake
scars on the arrow points, cores, and flakes, indicating that rapid
weathering of the surface took place after the items were discarded.
In many cases the dorsal surfaces of flakes are more heavily
weathered than the ventral surfaces, just as in "cortex flakes" of
chert, indicating that considerable weathering, probably at the
outcrop, had already taken place before the material was chipped.
The rapid weathering of the Martin Lake artifacts is presumably
due either to incomplete fusion, a lower silica content, a greater
abundance of small gas bubbles in the rock, or some combination of
these factors. In any case, it seems fairly certain that virtually all of
the Martin Lake specimens were obtained from the same exposure
and that this exposure is different from that which furnished raw
material for the other east Texas specimens. More detailed lithologic
studies will be required to verify this hypothesis and pinpoint the
sources. The unweathered rock is probably most comparable to that
from locality M41TN1, an exposure with partially fused rocks in
Trinity County. Along with the chipping debris there are chunks of
soft, chalky, light blue-gray to pink, slightly baked tuff at some of the
Martin Lake sites. This material does not closely resemble any of the
Chalk Pit rocks I have seen.
There is one exception to the preceding discussion: a single
unweathered flake fragment from 41 RK 19 that is identical to the
fused glass from the Chalk Pit.

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

199

The most recent aboriginal site at which there is good evidence for
use of fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation is the
Deshazo site (41 NA 27) in the Bayou Loco drainage near
Nacogdoches. This site appears to have minor Archaic and possibly
later prehistoric Caddoan components, but the principal component
is a protohistoric (presumably Hasinai) hamlet and cemetery. Trade
goods are very scarce in the domestic portion of the site, suggesting it
predates entry of Europeans into the immediate area. Glass trade
beads from the site correspond to the Harris’ Period 1 (1700-1740
A.D.) beads (Harris and Harris 1967: 130; Dee Ann Story, personal
communication). Several hundred flakes, cores, and chipped stone
artifacts were recovered in excavations by the Texas Archeological
Survey and the Texas Archeological Research Lab in 1975, and
among these were four flakes and one flake or shatter fragment of
fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation. One was found in a
midden deposit inside structures 1 and 2, another in the plow zone in
the same area, another inside structures 1 and 3, another in a midden
deposit adjacent to and just outside structures 5 and 6, and the fifth
was found on the surface 40 meters east of the main excavations.
Some speculations about extractive technology
We can only speculate about what sort of exposures of fused rocks
may have existed prehistorically, and what methods were used to
recover raw material for chipping. Recent quarrying, pine
plantations, and firebreaks have extensively disturbed the Chalk Pit
locality, which I suspect was the primary source locality. On a recent
trip there I saw thoroughly fired and fractured rocks extending to the
base of the A soil horizon in the northern part of the quarry, but no
glass aggregates were present. Baked shales could be obtained there
simply by scraping off the topsoil. Most of the fused glass, however,
occurs in the middle unit {King and Rodda 1962: 266), generally well
below the surface [below the light-colored stratum in Fig. 4). It seems
likely that recovery techniques were limited to" collecting glass
aggregates exposed by erosion.
Manufacturing technology
Flakes and cores of fused volcanic glass are found at all but five of
the sites considered here, indicating that artifacts were not
introduced from the outcrop area in finished form. Instead, small
nodules were brought to the sites and there reduced to flakes and
shatter fragments, with some of the flakes being selected for shaping
into finished tools. At the George C. Davis site, for example, the
reduction process is represented by cores, flakes and shatter

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 4. Exposure of fired tuff and tuffaceous claystone in the east
wall of the Chalk Pit quarry. Glass aggregates occur at about the same
level as the rock hammer, but none are visible in this photo.

MANNING

FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

201

fragments, arrow point preform failures (Fig. 5, H-K, this paper, and
Shafer 1973: 147, Fig. 14, D2, E2), and finished Alba points (Fig. 5, G).
The only tool forms presently known are San Patrice points, arrow
points (Alba, possibly Catahoula, and unclassified), and a small
biface.
Although Sharer found in his study of Manning fused glass chipping
debris at the Davis site that the particular percussion technique
could not be conclusively identified on many flakes and cores, his
experiments with core reduction suggested that anvil (bipolar]
percussion was a major reduction technique for Manning fused glass
at the Davis site (Shafer 1973: 149}. Shafer classified the chipping
debris as follows:*
Hard hammer percussion
bipolar flake debitage
opposed ridge flakes
miscellaneous
bipolar core debitage
opposed ridge
point-base
miscellaneous
Technique uncertain
miscellaneous flake debitage
flake fragment debitage
miscellaneous core debitage

2
7
2
1
3
61
59
20

*Taken from Shafer, 1973, table 2; does not include some items tabulated in
this paper.

A surface collection of chipping debris from the Chalk Creek #1 site
(41 WA 71} made by Bill Moore provides us with an opportunity to
look at the byproducts of tool manufacture at a site near the source
area. The Chalk Creek site is a small site located on a sandy ridge
about 3 kilometers away from the Chalk Pit quarry. As would be expected at a site so close to the source area, fused volcanic glass
makes up a larger proportion of the chipping debris and frequently
occurs in the form of larger flakes than at the Davis site. Manning
fused glass comprises about 60% to 70% of the Chalk Creek surface
collection.
This assemblage of manufacturing debris is quite different from the
George C. Davis sample and suggests that manufacturing processes
differed at the two sites. It might not be legitimate to treat this
surface collection as an assemblage, since both heavily patinated and
unpatinated or lightly patinated flakes are present, but sorting of the
flakes by degree of patination shows that patination does not covary

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

202

B
A

E

D

F

@

’L

I

H

0

K

J

0.5 cm

FIGURE 5. Projectile points made of fused volcanic glass from the
Manning Formation A, San Patrice, C. W. Ellis site (41 PK 1); B, San
Patrice, Rusk County; C, Catahoula (?), Houston site (41 SJ 19); D,
unclassified arrow point, 41 TN 11, surface; E. Alba or Catahoula,
Claude Riley collection, Madison County; F, Alba, Robbin’s Ferry site
(41 HO 4), surface; G, Alba, George C. Davis site (41 CE 19), WPA
excavations, sub-Mound A wash, near features 12, 13, 14, depth 14
inches; H-K, arrow point preform failures, George C. Davis site; H, K,
surface southeast of Mound B; I, plow zone over Mound B; J, surface,
east of Highway 21.

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

A

203

B

D

C

FIGURE 6. Cores of fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation
A, free-hand/bipolar (?) core remnant, Chalk Creek site, surface;
arrow indicates direction of possible bipolar percussion blow; B,
core, technique uncertain, Chalk Creek site, surface; C, core
remnant, technique uncertain, George C. Davis site, Unit 6 plow zone;
D, bipolar core, George C. Davis site, surface east of Highway 21,
area M5.

with the descriptive categories presented below. The Chalk Creek
sample can be partitioned into the following categories:
1. Flakes with intact platform remnants and moderately developed bulbs
of percussion (N = 42). This group of flakes is almost certainly the result

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

204

of percussion with a hard hammer on cores that were not supported on
a hard anvil. These flakes have platform remnants that are in many
cases quite broad; many flakes are short, wide, and expanding in
shape, others elongated, a few irregular; these tend to be thick in crosssection, tapering toward the distal end, but most are not markedly
arched. Nine are snapped near the distal end.
2.

3.

4.

Flakes from early stages of biface thinning? (N=15). These have
narrow, frequently battered platform remnants and are elongate and
very thin, often with a reticulate scar pattern on the dorsal surface.
Platform remnants are similar to the direct impact percussion flakes,
but the elongate shape and marked thinness suggests hard hammer
percussion from early stages of biface thinning. One has a faceted
platform remnant and falls within the range of variability of soft
hammer thinning flakes, but none have lipped platform remnants.
Flake fragments possibly from thinning flakes (N= 3). The proximal
ends of these are snapped off but their shape and thinness suggests
they are broken examples of flakes in the preceding category.
Direct impact percussion flakes (N = 92). Direct impact percussion is a
useful term introduced by Shafer (1973: 114) to describe flakes that
result from blows delivered head-on at a 90° angle to ~the striking
platform, but lacking the definitive attributes of anvil percussion (such
as bipolar battering). Direct impact flakes can result either from anvil
or free-hand percussion. These flakes are characterized by well
developed cones of percussion or by platform remnants that are
shattered, often with a jagged, ridgelike edge, or are extensively
battered. The columnar-faceted shape characteristic of bipolar
percussion is absent, however, and none of the flakes show bipolar
battering. Fourteen of these flakes have cones of percussion, including
5 snapped near the distal end, Seventy-eight have shattered platforms,
including 28 snapped near the distal end and 10 hinged through toward
the dorsal surface. These flakes have attributes that could result either
from free-hand or anvil percussion, but as a group they do not closely
resemble debris from experimental bipolar reduction of Manning fused
glass cores.

5.

Flake fragments (N = 130).

6. Angular shatter fragments (N = 28).
7. Cores (N= 5). Three are exhausted core nuclei (Fig. 6A, B); one has
what looks like a free-hand percussion scar on one face, with extensive
battering on a lateral edge, perhaps from anvil percussion (Fig. 6, A).
One is a spall from what may be a crudely worked biface.
8. Unclassified fragments (N = 3).
TOTAL: 318

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

205

This classification of the chipping debris seems to indicate that
manufacturing processes at the Chalk Creek site were directed less
toward bipolar reduction of small cores than at the Davis site and
more toward free-hand reduction of larger cores, possibly indicating
production of thinned bifaces. Aside from the possible biface
fragment mentioned above in category 7, no definite examples have
been discovered at the site. One elongate biface fragment and one
possible dart point blade fragment are made of unidentified material
that could be fused volcanic glass. In summary, the chipping debris at
Chalk Creek seems to indicate both greater availability of Manning
fused glass and the manufacture of tool types different from those
being made at the Davis site.
SUMMARY
Fused volcanic glass is a highly localized natural resource that
apparently occurs, at least in chippable form, only at a few localities
within the Manning Formation (baked shales are less readily
identifiable since they also occur at localities in the Wilcox Group).
There is clear evidence that one or more of these localities was known
as early as the Early Archaic, and by the early Caddoan period, fused
volcanic glass was being distributed as far north as the middle Sabine
drainage, 120 kilometers away, although the material was never used
in quantity except in the vicinity of the outcrop. It seems unlikely that
knowledge of the material was lost during the Middle and Late
Archaic, since many of the sites at which fused volcanic glass
chipping debris occurs also have Middle or Late Archaic dart points
made of chert, quartzite, or petrified wood. It is also worth
mentioning that many of the sites also have sandy paste pottery and
some have Catahoula sandstone, both items that could also have been
obtained in the Kisatchie Escarpment region.
While most of the sites included in this study are either undated or
poorly dated, the evidence from the Davis site and the Martin Lake
area indicates minor use of fused volcanic glass over fairly long
periods of time, suggesting some sort of long-standing resource
distribution pathway connecting these areas and the Kisatchie
Escarpment region. At the Davis site occasional use of fused volcanic
glass over a period of several centuries may be indicated.
Even more interesting, though, is the evidence already presented to
support the hypothesis that the Martin Lake fused glass was derived
from a source locality that was probably different from that
(presumably the Chalk Pit) supplying other east Texas sites. This
implies two distribution pathways, one supplying the middle Sabine

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

drainage and the other supplying the Trinity, Neches, and Angelina
drainages. Careful petrographic studies are needed to investigate
and verify this relationship.
Knowing that fused volcanic glass would have been more difficult
to obtain with increasing distance from the outcrop, we might predict
that sites farther away from the Manning Formation would show
more thorough reduction of cores, resulting in smaller exhausted
cores, smaller flakes, more reliance on anvil percussion, and more
recycling of chipping debris. In general this seems to be true, partly
illustrated by differences in chipping debris at the Chalk Creek and
George C. Davis sites. Ultimately it may be possible to plot, for each
site, weights of flakes and cores against distance from the outcrop in
order to form a regression estimate of intensified reduction with
transport distance. This might allow us actually to identify distribution centers (positive residuals} and consumer sites (negative residuals} within the distribution networks.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The research reported here was begun in 1970 and continued in 1975
with encouragement and material support from Dee Ann Story, Director,
Texas Archeological Research Lab. Mr. Gaff L. King, Jr., of Crockett first
took me to the Chalk Pit quarry in 1970. Bill Caskey and L. D. Stewart of
Houston made their collections available for study. Bill Moore of Huntsville
made his collections available for study, took me to some of the sites he has
reported, provided hospitality during my stay in Huntsville, and donated
chipping debris from some of the sites to TARL. Carolyn Spook assisted in
plotting chipping debris at the Davis site. Others who have provided
information~or assistance include Harry Shafer (Department of Sociology
and Anthropology, Texas A&M University), S. E. Clabaugh (Department of
Geology, University of Texas at Austin), Ed Garner (Bureau of Economic
Geology), and Milton Bell (Texas Highway Department).

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

207

REFERENCES CITED

Davis, E. Mott and Salvatore Valastro, Jr.
1970 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates VIII. Radiocarbon, Vol. 12,
No. 2, pp. 617-639.
Harris, R. King and Inus Marie Harris
1967 Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. In: Robert E. Bell, Edward
B. Jelks, and W.W. Newcomb, A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory. Final Report for Grant GS-964,
National Science Foundation, pp. 129-162.
King, E. A., Jr. and Peter U. Rodda
1962 Fused Rocks in the Jackson Group (Eocene), Texas. Transactions,
Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies No. 12, pp. 265-270.
Lonsdale, John T. and David J. Crawford
1928 Pseudo-Igneous Rock and Baked Shale from the Burning of Lignite,
Freestone County, Texas. In: Contributions to Geology, 1928,
University of Texas Bulletin, No. 2801, pp. 147-158.
Renick, B. Coleman
1936 The Jackson Group and the Catahoula and Oakville Formations in a
Part of the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain. University of Texas Bulletin, No.
3619.
Sharer, Harry J.
1973 Lithic Technology at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County,
Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Story, Dee Ann and Salvatore Valastro, Jr.
1975 Radiocarbon dating and the George C. Davis site. Paper presented at
the 40th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archeology,
Dallas.
Valastro, Salvatore, Jr., E. Mort Davis, and Alejandra G. Varela
1975 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates X. Radiocarbon, Vol. 17, No.
1, pp. 52-98.

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES
FROM A CROCKETT COUNTY SHELTER:
A TEST FOR SEASONALITY
J. PHIL DERINC AND HARRY J. SHAFER

ABSTRACT
Four matrix samples collected from a thin fiber lens in Gobbler Shelter,
Crockett

County,

Texas

are

analyzed

in

an

attempt

to

determine

seasonality. Analyses of the artifacts, plant and animal remains are also
reported. Problems of plant identification are discussed and preliminary
techniques

for

identification

of

the

plant

materials

are

described.

Insufficient knowledge of plant flowering behavior and prehistoric plant
distribution prevented the determination of seasonality. A more inclusive
approach which involves placing the seasonality question in its proper
ecological context is suggested.

INTRODUCTION
"No material relicit of a former population can be discarded as
irrelevant" (Heizer and Cook 1956:230).
Archeologists have found the analysis of plant remains to be
indispensible to the reconstruction of prehistoric subsistence
patterns. Although many reports emphasizing analysis of plant
remains have been printed recently, archeologists have overlooked
one of their best data sources, southwest Texas. In this paper we
report the analysis of well preserved plant material from a small, dry
rockshelter in Crockett County, Texas. The data were used in an
attempt to determine which season or seasonsI the site was utilized by
prehistoric hunter-gatherer groups.
Literally hundreds of small rockshelter sites occur in the limestone
canyons of west central, southwest, and west Texas. Many of these
shelter

sites

once

contained

dessicated plant

remains

left

by

aboriginal inhabitants. The cultural deposits in an ,alarming number
(perhaps most) of these rockshelter sites have been destroyed by relic
hunters for the sake of a few chipped stone artifacts. In other
instances, amateur archeologists have attempted to obtain controlled
samples of artifacts from these sites. However, by discarding the
dried plant materials they overlooked perhaps the largest potential
source of information about the lifeways of the prehistoric
inhabitants.

’For the purposes of this paper, "season" is used in the chronological sense to denote
one of the four astronomical periods of the year: spring, summer, autumn, and winter.

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

For the most part, the amateur archeologists cannot be faulted for
this inappropriate sampling technique, for they were using precisely the same methods of collecting employed by professional
archeologists. At the time of this writing, partial excavations at II
rockshelter sites have been reported from Crockett County (Lorrain
1968; Riggs 1968a, 1968b, 1969, 1974; Word 1971). Several of these
shelters contained dried plant remains but the materials were neither
systematically collected nor analyzed.
OBJECTIVES
Many hunter-gatherer groups follow a seasonal migratory path in
search of food (Lee and Devore 1968: 12). Since the prehistoric
populations who inhabited the Live Oak Creek area were hunters and
gatherers and since the dry deposit at Gobbler Shelter was 10 cm. or
less in thickness, the analysis of the botanical materials in the fiber
lens could yield data on seasonality. We felt that there was a good
chance the shelter was visited intermittently by late prehistoric
groups during one or more seasons of the year. A demonstration of
seasonality could be used to advance hypotheses regarding the
subsistence settlement models of Late Archaic populations in the
area.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE
Gobbler Shelter is a westward-facing rockshelter located on a
small tributary canyon of Live Oak Creek in Crockett County, Texas
(Fig. 1, A,B). The rockshelter is about 23 meters wide, 7 to 9 meters
deep, and 2 to 3 meters high at the drip line. The site was recorded in
1974 by Texas Highway Department archeologists during the course
of their work along the proposed right-of-way of Interstate 10.
Prehistoric cultural activity was evident from the outside by a thin
burned rock talus on the slope in front of the shelter and remnants of
soot deposits on the ceiling. A badly disturbed dark gray ashy deposit
was evident under the overhang near the drip line; dessicated plant
remains could be seen in the edges of several potholes in the central
portion and near the southern end. Much of the floor at the back of
the shelter was exposed limestone bedrock. It is estimated that
approximately 70% of the aboriginal deposit was destroyed by
artifact collectors.
The fill exposed in the walls of several shallow potholes revealed a
stratified deposit averaging 20 to 25 cm. thick. The upper portion of
the deposit consisted of 4 to 6 cm. of compacted sheep dung overlying
a thin layer of white limestone dust weathered from the shelter wall.

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

211

A

FIGURE 1. Views of Gobbler Shelter. A, View of shelter setting, Gobbler Shelter (41 CX 117) located on the right; site 41 CX 113 to the left.
B, View of Gobbler Shelter (41 CX 117).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

212

This layer of dust measured about 6 cm. thick. Beneath the dust was a
thin fiber lens resting directly on bedrock. The fiber lens varied in
thickness but averaged about 10 cm.
In January, 1975, members of the Highway Department’s archeological staff returned to the shelter for the purpose of obtaining small matrix samples from the fiber lens exposed in the
pothole walls. These samples were sent to the Texas A&M University
Anthropology Laboratory for analysis.
This study reports the contents of four of these samples together
with a small collection of artifacts obtained from the surface of the
shelter.

ARTIFACTS
The small sample of artifacts collected from the surface and
pothole backdirt during the two trips to the site is described below.
Cordage (6 specimens; Fig. 2, D-F)
There are 5 examples of 2-ply, Z-twist yarn in the sample. The diameter
of the smallest is I mm., while the largest twist measures 4 mm. The fibers

B

0

cnl

2

C
FIGURE 2. Perishable artifacts. A, pointed stick; B, C, knotted fiber;
D-F, cordage.

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT
of three examples are from unidentified plants. One specimen of cordage is
a 4-ply yarn with S-twist fibers twisted into a 2-ply Z-twist which was then
S-twisted into a 4-ply yarn. Two specimens (one shown in Fig. 2, F) are of
combined plant fibers and hair. Identification of the hair was made by
Glendon H. Weir {ms.) on the basis of structural data using the Scanning
Electron Microscope. He compared the archeological specimens with fur
samples in the mammalian reference collection in the Wildlife and
Fisheries Department at Texas A&M University. Weir’s findings indicate
that the hair is jackrabbit (Lepas californicas}.

Knotted Fibers (5 specimens; Fig. 2, B, C)
Four of these are square knots and one is an unidentified fragment.
Three are tentatively identified as Yucca sp. on the basis of the cell morphology in traces of the epidermis (see methods section for description of
this technique). Two of these knots are on the same fiber strip (Fig. 2, C).
The fourth square knot is made with Agave lecheguilla; here again, the
identification was made on the basis of epidermal cell shape. The fifth and
fragmentary specimen is unidentified.

Modified stick (1 specimen; Fig. 2, A)
This artifact is 12.3 cm. long and 5 mm. in diameter at the maximum. The
entire surface of the stick has been presumably scraped with a sharp
edged stone tool, and one end is tapered to a point. The point appears to
have been fire-hardened and is polished from use. Traces of polish extend
up the stick approximately 2 mm. from the tip. The opposite end exhibits a
series of hack or cut marks, the largest of which appears to have severed
the stick from a larger piece. Owing to the polished tip, it is doubtful that
this stick functioned as a foreshaft as one might suspect from a cursory
glance. The polished tip suggests that it may have served as a wooden awl.

Lithic Artifacts
Several stone artifacts were recovered from the disturbed fill in the
front portion of the shelter. This sample includes unmodified flakes, an
unretouched chert nodule or core, a chert core-hammerstone, modified
chert flakes, and a mano fragment,
Two of these flakes were removed during the course of retouching a
biface. Three were removed from cores by hard-hammer percussion
during early stages of core reduction.
One specimen (Fig. 3, C) is a flake fragment which is unifacially
retouched along one edge. Traces of charred organic material adhere to
one end. Another specimen (Fig. 3, A) is a burned fragment of a unifacially
retouched tool. The flake’s ventral surface exhibits a high gloss resulting
from extensive use along and near the retouched edge. This gloss plus the
unifaeial retouch indicates that this specimen was used as a knife. The
angle of the modified edge is 48 degrees.

213

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

214

Utilized Flake (1 specimen; Fig. 3, B)
A hard-hammer flake exhibits bifacial edge nicking around much of the
lateral margins; traces of edge polish can also be detected in two areas.
The edge angles are sharp, measuring 40 degrees or less.
Hammerstone (1 specimen; Fig. 3, F)
A fragment of a chert nodule has been battered along a thick portion of
the edge. The battering is not extensive.
Core Fragment (1 specimen)
This item is a tabular chert nodule 71 cm. long and 37 cm. wide that
exhibits two flake facets. It has not been altered otherwise.
Mano Fragment (1 specimen; Fig. 3, G)
This specimen is of coarse-grained quartzite, a material which is clearly
foreign to this predominantly limestone region. The mano was biracial and
extensively used. There does not appear to be any clear evidence of use
subsequent to its breakage. Therefore, it was likely broken at the site.
Traces of unidentified organic material adhere to the pits in both faces.

A

C

D

E

F

G
0

cm

3

FIGURE 3. Lithic artifacts. A-C, retouched flakes; D, E, unmodified
flakes; F, hammerstone; G, mano fragment.

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

215

Comments on the Artifacts
This small artifact sample is not considered sufficient to be representative of those activities at the site that are manifested in material
remains. The sample is, however, indicative of the diversity of
activities carried out here, such as those involving manufacture and
use of chipped stone tools, use of ground stone tools, use of various
artifacts requiring the manufacture and/or use of cordage, knotted
fibers, perhaps weaving, certainly food preparation, and cooking.
Taken together, the range of functions at the site strongly suggests
that Gobbler Shelter served as a camp site.
This sample is also lacking temporally-diagnostic specimens.
However, based on findings from other small rockshelter sites in
Crockett County (Lorrain 1968; Word 1971}, we expect that the
deposits date some time after 500 B.C., either during the Late Archaic
or post-Archaic periods.

PLANT ANALYSIS
A. Methods
Each of the four Gobbler Shelter matrix samples filled a 20-pound
paper bag about two-thirds full. The samples were sifted through a
window (1/16-inch) screen to remove the cave dust. The material
which i3assed through the screen was examined for very small seeds
and then discarded. The rest was hand sorted, identified and
separately packed for storage.
Because of the small sample size, the seeds were simply counted.
Measurement of bulk volume is a more satisfactory indication of
relative abundance. The vegetative remains of sotol, lechuguilla, and
yucca were weighed. Plant remains were identified using seed
identification manuals, illustrated floras, and available reference
collections.
In dry areas of southwest Texas fibrous remains of lechuguilla,
sotol, and/or yucca often comprise the bulk of the dry midden
contents. Sandals, matting, baskets, and cordage which were made of
the leaves and fiber of these plants have often been recovered.
Charred and/or chewed leaf parts (quids) are often an abundant
midden component. In separating these three genera archeologists
have tried to rely on differences in external appearance. However,
this method has nod been adequate since the altered condition of
most plant remains obscures the more obvious morphological
characteristics. Recent investigations into the prehistoric subsistence
patterns in the lower Pecos River area (Alexander 1970; Moore 1975;
Shafer 1975) have created a need for a convenient and more nearly

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

accurate means of identifying these genera in all stages of
processing, including the final product, whether it is a quid or a
basket.
The problems of accurate identification of these fibrous remains
can be illustrated by reviewing previous reports from the lower Pecos
area. Irving (1966: 61-88) reported fibrous plant remains from six
shelters in the Amistad district. He found that lechuguilla was the
dominant economic plant, yet sotol was not mentioned. This is
contradictory since at Fate Bell Shelter, one of the sites Irving
studied, two sotol cooking pits with fragments of sotol had been
reported earlier by Pearce and Jackson (1933: 16-17). At Baker Cave
in Val Verde County, Word and Douglas (1970: 12-13) reported that
quids were present but made no attempt at identification. Remains of
lechuguilla were the most abundant midden component in Parida
Cave (Alexander 1970: 63) and Conejo Shelter (Alexander 1974: 220),
both in Val Verde County.
In Crockett and Pecos Counties, upstream from the Val Verde
County sites virtually no macrofossil analyses have been made.
Holden (1941: 33) found many quids in McKenzie’ Cave in Pecos
County that he said were "perhaps sotol." Near Iraan in Crockett
County, Lorrain (1968: 43) reported only a few knotted sotol leaves
and several cut lechuguilla leaves from Meadows Shelter H and she
found no perishables at the Sotol Site. At Red Mill Shelter, Word
(1971: 306) identified cut leaves of sotol, sacahuisti (Nolina texana)
and lechuguilla. He found two types of quids which he speculated
were of sotol and lechuguilla (Word 1971: 307).
None of these reports substantiate their plant determinations by
detailing identification methods. Anyone trying to synthesize
prehistoric subsistence patterns in the lower Pecos River area is
faced with a mixture of conflicting data.
Recognizing the need for dependable means of identifying sotol,
yucca, and lechuguilla, we began testing different analytical
techniques. Of the methods attempted, the one involving the
comparison of the cuticular features of the three genera has proved
the most promising. Thin pieces of the leaf’s epidermis are placed on
a clean glass slide with a drop of clearing solution over which is
placed a cover slip. Microscopic identification is made by comparison
to known reference specimens. Photographs taken by Glenna
Williams-Dean of a lechuguilla quid epidermis and lechuguilla, sotol
and yucca reference leaf cuticle are shown in Figures 4 and 5.
This technique is preliminary, but refinement and expansion of the
process could insure quick and dependable identification of even
highly modified plant remains. We believe this technique will be

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

217

A

FIGURE 4. A, photograph of the epidermal cells of sotol (Dasylirion
texanum); B, epidermal cells of lechuguilla (Agave lecheguilla).

A

B

FIGURE 5. A, photograph of the epidermal cells of Yucca (Yucca sp.);
B, epidermal cell of cut leaf base from Gobbler Shelter identified as
Agave lecheguilla (compare with Fig. 4, B).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

218

especially helpful in determining the specific plants used in
manufacturing material culture elements, and have already
demonstrated its potential in artifact analysis by identifying the
genera of the split and knotted leaves from Gobbler Shelter.
B. Results
The results of the quantitative analysis of macrofossils from
Gobbler Shelter are listed in Tables I through 4. The sample size was
TABLE 1. CONTENTS IN MATRIX SAMPLE #1

Scientific Name

Common Name

Number or Amount

Leaves:
Quercus virginiano

Virginia Live Oak

35 leaves

Quercus pungens

Vasey Shin Oak

29 leaves

Janiperus sp.

Jmfiper, Cedar

24 leaf fragments

Seeds, Bulbs:
13 seeds

Prosopis sp.

Mesquite

luniperus sp.

Juniper, Cedar

102 seeds

Opuntiu sp.

Prickly Pear

205 seeds

Allium drummondii

Onion

13 bulb fragments

Quercus pungens

Vasey Shin Oak

11 acorn fragments

Jaglans microcarpa

Walnut

3 infloresence stalks,
numerous seeds

Setaria lutescens
Diospyros texana

4 fragments

Texas Persimmon

1 seed

Other Plant Remains:
Dasylirion texanum

Sotol leaf & caudex
fragments

Agave lecheguilla

Lechugnilla leaf & caudex
fragments

Yucca sp.

Yucca leaf & caudex
fragments

191.9 grams
32 grams
5 culms

Gramineae
Faunal Remains:

27.8 grams

Nunlber

fish vertebrae

8

scales

3

gill covers

1

small bone fragments

3

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

219

small and indicates the contents of only a fraction of the Gobbler
Shelter midden. Leaf and caudex fragments of Yucca (Yucca sp.),
lechuguilla (Agave lechegui!!a), and sotol (Dasylirion texanum),
constituted the largest portion of preserved botanical material. Fruits
of mesquite (Prosopis sp.), juniper (]uniperus sp.), prickly pear
(Opuntia sp.), oak (Quercus pungens), walnut (luglans microcarpa),
and persimmon. (Diospyros texana), indicated that other plant
resources were exploited when ripe.

TABLE 2. CONTENTS IN MATRIX SAMPLE #2
Scientific Name

Common Name

Number or Amount

L eave s:
Quercus virginiana

Virginia Live Oak

Quercus pangens

Vasey Shin Oak

Diospyros texana

Texas Persimmon

11 leaves
5 leaves
35 leaves

Seeds, Bulbs:
A!Hum drummondii

Onion

Opuntia sp.

Prickly Pear

52 seeds

/aniperus sp.

Juniper, Cedar

85 seeds

Prosopis sp.

Mesquite

25 seeds

Quercas sp.

Oak

8 acorn fragments

luglans microcarpa

Walnut

5 walnut fragments

Diospyros texana

Texas Persimmon

i seed

Gramineae

probably three unknown
species

4 bulb fragments

Other Plant Remains:
Dasylirion texanum

Sotol leaf & caudex
fragments

Opuntia joint fragments

Prickly Pear pads

Agave lecheguilla

Lechuguflla leaf & caudex
fragments

charcoal
Faunal Remains:

(including

3.5 grams

58 grams
10 grams

Number

beetle

1

rabbit bone

1

charred bones

2

5 quids)

wt. 155 grams

total

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

220

The remains of plant and animal resources are listed in Table 5. No
attempt will be made to explore all of the uses of the plant and animal
parts identified in the matrix samples. The samples were collected
mainly to seek an answer to the problem of seasonality and not to
provide a definitive statement concerning the much more encompassing problem of plant use. However, using information
derived from this study we can tentatively list those plants which we
feel served as food and material for manufacturing products.
Coprolite analyses from other locations in the lower Pecos River
area have provided a substantial list of plant foods actually
consumed by peoples of the Lower Pecos Archaic (Riskind 1970;
TABLE 3. CONTENTS IN MATRIX SAMPLE #3
Scientific Name

Common Name

Number or Amount

Leaves:
Quercus virginiana

Virginia Live Oak

Quercus pungens

Vasey Shin Oak

3 leaves

Juniperus sp.

Juniper, Cedar

Fouquieria splendens

Ocotillo

Diospyros texana

Texas Persimmon

53 leaves

Prosopis sp.

Mesquite

21 seeds

Quercus sp.

Oak

/urdperus sp.

Juniper

85 seeds

Allium drummondii

Onion

58 bulb fragments

Diospyros texana

Texas Persimmon

Opuntia sp.

Prickly Pear

37 seeds

Dasylirion texanum

Sotol leaf & caudex
fragments

54 grams

Agave lecheguilla

Lechuguilla leaf & caudex
fragments

58 grams

Yucca sp.

Yucca leaf & caudex
fragments

17 grams

Opuntia sp,

Prickly Pear pads

7 leaves
20 leaf fragments
7 leaves

Seeds:

6 acorn fragments

1 seed

Other Plant Remains:

Unidentified Quids

4.4 grams
48 grams

Unidentified fiber mass
(Lechuguilla, Sotol, or Yucca)
Charcoal

23 grams
7.8 grams

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

221

Bryant 1974). This information, combined with ethnographic data on
historic Indian adaptations in the American Southwest (Sharer, et al
1975) serves as the basic reference in our interpretations of the uses
for some plants. The economic uses of other plants or plant parts not
used for food are more certain since they occurred in the artifactual
remains at the site.

TABLE 4. CONTENTS IN MATRIX SAMPLE #4

Scientific Name

Common Name

Number or Amount

Quercus virginiana

Virginia Live Oak

19 leaves

Quercus pungens

Vasey Shin Oak

41 leaves

luniperus sp.

Juniper

86 leaf fragments

Diospyros texuna

Texas Persimmon

94 leaves

Leaves:

Berberis trifoliolata

i leaf

Seeds, Bulbs:
Prosopis sp.

Mesquite

11 seeds

luniperus sp.

Juniper

37 seeds
33 seeds

Opuntia sp.

Prickly Pear

Allium drummondii

Onion

Celtis sp.

Hackberry

I seed

Diospyros texana

Texas Persimmon

1 seed, 1 calyx

Juglans microcarpa

Walnut

7 fragments

Quercus sp.

Oak

4 acorn fragments,
2 acorns

Sophora segundiflora

Mountain Laurel

i seed, i pod fragment

4 bulb fragments
2 bulbs

Other Plant Remains:
Dasylirion texanum

Sotol leaf & caudex
fragments

90 grams

Agave lecheguilla

Lechugnilla leaf & caudex
fragments

65 grams

Yucca sp.

Yucca leaf & caudex
fragments

22 grams

Agave lecheguilla

Lechuguflla quids (5)

14 grams

Dasylirion texanum

Sotol quids (3)

12 grams

Unidentified Quids

(21)

73 grams

Opuntia sp.

Prickly Pear pad
fragments (13)

38 grams

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The listing in Table 5 is representative only of the matrix samples
themselves and not necessarily the shelter as a whole. A more
comprehensive and informative listing of economic plants and
animals will be possible only after the completion of additional
sampling of the shelter. Nevertheless, the contents of the samples
may be viewed as random selections and therefore give some
indication of the range of plants and animals exploited by the
aboriginal populations who frequented Gobbler Shelter.
C. Discussion
The prehistoric hunter-gatherers of the lower Pecos River area
utilized plants extensively in their diet and in their subsistence
technology. As emphasized earlier, dry conditions in many of the
area’s rockshelters have saved otherwise perishable plant remains in
midden deposits for thousands of years. While analysis of the
perishable artifacts has contributed much to the understanding of
these aboriginal populations, the bulk of the dry shelter middens is
composed of plant refuse, the by-product of implement making and
food preparation.
Although plant macrofossils comprise the bulk of deposits in many
of the lower Pecos area rockshelters, few people have systematically
collected and examined them. There are only four reports which
seriously treat plant remains from the lower Pecos River area (Irving
1966; Alexander 1970, 1974; Shafer, et al 1975). All of these papers
dealt with plant macrofossils found in caves downstream from
Crockett County, in or near the Amistad Lake district. The earliest
paper was a partially quantified checklist of plant parts recovered
from six rockshelters in the Amistad district (Irving 1966:89). Irving’s
(1966:89) only significant remark about his data was that plant usage
differed among the six sites. Shafer, et al (1975) reported ten of the
most abundant plant species recovered from 41 W 456.
Interpretation of data was confined to cautious speculation about the
utility of these plants. Both of the studies by Irving and Shafer, et al,
were preliminary reports.
Alexander’s observations on vegetal remains from Parida Cave
(41 VV 187) constituted the first significant interpretation of plant
macrofossils from the lower Pecos area. He reported that vegetal
parts of lechuguilla, sotol, and prickly pear occurred in "overwhelming proportions" which "Occupied important positions in the
prehistoric diet" (Alexander 1970: 61). This component of the vegetal
refuse was probably available on a year-round basis, raising the possibiility of long-term shelter occupation. Therefore Parida Cave may
have been retained as a campsite, or permanent base, from which
long range foraging was conducted (ibid: 63).

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

223

o

o

°
~

o

~

0

"E

U
m

~

o
o

o
o

cO

;>

-o= ~

--

"=

9,.,=--.

,-a

-

CO

c~

0

~’:~

~°~

___

~°~ ~
.~0 0

0

o ~ =

0
0

C~ 0 "-

.. ~

,~

0 ~.~
M (D .~
~
~ ~

-~

.~
o

’_

~.~~

<

.~ ~ ~

0

~o~

224

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The first quantitative analysis of plant macrofossil remains from
this area was reported four years later (Alexander 1974). The plant
material came from Conejo Shelter, located two miles north of the
confluence of the Rio Crande and the Pecos River. Alexander used
macrofossil data to test a hypothesis explaining prehistoric cultural
stability in the lower Pecos area. Because the environment changed
very little over a period of about 4,000 years, he believed that the
people had a chance to adapt very efficiently and maintain this
cultural pattern for a long time. We shall focus on his treatment of
seasonality for the purposes of this paper.
Using seasonal flowering and fruit ripening data from Vines’ (1960)
book on woody vegetation in the American Southwest, Alexander
determined the time of year when the fruits of nine economic
plants would ripen. He placed them in chronological order of the
seasons hoping to find evidence of a similar order in the midden
deposits of Conejo Shelter. Instead, he found that most of the plants
occurred in varying abundance throughout the midden (Alexander
1974: 197-198). As a result of this broad distribution within the
midden, Alexander’s conclusions from Conejo Shelter differ from
those in his Parida Cave report. Instead of stressing the possibility of
year-round shelter occupation, he (1974: 198) states:
It appears from this [data distribution] that lenses represent the residues
from long seasonal occupations which lasted perhaps from early summer
through late fall...

Alexander’s evidence could lead to this conclusion. However, there
are many variables which complicate the determination of seasonality from plant macrofossil data.
It is indisputable that many plant resources are available on a
short term basis during the year. Seeds and fruits can be excellent
examples. If prehistoric peoples in the lower Pecos area made
seasonal rounds, they probably left remains of the plants which were
available at the time of the year they visited Gobbler Shelter. We
were tempted to use these plants as an indication of what season of
the year shelters were occupied. Unfortunately we have found that
these indicator plant parts are not always available in southwest
Texas during the same season of every year. In Table 6 we have
demonstrated this problem by comparing Alexander’s source of
seasonality (Vines 1960) to the flowering and fruiting observations
which we made in the summer of 1975. This illustrates the fact that
flowering of many plants in the lower Pecos is not directly governed
by the "seasons," but by factors such as photoperiodism, tern-

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

225

perature, and soil moisture. True, seasons generally exhibit certain levels of light, temperature, and moisture. However, abundant rainfall can result in a double flowering/fruiting of some
plant species as we noted during the wet summer of 1975. We realize
that any area in the world is subject to this variation. But in
southwest Texas rainfall is so erratic and plant response to moisture
is so pronounced that archeologists seeking clues to seasonality
should not overlook these factors.
The problem is easily illustrated by applying our reasoning to the
Gobbler Shelter data. As shown in Tables 1 through 4, we recovered
seeds, fruits, or flower parts representing nine plant genera.
One must remember that these plant remains were available to
human populations because the plants had produced fruits in
response to local environmental conditions.
The left column in Table 6 shows when the plants might normally
flower. However, if the winter is mild and rainfall is heavy, flowering
can occur much earlier and extend late into the fall. In fact, any
combination of rain or drought and warm or cold could produce
flowering or fruiting which is idiosyncratic to a given year or series of
years. In the case of Gobbler Shelter, we have evidence of occupation
from late summer to early fall only if we follow Vines’ (1960) schedule
of flowering. If we compare our data to the observations made in a
wet year (See Table 6, right column) occupation is shifted to earlier in
the summer and extends later into the winter. Moreover, one cannot
TABLE 6. POSSIBLE SEASONAL OCCURRENCES OF GOBBLER SHELTER FLOWERING

Plants

Vines 1960
Months of Flowering

Prosopis sp.

August-September

Opuntia sp.

June-September

Celtis sp.

September-October

Quercus pungens

September-November

Juglaus
microcarpa

September-November

Fruits in July and August,
second flowering in August

Diospyros texana

August-February

Fruits in July, fruit
ripening in late August

Observations of 1975
Fruits in July, same trees still
flowering

Fruits in July

still

226

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

exclude the possibility that the shelter was occupied in the winter
because an absence of most plant fruits would be a normal winter
occurrence. To say that Gobbler Shelter was unoccupied in the
winter because of an absence of seasonal indicators would involve
the use of negative evidence.
An oversimplified approach has kept us from detecting seasonal
occupations at Gobbler Shelter. We lack the information needed to
place the problem of seasonality in its proper context. Environmental
factors which encourage flowering of each plant species in southwest
Texas are not well known. Neither are we certain of the prehistoric
distribution of these plants. Six years ago Alexander {1970: 61} emphasized that post-contact changes have occurred in the vegetation of
the area. More accurate knowledge of plant distribution in relation to
microenvironments will enhance the accuracy of our statements
about plant behavior and prehistoric human procurement patterns.
The establishment of an ecological Context in southwest Texas for
the study of prehistoric human behavior is currently underway at
Texas A&M University. The project has two immediate goals: (1} to
reconstruct vegetation changes which have occurred in southwest
Texas since initial European settlement and [2) to determine the
feasibility of selecting certain seasonal indicator plants based on a
thorough understanding of their flowering behavior. When we know
what makes these plants flower and approximately where they were
flowering, our stories of prehistoric lifeways in southwest Texas will
become both more informative and more accurate.

CONCLUDING STATEMENT
The results of the analysis of four matrix samples from a small
rockshelter containing dessicated plant remains are neither
representative nor conclusive with regards to what can be learned
from such studies. We do feel, however, that these results indicate
the potential of such data sources as plant macrofossils.
The major objective of the study was to determine which season or
seasons of the year the shelter had been utilized. To this end, all
plant, animal, and lithic materials were sorted and a quantitative
list of all components was compiled. During the analysis new plant
identification techniques were explored. Refinements of the method
will be reported later. Thirteen genera of plants commonly listed as
lower Pecos food sources were identified. This represents the largest compilation of potentially economic plants reported from
archeological sites in Crockett County. Nine genera of plants were
listed as potential seasonal indicators. Wood, fiber, and cordage

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

227

artifacts made from at least four different plant sources and one
animal source were also recovered.
However, in attempting to determine seasonality the question of
plant behavior and unpredictable weather conditions complicated the
issue. Reliable data on seasonal flowering of plants in the lower Pecos
are not available. Field observations by the authors have shown that
erratic rainfall can cause very early or very late flowering by plants
in semi-arid regions such as the lower Pecos. Because of this highly
variable behavior, the assumption that plants flower on a seasonal
basis has proved misleading. We conclude that a determination of
seasonal occupation at Gobbler Shelter is premature, given the
available information. This by no means nullifies the value of plant
macrofossil data in interpreting prehistoric subsistence patterns. The
problem is merely expanded to include a detailed consideration of
both plant and human behavior.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank several individuals for their
contributions to this study. Gary L. Moore, Glen Goode and Frank A. Weir
of the Texas Department of Highways and Transportation directed the
authors to Gobbler Shelter and provided the matrix samples for study. The
photographs used in Figure 1 were also made available by Frank Weir.
Glerma Williams-Dean worked with the senior author on developing
methods of identifying leaf fragments of yucca, lechuguilla and sotol.
Glendon H, Weir provided the identification for the animal and plant fibers
in cordage specimens. Williams-Dean, Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr., Gary L.
Moore and B. I. Strode critically reviewed earlier drafts of this paper.
However, we assume sole responsibility for any error of fact or
interpretation.

228

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Alexander, Robert K.
1970 Archeological Excavations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeologieal Salvage Project, No. 19.
1974 The Archaeology of Conejo Shelter: A Study of Stability at an Archaic
Rockshelter Site in Southwestern Texas. Ph.D. Dissertation, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Bryant, Vaughn M.
1974Prehistoric Diet in Southwest Texas: The Coprolite Evidence.
American Antiquity, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 407-420.
Campbell, T. N.
1958 Origins of the Mescal Bean Cult. American Anthropologist, Vol. 60:
pp. 156-160.
Heizer, Robert and Sherburne Cook
1956 Some Aspects of the Quantitative Approach in Archaeology.
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 12, pp. 229-248.
Holden, W. C.
1941 McKenzie Cave and Adjacent Sites in Pecos County. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 13, pp. 46-57.
Irving, Robert S.
1966 A Preliminary Analysis of Plant Remains from Six Amistad Reservoir
Sites. In: Dee Ann Story and Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr: (assemblers), A
Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad Area. Report of
Research, National Science Foundation, GS-667, Austin.
Lee, Richard B. and Irven DeVore
1968 Man the Hunter. Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.
Lorrain, Dessamae
1968 Archeological Excavations in Northwestern Crockett County, Texas,
1966-1967. State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report
No. 12.
Moore, Gary L.
1975 Scheduled Hunting and Gathering in the Trans-Pecos. Paper
presented at the Symposium "Prehistoric Adaptations in the
Chihuahuan Desert." Annual meeting of the Society for American
Archaeology, Dallas.
Pearce, J. E. and A. T. Jackson.
1933 A Prehistoric Rockshelter in Val Verde County, Texas. University of
Texas Publication No. 3327, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 3.
Riggs, Aaron D.
1968a A Crockett County Shelter (41 CX 10). Transactions of the Third
Regional Archaeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico
and Western Texas, South Plains Archaeological Society, pp: 41-50.
1968b A Preliminary Report on a Crockett County, Texas Shelter: 41 CX 12.
Transactions of the Fourth Regional Archaeologica! Symposium for
Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, Iraan Archaeological
Society, pp. 2-18.
1969 Rattlesnake Shelter: 41 CX 29. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological
Society, Vol. 40, pp. 107-117.
1974Nan’s Shelter: 41 CX 109. Transactions of the Ninth Regional
Archaeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and
Western Texas, Midland Archaeological Society: pp. 25-38.

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

229

Riskind, David H.
1970 Pollen Analysis of Human Coprolites from Parida Cave. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 19, pp. 89-101.
Shafer, Harry J.
1975 Art and Territoriality in the Lower Pecos Archaic. Paper presented
at the Symposium "Prehistoric Adaptations in the Chihuahuan
Desert." Annual meeting of the Society for American Archaeology,
Dallas.
Shafer, Harry I., Phil Dering, Glerma Williams-Dean and Vaughn M. Bryant,
Jr.
1975 A Preliminary Report of Hinds Cave, Val Verde County, Texas.
Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Report No. 8.
Vines, Robert A.
1960 Trees, Shrubs and Woody Vines of the Southwest. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Weir, Glendon H.
ms. Mammalian Hair from Gobbler Shelter, Crockett County, Texas.
Manuscript on file at the Texas A&M Anthropology Laboratory,
College Station.
Word, James H.
1971 The Dunlap Complex in Western Central Crockett County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42, pp. 271-318.
Word, James H. and Charles L. Douglas
1970 Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas
Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 16.

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY ON THE
GULF COAST OF YUCATAN, MEXICO
JACK D. EATON
ABSTRACT
Except for the introduction of metals and plastics, modern fishing
technology on the coast of Yucatan has apparently changed little since
ancient times. Handlines with baited hooks, and weighted nets, are still the
most common implements used by individual fishermen on the Gulf coast
today.
Notched stones and potsherds, interpreted as fishing line sinkers and net
weights, have been found at several ancient sites along the Yucatan coast.
A comparison in weight range with modern fishing sinkers favorably
support the interpretation. Association of these notched objects with
coastal settlements dating from the Formative period lend material
evidence for a fishing technology which can be traced to the earliest known
occupation of the Yucatan coast.

INTRODUCTION
Man has lived beside the sea and obtained much of his subsistence
from it since very early times. The practice of fishing, probably as a
supplementary source of subsistence, evidently dates to at least the
Upper Paleolithic. Fishing societies can be traced back to the
Mesolithic and were contemporary with advanced hunting and
gathering societies (Lenski and Lenski 1974). Fishing societies, like
hunting or agrarian societies, are environmentally specialized; and
therefore specialized equipment and techniques were developed to
effectively exploit the environment. It appears to have been during
the Mesolithic that true fish hooks, nets, traps, and boats with
paddles were first used.
Fishing technology was well developed in ancient Egypt, Assyria,
China, and by the Greeks and Romans (Radcliffe 1974). In the New
World, fishing was practiced by some of the earliest known Americans who arrived during the Pleistocene, and subsequently through
all later periods (Willey 1966).
The sea coast in many parts of the world is a rich and varied
ecological zone well suited for subsistence exploitation by man. One
such zone settled by early man is the Gulf Coast of North America and
Mexico. Although sites earlier than the Archaic stage have not been
commonly identified on the Gulf Coast, man was almost certainly
there much earlier.
During the Pleistocene the sea level was considerably lower than
today because of the vast amount of the earth’s surface water being

232

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

trapped in gigantic ice caps. Subsequent melting of the ice due to
warming of the earth’s atmosphere caused the sea level to rise, thus
flooding and covering the earlier coastal habitation sites, and by
about 3500-4000 years ago the rising water reached the approximate
level at where it is today (Coleman and Smith 1964). This, of course, is
an over-simplification of the events, but serves to explain why
Pleistocene fishing community sites have not been found on the
present coast.
On the Texas Gulf Coast the earliest sites recorded which were
associated with marine exploitation belonging to the Archaic stage,
possibly as early as around 3000 B.C. and continuing much later in
time (Campbell 1956, 1958; Fritz 1972; Hester 1971; Story 1968). There
are also later sites occupied into the historic era. Essentially these
are shell middens representing the habitation sites of coastal people
who subsisted, at least to a large degree, upon marine resources.
Little in the artifact collections from the Texas coastal sites clearly
demonstrate the actual technology used in fishing, although the
faunal remains indicate that fishing techniques were used.
Perforated oyster shells, described as possible net weights, are
reported from certain Archaic sites (Campbell 1958; Story 1968) and
might indicate the use of fish nets or weighted lines. Also reported
(Story 1968: 57) are fragments of worked bone which might have been
compound fish hooks.
Fishing community sites belonging to the late pre-ceramic period
(Archaic) have been reported on the Gulf Coast in the Mexican State
of Veracruz (Wilkerson 1975). Included in the artifact collections is
an object (not illustrated) described as a net sinker, suggesting the
use of fishing nets.
On the Yucatan coast the earliest occupation so far uncovered
belongs to the Middle to Late Formative period (ca. 400 B.C.). Not all
sites found on the coast were communities dependent upon a fishing
economy. Some were established to collect salt, and there were trade
ports, but it would seem reasonable to expect that all seashore
communities derived at least part of their subsistence through
fishing. This would probably include the use of spears and arrows,
nets and traps, and weighted lines with hooks.
This report deals with small notched stones and notched potsherds
believed to have been used to weight fishing lines and nets. These
were found at several ancient village sites along the north coast of
Yucatan (Fig. 1), dating from the Formative until the Colonial period,
and which appear to represent a fishing technology of long tradition
(Eaton 1974, 1976). The coastal collections include 168 samples of
notched stones from four sites, and 58 samples of notched potsherds

233

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY OF YUCATAN

from four other sites. The collections, which were the result of
selective sampling, do not necessarily represent a comprehensive
distribution pattern for the coast, as they are undoubtedly to be found
at other coastal sites. The notched stones and sherds will be
described separately, although their basic functions were probably
the same.

o

QUINTANA
RO0

d

CAMPECHE

Che.~u~

GUATEMALA

.o ....
/’7

d. ~’,= ~o ~

I

I

I

F

I

FIGURE 1. Yucatan peninsula. Location of archaeological sites where
fishing weights were found.

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIMENS
Notched stones (Fig. 2).
These are essentially small flat stones of roughly square to rectangular
forms and have notches chipped, and occasionally cut, into two opposing
sides. Most of the stones tend to be slightly rectangular, or oblul~g, in
outline, and notching is about equally found at the ends or at the midsections. Essentially, the stones appear to have been selected for their
natural forms; however, there are a few samples which might have been
chipped and ground to desired shape. Although some of the edges appear
to have been intentionally ground, this may have actually been the result of
use-wear. The notches had been chipped in most samples, but there are at
least three specimens in which the notches were clearly cut with a sharp
blade. The notching of the stones was evidently done to facilitate tying
securely to a line, and the notches are always positioned in-line with the
long or short axis to provide balanced tying (Fig. 4).
Most of the samples collected are medium to coarse grained local
limestone. Some of the smaller ones, however, are beach pebbles, and
there are some fashioned from small flint nodules and core flakes. There is
one specimen which is fine-grained limestone, and another which is coarse
volcanic stone. These appear to be reused fragments of imported stone
implements.
The stones in the collection range in size from 1.7 by 1.7 cm and 0.2 cm in
thickness, to 5.6 by 7.4 cm and 2.2 cm in thickness. They range in weight
from I gram to 128 grams.
Notched potsherds (Fig. 3).
In the collection are six rim sherds and the rest are body sherds.
Unfortunately, most of the sherds are too eroded to identify the wares. Five
specimens are fragments of Colonial period Spanish olive jars, but the rest
appear to be precolumbian wares of unidentified types.
The sherds are worked to an ovoid, square, or rectangular form,
apparently by breaking and grinding. Each has a notch cut in two opposing
sides as described for the notched stones. The notches are usually Vshaped, were obviously cut with a sharp blade, and with only one
exception all rectangular and ovoid forms are notched on the ends.
The sherds range in size from roughly 2.0 by 2.0 cm square, to
rectangular form 8.5 cm long and 4.5 cm in width. The average thickness is
around 1.0 cm. The weights of the notched sherds in the collection range
from 5 grams to 51 grams.

PROVENIENCE
A total of 168 notched stones was collected from middens of four
coastal village sites which span the Maya Late Formative to Modified
Florescent periods (Ball and Eaton 1972; Eaton 1976). Six samples
were collected from Chicxulub site, an early phase Late Formative
occupation dating somewhere between 50 B.C. to A.D. 150. One
hundred and ten samples were collected from Yapak site, a later
phase Late Formative into Early Period I occupation dating sometime

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY OF YUCATAN

235

FIGURE 2. Notched stones. Upper row (l-r): 1, 10, 20, 30 and 40 grams.
Lower row (l-r): 50, 68, 90 and 128 grams.

FIGURE 3. Notched potsherds. (l-r): 6, 11, 13, 22 and 46 grams.

236

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

during A.D. 150 to 250. Five samples are from Chuburna site, an Early
Period I village occupied between A.D. 450 to 550. And, 47 samples
were collected from Xcopte site which was occupied during the
Modified Florescent period of around A.D. 900 to 1200.
The relatively large collections from Yapak and Xcopte sites were
the result of more intensive search for notched stones to establish a
larger type collection and should not be interpreted as relative size of
sites or occupations.
A total of 58 notched potsherds was collected from four coastal
middens and from the shallow water of a lagoon. One notched sherd
was recovered from San Crisanto I site which was occupied during
the Late Formative into Early Period I. One was recovered from
Dolores site, a village also occupied during the Late Formative into
the Early Period. Four were found at Tambo site which was occupied
during the Pure Florescent period (roughly A.D. 800). Nine notched
sherds were found at Rfo Copul site, which has not been dated
securely but is probably Decadent period, just before Spanish
contact. The remaining 43 notched sherds were found scattered along
the edge of Laguna Chuburna. In the Laguna collectiotl are sherds of
eroded precolumbian wares, and there are sherds of Spanish Colonial
ware.
Table I lists the locations, quantities, weight sizes, and
chronological setting for both notched stones and notched sherds
collected from the coast of Yucatan.

COMPARATIVE MATERIALS
Notched stones, as opposed to grooved stones (and there may be
functional differences here), are relatively rare, or simply reported
less frequent than notched potsherds in the Maya area. One endnotched stone is reported from Barton Ramie (Willey et al 1965: 484)
and is probably Late Classic. A small end-notched stone is also
reported from La Victoria (Coe 1961: 106) and is Late Formative.
Andrews (personal communication) reported notched stones from
Dzibilchultun in early context.
Notched potsherds in abundance are reported from Tulum and
other Decadent period sites on the Quintana Roo coast (Sanders 1960:
261). Andrews (personal communication) mentioned finding notched
sherds which might be Late Formative period on Isla Cancun, at
Decadent period Xcaret, and many at Dzililchultun. Proskouriakoff
(1962: 402) reports them from Decadent period Mayapan. They are
reported from Barton Ramie (Willey et al 1965: 408-409) in Late
Classic to Postclassic context, and Coe (1961: 101,105) reports them

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY OF YUCATAN

Qi~Z~

~

~

o

o

~--~

.e~

r..O

0

>

0~

.o

.o

+.,
¢0

,
03

,
0

uo

o

o,,!

~

LeO

237

o

~

¢,,,1

03

¢0

¢0
tO

[’...

CO

Z~
;-D

z~
mO
gT4

CO

0
co
03

CO

zz

¢0

×
¯ ,~
,..c:l

0

~4
cO
¢0

~
cO

0

r.D

0

0
,.0

O~
"~

0

:I

c~

0
~

o

¢0
¢0
~
~
_o

;=
4:3
4:::1

238

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

from La Victoria during Early and Middle Formative stages. Matheny
(1970: 98,100) reports eight notched sherds which range in weight
from 1.5 to 99 grams from the Campeche coast, but the dating is
unknown. Notched sherds are also reported from Altar de Sacrificios
(Willey 1972: 84) which are Late Classic to Early Postclassic.
All of the above mentioned archeological sites, which are located in
widely separated places in the Maya lowlands, and beyond, are
situated on or near the sea coast or major river drainages.

DISCUSSION
The probable use of the notched stones and sherds was for fishing
line sinkers and net weights. It has not been determined if there were
functional differences between those notched in-line with the long
axis and those notched in the short axis. The smaller weights, for
example those weighing under 20 grams, were probably used to
weight fishing lines in shallow water. The heavier weights could have
been used for sinkers on lines to be dropped in deeper water, or for
weighting small nets. Seine and cast nets were probably in common
use on the coast of Yucatan since very early times as they are well
suited to shallow water fishing. Tozzer (1941: 156) mentions the use of
"trammel" nets by the Indians around the time of the conquest, and
these might also have been used much earlier.
Seine nets, cast nets, and hand lines with baited hooks are the most
common implements for fishing the shallow coastal waters of Yucatan
by individual fishermen today. Hand lines are frequently cotton, but
synthetic lines are also used, most notably for leaders. Cotton lines
are easier to handle and do not cut the hands as the synthetics all too
often do. By contrast, most cast nets and some seine nets noted today
are made of synthetic lines, usually nylon, and occasionally
monofilament, while cotton cord nets are becoming increasingly rare.
Nets made with synthetic lines last much longer than cotton. A cotton
net will rot and is usually not dependable for more than one or two
years. A synthetic net will not rot and will give good service for
several years, providing it is rinsed after each use and maintained. In
ancient times lines and nets were probably of cotton cord or other
spun fibers. Yucatan produced a great deal of cotton which was
exported in quantity in pre-conquest times (Roys 1972:53).
For weighting nets and lines today, lead is used almost exclusively.
This, of course, refers to equipment used by those whose livelihood is
fishing, and does not take into account the occasional small boys seen
fishing in the lagoons and off the side of piers with a hand full of
string, a bent pin for a hook, and an old rusty machine screw for a
sinker.

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY OF YUCATAN

239

The collection of notched stones and sherds, considered as sinkers,
is remarkably similar in weight range to the lead sinkers I carry in my
own fishing tackle box. I have split-shot which weigh 1 gram each,
and hollow leads that weigh 3 grams and 14 grams. These are for
weighting lines in shallow water, for example to fish for Gray
Snapper in the mangrove waterways. There are also heavier lead
weights of around 54 grams and 117 grams to weight drop lines into
deeper water. It is not unlikely that fishermen in ancient times kept
and maintained a fishing kit which included sinkers of various
weights. As any fisherman knows, when you get a snag and the tackle
is lost, you are out of business unless you have replacement gear.
Modern cast nets are weighted with lead. For a net of around 2 to 3
meters in diameter, the lead weights are usually 2-4 cm long, weigh
20-30 grams each, and are spaced about 5 cm apart on the lead line
(Dahlem 1968: 14-15). These are usually hollow weights which are
slipped onto the lead line and tied or crimped in place. There are, of
course, a variety of other weight sizes and spacing used by individual
net makers who are frequently required to make do with what is
available. The weighting of cast nets varies not only with the size of
the net used, but also with the depth of the water fished. Nets for
fishing shallow water close inshore are lightly weighted compared to
nets used in deeper water. Heavy weighting is not necessary when
casting into shallow water. Also, when a fisherman is wading up to
his waist, perhaps working with a weighted net that has to be held
high, making the cast becomes very tiring. Working deeper water
from a dock or boat allows a heavier net to be used, and the net can
hang down before the cast, thus reducing fatigue. The heavier the
net, the faster it will sink in any given depth of water; and rate of
descent becomes important when casting into a school of fish. All of
these factors are taken into consideration by the experienced
fisherman and his equipment is generally designed for his specific
method of fishing.
There are basically two kinds of casting nets used on the Yucatan
coast. One, the most frequently used, is the English style net that has
brails and a hand line allowing the net to be pulled in after each cast.
This causes the net to close up trapping the fish within. It can be used
in any depth of water since it closes over the fish as it is pulled in.
The other type is the Spanish net. It does not have brails to close the
net into a pouch as it is pulled in. This kind of net is cast into shallow
water and left there until the fisherman wades to it and takes the fish
out by hand, reaching under the net.
Seine nets, which hang vertically in the water, having floats at the
upper edge and sinkers at the lower, were probably also used by the

240

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ancient coastal fishermen of Yucatan. A perforated thick disk
fashioned from buoyant light volcanic pumice was collected from a
Formative site (Alegria 1) on the coast and appears to have been a net
float. Fragments of light pumice were found at other sites along the
coast and many of these might have served as floats. Most floats,
however, were likely fashioned from a light wood, as modern
fishermen often do, but these would not survive for any great length
of time.
The construction and weighting of the seine nets are essentially the
same as for cast nets, only the form differs. Seine nets are
constructed to foul the fish in the netting, whereas cast nets are
usually of tighter weave and totally capture the fish. Both net types
have their uses for specific fishing. The cast net is generally thrown
into schools of fish and captures all but the tiniest fish. The seine net
is hung, frequently at waterway entrances, but also used for sweep
netting, and catches only the fish of certain minimum size, depending
upon the spacing of the netting.
The notched stones and sherds collected from ancient sites along
the coast might well have served as weights for lines and nets much in
the manner of modern usage as described above.

FIGURE 4. Suggested use of notched stones and sherds as fishing
weights.

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY OF YUCATAN

241

CONCLUSIONS
The collection of notched stones and sherds from the Yucatan coast
seem best described as weights for fishing lines and nets. The
notching of the objects is placed in direct line with the long or short
axis which provides for best in-line balanced attachment to a linear
cord, as suggested in Fig. 3. The sizes and weights of the notched
stones and sherds fall within a usable range, as compared with
modern sinkers, and the finding of these objects at seaside habitation
sites helps to support this view.
The size and weight range of the notched stones and sherds suggest
that they could be used equally well and interchangeable as sinkers
for drop lines or nets. The actual material used by the fishermen,
whether small stones or potsherds might have simply been
preference. Sherd material might be easier to work, but stone would
be much more durable, particularly considering the rough handling to
which the weights would be subjected. It is interesting to note,
however, that although both notched stones and notched sherds were
found at sites representing occupations ranging from the Formative to
the Colonial period, no individual site sampled had both worked
materials represented. At Yapak site, for example, the collection
included 110 notched stones, yet not a single notched sherd was
noted. This is surprising since the site contains a large amount of
pottery fragments. The same was true for Xcopte site where a
relatively large collection of notched stones was made.
In the total collections from the coast there are nearly three times
the number of notched stones compared to notched sherds. This
contrasts with the overall pattern as noted for the greater Maya area
where, in general, far more notched sherds are reported than
notched stones. The actual significance this may have regards
ancient fishing technology on the Yucatan coast is not apparent to me
at this time.
Fiber cord has not survived at the sites, and there is only meager
evidence remaining of net floats. No fish hooks were identified in the
coastal collections (although shell hooks reported to be from Isla
Jaina are on display in the Campeche museum) and this possibly
suggests that they were mostly made from perishable materials, such
as small pointed sticks, bone, or thorns. The notched weights
described in this report do, however, provide us with some tangeable
evidence of a fishing technology that can be traced back to at least
the Formative period in Yucatan.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

242

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The objects described as fishing weights in this report were collected by
me during an archaeological reconnaissance of the west and north coasts
of Yucatan in 1968. The survey was part of a research program being
carried out in Yucatan by the Middle American Research Institute of
Tulane University and under the general supervision of the late Dr. E.
Wyllys

Andrews IV.

I express my gratitude

for all of the

aid and

encouragement received from Dr. Andrews during a long and demanding
field season.
Dr. Joseph W. Ball is thanked for his review and identification of the
coastal pottery which supplies the chronological background.
Funds to do the

coastal

survey were

provided by

the

American

Philosophical Society, to whom I express gratitude,

REFERENCES CITED
Ball, J. W. and J. D. Eaton
1972 Marine Resources and the Prehistoric Lowland Maya: A Comment.
American Anthropologist, Vol. 74, No. 3, pp. 773-776.
Campbell, T. N.
1956 Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre,
Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp.
7-46.
1958 Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 423-442.
Coe, Michael D.
1961 La Victoria, An Early Site on the Pacific Coast of Guatemala. Peabody
Museum, Vol. 53. Harvard University.
Coleman, James M. and William G. Smith
1964 Late Recent Rise of Sea Level. Bulletin of the Geological Society of
America, Vol. 75, pp. 833-840.
Dahlem, Ted
1968 How to Make and Mend Cast Nets. Great Outdoors. St. Petersburg,
Florida.
Eaton, Jack D.
1974 Shell Celts from Coastal Yucatan, Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 45, pp. 197-208.
1976 Archaeological Reconnaissance of the Coasts of Yucatan, Mexico.
Middle American Research Institute, Tulane University (Manuscript
submitted for publication}.
Fritz, Gayle
1972 Pilot Archeological Field Survey of Cox Bay, Calhoun County, Texas.
Texas General Land Office, Austin.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1971 Loyola Beach: An Example of Aboriginal Adaptation to the Maritime
Environment of the Lower Texas Coast. Florida Anthropologist, Vol.
24, No. 3, pp. 91-106.

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY OF YUCATAN

243

Lenski, Gerhard and Jean Lenski
1974 Human Societies: An Introduction to Macrosociology. McGraw-Hill,
New York.
Matheny, Ray T.
1970 The Ceramics of Aguacatal, Campeche, Mexico. Papers of the New
World Archaeological Foundation, No. 27.
Proskouriakoff, Tatiana
1962 The Artifacts of Mayapan. Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Publication 619, pp. 321-442.
Radcliffe, William
1974 Fishing from the Earliest Times. Ares Publishers, Chicago.
Roys, Ralph L.
1972 The Indian Background of Colonial Yucatan. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.
Sanders, William T.
1960 Prehistoric Ceramics and Settlement Patterns in Quintana Roo,
Mexico. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publication 606, Contribution 60.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 Archaeological Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites.
State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report No. 13.
Tozzer, Alfred M.
1941 Landa’s Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan: A Translation. Peabody
Museum, Vol. 18. Harvard University.
Wilkerson, S. Jeffrey K.
1975Pre-Agricultural Village Life: The Late Prehistoric Period in
Veracruz. Studies in Ancient Mesoamerica, II. Contributions of the
University of California Archaeological Research Facility, No. 27, pp.
111-122. Berkeley.
Willey, Gordon R.
1966 An Introduction to American Archaeology. Vol. 1, North and Middle
America. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Willey, Gordon R. et al
1965 Prehistoric Maya Settlement in the Belize Valley. Peabody Museum,
Vol. 54. Harvard University.
1972 The Artifacts of Altar de Sacrificios. Peabody Museum, Vol. 64, No. 1.
Harvard University.

THE SUGAR INDUSTRY AT MISSION SAN JOSI~ Y
SAN MIGUEL DE AGUAYO
JOHN W. CLARK, JR.

ABSTRACT
Archeological and historical investigations connected with archeological
testing of foundations at Mission San Jos6 conducted in December of 1974
revealed details of the first sugar refinery in the bounds of the State of
Texas. As early as 1755 San Jos6 had a sugar mill and cane fields. By 1794
the mill was associated with a water powered grist mill.

INTRODUCTION
The Mission San Jos6 y San Miguel de Aguayo was established on
the left bank of the San Antonio River by Fr. Antonio Margil in 1720.
By 1740 it had been moved to the right bank and moved again to its
final location before 1755. During much of its history the mission
served as the administrative center of the Texas missions. It was
widely recognized as an efficient and aesthetically pleasing mission.
The mission had several significant aspects to its function. Of
course, the best known and most publicized function was the
christianizing of the Indians. Other functions included the inculcation
of Spanish social values and customs, teaching the Indians useful
industrial arts so that they could become independent members of a
hispanized community and to provide a hispanized community to
enhance Spanish claims to the frontier.
To facilitate these activities or functions the missionaries
developed a major architectural and industrial complex. The complex
naturally included a church and sacristy with a convent for the
resident priests and for the offices connected with the administration
of the Texas missions. Additionally there was a wall for defense from
raiding "wild" or noncongregated Indians with a "Pueblo" or Indian
quarters built on the interior perimeter of the compound wall. Within
the compound were the granary and a number of shops associated
with the varied industrial activities of the mission Indians. The
interior of the compound was divided into eight plazas surrounded by
structures. In addition to the structures within the compound were a
small number of structures on the outside of the compound and the
mission ranch located several miles from the mission. The mission
farm was located near the mission, irrigated by an acequia deriving
its water from the dammed San Antonio River. Drinking water for the
mission was provided in wells excavated within the compound.
Morfi (1935: 97) provides a list of the crops which included maize,
beans, lentils, cotton, watermelons, other kinds of melons, sweet

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

potatoes, peaches, and sugar cane. Cattle, sheep and goats were
raised on the ranch, a few being kept at a corral at the mission for
weekly butchering.
There were several shops both within and without the compound.
They included a carpentry shop (Marmolejo 1755, Salas 1785 and
Mu_~oz 1794), a textile shop (Marmolejo 1755, Salas 1785, and Mugoz
1794), a masonry shop (Marmolejo 1755), a tailor’s shop (Solis 1931:
20), and an armory (Morfi 1935). Outside the compound were the
blacksmith shop, corral, sugar mill and by 1794, the grist mill.
The location of the blacksmith shop is provided by Salas (1785) as
on the opposite side of the granary from the carpentry shop. The
foundations of the carpentry shop were partially exposed by
restoration architect Harvey P. Smith, Sr., in 1933 on the interior of
the compound adjacent to the granary. Thus the blacksmith shop is
outside the compound on the west wall adjacent to the granary.
Likewise, the location of the grist mill is known. It was located in
1934 when the reservoir inlet was encountered during the cleaning of
the acequia for the restoration project. The structure was then
excavated and restored.
Also when cleaning the area around the mill, another feature was
encountered. This feature consists of a bottomless stone box. This
will be discussed in connection with the sugar processing at the site.

18TH CENTURY SUGAR PROCESSING
Little information is available on the technology of the sugar
industry of New Spain especially on the frontier. One of the best
descriptions is one found in the Archivo General de la Nation in
Mexico City quoted by Sandoval (1951: 158) describing the sugar

refinery at Cocoyotla, Veracruz:
"... se compon{a de anden, casa de calderas, trapiche con paredes de cal
y canto y techo de tejamanil,un trapiche en corriente y armado de cuatro
castillos, dos capirotes, teleras, banco, cuatro calderas, tres moledoras de
teguague, canales para el caldo con mds tres moledores chicos en bruto. Y
en dicha casa de calderas sentadas y puestas cuatro calderas de cobre
fundidas casi nuevas. Un tanque para recibir el caldo, un cazo que sirve de
resfriadero, otro mediano para paradera, cuatro espumaderas, una bomba
de cobre, dos remillones de lo mismo, dos espgtulas de fierro 2’
"... It is composed of a loading dock, a house of cauldrons, sugar refinery
with walls of masonry and a shingle roof, a water powered sugar mill
having four towers, two hoods, cutters, bench, four cauldrons three
teaguague [stone] grinders, channels for the syrup and three additional
small, rough grinders. And in the said house of cauldrons are placed and
set four nearly new copper cauldrons. There is a vat to receive the syrup,
a pan which serves as a cooler and another medium size one serving as a

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

247

reservoir, four skimmers, a copper pump, two syrup extractors for it and
two iron spatulas."

From this description it is clear that there are several steps
involved in the processing of the sugar. First the cane was cut and fed
into the mill to crush the cane and extract the juice. The juice was
collected and cooked in a vat (Fig. 13) or large flat cauldron to near a
carmelized state then cooled and poured into molds to make
piloncillo.
P

SUGAR PROCESSING AT SAN JOSE
The question arises as to the comparability of the San Jos6 sugar
ingenio or sugar refining complex.
Marmolejo (1755) described the ingenio at the mission as being 15
varas long, 61/2 varas wide roofed with tule or native cane. It had
wooden moledoras for crushing the cane, three cauldrons for boiling
the syrup and a trough for conducting the syrup from the mill to the
vats. Additional information was provided by Mu~oz (1794). The
items associated with the sugar industry listed in his inventory
(slightly out of original sequence) include the following:
"Un dicho [molino] en corriente para moler ca~a.
Un fondo de metal con peso de trese arrobas nueve libras con payla de cal
y canto para cocer el caldo de la carla de castilla para hacer piloncillo.
Un perol grande de cobre para lo mismo con peso de sets arrobas.
Quinientas y cinquenta y quatro formas para pilocillos.
Se les entregaron y recibieron dos cientos siete rail ciento ochenta y sets
cafias de castilla en ciento ochenta y sets surcos que ocupan quatro
tablas."
"One of the said [mill] powered by water to grind cane.
A vat of masonry with a metal basal grate weighing 338.9 pounds for the
cooking of sugar cane syrup to make sugar cones.
A large copper vat for the same [the masonry vat) weighing 159 pounds.
Five hundred and fifty four molds for sugar cones.
They were given and they received 207,186 sugar canes in 186 rows
occupying 4 fields."

248

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

These descriptions point out striking similarities with the ingenio at
Cocoyotla and provide a detailed description of the equipment used.
LOCATION OF THE SAN JOSE INGENIO
The physical location of the sugar refining complex has remained
in question until recently. It has been thought by some that the ingenio
was on the interior of the compound. The earliest suggestion is a
report by governor Jacinto Barrios y Ifiuregui (1758) which states:
"Y hay otras quatro plazas que formalos quarteles, carpinterfa, troje y
obraje sin otras oficinas como el yngenio donde se haze el piloncillo y la
miel..."
"And there are four other plazas formed by quarters, the carpentry shop,
granary and workshop except others such as the sugar refinery where
they make piloncillo and syrup."

This would suggest that the sugar mill was not associated with the
eight plazas composing the compound. This is enhanced by the
inventory of governor MulSoz in 1794. In his document he discusses all
of the shops and items associated with the interior of the compound
then discusses the blacksmith shop, the grist mill and the sugar mill.
The smithy and grist mill are known to have been on the outside of the
compound. The grist mill, "Un molino para moler trigo en corriente
con la falta de una cortina" (a water powered mill for the grinding of
wheat, lacking one wall), was built adjacent to the acequia to make
maximum use of the available water to drive the mill. In the next
sentence (Mufioz 1794) the sugar mill was described.
There are two points to be noted here:
I. Both mills are described as "en corriente," that is, powered by a
current of water, and
2. The mill lacked a wall. The excavation in 1934 of the mill revealed the
reservoir, three walls, a vaulted turbine chamber and the millrace. The
missing wall apparently was the same missing wall described by
Mufioz.

Thus, there are two documents suggesting that the sugar mill was
outside the compound, the Barrios y Jguregui report and the Mufioz
inventory. Furthermore, if Mufioz was proceeding clockwise around
the compound as he appears to have been doing, then the sugar mill
was east of the grist mill.
ARCHEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE OF AN INGENIO AT SAN JOSt~
During the 1934 excavation of the acequia and mill complex Harvey
P. Smith, Sr., encountered the remains of a stone box (Fig. 2). He

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

249

identified this structure as a leather tanning vat. It did not have,
however, a sealed masonry base. On the north wall of the structure
he found an opening into a small cylindrical chamber oriented
vertically. The south wall of the structure was found to be somewhat
broken down.
The major portion of the structure (Fig. 1) measures 2.23 meters by
1.49 meters by 0.95 meters deep (interior measurements). It consists
of walls approximately 18 cm thick. The cylindrical chamber is 0.99 m
in diameter, 69 cm deep and set away from the main rectangular
structure 23 cm. The walls are constructed of "cal y canto" or
limestone and lime mortar. The walls are laid up with irregularly
shaped limestone cobbles with much mortar on the exterior sides of
the walls. The interiors are smooth plaster. The bases of the walls are
fiat and level.

/
/
11
II

II

FIGURE 1. Plan of the Ingenio de Azucar (payla de cal y canto).

250

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Archeological excavations in December, 1974 were conducted at
the mission, and one 1 x 2 meter pit was excavated adjacent to the
east wall of the structure. The fill adjacent to the wall consists of
horizontal zones of calcium carbonate (caliche) suggesting that the
structure was constructed in a pit using the walls of the pit as a form.
This appears to be true at least for the east wall. There appears to
have been no attempt at coursing the stones. The wall and mortar fill
masks the exterior face of the wall.
Much of the fill above the structure had been removed in the 1934
excavations leaving the structure in an internally drained pit so that
a drain had to be placed in the structure to reduce water
concentrations. Even so, water levels are generally high in this area
and shade provided by the many trees in the area reduces the
evaporation rate. This has resulted in the weakening of the structure
and the possible obliteration of evidence of firing in the structure.
COMPARISONS WITH 19TH AND 20TH CENTURY INGENIOS
An effort was made to locate small scale sugar operations of the
19th and 20th centuries as a point of reference for the archeological
remains at San Jos~. It was quickly found that sugar and sorghum
presses and refineries were not especially uncommon. Five selected
examples will be discussed, one in Hays County near Buda, one in
Kendall County near Sisterdale, one in Jasper County near Kirbyville,
one near Rabun Gap, Georgia, and one at Bustamante, Nuevo Leon,
Mexico. All four are very similar in construction and their internal
relationships.
The ingenio near Buda (Fig. 3) consists of a cast iron "trapiche"
sitting on a wooden platform operated by an arm moved by a horse or
other draft animal and a syrup cooker (payla) consisting of a
rectangular stone and lime mortar (cal y canto) and brick and lime
structure. The rear half of the structure, including the rectangular
chimney is made of stone and the front made of brick. The top is open
and the base is the unmodified ground surface. The front (brick) half
has an iron grate ffondo de metal). In addition there is a metal door
built into the front of the payla (Fig. 4) with the following inscription in
raised letters:

D. M. COOK
PAT JUNE 22 ’58
DEC 20 ’59.
The total length of the payla structure including the chimney is 3.85
meters with the chimney being .77 cm wide. The structure is 1.21 m

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

2 51

FIGURE 2. View of the payla de cal y canto at San Jos6 looking
northwest. The photo shows the original structure, the test pit and the
chimney structure.

FIGURE 3. General view of the sugar refinery (ingenio) near Buda,
Texas, consisting of a metal mill (trapiche) and syrup cooker (payla de
cal y canto).

252

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

wide and 67-70 cm high. On the structure is a vat or cauldron {perol)
made of wood and galvanized sheet metal. This perol is 2.9 m long,
and 1.11 meters wide.

FIGURE 4. A detail of the Buda refinery showing the iron grate, cast
iron door and cooking vat on the top of the payla de ca1 y canto.
Constructed over the payla is an open walled pitched galvanized
iron roof 3.1 m wide and 3.5 meters long. The chimney of the payla
projects beyond the rear of the roof.
The ingenio near Sisterdale (Fig. 5) is evinced by a simisubterranean payla made of stone and mortar lined on the interior
with brick. It is similar to the Buda ingenio but does not retain theperol or the metal door at the front. Also unlike the Buda example, the

FIGURE 5. A general view of the semi-subterranean payla de ca1 y
canto at Badenthal near Sisterdale having a round pipe chimney.

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

253

chimney appears to have been round rather than square. The
chimney had apparently collapsed and was replaced by a sheet metal
tube. Like the Buda example it is protected by a galvanized pitched
roof.
The ingenio near Kirbyville is similar to that at Buda and the one
near Sisterdale. It had an iron trapiche with two vertical cylindrical
grinders (moledoras). The payla consists of an above ground
rectangular brick structure with a chimney made from round metal
culvert pipe. It has a removable rectangular metal perol and a shelter
having a galvanized pitched roof.
Additional information on the structure was provided by Elton R.
Prewitt of the Texas Archeological Survey who has seen this ingenio
in operation. The trapiche was operated by a mule. Canes were fed
into the trapiche and the juice of the crushed canes ran from the
grinders (moledores) to a metal trough (canales para el caldo) and
then to a wooden trough or vat (tanque para recibir el caldo). It was
then transferred to the cooking vat (perol). In the payla pine wood
was used for fuel. A skimmer (espumadores) was used to remove the
froth and foreign material in the syrup (caldo).
The most complete information available on current use of an
ingenio is provided by Wiggington (1975: 424-436) in discussing the
process of making sorghum syrup. In this process the cane is fed into
the fill and the juice filtered through coarse cloth into a barrel (Fig.
6). When a sufficient quantity of juice is collected it is again filtered

FIGURE 6. The mill near Rabun Gap, Georgia grinding cane. Courtesy,
Foxfire Fund, Inc.

254

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and then placed in a vat over a boiler or firebox. There it is thickened
and foam is removed by skimmers (Fig. 7). It is then collected in
buckets and jars for storage. This operation is virtually identical to
the sugar making. The principal difference is that the sugar cane
syrup would be placed in molds to crystalize.
The fifth mill examined is located at Bustamante, N.L., M~xico
north of Monterrey. The complex consists of a large rectangular
firebox with a substantial chimney and having a large rectangular
vat for preliminary cooking of the syrup (Fig. 10). An adjacent smaller
firebox (below ground level) with a circular vat for final cooking of
the syrup, a shed roof over both structures and a mill powered by a
mule. The smaller firebox appears to be virtually identical to the
feature at San Josd (Figs. 9, 11), having a rectangular box connected
to a circular (Fig. 12) chimney-like feature for the final cooking of the
syrup. It has a subterranean vent similar to the vent hole shown of the
drawings of Harvey P. Smith, Sr. Virtually the entire structure is
subterranean, like the feature at San Jos~, except the upper portion of
the support for the cooking vat.

FIGI~E 7. Cooking the juice of the cane and skimming off the foam in a
payla de cal y canto near Rabun Gap, Georgia. Courtesy, Foxfire
Fund, Inc.

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

255

RECONSTRUCTION OF THE SAN JOSt~ INGENIO
Archeological excavations, historical documentation and
comparison with other ingenios allow a tentative reconstruction of
the sugar industry at San Jos6 (Fig. 8). Documentary sources suggest
that the trapiche was outside the main compound possibly east of the
grist mill. Archeological investigations have revealed the location of
the grist mill and a payla de cal y canto or masonry and mortar vat.
Since both the grist mill and the sugar mill were water powered it
stands to reason that both would use the same power source, namely
the acequia north of the compound wall.
An interesting facet of the 1794 description of the grist mill is that it
lacked one wall. Also, interestingly, the Harvey P. Smith, Sr.,
excavation did not find evidence for an east wall (as indicated in his
architectural drawings). This may suggest that the trapiche was
driven from belts using the same shaft and turbine as the grist mill.
Thus the trapiche would necessarily be near the grist mill. There is
certainly historical precedent for the use of water-power to runtrapiches. By the middle 16th century a water-powered mill was built
at Yaguate in Espafiola, West Indies by technicians from the Canary
Islands (Sauer 1966: 210}.

FIGURE 8. Hypothetical reconstruction of the ingenio de azucar at San
los6 Mission as it might have appeared in 1794. Drawing by Jim Bonar.

256

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The trapiche at San Jos6 consisted "... of three, sometimes [possibly] only of two, vertical cylinders which may be smoothed tree
trunks, the cane being crushed as it passed between the
cylinders..." (Sauer 1966: 210). It probably was mounted on thick
posts sunk fairly deeply in the ground.
Leading from the trapiche at a shallow angle there would have
been a trough to conduct the juice from the trapiche to the metal tank
(tanque) where the juice (caldo) was collected. The tank was
probably located adjacent to the payla so that by removing a plug
would allow the juice to flow into the pan or perol grande de cobre by
gravity. Therethe caldo would be cooked into thick syrup.
The payla was protected by a pitched roof open walled structure
(Marmolejo 1755) 15 varas (12.54 meters) by 6½ varas (5.43 meters
using the Castilian vara of 0.835905 meters/Haggard 1941: 851) with
roof thatched with tule or native cane. Associated with the sugar
production were 554 pi!onci!lo molds {formas) (Fig. 14). These molds
were almost certainly conical and had a bunghold in the base to drain
off the molasses from the crystallized sugar (Diderot 1559: Plate 39
and 41).

CONCLUSIONS
Archeological, documentary and comparative investigation of the
"leather tanning vat" feature at San los6 Mission suggests that the
feature is the payla de cal y canto described in the San Josd
documents associated with a sugar refining complex. This complex
included a mill run by water power as of 1794, an open walled
structure roofed with native cane and a number of pieces of
equipment particular to the sugar industry.
An intriguing aspect of the situation is that the sugar industry in
the West Indies as developed in the early 16th century was
introduced by Canary Islanders (Sauer 1966: 210). In the San Antonio
area Canary Islanders formed the core of the secular community
beginning in 1731. Thus Canary Islanders, islefios, were available as
consultants for several civil engineering projects such as the acequia
systems and the sugar industry at San Jos6.

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

o

257

258

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper could not have been written without the aid of my field
assistant on the 1974 test excavations at San Jos~, James E. Ivey. David
McDonald, a translator working at the Old Spanish Missions Historical
Research Library at San Jos6 provided help in finding the Barrios y
J~uregui report. Father Benedict Leutenegger provided access to records
in the library and always proved to be a valuable source of information.
Elton R. Prewitt of the Texas Archeological Survey provided information
on his father’s sugar processing in Jasper County. Dan Scurlock of the
Texas Historical Commission accompanied me on a trip to examine the
ingenio near Buda and provided valuable data and sources.

259

260

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED

Barrios y Jfiuregui, Jacinto
1758 Informe del governador sobre la mision de San Jos6. Archivo de San
Francisco el Grande, Biblioteca Nacional de Mexico. Photostat on file
at the University of Texas at Austin, Vol. 12, pp. 59-61, Barker Texas
History Center Archives.
Diderot, Denis
1959 A Diderot Pictorial Encyclopedia of Trades and Industry. Edited by
Charles C. Gillispie. Dover Publications Inc., New York.
Haggard, J. Villasana and Malcolm D. McLean.
1941 Handbook for Translators of Spanish Historical Documents. Semco
Color Press, Oklahoma City.
Marmolejo, Yldephonso
1755 Inventory of the mission and the increase gained in the year and ten
months which elapsed before I took charge. Translated by Fr.
Benedict Leutenegger. Old Spanish Missions Historical Research
Library, San Antonio.
Morfi, Fr. Juan Agustfn de
1935 History of Texas, 1763-1779. Part 1. Translated by Carlos Eduardo
Castafieda. Quivira Society Publications, Vol. 6. New York.
Mufioz, Manuel
1794 Inventory of the material goods of the Mission San Jos6. Typescript
from the Archivo de Govierno, Legajo 7, Expediente 448, Saltillo,
Coahuila.
Salas, Josef Maria
1785 Inventory which I, Fr. Josef Agustin Falc6n Mariano received in this
mission of Sehor San Josef of the province of Texas from Fr. Josef
Maria Salas. Translated by Ft. Benedict Leutenegger. Old Spanish
Missions Historical Research Library, San Antonio.
Sandoval, Fernando B.
1951 La industria del Azficar en Nueva Espafia. Universidad Nacional
Aut6noma de Mexico, Instituto de Historia, Mexico.
Sauer, Carl Ortwin
1966 The Early Spanish Main. University of California Press, Berkeley and
Los Angeles.
Solis, Jos~ de
1931 The Solis Diary of 1767. Translated by Peter P. Forrestal. Preliminary
Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical Society, Vol. 1, No. 6.

NOTES
BIFACING PATTERNS ON PRISMATIC FLAKES
J.

B. SOLLBERGER

ABSTRACT
The bifacing of prismatic flakes and blades provides a constraint to
pressure flaking that results in various predictable diagonal flake scar
patterns. These flake scar patterns, together with cross sectional studios
of flakes, generally identify prismatic blade production for the purpose of
biface manufacture. Diagonal flaking removes longitudinal ridges,
permitting complete bifacing, and also produces a superior cutting edge for
use against soft materials. It is proposed that diagonal flaking patterns are
the result of technological considerations, rather than simply being a
matter of esthetics on the part of individual craftsmen.

INTRODUCTION
Various patterns in pressure flaking to produce thin bifaces for
knives and projectile points have been recognized for some time (e.g.
Crabtree 1972:87) and these patterns have generally been attributed
to cultural traditions and choices by individual craftsmen, rather
than to technological considerations. While specific flaking patterns
may have esthetic relationships, this report will discuss the
technological Considerations for using diagonal flaking and the
resulting patterns such as chevron, half chevron, opposed oblique,
and diagonal ribbon flaking.
Experiments by the writer have shown that longitudinal dorsal face
ridges on flakes impose a restraint to bifacing the dorsal faces, if
economically-sized flakes are being used. "Economically-sized"
flakes are ones that have been produced to maximize yield from raw
material and minimize labor in producing finished tools. In other
words, these flakes are of minimum size to produce desired finished
biface sizes. It will be shown that the presence of diagonal flaked
bifaces and unfinished prismatic flakes on an archeological site can
serve as an index that the lithic technology was oriented toward the
production of bifaces selectively from prismatic flakes, rather than
the bifaces being random reductions of irregular shaped flakes and
cores. It is generally recognized that prismatic blades make ideal
blanks for the production of lithic tools (Bordaz 1970).

262

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

DISCUSSION
Prismatic blades and flakes have one or more, usually prominent,
parallel longitudinally oriented dorsal face ridges, with the ridges
sometimes called "arrisses" (Crabtree 1972:34), as shown in Fig. 1.
The term "blade" is generally reserved for flakes with lengths at
least twice widths. Horizontally, dorsal face surfaces are concave
between lateral edges and ridges (Fig. 1,c). Such faces cannot be
initially flaked in a random style or directly across the dorsal ridges
to accomplish complete bifacing if minimum reduction in blank size is
desired.
In complete bifacing of a prismatic blade, there is a technological
constraint on initial flake removal from the dorsal face. A conchoidalshaped flake always results from flaking into a planar surface, with
little control of flake width expansion. This problem is greatly
amplified in flaking across the concave surfaces of ridged flakes. Fig.
1,a illustrates the general expansion in flake width, when flaking
directly across a blade lateral edge from a platform location such as
points 1 and 2. In cross section, such a flake removal would start at a

G

¢

FIGURE 1. Prismatic flake attributes. See text for explanation.

BIFACINC PATTERNS ON PRISMATIC FLAKES

263

thin fragile platform and then become even thinner as the fracture
proceeded from the lateral edge to the dorsal ridge. The flake would
be required to thicken if a portion of the dorsal ridge were to be
successfully removed. Finally, the bifacing flake would be required to
thin again to terminate. With flake removals having rapidly
expanding widths, this fracture sequence is not possible. In actual
practice, flaking directly across the unscarred original surface of a
prismatic blade will result in flake removals stopping short of the
dorsal ridge, or in the worst case, ruinous snapping of the prismatic
blade.
As shown by the side view of a prismatic blade (Fig. 1,b) dorsal
ridges and corresponding concave face surfaces are longitudinally
straight or convex. Complete bifacing of economically-sized prismatic
flakes is possible if: (1) the diagonal flaking angle is sufficiently acute
to the dorsal ridge line that individual flakes removed will not be
concave dorsally except immediately short of the dorsal ridge, and (2)
the individual bifacing flakes are narrow elongates, where each flake
removal establishes a ridge to strengthen and guide the next flake
removal to and beyond the dorsal ridge. If the individual craftsman is
willing to have a greater loss in original prismatic blade dimensions, a
more random flaking pattern can be used to produce bifaces.
Diagonal flaking becomes patterned according to the location of the
dorsal ridge in relation to flake center. Some of these patterns are
shown in Fig. 2,a-c. In all such diagonal flaking patterns, the first
series of oblique flakes from one lateral edge of a flake tool blank
must extend beyond, and remove a portion of, the dorsal ridge. Flake
direction from the opposite lateral edge then determines the flaking
pattern type.
The half chevron flaking pattern (Fig. 2,a) is diagonally flaked first
from the lateral edge nearest to an off-center dorsal ridge. It is
usually necessary to execute this series of flakes first, because this
short face surface is more horizontally concave than the wider dorsal
surface on the other side of the ridge. These narrow oblique flakes
remove and round off the dorsal ridge. Termination of these flakes
occur at the near-edge of the "far side" concave face surface,
thereby flattening the concave face surface on the other side of the
ridge. It is then possible for flake removals from the wider opposite
face surface to be made horizontal, directly across the dorsal ridge
axis. These final bifacing flakes from the opposite side of the original
flake blank can be both longer and wider than the first series of flakes
that removed the dorsal ridge.
This flaking description is confined to prismatic blades having one
dorsal ridge. Half chevron flaking patterns are therefore one method

264

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of identifying bifacing of economically-sized prismatic flakes. The
writer has seen large numbers of this type of artifact that are
commonly not completely flaked on the ventral surface. The cross
section of the biface will be a flat triangle.
In producing a stemmed biface from a prismatic blade, the bulbar
proximal end can be flaked first to thin and straighten the blank.
Diagonal and then other random flakes are used to remove the dorsal
ridge and then thin and shape the basal stern area. Diagonal flaking
proceeds on the middle and distal portions of the still ridged blank to
obtain complete bifacing.
The chevron pattern of flaking results from the use of a prismatic
blade with an isosceles triangle cross section, therefore having a
well-centered dorsal ridge. This flaking system can also be used on
prismatic blades having two dorsal ridges, and a trapezoidal cross
section. The chevron pattern is identified by oblique flakes from both
lateral edges that are directed toward the stem end of the biface. This
pattern can be executed in two sequences: (i) a complete series of
flakes is removed from the lateral edge on one side, with each flake

b

d

FIGURE 2. The dorsal face of bifaced prismatic flakes showing normal
cross sections and flake scar pattern, a, Half Chevron; b, Chevron; c,
Diagonal Ribbon. The point shown as d cannot be the normal for
initial bifacing of an economically-sized prismatic flake.

BIFACING PATTERNS ON PRISMATIC FLAKES

265

removing some of the dorsal ridge, and then the flaking process is
repeated on the opposite lateral edge; or, (2) one flake removal from
one lateral edge is followed by a flake removal from the opposite
lateral edge to consecutively remove portions of the dorsal ridge until
bifacing is complete. If two dorsal ridges are present, a series of
consecutive flakes must be detached from each lateral edge to remove
portions of each ridge.
Oblique opposed and diagonal ribbon flaking are two other
variations in diagonal flaking patterns that can be used to biface
prismatic flakes with a minimum in overall size reduction. In both
cases a series of diagonal flakes is removed from a lateral edge, and
diagonal flaking from the opposite lateral edge is done in a parallel
opposed manner. Oblique opposed flaking generally results in a
biface with a central ridge. In diagonal ribbon flaking, wider and
thinner flake removals are obtained. The wider flakes give
terminations farther beyond the dorsal ridge, and the resulting cross
section of the biface is more gently convex than with oblique opposed
flaking.
Ventral faces of prismatic blades and flakes are typically flat to
slightly convex. Such a surface is easily flaked by any desired scar
pattern, and results in a slightly convex surface. If a strong ridge is
present on both faces of a biface, this means that more material than
necessary was removed from the ventral face to effect bifacing, and
size reduction of the original raw material piece was more than
minimal; or that the original biface has been resharpened along the
lateral edges (Sollberger 1971). Economically-sized prismatic flakes
do not have the necessary thickness along the lateral edges to
sacrifice in order to form a ridge on the ventral face.
The technological constraints in bifacing of economically-sized
prismatic flakes described in this report are the result of actual lithic
flaking experiments by the writer, and demonstrate the usefulness of
replicative experimentation, now recognized as an important
archeological method (Hester and Heizer 1973; Coles 1973}. A number
of references are available in the literature where archeological
lithic assemblages are described with use of diagonal flaking
methods, with wide distribution in space and time.
Frison (1970: 36-38) has described a lithic industry that produced
half chevron patterned arrow points:
"Most are made on percussion flakes of prismatic cross section. The
median ridge of the flake was removed by careful pressure flaking. The
flake scar pattern is usually such that the flakes extend toward the center
at right angles from one blade edge; on the opposite side the flake scars
extend downward towards the center at less than a right angle with the
blade edge."

266

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Except for the name and actual flaking sequence, Frison has
described half chevron flaking technology.
King (1969: 78) made the following observation for the Sam
Kaufman site in Red River County, Texas: "There are two categories
of arrow points--those made on flakes and those made on flake
blades". From King’s illustrations and from personal examination of
some of these points, I would comment that of those made on blades,
ventral face flaking is largely limited to the proximal and distal ends
of the points. The dorsal faces of these points have chevron, half
chevron, opposed oblique, and diagonal ribbon flake scar patterns.
Chard (1956: Figs. 133,134) illustrates clearly for Siberian
examples that dorsal faces of prismatic blades were not completely
bifaced by horizontal flaking. The original blade cross sections and
ridges are essentially unaltered, except for the projectile point tips
and tapered stems. The only illustrated dorsal face that approaches
being completely flaked has oblique opposed flaking.
Giddings (1951) illustrates weapon tips made on prismatic blades
for the Denbigh Flint Complex where complete bifacing was usually
obtained. In his Fig. 64,1,5,6,7 he shows half chevron flake scar
patterns. Fig. 64,2 illustrates opposed oblique, and Fig. 63,b shows the
diagonal ribbon pattern. Chard’s Fig. 61,a-5 is a poorly executed
example of the full chevron pattern. Fig. 60,b-3 illustrates a fine
example of converting true blades to diagonal ribbon pattern bifaces.
From the foregoing discussion, it is evident that flake scar patterns
for completed bifaces on prismatic blades are not so much a matter of
choice, but rather a flint knapper’s set of required flaking techniques.
These techniques were not developed solely for esthetic purposes, but
to overcome constraints inherent to various blank forms produced for
bifacing. The constraints examined here are those that apply to
prismatic flakes, that due to economical size, have a greater reliance
on pressure flaking than on percussion. Flakes without prismatic
cross sections can be, and were, bifaced with wide flake removals in
random direction and sequence. Economically sized prismatic flakes
must be bifaced with some diagonal flaking pattern, to remove dorsal
ridges without undue sacrifice of artifact size. Thus, diagonal flaking
patterns are diagnostic attributes for the bifacing of prismatic blades
and flakes.
By inference from the above, fine horizontal opposed flaking (Fig.
2,d) that forms ridged cross sections also probably does not represent
an esthetic choice by the craftsman, but instead may represent
economical multiple edge resharpenings. Repeated edge
resharpenings on this bifaces, where flakes extend beyond midwidth, rapidly convert the biface to be too thin and fragile for utility.

BIFACING PATTERNS ON PRISMATIC FLAKES

267

Either ridges must be formed, or beveling resorted to, for repeated
economical usage (Sollberger 1971).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I am grateful to Leland W. Patterson for his interest and organizational
help in the preparation of this paper.

REFERENCES CITED
Bordaz, J.
1970 Tools of the Old and New Stone Age. Natural History Press, Garden
City, New York.
Chard, Chester S.
1956 The Oldest Sites of Southeast Siberia. American Antiquity, Vol. 15,
No. 4, pp. 405-409.
Coles, J.
1973 Archaeology by Experiment. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York.
Crabtree, Don E.
1972 An Introduction to Flintworking. Occasional Papers Idaho State
University Museum, No. 28.
Frison, George
1970 The Glenrock Buffalo Jump. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 15, No. 50, Pt.
2, pp. 1-66.
Giddings, J. L., Jr.
1951 The Denbigh Flint Complex. American Antiquity, Vol. 16, No. 3, pp.
193-203.
Hester, Thomas R. and Robert F. Heizer
1973 Bibliography of Archaeology I: Experiments, Lithic Technology and
Petrography. Addison-Wesley Module in Anthropology, No. 29.
King, H. Gill
1969 Chipped Stone. In: Archeological Investigations at the Sam Kaufman
Site, Red River County, Texas. Southern Methodist University,
Contributions to Anthropology, No. 5.
Sollberger, J. B.
1971 A Technological Study of Beveled Knives. Plains Anthropologist, Vol.
16, No. 53, pp. 203-218.

THE ARCHEOLOGIST AS PARTICIPANT OBSERVER*
WILLIAM J. MAYER-OAKES

INTRODUCTION
In recent years there are two discernible major trends that have
been important in archeology, that towards the fully "Anthropological" archeology as well as one towards "Scientific" archeology. This has been particularly evident during the 1960’s and
1970’s--a time when the growth of the field of archeology in terms of
the number of its practitioners as well as the growth in numbers of archeological methods and techniques and the development of them has
been an important characteristic. This latter series of developments
we might very well term the increasing "sophistication" of the field of
archeology. In a recent review (Mayer-Oakes 1974) of a book purporting to present the field of "new archeology", I have presented the
concept of a "spectrum" as a useful and realistic way to view the
current status of activities in archeology. In Fig. 1, concerned wiht
the objectives of archeology, is presented a summary of the comments
that I have made in the review with regard to the development of a
variety of objectives for modern archeology. In this paper my
emphasis will be on a series of developments in the area of objective
which I list in Fig. 1 as the area of "function". It is my particular
concern here to take a look at the nature of current achievements of
understanding function by means of lithic studies.

INTEREST IN FUNCTION IN LITHIC STUDIES
Stemming at least indirectly from Walter Taylor’s "Conjunctive"
approach, the interest in reconstruction of past human behavior via
the most direct route has also been influenced by the rise of
"behavioral science", e.g., ethology and behaviorism in various
fields. In archeological lithic studies this behavioral interest has been
coupled with interest in and use of an experimental approach. This
behavioral interest is expressed most clearly in the formulation of
problems where the objectives are "functional" and the method of approach or operations are "micro-analytical".
If we look first directly at the interest in function, we can see that
this has been expressed most clearly in the concern to replicate
probable past manufacturing processes (i.e., behavior). This interest

*Revised version of a paper presented at 1973 meeting of the Texas Archeological
Society, October, Lubbock, Texas.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

270

Archeology
Anthr°p°l°gicalI
Spectrum

1976
New*

1970
"Specific"
ProblemOriented
Archeology

1960
1950
1940

Time-Space-Culture
ORDER
(e.g. M d-West Taxonomy)

"Sponge"
Problem
Orientation

~

RELIC-COLLECTING

1930!~

ere-1920

CHAOS

FIGURE 1. Schematic View of U.S. Development of Archeological Objectives (Problem Orientation).

in function is most widely recognized, and is now an accepted part of
the thinking of many lithic analysts, due to the work of a growing number of chipping specialists led by Francois Bordes, Don Crabtree and
others. The procedures involved here are correctly described as "experiments" but they are essentially crude or inelegant kinds of experiments.

ARCHEOLOGIST AS PARTICIPANT OBSERVER

271

A second expression of this interest in function, (less well known
and less advanced as yet) is the experimental usage of stone tools in
an attempt to replicate the various processes of prehistoric behavior
with the tools.
From each of the above experimental approaches to replicate
prehistoric function or prehistoric human behavior--tool manufacture and tool use--have developed refinements and extensions. With
regard to tool manufacture, a major direction of new work is in the
carefully controlled and rigorous context of laboratory experiments,
for example with machine rather than live chipper, as done by A.
Faulkner (1973) for pressure-made blades. With regard to tool usage
the most promising developments, I feel, are the extension into the
wider arena of "living archeology", for example as in the recent exPeriments in survival under conditions of prehistoric technology as
carried out by E. Callahan of Virginia (1973). This general interest in
function I would characterize as "anthropological". It is clearly part
of the attempt to make archeology more explicitly and more broadly a
kind of anthropology.
INTEREST IN MICRO-ANALYSIS
In the above-mentioned studies concerned with function, the style
or method of approach has been what I call "micro-analytical". By
this term I refer to both the scale and scope of attention to detail as
well as the particular kind of analytical activity or operation. Attention has been directed to a wide range of details by means of the
concepts of attribute and attribute systems. The manipulation of
these concepts has been increasingly sophisticated, utilizing
statistical and sometimes computer analysis techniques.
In the "stone chipping" or manufacturing area of interest, both the
chipper and the analyst of end products are actively looking at
minutiae of the materials used, the context of force (support, angles,
quantity) and the force media (hammers, anvils, punches, pressers) in
order to understand and explain relationships between results and
technology applied (e.g., Henry, et al 1976). In the "stone tool use"
area of interest attention has been focused on tool purpose, efficiency
and signs of wear or damage that indicate use. This general interest
in micro-analysis I would label scientific.
OTHER APPLICATIONS OF FUNCTIONAL OBJECTIVE
Outside of lithic studies this interest in function has been expressed in studies of settlement patterns, environmental exploitation
patterns and in general by the whole "systems" approach to un-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

272

derstanding cultural stability and change. The attempt to understand
the processes of past manufacture and use of tools thus is one example of the general interest in getting realistically back (not
speculatively back) into the past of real human behavior.* This is a
good series of examples of the "practical" aspect of important
current research. It is guided by a pervasive consensus on what is important to do in archeology. Far from being an example of "young
fogies" some of the most impressive advances in knowledge these
days are coming through this kind of work. I think of it as a realistic,
productive and very tangible interest in "process".

RESULTANT NEW PERSPECTIVES
IN CURRENT LITHIC RESEARCH
A field school in lithic technology held annually since 1969 by Don
Crabtree is a most explicit example of the interest and accomplishments in the study of past human behavior. When asked for
his feelings Crabtree said:
Certainly, we cannot live without theory in this profession but "theory" is
still derived from the Greek word meaning speculation which can
sometimes be ambiguous and give little clue to the actual manufacture or
intended functional use of a specific stone tool. So it is my contention that
by actually trying to manufacture the stone tools, the students become
aware of the importance of proper preforming, thinning, platform
preparation, ridge control, angles of platform and applied force; use of
proper billet, hammer, percussor, compressor; coordination of eye and application of force, muscular motor habits, choice of suitable materials for
specific tools, dampening or acceleration of applied force and other factors too numerous to list here. They also become aware of the diagnostic
value of debitage for, as you are aware, most of the clues to manufacture
go with the detached flake and only by the study of this debris can we
calculate such steps as the angle of the platform--whether it was isolated
by flaking, faceting, grinding, polishing--angle of force, control of the
length and width and termination of the detached flake or some of the 100
or more definitive characteristics.
It is not my intention to make a flintknapper of every lithic tech student
and they need not become proficient at the art, but I feel an attempt to
replicate by actual manufacture will improve their typology. And, certainly, it makes the future study of debitage more interesting and
beneficial (personal communication, 1973).

Two of the students who were involved in this summer field school
also had important comments to make. Carl Phagan of Ohio State
*See the "behavioral archeology" paradigm being developed by J. Reid and M. Schiffer (1974).

ARCHEOLOGIST AS PARTICIPANT OBSERVER

273

University, one of the participants in the second field school of 1970,
says in his report submitted to Crabtree:
Ethnographers have long profited by a personal involvement with the objects of their study, feeling that the gain in understanding made possible by
a certain degree of actual participation is worth some loss in complete objectivity. Prehistorians have felt that since their subjects are no longer
alive, such participation is impossible. This flintworking school is,
however, a definite first step in the involvement of prehistorians in the
lives of their subjects, and as such makes a significant contribution to the
study of early man. One--and only one--who has sweat and bled over the
production of a projectile point has a new understanding, a new feeling, a
new perspective. He is better able to sense the significant elements in its
production which are perhaps only subtly evident in its final form. He may
also be able to treat as properly insignificant some aspect which appears
obvious. As a suggestion for a further step in this process of involvement in
prehistory I would suggest for a selected group of students an extensive
period of study not only in the production of aboriginal tool kits by various
techniques, but their use in a complete pattern of subsistence.

Irwin Rovner, then of the University of Wisconsin, in his report made
the same points in a somewhat different way.
In general, anthropologists have always used informants; archaeologists
have used ethnographic analogy. The two combine when, as has happened
so many times, a native worker identifies as typical in his cultural
inventory, some artifact which the archaeologist has labeled
"problematic" or "ceremonial". The "alien" professional can hope, at
best, for a reasonable insight, an analytical sensitivity to the objective
material he recovers. It is this analytical sensitivity, in the final analysis,
that is the most important thing learned at your flintknapping
school--more than all the field work and lab analysis I have done in the
past. A review of my own ideas and the reports of others leave me with one
conclusion--to begin to understand stone tools, you must start by learning
to break stone, to experience first-hand the problems and methods for
success and reasons for failure.

ARCHEOLOGICAL "PARTICIPANT OBSERVATION"
From the two main kinds of interest that lithic technologists have
had in function (manufacturing and use of stone tools) has come a
recognition that this is an important way to attempt realistic time
travel, i.e., recreating possible past chipping behaviors is like going
back to a hunk of the past behavioral context, "as if" being there as a
participant observer. In fact, this operational technique is now the
best candidate for the establishment of a traditional and distinctive
anthropological method--participant observation--as a central
element in contemporary archeology. As such, this is in accord with

274

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

some of the goals of the so called "new" archeology, but if these new
goals limit anthropology to being a field of Science, it must then be
seen to be in conflict with those goals. Because this is not strictly a
"scientific", but is a craftsman approach to gaining knowledge, I see
the above described kind of work in lithic technology as an example of
the importance of personal and unique factors (that is, the contribution of creative individuals) to the field as a whole. Yet I think it
is undeniable that the work in and the replicative study of past tool
manufacture and past tool usage is an important contribution to the
field of anthropological archeology.
At this point the critical observer can say, "so what!" What we
have been discussing is simply another way of looking at the subject
matter of archeology, an attitude that has been stressed by Binford
and others. We are specifically concerned with the re-evaluation of
the nature and possibilities for usage of the archeological record. In
the lithic studies mentioned here we have a good example of a way
that changes in approach to the study of the archeological record are
being carried out. New aspects of the record (for example, debitage
location, new artifact attributes) become important and useful as a
result of the replicative and analytical lithic studies. An excellent
overview of the directions of lithic research as of 1973 is presented by
Swanson (1975).
By making this stress on participant observation an explicit attempt to get back to an understanding of past human behavior we may
very well go in a number of new directions. No doubt we could derive
useful new information based upon ideas about site location; or
ecological knowledge; or economic or social behavior (for example
hunting, fishing, agriculture). This then I see as fruitful ground for the
careful and explicit formulation of new problems. Often these may be
set up as hypotheses for testing or they may simply be problems which
demand some kind of experimental activity. And really, we would but
be making explicit and rigorous the kind of casual and informal approach to the "thinking" of prehistoric people characteristic of some
archeological work.
I suggest, in conclusion, that we archeologists professing also to be
anthropologists explicitly accept "participant observation" as a
methodological goal. With such a goal we must bend ourselves to the
task of ingeniously devising techniques for adapting the method to our
data and our problems. By so doing we may in fact develop a truly
"behavioral" archeology.

ARCHEOLOGIST AS PARTICIPANT OBSERVER

275

REFERENCES CITED
Callahan, Errett
1973 The Old Rag Report: a practical guide to living archeology.
Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Virginia Commonwealth
University. Richmond.
Faulkner, A.
1972 Mechanical Principles of Flintworking, Ph.D. dissertation,
Washington State University. Pullman
Henry, Don O., C. V. Haynes and B. Bradley.
1976 Quantitative variations in flaked stone debitage. Plains
Anthropologist, Vol. 21, No. 71, pp. 57-62.
Mayer, Oakes, William J.
1974 Review of "Contemporary Archeology: A Guide to Theory and Contributions." American Anthropologist, Vol. 76, pp. 651-657.
Reid, J. Jefferson and M. B. Schiffer
1974 Behavioral archaeology: Four strategies. Paper presented at 1974
SAA meeting. Washington.
Swanson, Earl (editor)
1975 Lithic Technology. Mouton, The Hague.

BOOK REVIEWS

The Presidio: Bastion of the Spanish Borderlands. by Max L. Moorbead.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman. 1975. xfi + 288 pp., 21 illus., 5
maps. $9.95.
Max Moorhead has compiled information about the presidios of the
Provincias Internas in a concise well documented volume invaluable to
students of the Spanish Colonial period, including archeologists and
anthropologists as well as historians. The book is the result of seven years of
research in Mexico and Seville, Spain, and the British Museum. The research
was to define what the presidio was and how fully it influenced the course of
regional history, and to determine "more fully its impact on the human
environment." Moorhead also aimed to date the presidios and to fix their
locations more precisely than had previously been done. He seems to have
succeeded in these aims, although many locations are not exactly pinpointed.
The scope of the study is limited to Spanish Provincias Internas, including
what is now Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona, and the Mexican states of
Coahuila, Chihuahua, Durango, Sonora, and Sinaloa. The presidios of
California and Florida were not included because they were situated on the
sea coasts and did not fall under the uniform regulations of the 18th century.
To compensate for this lack several important studies of these presidios are
listed.
The illustrations are excellent reproductions of the 21 drawings made by
Urrutia during the Rubf inspection of 1766-68. The originals of these
drawings are in the British Museum. The five maps are line drawings which
show the locations of the presidios of northern New Spain during 1570-1600,
1600-1700, 1700, 1700-1771, 1772-1800.
The book is in two sections: Part I traces the historical development of the
presidio, and Part II, in the author’s words (p. vii), "attempts to analyze the
institution in its several facets and functions."
The five chapters of Part I: Historical Development, are: I. Origin and early
development; 2. The Reglamento of 1729; 3. The Reglamento of 1772; 4.
Teodoro de Croix and the Commandancy General, 1776-84; and, 5. The
Instrucci6n of 1786 and the Final Phase, 1783-1810. Throughout the
development of the presidial system the struggle for communication and
regulation along a widespread front to control the Indians and the presidio
itself is evident in periodic attempts to reorganize the entire system. The
presidios of Texas, their changing patterns with the shift of Indian threat and
foreign encroachment along the eastern frontier are brought into focus as to
their role in the entire system.
Part II: Descriptive Analysis, contains chapters entitled: i. The Fort; 2. The
Presidial Company; 3. The Payroll; 4. The Civilian Settlement; and, 5. The
Indian Reservation. It is in this part that the processes of operation and the
lasting effects of the presidial system are brought out.

278

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Moorhead characterizes the presidio as primarily a military installation;
but, he states (p. 3) "it came to exert a pervasive influence on the political,
economic, social, and even demographic development of its environment." He
notes it served its purpose well, because it was never seriously challenged by
the Indians and rarely by European forces. He also suggests the most lasting
influence of the presidio is found in the associated civil settlements which
outlasted the military establishment, some to the present day. Furthermore,
he suggests the presidio as an Indian agency, more so than the mission,
formed a precedent and began a process which was to be completed with the
Anglo-American Indian Reservation.
As in any work, errors are bound to creep in, and here few were noted.
One that I cannot let go unnoted, however, is the author’s statement (p. 53}
that the San Xavier missions (in central Texas} were established for the
Apaches; these were instead established mainly for the Mayeye, Deadose,
Yojuane, and Orcoquisa Indian groups. It was the unsuccessful and ill-fated
Mission Santa Cruz de San Sabd which, it was hoped, would tame the
troublesome Apache.
Regretfully, Moorhead does not seem to be aware of, or at least did not take
advantage of, archeological studies made of several Texas presidios. Another
regret is that translations or transcripts were not published of some of the
primary documents not available in this country. Many details in these
documents would be potentially useful to ettmo-historians, anthropologists,
and archeologists.
Kathleen Gilmore
Institute of Applied Sciences
Denton, Texas

The Payaya Indians of Southern Texas. T. N. Campbell. Special Publication
No. 1, Southern Texas Archaeological Association, San Antonio 1975. 30
pp. $2.5O.
T. N. Campbell’s long period of research into the ethnohistory of Texas
Indians is well known and the published results are being anticipated by
many. Thus it was with more than casual interest that I took up this modest
volume published by the Southern Texas Archaeological Association; would
that every other 30 pages published on native Texas cultures contained as
much sound scholarship and usable information. Moreover, the Southern
Texas Archaeological Association is to be highly commended for the
scholarly and technical quality attained in their first "Special Publication";
hopefully, they will be able to sustain this level in the future.

279

BOOK REVIEWS

Campbell’s volume is instructive in two respects: (1) it represents new
information as well as a current synthesis of Payaya ethnohistory; and (2} it
is

an object lesson on the use of ethnohistoric information by other

specialists.
Research and publication on the ethnohistory of Texas Indians has not
been vigorous in recent decades and consequently most archeologists have
continued to rely upon the limited body of primary data that has been
available and upon the numerous secondary sources that for the most part
are now quite dated. This report presents information that alters several
previously held notions about the Payaya, one of the most important of which
has to do with the pre-mission territory of this band and with likely areas in
which Payaya archeological sites might be found and studied. Campbell also
stresses the larger historic setting wherein his redefined territory of the
Payaya was unenviably situated between two approaching frontiers: the
Apaches from the north and the Spanish from the south. This circumstance is
then seen as having a profound influence upon the Payaya in the 17th and
18th centuries with respect to trends in occurrence of settlements shared
with other bands, on ecological zones available for exploitation, on the
initiation

and

course

of

settlement

at missions,

and upon population

bioanthropology. Collateral issues are also raised such as territory changes,
acculuration in the mission
interpretation

of

the

settlements,

Payaya

and a critique of Ruecking’s

band-cluster.

Considering

the

range

of

archeological and documentary evidence potentially available, Campbell
surely is correct in his conclusion that "Southern Texas is a good area for
studying the decline and fall of fragile hunting and gathering societies."
There is more, however, for Campbell rather clearly demonstrates that the
earlier ethnohistoric literature is not only limited, but fallible as well. The
"old

standards"

among

secondary

sources--e.g.,

Hodge,

Bolton,

and

Swanton--have served us well but much work has been carried out since
their day and many primary sources yet remain to be examined for new data.
When Campbell published his researches on this and other Texas groups in
their final form we hope that the narrative will be supplemented with maps,
tables of demographic data he has gleaned from mission records, and
translated texts of relevant new documents he has discovered. The present
result, nevertheless, is a significant new synthesis of Payaya ethnohistory.
Lawrence E. Aten
National Park Service
Washington, D.C. 20240

280

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Archaeological Excavations at Lake Lavon 1974. Mark J. Lynott, Southern
Methodist University Contributions in Anthropology, No. 16. 1975, 136 pp.
A funny thing happened to salvage archaeology on the way to the MossBennett Bill--it became "cultural resource management." It just took a
second or two to scratch out the offending word "salvage" and pencil in
"CRM" but, oh, it was time well-spent. In that magic moment the burrower,
the hippy, the cowboy-archaeologist in all of us faded away and we became
"managers," heir to all the privilege connoted by that title in this
businessman’s society of ours. Don’t get me wrong, I have salvaged with the
best of them and I know that there is plenty in a name. A noted colleague of
mine informs me, for example, that while a certain government agency is
unwilling to spend a nickel on archaeological "testing" they balk not a whit at
sponsoring the same operation if one will only call it "subsurface
evaluation." No, the name change is fine with me. My beef is simply this: the
name has been changed--to protect the innocent, I suppose, or maybe the
guilty--but with a number of very notable exceptions, salvage archaeology or
cultural resource management or old what’s-its-name, has yet to be
transformed in substance. Specifically it has yet to effect the historic, and I
believe, inevitable, wedding of the old-line, nuts-and-bolts field research that
brought it to prominence in the first place with the newer, problem-oriented,
radically deductivist archaeology that is rapidly co-opting the mainstream at
least of the American branch of our discipline.
Now as the man says, such things are easier said than done. But we don’t
get there just by following the bulldozers around. Heaven knows we all have
done plenty of that, and the likelihood is great that we will have to continue
doing it. We will have to continue letting the agencies pick where we dig. We
will have to let the agencies’ construction, destruction, impounding, blasting,
flooding and scraping schedules dictate largely what we dig. But, we do not
have to let the agencies tell us how we dig or what we do with data once
recovered. The work done by Mark J. Lynott and his collaborators from
Southern Methodist University at Lake Lavon (and here at last is the review)
is a good example of just exactly this. "Where" and to some extent "what"
belonged to the National Park Service. "How" belonged to SMU.
Lynott chose to use the excavations of two Wiley Focus sites scheduled to
be destroyed by the enlargement of the lake as a laboratory in which to test,
among other things, a number of hypotheses about the prehistoric function of
the anomalous "pit" features known from this time range in the area. As
Lynott admits in the report, the test results were not entirely conclusive and
more remains to be done. Nonetheless, with no sacrifice in the recovery of
standard kinds of culture historical data, an effort was made at
systematically collecting evidence about Wiley Focus culture process.
This is not to say that the effort was flawless. I balk, for example, at
Lynott’s (p. 18) bland assertion that a controlled surface collection provides a
"representative sample" of the artifactual and temporal variety at the site at
minimum cost. Such an assertion is not God’s truth, but a testable hypothesis

BOOK REVIEWS

281

in itself and judging from the results obtained by the originators of the
technique (Redmon and Watson 1970), it is a questionable one at that. But
more importantly, I would have preferred to see Lynott state his hypotheses
in a more rigorous, formal manner. In doing this one is first called upon to
state the general theory or theoretical proposition from which the hypothesis
is drawn, the antecedent conditions or special circumstances surrounding its
application in the instance at hand, the hypothesis itself, and finally, a list of
the test implications of that hypothesis. Such test implications are of course
nothing more than the explicit statements about what kinds of evidence one
would expect to find if the hypothesis were true. Ideally such implications
should be framed in a manner allowing the hypothesis to be tested
statistically. This procedure is particularly adapted to the generation of
hypotheses about function in the prehistoric record (cf. Hill’s 1970 use of the
method in assessing Pueblo room function in the Southwest). The internal
logic inherent in the method is so powerful that, if it is applied with rigor, the
rapid construction of exhaustive hypotheses and test implications generally
results. Instead, by operating more informally, Lynott ends up testing
hypotheses that the pits are "community council chambers," burial areas for
high status individuals or open-air-ritual feasting centers (p. 39). This is not
really a comprehensive list of possibilities. Why not borrow pits or ersatzMesoamerican ball courts, to name a few other possibilities not investigated.
But, putting aside the specific explanations which might be offered for
these pits, the point remains that Lynott’s effort is definitely in the right
direction. Like him, we should all cease boring each other with endless
streams of preliminary reports chuck full of less-than-memorable
particularisms. Instead, we should seek ways of enlarging the significance of
our work by generalizing it and rendering it useful for the ends of
anthropology, and yes, of science, as a whole.
D. Bruce Dickson
Texas A&M University

REFERENCES

CITED

Hill, I. N.
1970 Broken K Pueblo: prehistoric social organization in the American
Southwest. Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona, No.
18.
Redman, Charles L. and Patty Jo Watson
1970 Systematic, intensive surface collection. American Antiquity, Vol. 35,
pp. 279-291.

THE AUTHORS

Lawrence E. Aten is Deputy Chief of the Interagency Archeological Services
Division of the National Park Service, Washington, D. C. He received
his B.S. in Geology from the University of Houston and is presently a
Ph.D. candidate at The University of Texas at Austin. His study of the
prehistoric cemetery site at the Harris County Boys’ School (authored
with C. K. Chandler and others) is Special Publication, No. 3, of the
Texas Archeological Society. Address: Interagency Archeological
Services Division, Office of Archeology and Historic Preservation,
National Park Service, U. S. Department of the Interior, 18th and C
Streets, N. W., Washington, D. C. 20240.
Douglas R. Brown received a B.A. degree in Anthropology from The University of Texas at Austin, and is presently an archeologist at the Western
Archeological Center (National Park Service, Tucson). Mr. Brown has
carried out archeological investigations in Texas and the Southwest,
and has a continuing interest in the development of field methodologies.
Address: National Park Service, Western Archeological Center, P. O.
Box 49008, Tucson, Arizona 85717.
Kenneth M. Brown has been a member of the Texas Archeological Society
since 1963. Since that time, he has attended several of the Society’s
field school. Additionally, he has conducted archeological studies in the
Caddoan area of eastern Texas. Address: 5211 Eilers Avenue, Austin,
Texas 78751.
John W. Clark, Jr. is a staff archeologist with the National Register division of

the Texas Historical Commission. He received his B.A. in Anthropology
at The University of Texas at Austin and has done graduate work at the
University of Arkansas. Clark has conducted excavations at a variety of
historic and prehistoric sites in Texas. His publications include
"Archeological Investigations at Fort Lancaster Historic Site, Crockett
County, Texas" (Texas Archeological Salvage Profect, Research Report
1972) and "Rock Art of the Guadalupe Mountains National Park Area"
(Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 1974). Address: Texas
Historical Commission, P.O. Box 12276, Austin, Texas 78711.
J. Phil Dering received his B.A. degree in Anthropology from Texas A&M
University. He has co-authored several research reports for the Texas
A&M University Anthropology Laboratory. Presently, he is a research
assistant at Texas A&M, where he is working on an M.S. degree in
Botany. His primary interests are paleoecology and prehistoric huntergatherer subsistence patterns. Address: Department of Biology, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

284

D. Bruce Dickson received his Ph.D. from the University of Arizona in 1973
and is currently Assistant Professor of Anthropology at Texas A&M
University. Dr. Dickson has conducted archeological fieldwork in
Central America as well as the American Southwest and Southeast. His
major research interests include archeological method and theory,
paleogeegraphy and the prehistory of southern North America and
Mesoamerica.

Recent

publications

include

"Archaeological

Test

Excavations at the Sam Houston Schoolhouse, Maryville, Tennessee,
1973" (Tennessee Archaeologist, 1975), and "Settlement Pattern
Stability and Change in the Middle Northern Rio Grande region, New
Mexico: A Test of Some Hypotheses" (American Antiquity,

1975).

Address: Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas 77843.

Jack D. Eaton is Faculty Associate at The University of Texas at San Antonio.
In recent years, he has conducted excavations along the coast and in
the Rio Bec region of Yucatan. In 1975 he studied the prehistoric salt
industries of coastal Yucatan under the sponsorship of The University
of Texas at San Antonio. Presently, he is deputy field director of UTSA
excavations at the Spanish Colonial missions near Guerrero, Coahuila.
Among his publications is "Ancient Agrmultural Farmsteads in the Rio
Bec Region, Mexico" (Contributions, University of California
Archaeological Research Facility, 1975). Address: Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San
Antonio, Texas 78285.
Kathleen Gilmore received her Ph.D. in Anthropology from Southern
Methodist University, and is currently associated with the Institute of
Applied Sciences at North Texas State University. Gilmore’s major
research interests are ceramic analysis and Spanish colonial
archeology. Publications include "The San Xavier Missions: A Study in
Historical Site Identification" (State Building Commission,
Arhceological Program, 1969) and "Mission Rosario Archeological
Investigations" (Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Historic Sites
Restoration Branch, Report 14, Parts 1 and 2, 1974, 1976). Address:
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton,
Texas 76203.
lohn W. Greer is currently working toward a Ph.D. in Anthropology at the
University of Missouri, Columbia. He has done field work in Texas, the
Southwest, the Plains, in Mesoamerica, and in Europe. He has
published the results of these studies in several journals, including
several papers which have appeared in the Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society. Address: Department of Anthropology, 210
Switzler Hall, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65201.

THE AUTHORS

285

Robert F. Heizer is Professor of Anthropology and Coordinator

of the

Archaeological Research Facility, University of California, Berkeley.
He received his Ph.D. at Berkeley in 1941. Professor Heizer has done
archaeological fieldwork in California, Nevada, Mexico, Guatemala,
Bolivia, and Egypt, and has authored numerous publications dealing
with these investigations. In 1955 and at later times, he has carried out
investigations at the Olmec site of La Venta and was co-author (with
Philip Drucker) of the basic report on that site published in Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin

170 (1959). Address: Department of

Anthropology, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California
94720.
Thomas R. Hester is Associate Professor of Anthropology, and Director,
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio. He received his Ph.D. degree from the University of California,
Berkeley, in 1972. Hester has carried out archeological work in Texas
and northeastern Mexico, the western United States and Egypt. Among
his publications are Field Methods in Archaeology (with R. F. Heizer
and J. A. Graham, Palo Alto 1975) and "The Obsidian Industry of Belch
(Guatemala)" (Actas,

41st International Congress of Americanists,

1975). Address: Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78285.

William ]. Mayer-Oakes received an M.A. in Social Sciences at the University
of Chicago in 1949 and his Ph.D. at that institution in 1954. Presently,
he is Professor of Anthropology, and Chairman, Department of
Anthropology, at Texas Tech University. Dr. Mayer-Oakes has worked
as a research specialist, teacher, museum director, and department
head, as well as a research administrator, during more than 25 years of
professional experience in archeology. He is the author of numerous
papers. Address: Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech University,
Lubbock, Texas 79409.
Leland W. Patterson is currently Chairman of the Houston Archeological
Society. He is an active amateur archeologist with major interests in
the upper coast and south-central regions of Tbxas. His research
activities include site survey, lithic technology, cultural change, and
cross-cultural comparisons. He has published a number of papers in the
Ohio Archaeologist, La Tierra, and the Houston Archeological Society
Newsletter, as well as several articles on lithic technology in other
journals. Address: 418 Wycliffe, Houston, Texas 77079.
Harry 1. Sharer is Assistant Professor of Anthropology, and Coordinator,
Archeological Research Laboratory, at Texas A&M University. He
received his Ph.D. in Anthropology at The University of Texas at Austin.
Shafer has conducted archeological fieldwork in many areas of Texas

286

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and in Israel. His publications include a number of monographs in the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project series, and he is also the author of
"Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos Region, Texas" (American
Antiquity 1975), and "Comments on Woodland Cultures of East Texas"
(Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 1975). Address: Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843.
I. B. Sollberger is an amateur archeologist with a major interest in experimentation and interpretation in lithic technology. His publications include "A Technological Study of Beveled Knives" (Plains Anthropologist 1971) and "The Basic Tool Kit Required to Make and Notch Arrow
Shafts for Stone Points" (Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
1969). Address: 8515 Forest Hills Blvd., Dallas, Texas 75218.
A1 B. Wesolowsky received his B.A. and M.A. degrees in Anthropology from

The University of Texas at Austin. He is currently a doctoral student at
Christ’s College, Cambridge University (England}. Wesolowsky has has
extensive experience in the archeology and physical anthropology of
Texas, Arkansas, Greece, and Yugoslavia. For the past several years,
he has participated in the major excavations at Stobi in Yugoslavia.
Some of his publication include: "The Skeletons of Lerna Hollow"
(Hesperia 1973) and "Burial Customs in the West Cemetery" (Studies in
the Antiquities of Stobi, Vol. I, 1973). Address: 12 Devonshire Road,
Cambridge CB1 2 BH, England.

information for Contributors
The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society publishes original papers in the field
of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and adjoining areas in the United
States and Mexico, but papers on other areas will also be considered. Articles concerning archeological technique, method, or theory are encouraged.
Manuscripts must be typed, double-spaced, on 81A x 11 white paper. Footnotes should
be avoided or kept to a minimum. Reference to published literature, by author, date, and
page or figure number should be placed within parentheses in the body of the text, with
full bibliographic citations at the end. See this issue of file Bulletin for examples.
Authors should also consult "Information for Authors", in Texas Archeology, Vol. 18,
No. 1 (January, 1974) or write to the Editors for a copy.
The proportions of full-page illustrations (picture or drawing plus captions) should be
suitable for reduction to the effective page size of the Bulletin of 4~A x 7 inches. Plates
may be printed either horizontally or vertically, but allowance for the caption to be printed the same direction must be made. Captions for illustrations should be listed in
numerical order and placed behind the list of references cited.
A complete manuscript is one with: a title page, an abstract, main body, references
cited, appendices (if necessary), figure captions, and completed photographic and drafted plates. Only complete manuscripts will be considered.
Papers published in the Bulletin are abstracted and indexed in ABSTRACTS IN ANTHROPOLOGY.
Manuscripts should be addressed to: (1977) Dr. Harry J. Shafer, Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843; (1978) Dr.
Thomas R. Hester, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78285.

